The road back will be even harder now than it was in March . The United States is experiencing multiple outbreaks from California to Florida that will seed more infections in the weeks and months ahead . The hope that summer ’ s warm weather would help , that the sacrifices made in March and April would be sufficient , that a miracle cure would arrive — all have been dashed . The United States faces a crisis unseen in recent generations , and if it deepens , the pain won ’ t be only in illness and death but also in education and economics .
It is time to return to first principles . We need a colossal effort , a Manhattan Project , to fight the virus , and we don ’ t have it . Experts have identified the best strategy : test , to find out who is sick ; trace , to find out who may be sick ; and isolate those who are suffering . Personal habits must accompany this : wearing face masks , hand washing , physical distancing and avoiding crowds in enclosed spaces .
The strategy worked in nations that pursued it with conviction , such as South Korea and Germany . But in the United States , testing began in chaos and still lags what ’ s needed to suppress or even mitigate the virus , according to a useful analysis just published by the Harvard Global Health Institute and NPR . To reach a goal of mitigation , or keeping the ratio of positive tests below 10 percent , would require 1.2 million tests a day ; the United States is currently performing about 570,000 . The analysis found 32 states are not doing enough to achieve mitigation ; 18 and the District are doing enough . To suppress the virus , and get the positive ratio below 3 percent , would require 4.3 million tests a day . Suppression might allow some return to normalcy . “ That ’ s what we all want — to get our lives back . But right now we ’ re losing to the virus , ” says Ashish Jha , who runs the Harvard institute . Contact tracing is also way behind what would be necessary .
President Trump ’ s negligent approach , leaving it to the states while declaring that everything is fine , has put the nation adrift in a viral sea . We must move beyond Mr. Trump ’ s devastating leadership vacuum . A few states have done better than most , but as the virus map demonstrates , the power of the pandemic is greater than the states can bear . The nation still needs a federal response . The virus is relentless and opportunistic — but the response has been patchwork and uneven . Unless that is fixed , we will be doomed to more suffering and terrible losses still to come .