After months of COVID-19 lockdowns , states across the country began to lift stay at home orders and restrictions at the end of May . Today , all 41 states which issued stay at home orders have begun lifting restrictions . However , as the number of COVID-19 cases surge across parts of the country , the opening process is being slowed or even reversed in several states .
If we use the 1918 Spanish Flu as our guide , we can presume a second peak is coming . In 1918 , US cities which had implemented control measures to limit public interaction saw a second peak after they eased the restrictions . This is because the majority of their populations were not exposed during the initial outbreak and the communities did not develop a herd immunity .
Lawmakers are becoming increasingly concerned about rising infection rates and potential implications for overcrowded hospitals . Today , we ’ ll walk through some of the pros and cons of reinstating widespread shutdown or stay at home measures .
On March 19th , California became the first state to issue stay at home orders , followed by 41 other states as well as the District of Columbia . Even states that did not issue a stay at home order , including Arkansas , Iowa , Nebraska , North Dakota , South Dakota , Oklahoma , Utah and Wyoming , implemented restrictions on certain social activities .
According to a CDC Survey , 80 % of Americans said they had self-isolated during this time .
The economy has been severely impacted by the COVID-19 shutdowns . Consumption makes up 70 % of the US GDP and is especially hard hit with stay at home orders . Unemployment has soared , with 6.6 million applying for unemployment in a single week in March when the shutdowns began .
Small businesses have been especially hard hit as they lose revenue and have to cut payroll . However , virtually all sectors have been impacted .
Shutdowns have also taken a non-economic toll . According to Forbes , there is also risk of increased kidney failure , homelessness ( which is linked again to depression , drug addiction , alcoholism , and anxiety ) , poverty , unplanned pregnancies , and abuse .
Additionally , many individuals have begun to experience “ Quarantine fatigue , ” which occurs when people show low motivation or energy to comply with safety guidelines . During the early days of the pandemic most individuals were motivated to comply with restrictions based on fear . However , after three months where many people have n't seen someone infected , people begin to let their guard down and underestimate the threat of infraction and harm .
Some states are experiencing a rapid increase in cases since lockdowns have been lifted , leading many to question if another round of shutdowns will be needed .
Supporters of another shutdown focus on preventing further infection and overwhelming hospitals . Opponents of another shutdown focus on the economic and health impacts of a shut down and ask if the pros really outweigh the risks .