As novel coronavirus spreads around the world , some U.S. officials seem to be downplaying the potential global scope and severity of the disease by comparing it to a common illness — influenza .
In a press conference Wednesday , President Donald Trump softened the severity of the COVID-19 outbreak , saying that the virus is “ a little bit like the flu . ”
“ We ’ ll essentially have a flu shot for this in a fairly quick manner , ” he said , referring to efforts to develop a vaccine for the disease . According to experts like Dr. Anthony Fauci , who directs the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases , it ’ s still likely to be at least a year before a vaccine is ready for human use .
Trump also noted that far more Americans die from the flu each year than have been infected by the coronavirus thus far .
But experts say comparing COVID-19 to the flu understates what ’ s at stake .
“ It ’ s a confusing tone that the president set , ” said Lawrence Gostin , a professor Georgetown University who also directs the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on National and Global Health Law . He said the World Health Organization and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have underscored the seriousness of the virus , but Trump ’ s comments appear “ to fluff it off as if it ’ s a common cold . ”
Nancy Messonnier , director for the CDC ’ s National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases , has warned that transmission of the virus in the U.S. is inevitable , that it is “ not so much a question of if , but when . ”
So far , there are millions of cases of the flu worldwide , compared to about 84,000 novel coronavirus cases , as of Friday afternoon . But public health officials warn that there is still a lot they don ’ t know about the new virus , including the various ways it ’ s transmitted , how pathogenic it might be , and how it could alter genetically .
That uncertainty creates an added urgency to containing the virus and , if those efforts fail , preparing for it to infect large swaths of the global population .
Here ’ s what we know now about the way these two infections compare , in terms of transmission , deadliness and scope .
Both the flu and COVID-19 are spread from person-to-person , transmitted through respiratory droplets that are formed when these people cough , sneeze or talk , according to the CDC . COVID-19 may also be transmitted when people touch surfaces that are infected , but this has not yet been confirmed .
“ We know these viruses can potentially survive on surfaces depending on the number of hours or days , ” said Dr. Brian Garibaldi , the director of the biocontainment unit at Johns Hopkins Medicine . “ We don ’ t know yet if it ’ s more likely that you ’ re going to get [ COVID-19 ] by coming into contact with droplets in the air . ”
Neither the flu nor COVID-19 can be treated with antibiotics .
Garibaldi added that the one way it may be useful to compare COVID-19 with the flu is when talking about prevention .
“ The method you can use to try to protect yourself from the flu is also going to help prevent you from getting the coronavirus , ” he said . Practicing good hygiene , by throwing out tissues , covering your cough and washing your hands , will help prevent the spread of both diseases .
Of the 83,652 COVID-19 cases confirmed thus far , there have been 2,858 deaths , according to the World Health Organization . A total of 2,791 of those deaths were within China . So far , 15 COVID-19 cases have been reported in the U.S. , with zero resulting deaths thus far . Another 47 Americans contracted the disease abroad and have been brought back to the U.S. to be quarantined .
By contrast , the CDC estimates that at least 18,000 people in the U.S. have died from the flu since October , and at least 32 million have been infected .
Globally , the flu kills hundreds of thousands of people annually . A 2017 study published in the Lancet , a leading medical journal , estimated that between 291,000 and 646,000 people die from seasonal-related respiratory illnesses each year .
Nevertheless , just because the flu is a more severe threat to Americans than COVID-19 right now doesn ’ t mean that the virus couldn ’ t grow to become just as , or more , deadly in the future . “ It ’ s precisely because the flu kills so many people that we should worry about coronavirus . We don ’ t want a mass-circulating virus that kills that many people , ” Gostin said .
Harvard epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch estimates that between 40 percent and 70 percent of people around the world will be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 . Gostin said that these sorts of predictions are “ exactly why we need to take it seriously . ”
A recent study estimated that the mortality rate from COVID-19 is 2.3 percent , more than 20 times the death rate from the flu .
It should be noted that the vast majority of COVID-19 cases confirmed by China — 81 percent , as of Feb. 11 — are mild , meaning they did not involve pneumonia . Symptoms could be so mild that they are confused with the common cold , which is in the same family of viruses as COVID-19 .
Health officials caution that the fatality rate is dynamic and will likely change , particularly if more mild cases are confirmed , and as public health officials collect more data about cases in a growing number of countries .
“ There have got to be a lot of infections out there that are not detected , just because they are mild . If you add another 100,000 people , then the rate drops , ” said Gary Kobinger , the director of the Infectious Disease Research Center at Laval University .
In a briefing on Tuesday , Dr. Michael Ryan of the World Health Organization warned against reading too much into high fatality rates as the virus spreads to other countries . When asked about Iran , which recently reported an 11-percent mortality rate , Ryan said , “ We need to be very careful in the first wave of infections and any newly affected country because we may only be detecting severe cases and the deaths will be over-represented in that . ”
As researchers work to bolster our understanding of COVID-19 , that disease currently appears to be more deadly to the smaller swath of the population it has infected . In contrast , with so many more known annual infections , the mortality rate from the flu is about 0.1 percent annually .
To put the current COVID-19 estimates in context , the 1918 Spanish influenza pandemic — one of the deadliest of all time — infected about 500 million people , and killed more than 2.5 percent of all those infected .
The fact that there is not yet a vaccine available for COVID-19 also makes the threat level different from that of the flu , at least for now .
Should the U.S. see transmission pockets start to form before a vaccine for COVID-19 is developed , Garibaldi said Americans could experience fatality rates that are just as severe as China ’ s .
“ The Chinese health system is fantastic — they have all the technology that we do , ” he said . “ There ’ s no reason to suspect that we ’ re going to do better than China if the mortality rate is 1-2 percent . ”