President Donald Trump and China ’ s President Xi Jinping at the G20 leaders summit in Osaka , Japan , June 29 , 2019 . ( Kevin Lamarque/Reuters )
Despite the potential of a pandemic that could crater the global economy , it ’ s a relief to know that China ’ s Communist rulers are focusing on the important things . The latest brouhaha between China and the United States unfolded last week when Beijing expelled three Wall Street Journal reporters in retribution for an opinion column entitled “ China Is the Real Sick Man of Asia. ” It was the first time since 1998 that a foreign reporter has been kicked out of China .
As a regular contributor to both ███ and the Wall Street Journal , I can only dream of causing such an international incident — speaking engagements by the dozens would await me . Alas , unlike at NR ( occasionally ) , headlines at most newspapers are not written by the authors , as it was in this case . And my own WSJ piece later that week , on how Wuhan ’ s coronavirus could cause a second revolution to emerge from that city ( the first being in 1911 , causing the overthrow of the Qing Dynasty ) , was given a suitably non-offensive title .
The title struck a bell with me . Of course , the phrase “ sick man of Europe ” was first applied to the faltering Ottoman Empire in the late 19th century , having everything to do with assessing Turkey ’ s weak internal politics , and nothing to do with racism . It ’ s a pithy moniker , so it ’ s been applied to other countries , including apparently China itself , during the 19th and 20th centuries , as the Qing disintegrated and the country plunged into warlordism and civil war until Mao Zedong ’ s sanguinary victory in 1949 . I haven ’ t gone back to any contemporary sources to find just how common it was , if at all , to refer to China as the sick man of the Far East ( as they would have put it back then ) .
And yet , history aside , I felt the phrase was somehow connected with something I had written long ago . Sure enough , Google instantly picked out an essay I wrote in 2009 for Foreign Policy , entitled “ The Sick Man of Asia. ” I was over a decade ahead of the times . I racked my brains , trying to remember the names of the American journalists who had been expelled due to my callousness , of how many times I had been denied a visa , and of the diplomatic strategy the U.S. government adopted in response to the crisis I had caused .
Oh , wait , silly me . My “ The Sick Man of Asia ” article wasn ’ t about China at all . It was about Japan . Subtitled “ We ’ ll Miss Japan When It ’ s Gone , ” the piece lamented Tokyo ’ s then-paralyzed political system and fading regional role ( much of which has been turned around by current prime minister Shinzo Abe , by the way ) .
Sadly , my excoriation of Japan ’ s weaknesses caused no vapors amongst the leadership in Tokyo . No Foreign Policy reporters were kicked out of Japan , no diplomatic demarches followed , nor was I declared persona non grata by the Foreign Ministry . There was no online backlash , no calls for my head nor for me to be thrown off Twitter . Indeed , not much of a reaction at all .
How different when it comes to the world ’ s most populous , and some say strongest , nation . How pathetic the spectacle of a government , imposed by force on more than one billion people with an extraordinary millennia-old culture , whining like a petulant child over an eight-word headline . Or over a Batman comic book cover , or a tweet by an NBA manager .
As hundreds of millions Chinese hide from the coronavirus , as over a million Muslim Uyghurs are kept in concentration camps , as Beijing directs cyber and human espionage operations to strip the world of its industrial secrets and personal information , China ’ s Communist leaders going into conniption fits over a newspaper headline says it all , revealing just how little legitimacy they have , and how less capable they are in dealing with the world than the supposedly conservative and ossified Japanese .
But maybe that ’ s because Japan is a democracy and largely respectful of press freedom , unlike China ’ s thin-skinned , authoritarian dictators . Perhaps they , even more than the WSJ headline writers , know just how weak — dare I say sick — their system is .