The number of people killed by the new coronavirus rose by 97 on Sunday , the highest number of casualties in a day .
The total number of deaths in China is now 908 - but the number of newly-infected people per day has stabilised .
Across China , 40,171 people are infected while 187,518 are under medical observation .
Meanwhile , 60 more people have tested positive on a cruise ship quarantined in Japan - meaning 130 out of 3,700 passengers have caught the virus .
The Diamond Princess ship is on a two-week quarantine off Yokohama , after a passenger - who earlier disembarked in Hong Kong - tested positive .
The infected passengers are taken off board and treated in nearby hospitals .
The new cases mean around a third of all coronavirus patients outside of China were on the Diamond Princess .
According to Chinese data , 3,281 patients have been cured and discharged from hospital .
On Monday , millions of people returned to work after the Lunar New Year break , which was extended from 31 January to curb the spread of the virus .
But precautionary measures remain in place , including the staggering of working hours , and the selective reopening of workplaces .
Chinese president Xi Jinping visited a local hospital in Beijing that offers treatment to coronavirus patients . He also took part in a video chat with medical workers in Wuhan , the epicentre of the outbreak .
Images from state media show Mr Xi wearing a mask and having his temperature checked . The president has largely stayed away from public view during the outbreak .
`` We must have confidence that we will eventually win this battle against the epidemic , '' he told staff at Ditan hospital in Beijing .
Over the weekend , the number of coronavirus deaths overtook that of the Sars epidemic in 2003 which also originated in China and killed 774 people worldwide .
The WHO on Saturday said the number of new cases in China was `` stabilising '' - but warned it was too early to say if the virus had peaked .
On Sunday evening , the organisation sent an international mission to help coordinate a response to the outbreak .
The new virus was first reported in Wuhan , the capital of Hubei province . The city of 11 million has been in lockdown for weeks .
The outbreak was declared a global emergency by the WHO on 30 January .
It has spread to at least 27 other countries and territories , but so far there have only been two deaths outside of mainland China , in the Philippines and Hong Kong .
In the UK , the number of people infected by the coronavirus doubled to eight after four more people tested positive for the virus on Monday .
The Department of Health has described the coronavirus as a `` serious and imminent threat '' to public health . The government has issued new powers in England to keep people in quarantine to stop the virus spreading . Under these measures , people who have contracted the virus will be forcibly quarantined and not allowed to leave .
The director-general of the WHO on Sunday warned that the virus being transmitted by people who have not been to China could be the `` tip of the iceberg '' .
`` There 've been some concerning instances of onward 2019nCoV spread from people with no travel history to China , '' Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus wrote on Twitter
`` The detection of a small number of cases may indicate more widespread transmission in other countries ; in short , we may only be seeing the tip of the iceberg . ''
Meanwhile in Hong Kong , police are searching for two people who absconded from quarantine , the South China Morning Post reports . Nearly 1,200 people are in quarantine in the region .
Also in Hong Kong , passengers on a quarantined cruise ship have been allowed to disembark after tests showed no infection among them or its crew .
The World Dream had been held in isolation after eight passengers from a previous cruise had caught the virus .
South Korea has issued a temporary ban on cruise ships entering its ports due to fears of spreading the virus .
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist . You can also contact us in the following ways :