The first known case of the novel coronavirus ( COVID-19 ) was traced to Wuhan , Hubei , China , on December 1 , 2019 .
That was 105 days ago . Since then , the sweep of the virus across China was devastating . In the Hubei province alone , there were 67,798 confirmed cases , according to the Johns Hopkins Center for Systems Science and Engineering .
But the virus — which shut down businesses and industries as it spread across China — began to level off in the Hubei province in the past couple of weeks . And while there were 3,099 deaths in Hubei , 55,094 people there recovered from the virus .
Late last week , residents of Hubei province began returning to work as factories and businesses reopened .
“ Food processors , manufacturers and other businesses essential for providing daily necessities in Wuhan , the city in the province where the coronavirus emerged in December , can reopen , the Hubei provincial government announced , ” The Washington Times reported . “ Construction also has gradually resumed on housing and public infrastructure projects in China as the country tries to bring employees back to work while still containing the epidemic . ”
In a video that went viral , medical workers in the province are seen removing their medical masks .
“ Chinese medical workers who have been fighting the [ coronavirus ] day and night in Wuhan celebrated the closing of the last temporary hospital in Wuhan , ” said a post on Twitter . “ The reported [ COVID-19 ] cases went from a surge in February of 15,000 in one day to only 15 this week . ”
Chinese medical workers who have been fighting the # coronavirus day and night in Wuhan celebrated the closing of the last temporary hospital in Wuhan . The reported # covid19 cases went from a surge in February of 15,000 in one day to only 15 this week . pic.twitter.com/xWuPd23EfY — redfish ( @ redfishstream ) March 13 , 2020
The video has been viewed more than 14 million times .
Chinese President Xi Jinping even visited the city of Wuhan last week , sending a message that the virus is under control . He dropped by the city on Tuesday , when China recorded its lowest number of infections , just 19 .
During his visit , Xi declared that the spread of the disease had been “ basically curbed ” in Hubei province and Wuhan .
“ Hubei and Wuhan have been the very most decisive battleground in this struggle to contain the epidemic , ” Xi said in remarks reported by state media late Tuesday . “ Through arduous efforts , there has been a promising turn in epidemic containment in Hubei and Wuhan , and we ’ ve achieved important interim results . ”
Xi also visited Huoshenshan hospital , a temporary facility that was built in just 10 days .
Wuhan “ may have zero new cases by the end of March if we work harder and if nothing sudden comes up , ” Li Lanjuan , director of China ’ s State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases , told reporters Wednesday , The Times reported .
China took restrictive measures to stem the spread of the virus , but it ’ s unclear if the steps taken in the U.S. will lead to the same results .
Dr. Gustavo Ferrer , a lung specialist at Aventura Hospital in Florida , told the Times that while cases in the U.S. are only just beginning , they will plateau in the next couple of weeks .
“ We should be encouraged , but we should remain vigilant , ” Dr. Ferrer said . “ Being aware is extremely important because when things are going down we tend to lower our guards , and this is when we are not prepared for any of this . ”
Related : ‘ Not True ’ : Trump Admin Responds To Reports On Trump And German Coronavirus Vaccine Firm