A passenger wearing a face mask checks his mobile phone on a bus following an outbreak of the novel coronavirus in the country in Beijing , China , February 21 , 2020 . ( Stringer/Reuters )
Fine , I ’ ll say it : I ’ m afraid of it , the virus .
For a significant portion of readers , that ’ s enough to write me off . “ It ’ s just like the flu , but not as bad , ” I ’ ve been told several times already . That response is based on a sound calculation used by Calvin Coolidge that for every ten problems you can see in the distance , only one will ever reach you .
But it looks like it reached us . Seattle ’ s outbreak has spread across several counties . New York ’ s is still mostly concentrated in mine , Westchester . In five days , Westchester went from one confirmed case to 82 . Schools in the lower part of the county , Scarsdale , have closed for ten days . Schools across the border into the Bronx , such as Fordham University , have also closed . A school district next to ours closed for one day because of a trace contact between a student and a confirmed case . Our schools haven ’ t closed yet , but I think they should .
I called and wrote an email to the local superintendent of schools and tried to explain my concern that in New York State , schools were only closing when a student or teacher tested positive for COVID-19 .
We aren ’ t testing asymptomatic people and the disease has an incubation period of at least two days . That seems like a protocol for discovering that you failed to contain the coronavirus , not for discovering when you should start acting to contain it . South Korea and Hong Kong closed schools before they became major vectors of transmission . Their numbers are starting to level off , but Seoul began discouraging people from leaving their homes unnecessarily five weeks ago .
In my email to the superintendent , I used a phrase a similarly concerned friend gave me as a shorthand for explaining to myself and to others why I ’ m taking action : “ Too early is , by definition , ‘ not too late. ’ ” I ’ m not a germaphobe or health nut . Far from it . But I have an abiding belief that the hardest prejudice to overcome is the notion that things will go on roughly as they always have .
Could President Trump be right that the Wuhan virus is less concerning that the flu , because it is less prevalent ? Maybe . But I doubt it . When there is not time for long-term longitudinal studies , broad prejudice is a good enough substitute . One might dismiss the extraordinary actions of China , South Korea , and Japan as actions taken by germaphobic , authoritarian East Asian cultures . But why would China ’ s government , so often known for treating life cheaply , shut down its industrial heartlands for a bad flu season ? One could dismiss the quarantine of Lombardy as an overreaction by dramatic Italians , though that doesn ’ t quite work : Lombardy is more like an Italian-speaking half-Teutonic Switzerland . But Israel has to be level-headed every day to survive , and it is temporarily shutting down entry into the country .
Locally , I ’ ve already noticed an inchoate class consciousness driving reactions at different levels of society . Bulk-shopping stores like Costco were picked over early . High-end grocers like Whole Foods were ransacked of frozen vegetables this weekend . ( An in-law of mine said that shoppers were peering into his cart and at the bags of frozen lima beans as if they might discover a new trove in the store or pilfer his when he wasn ’ t looking . ) But the mid-tier grocers were still well-stocked — except for hand sanitizer . An EMS worker I know is about to work a 24-hour shift . She joked : “ Usually , they [ the patients ] try to rob me of narcotics , now they ’ re trying to rob my cleaning supplies . What a time to be alive. ” Prepared people are preparing . High-information people have started to stockpile . And those who know scarcity are avoiding it by whatever bonkers means necessary . But the great middle is slow to accept the idea that the normal , gentle tide of American life can develop a sudden deadly undercurrent that pulls them down .
It ’ s true that the chances of death for those who are not old or immunosuppressed are small . But not that small . An optimistic scenario suggests that for middle-aged men , the chances of death resemble those of my high school ’ s junior and senior classes playing Russian roulette together with one or two deadly rounds among hundreds of dummy bullets . There could be one or two deaths among the more than 700 souls . There could be 100 deaths among their aged parents . My own graduating class ’ s 20-year reunion is in a few months . Will it be a mournful one ?
But the thing driving the crisis isn ’ t death itself , but the collapse of health-care systems . To take the example above , if the current numbers are reliable , there are another 50–90 bullets among those 700 rounds that could send me or my classmates to the hospital , needful of a respirator or intensive care . And there aren ’ t that many respirators and ICU beds available . Once a hospital becomes that crowded with critical and serious cases of bilateral interstitial pneumonia , other surgeries get deferred or canceled , or they are performed by exhausted and demoralized doctors . That ’ s when the death rates start to spike . That ’ s what happened in Wuhan . And that ’ s what ’ s happening in northern Italy now .
Maybe I ’ ve psyched myself out . There ’ s a minor and non-fatal peril in staring at your phone and waiting for news updates . Many political obsessives have been doing this since 2015 , and they ’ ve managed to hypnotize themselves into thinking Vladimir Putin controls the world and that , because of this , Donald Trump is turning America into a fascist society . If they ’ d had social media in 2005 , they ’ d have told you we lived in a theocracy .
The phone has a way of stimulating the brain and giving you tunnel vision . The physical act of hunching over it , focusing your eyes on a small plane , and tip-tapping your fingers over it is bound to create a physiological response indicating stress . Am I suffering from a self-inflicted delusion or something else ? I took my temperature this afternoon : 99.4 . And then I read that Italy is thinking of extending its quarantine to the whole nation .
Don ’ t panic . But my friend ’ s advice is comforting . Act too early — at least it won ’ t be too late .