WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - The U.S. Congress struggled to produce a fresh coronavirus relief bill on Monday , as a stubborn standoff between Republicans and Democrats complicated the challenge of passing legislation with most lawmakers out of town .
Senate Republicans , who are pressing lawmakers to agree to $ 250 billion in additional small business aid , chose not to bring the measure forward during a brief session , after Democrats reaffirmed their own demands for broader legislation .
“ It ’ s time for the Republicans to quit the political posturing by proposing bills they know will not pass either chamber and get serious and work with us , ” House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer said in a joint statement .
The standoff over the next coronavirus bill began last week with a skirmish on the Senate floor , where Republicans failed to pass a narrower measure to provide a fresh $ 250 billion to small businesses over Democratic opposition .
Republicans then blocked a Democratic measure that included the same $ 250 billion but set aside some of the lending for community banks to aid minority-owned and rural businesses , and provided further aid to hospitals and a federal food program for the poor . Democrats and state governors also want to include aid to help state governments on the front line of the outbreak .
Aides to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Republican leader Kevin McCarthy declined to comment .
But Republican Senator Dan Sullivan , who presided over the Monday pro forma session lasting less than one minute , said the Republican bill is needed because money for small business is beginning to run out .
“ Will there be an opportunity to talk about the other programs ? Yes , but a lot of us haven ’ t even spent any of the money at all , ” Sullivan told reporters .
The $ 250 billion in small-business loans would be in addition to $ 349 billion allocated by Congress in a $ 2.3 trillion measure passed last month following an earlier partisan standoff .
With Congress on recess and much of the country shut down , congressional leaders have tried to avoid calling members back to Washington . That has limited the options for moving legislation to unanimous consent and other parliamentary methods that require only a limited number of lawmakers to be present .
The House will remain on recess through May 4 , the chamber ’ s leaders said on Monday . Earlier it had been due to reconvene on April 20 . The Senate is still scheduled to return next week , although many lawmakers expect that to change .
“ I ’ ll tell you , I have no interest in going back now . How do you get there ? Train ? Plane ? ” Representative Nita Lowey , the 82-year-old Democratic chairwoman of the House Appropriations Committee , told the government cable television channel C-SPAN .
The Democrats ’ latest push for broader legislation cited Republican President Donald Trump ’ s hopes of starting to reopen the U.S. economy on May 1 , by underscoring the need for additional national coronavirus testing .
“ We all desire an end to the shutdown orders so we can get Americans back to work and back to normal . However , there is still not enough testing available to realistically allow that to happen , ” Pelosi and Schumer said .
The United States has recorded more fatalities from COVID-19 than any other country , more than 22,200 as of Monday , according to a ███ tally .