Other Republican lawmakers appeared mortified about the growing size of the spending bill , bickering over which policies to remove and warning that miscalculations could allow Democrats to seize control of the White House and Senate in November .
“ What in the hell are we doing , ” Sen. Ted Cruz ( R-Tex . ) asked his colleagues at the lunch with White House officials , according to several participants who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the exchange . Cruz was incensed at the push among his colleagues to boost spending levels even more .
The whole process now appears likely to spill into August , something the White House and congressional Democrats had hoped to avoid , because it would mean more than 20 million Americans would lose emergency unemployment benefits when they expire at the end of this month . They have not mapped out a plan for what would happen to these people as the pandemic ’ s turmoil continues to weigh on the U.S. economy .
The White House did not go into the talks with a preset strategy or a list of proposals that they knew GOP lawmakers would rally behind . This miscalculation created immediate problems . Numerous demands the White House had tried to formulate over the weekend were erased within hours .
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Monday that the goal was to keep the spending bill around $ 1 trillion , but by Tuesday he had abandoned that mantra . White House officials also backed away from demands for cuts to testing and health funds , and they retreated after a barrage of criticism of President Trump ’ s tax cut demand .
“ I think we ’ re going to spend what we need to spend , and we ’ re going to make sure we don ’ t spend more than that , ” Mnuchin said .
Democrats pointed fingers at the Republican infighting and said the White House and GOP leaders were unprepared to handle the country ’ s mounting economic and health care challenges . House Democrats passed a $ 3 trillion spending bill in May that would send another round of stimulus checks , provide more money to states , and help hospitals , among other things , but the White House has vowed to block it .
“ Republicans are in complete disarray , ” Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) said . “ Totally incompetent . Totally in disarray . Totally at war with one another . ”
In an effort to bridge differences , Mnuchin , White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows and White House National Economic Council Director Larry Kudlow met with Senate Republicans over lunch . But that led to little progress , as Republicans made clear to Mnuchin and Meadows that they were not supportive of Trump ’ s insistence on a payroll tax cut or curbed funding for coronavirus tests and the CDC . Mnuchin on Monday had insisted the payroll tax idea was in the bill , but he didn ’ t even bring it up during the lunch as the opposition snowballed , two people briefed on the interaction said .
“ We haven ’ t reached a conclusion on anything , ” Sen. John Neely Kennedy ( R-La . ) said when the lunch ended .
Meadows acknowledged the discontent , telling reporters , “ Well as you can imagine , any time you have Senate Republicans there , you have a number of different thoughts on what should or should not happen . ”
The White House and Senate Republican leaders had tried over the weekend to put together a joint deal to bring to Democrats , but those efforts did not lead to a unified GOP position . Talks bogged down over Trump ’ s insistence for the tax cut , something he has pushed since last year to force into law without any success . Some also bristled at Trump ’ s insistence for curbing coronavirus testing funds and a new requirement that aid to schools would be contingent on reopening plans .
Underlying the confusion surrounding the GOP stimulus package are tensions among Trump administration officials about their priorities .
Trump is being represented on Capitol Hill by Mnuchin and Meadows , a tandem that hasn ’ t brokered a deal jointly with Congress before . Trump has for months privately worried that Mnuchin , his chief negotiator with Democrats , was giving away too much to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) , leading conservative lawmakers to push for Meadows to have a more active role in the current round of talks . Before joining the White House , Meadows was a congressman and leader of the conservative House Freedom Caucus . Mnuchin , meanwhile , has a background as a banker and a Hollywood producer with few ties to the conservative movement .
On Tuesday , Meadows sat toward the back of the room and deferred to Mnuchin as he led the conversation with the GOP senators , according to two people aware of the meeting granted anonymity to share private conversations . Mnuchin discussed the importance of sending another round of stimulus checks and providing more money for the Paycheck Protection Program .
Mnuchin also told reporters it was important for lawmakers to reach an agreement before the supplemental increase in unemployment benefits runs out by the end of this month . Republican lawmakers , including Trump , have consistently bashed that benefit increase because they believe it makes it more lucrative for workers to stay home than reenter the labor market , but Mnuchin stressed the importance of providing some financial cushion for the jobless .
“ Our objective is to try to get something done before the enhanced unemployment insurance expires . There ’ s a lot of people who are still out of work , ” Mnuchin said . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) told reporters , though , that it was very unlikely a deal would be reached by the end of next week , laughing and saying “ no ” when asked if that was possible .
Within hours on Tuesday , it became clear the White House was already backpedaling on several of their demands — before negotiations with Democrats had even begun . Mnuchin and Meadows met with Senate Republican appropriators in the morning and appeared convinced to reverse course on the funding curbs , as Republicans had sought $ 25 billion for states for testing and tracing that the administration had initially opposed .
“ We ’ re moving in the right direction on all fronts ... We are making good progress , ” said Sen. Roy Blunt ( R-Mo . ) , a senior Appropriations Committee member , when asked about the disagreement over money for testing .
Participants cautioned talks were ongoing and nothing had been finalized .
White House spokeswoman Kayleigh McEnany said Tuesday that the White House is seeking “ targeted ” money for testing , saying that “ we ’ re willing to put in money for targeted testing that makes sense , not just dumping money into a pot that contains $ 10 billion . ”
Some experts said lawmakers should both approve more money and have the administration send it out more quickly .
“ States have been using some of this money , but the problem is that it ’ s not enough and easy for the states to draw down , ” said Sam Hammond , a policy expert at the Niskanen Center , a think tank that has been working with Senate Republicans on bolstering testing . “ The scale of the problem will require a lot more money than they have so far . ”
These programs are just one part of what the administration and McConnell had envisioned as a $ 1 trillion package that is likely to be the last major coronavirus relief bill before the election .
After attending the Senate Republican conference lunch the White House envoys met with Pelosi and Schumer .
“ We will begin our conversations today . It is my hope that we can resolve our differences and have a bill by the end of next week , ” Pelosi told fellow Democrats on a conference call Tuesday morning , according to a person on the call who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to discuss internal conversations .
There has been little GOP enthusiasm for the payroll tax cut plan , even though Trump has said he might not sign a bill that doesn ’ t include it . And GOP leaders are expecting a hard sell Tuesday but appear unwavering . Only a small handful of Senate Republicans — including Sens . Lindsey O. Graham ( S.C. ) and Steve Daines ( Mont . ) have endorsed the payroll tax cut as a sound policy .
But multiple senators and aides said Mnuchin didn ’ t even talk about the payroll tax cut in the Senate GOP lunch . Instead he was confronted by multiple complaints about the size of the emerging package , with some lawmakers who had voted for the $ 2 trillion Cares Act in March saying they couldn ’ t support the new package if it exceeds $ 1 trillion .
Inside the lunch , GOP senators voiced discontent over several components of the emerging aid package , whether it involved provisions pushed by the administration and the apparent ballooning size of the plan , according to multiple officials directly familiar with the private gathering . All of the officials spoke on the condition of anonymity to describe the closed-door discussion .
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Charles E. Grassley ( R-Iowa ) argued against the payroll tax cut , making the case that no voters would notice the tax relief and that he was skeptical that the policy changes could even be implemented before October .
Though the payroll tax cut remains a top priority of Trump , his top lieutenants inside the meeting made little apparent effort to sell the policy on Republican senators , who largely remain opposed to the proposal .
Electoral politics were also in consideration . Sen. Tom Cotton ( R-Ark . ) urged other GOP senators to be attentive to what Republicans in competitive reelection bids are hearing on the ground from voters , and made the case that if the GOP loses the majority , Democrats in control will implement policies that are much more costly to the national debt . So spending a bit more money now in a rescue bill that would aid Republicans in their races would be cheaper in the long run , he argued . Cotton is also up for reelection this November but is not considered to be in a competitive race .
But Cotton ’ s viewpoint appeared to clash with that of Cruz , who vigorously warned against spending too much money over on the package .
Cruz said the GOP should be focused on a safe restart of the economy and warned that if the economy remains shuttered in November , that Democrats will win both the White House and the Senate and that Republican senators , who usually meet in the ornate Mansfield room in the Capitol , will “ be meeting in a much smaller lunch room . ”
Mnuchin , who met with Republican senators before he was to huddle with the Democratic leaders , stressed to the GOP lawmakers that he will not launch into negotiations this afternoon with Democrats and that he would be in more of a listening mode with them .
Earlier , McConnell gave some details of the emerging GOP plan Tuesday in remarks on the Senate floor .
He said it would include $ 105 billion to help schools reopen , another round of funding for the Paycheck Protection Program for small businesses , more stimulus checks to individual Americans , incentives for hiring and retaining workers , and reimbursement for businesses to establish safety measures .
“ The American job market needs another shot of adrenaline , ” McConnell said . “ Senate Republicans are laser-focused on getting American workers their jobs back . ”
Trump has already enacted four laws that provided close to $ 3 trillion in new tax cuts and spending to try to help the economy and health-care industry navigate the coronavirus pandemic . The economy remains really weak , however , with an unemployment rate of 11.1 percent and roughly 20 million people collecting unemployment benefits . Lawmakers are split over what to do next . When he was heading into a meeting with Senate appropriators , Meadows was asked about the highest price tag they could agree to .
“ Obviously everybody looks at a trillion-dollar stimulus plan as the goal , but that ’ s going to be up to the senators and the House , ” Meadows said . “ It ’ s going to be a Senate- and House-led process . ”
Mnuchin said he would be there to see the talks through , having been through numerous rounds of frantic negotiations in the past .