As authorities in Galveston , Tex. , brace for big Fourth of July crowds , officials on Wednesday decided to shut down all beaches — matching efforts from officials in other hard-hit states who have closed public attractions for the holiday weekend .
“ We ’ re going to see several hundred thousand people come down here regardless of the recommendations that have come out , ” Galveston Beach Patrol Chief Peter Davis told KHOU this week .
Galveston County has about 3,300 confirmed coronavirus cases , more than 1,000 of which were reported in the past week alone , according to the county health department . The rate of positive tests has surged from less than 1 percent in May to roughly 15 percent currently .
On Wednesday , Galveston Mayor Jim Yarbrough signed an executive order to close beaches from 5 a.m. Friday until 12:01 a.m. Monday , ABC13 reported . The city of Galveston said the decision came after “ much deliberation . ”
“ At this time , based on the current health situation and the guidance of medical professionals , I do not feel it is prudent or responsible to have thousands of visitors descending on Galveston beaches , ” Yarbrough said in a statement , according to ABC13 . “ Galveston has and always will be a welcoming destination , but the ongoing public health crisis demands our attention and response . We have to prioritize health and safety . ”
Texas has emerged as one of the country ’ s latest coronavirus hotbeds , with state health officials reporting record highs in new cases , positivity rates and hospitalizations for weeks on end .
Galveston Island , about an hour ’ s drive southeast of Houston , is a hot spot for beachgoers and one of the region ’ s most popular weekend getaways .
Yarbrough told the Galveston County Daily News last week that he was not considering closing beaches and that he did not believe he had the authority to impose them .
“ I have not discussed it , ” he said at the time . “ Period . ”
Myrtle Beach , S.C. , is also expected to see a crush of vacationers this weekend . A rapid push to reopen the local economy has turned the area into a coronavirus petri dish , with cases spiking in recent weeks . But beaches and boardwalks are welcoming business , and the city is planning to hold its annual fireworks display .
Other oceanfront locales have shut down entirely . Beaches in Los Angeles will close until Monday , as will beaches throughout South Florida , which has reported record case numbers since mid-June .
The American Medical Association urged people to limit their Independence Day gatherings to their close contacts .