U.S. security agencies and their British and Canadian partners on Thursday accused Russian hackers of targeting organizations developing the COVID-19 vaccine , sparking condemnation on both sides of the Atlantic and warnings to companies that their research may be at risk of being stolen .
Moscow denied responsibility for the apparent cyber spying campaign , which was revealed in an advisory issued by Washington and its allies that claimed the culprits were “ almost certainly ” part of the Russian government .
Known by names such as “ APT29 , ” “ the Dukes ” and “ Cozy Bear , ” the hacking group has targeted organizations in the U.S. , Britain and Canada with the “ highly likely ” intention of stealing intellectual property relating to the vaccine ’ s development , said the advisory .
No targeted organizations were named in a publicized version of the document , which also did not indicate whether any specific data was actually stolen by hackers . The advisory did , however , say the hackers have successfully exploited known computer vulnerabilities to gain “ initial footholds ” within an unspecified number of organizations involved in fighting COVID-19 .
It said the hackers used custom malware not publicly associated with any campaigns previously attributed to the group , which has been active since at least 2008 and implicated in several high-profile intrusions including breaching the Democratic National Committee during the last U.S. presidential race .
“ It should be clear by now that Russia ’ s hacking efforts didn ’ t stop after the 2016 election , ” said Sen. Mark Warner , Virginia Democrat and ranking member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence . ”
Moving forward , the United States and the western world need to be prepared for increasingly aggressive cyber-attacks from Russian actors , ” Mr. Warner told The ███ . “ That ’ s going to require all of us — government , corporations and individuals — to step up our game . ”
Senate Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy , California Republican , told The Times “ these continued malicious actions to weaken our pandemic response must not go unchecked . ”
Mr. McCarthy said he intends to introduce legislation soon that would ensure the hackers are held responsible .
House Intelligence Committee Chairman Rep. Adam B. Schiff , California Democrat , urged President Trump to act and said he was asking for a briefing from his administration .
“ There is no issue more critical to the health and safety of our nation and its citizens right now than testing , tracing , treating and vaccinating , ” said Mr. Schiff . “ The consequences are literally life and death . ”
White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany told reporters the administration was aware of the activities included in Thursday ’ s advisory , saying the U.S. “ worked very closely with our allies ” to ensure COVID-19 vaccine research was protected .
The first cases of COVID-19 were reported in China and more than 13.5 million infections have been confirmed globally .
British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab on Thursday called it “ completely unacceptable ” that Russia would allegedly target organizations working to combat the pandemic. ” Canada ’ s Communications Security Establishment , one of the agencies that issued Thursday ’ s advisory with the U.S. National Security Agency , the Department of Homeland Security ’ s Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency , and Britain ’ s National Cyber Security Centre , said the attacks would “ hinder response efforts at a time when health care experts and medical researchers need every available resource . ”
Russia flatly denied responsibility , as it has with other major computer intrusions blamed on longtime President Vladimir Putin ’ s regime .
“ We find such accusations unacceptable , ” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Thursday . “ We have no information on who could have hacked pharmaceutical companies and research centers in the U.K. We can say only one thing , Russia has nothing to do with these attempts . ”