The federal government recommends no one attend gatherings of more than 10 people , but some churches are still encouraging big congregations to attend Easter Sunday services .
Carlos Barria / Reuters Pastor Tony Spell attends Sunday service at the Life Tabernacle Church in Baton Rouge , Louisiana , April 5 , challenging state orders against assembling in large groups to prevent the spread of COVID-19 .
The journalists at ███ are proud to bring you trustworthy and relevant reporting about the coronavirus . To help keep this news free , become a member and sign up for our newsletter , Outbreak Today .
When he picked up the phone and heard it was a reporter on the line , Louisiana Pastor Tony Spell almost immediately began reciting the Declaration of Independence . “ We hold these truths to be self-evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights , that among these are life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness , ” Spell , the leader of Life Tabernacle Church in Baton Rouge told ███ Thursday morning over the phone . “ My government is not my creator , my president is not my God , ” continued Spell , who was charged with six misdemeanors last week for continuing to hold in-person services despite the coronavirus pandemic . “ The president did not give me my rights to worship God and to assemble in church , and no socialist government or godless president can take that right away . ”
“ The president did not give me my rights to worship God . ”
While the majority of churches in the country have chosen to suspend services during the coronavirus outbreak — choosing , when they can , to host their congregations online via livestream — several churches around the country have continued to hold services . Many of them have big Easter Sunday plans , even as some church gatherings across the US have led to outbreaks among their congregants . Glorious Way Church in Houston , Texas , plans to hold a socially distanced Easter morning service on Sunday , removing benches and using volunteer ushers to make sure family units stay six feet apart from one another , the distance recommended by the Department of Health and Human Services to help prevent spreading the virus . Solid Rock Church , a megachurch in Ohio , has stated it will keep holding services as long as the First Amendment of the Constitution is upheld , though a notice on its website says it is limiting its services , suspending collections and communion “ in a normal sense , ” and that there are not a “ large number of worshippers ” in the facility for services . A link to “ Easter @ Solid Rock ” leads to an unrelated event , and the church ’ s calendar seems to show that the church plans on holding two services Sunday at their Lebanon ( “ North ” ) campus , as well as some “ adult classes ” for members of the church , including a finance class and one called “ Marriage Matters. ” A woman who answered Solid Rock ’ s phone told ███ she has been advised to refer all callers to its website , due to “ all the bad press we ’ ve received ” for staying open . The website has a notice saying they “ agree we must all comply ” with Ohio ’ s order , and lists ways in which the church is attempting to mitigate the spread . However , it also insists it is the church ’ s responsibility to stay open , quoting this line from the New Testament : “ Let us not give up the habit of meeting together , as some are doing . Instead , let us encourage one another all the more , since you see that the Day of the Lord is coming nearer . Hebrews 10:25 . ”
Come witness this POWERFUL moment in history ! We invite everyone out to come join us , as we observe Jesus ' last hours , through worship and skit . Tonight at 7pm here at The Bridge Church . This is a POWERFUL skit ! You do n't want to miss !
The Bridge Church in Robstown , Texas , has continued to hold special services leading up to Easter , Pastor Joel Garza told ███ over the phone Thursday , as well as its normal Sunday services . They disinfect the church before and after services , ask congregants to stay a “ safe distance ” from other families , and set up speakers in the parking lot for those who prefer to stay in their cars for service , but anywhere from 100 to 200 attendees have been showing up , Garza said , adding that he hopes more people come this Sunday for Easter services .
Spell , of the Life Tabernacle Church in Baton Rouge , told ███ he is sending 27 buses out to bring congregants to his church for Easter Sunday service , and that he expects about 2,000 people to attend . The service will last all day with a rotating cast of congregants as more are bused in and out — about eight hours for the morning service and three hours in the evening , he said . Since the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak , medical experts have advised against gatherings of more than a few people . On March 15 , the Center for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) urged against the congregating of more than 50 people . Just a few days later , President Donald Trump released his guidelines for slowing the spread of coronavirus , including avoiding “ social gatherings in groups of 10 or more people. ” Many houses of worship are obeying these guidelines , and some influential religious organizations and sects , including the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , the Catholic Church , the US Council of Muslim Organizations , and various denominations of Judaism have closed their houses of worship or are urging services take place online . As ███ reported last month , a poll conducted in mid-March found that nearly a fifth of religious Americans said they were still attending in-person services . However , conditions have changed and worsened significantly since then , and some outbreaks have even occurred explicitly due to church gatherings . At least 70 attendees of a church in Sacramento , California , were diagnosed with COVID-19 last week , and in March churches in Arkansas and Illinois saw dozens of citizens fall ill after attending church events . Several states that have issued stay-at-home orders have included exceptions for houses of worship . New York , Pennsylvania , Texas , Michigan , and California have all issued stay-at-home orders that either designate houses of worship as “ essential ” ( exempting them from having to close ) or encourage them to close but exempt them from penalties . For example , Michigan Gov . Gretchen Whitmer banned all gatherings outside the home , but added that “ a place of religious worship , when used for religious worship , is not subject to penalty '' for violating the order . Other states have directives that are not particularly clear on the guidelines for houses of worship . South Carolina and Alabama did not explicitly address houses of worship , but left them out of their list of nonessential businesses required to close . Louisiana Gov . John Bel Edwards issued an executive order in mid-March that banned gatherings of more than 50 people , but made exceptions for traveling “ to-and-from ” houses of worship . Ohio Gov . Mike DeWine ’ s order exempts houses of worship from the state ’ s ban on gatherings of more than 10 people , but he then tweeted a plea to religious leaders to halt in-person services . Even with these exemptions , some religious leaders , like Spell , have flouted directives so openly that they are now facing criminal charges .
Gerald Herbert / AP Pastor Tony Spell speaks to media after holding an evening service at the Life Tabernacle Church in Baton Rouge , Louisiana , March 31 .
In a phone call Thursday , Glorious Way Church Associate Pastor James Buntrock said that he has even hired law enforcement to be present at services to protect his congregation from media covering the church , or in case any “ activist type people ” try to show up to spread COVID-19 among the church attendees . “ Nobody has threatened us directly here , ” Buntrock said , adding that they haven ’ t had any problems with members of the press either : “ But I 've heard rumors of those possibilities , ” he said , “ so I just wanted to be prepared. ” Texas ’ stay-at-home order explicitly labeled houses of worship “ essential services , ” and some churches , like Glorious Way and the Bridge Church are taking that very seriously .
“ We as essential organizations need to show up right now . ”
“ We as essential organizations need to show up right now . If nurses and doctors , or police officers and firefighters , didn ’ t show up , it would be considered dishonorable , ” Bridge Church leader Joel Garza told ███ . “ Yet churches , for whatever reason , seem to feel like it 's okay not to show up when our world needs us the most. ” Garza even went as far as to say that he believed attending services would help people fight off coronavirus . “ Right now people are staying at home , depressed , it weakens your immune system , and they 're most susceptible to disease through depression , ” Garza said . “ But if they come to church , they 're encouraged , they 're joyful , their immune system receives like a B-12 , and they 're able to go do better fighting off any kind of infirmities. ” American Psychological Association Director of Clinical Research and Quality Vaile Wright told ███ Friday that there was “ certainly no evidence ” to suggest that attending church could boost your immune system , and that even recommending a distance of 6 feet between congregants was still in violation of the CDC ’ s recommendations . “ Long-term stress can suppress the immune system and that can in turn lead to illness , and we do know social contact is a way to buffer stress . However , the benefit that can come from that social contact does not have to be face to face , ” Wright said . “ It ’ s important that we come together during these times of worship , but you have to balance that with the public health imperative to stay physically apart . ”
Gerald Herbert / AP Congregants arrive for evening service at the Life Tabernacle Church in Baton Rouge , Louisiana .
Staff who spoke to ███ from each of the churches choosing to remain open for Easter said they had received angry , and even vulgar and explicit , complaints about their choice , but that they see the pandemic as even more of a reason for them to stay open . The pastors also argued that they are providing concrete support for people affected by the pandemic through their charity . Many churches that have remained open have also been gathering and distributing food and essentials to people whose income or meal access has been affected by coronavirus closures . “ I appreciate what doctors and nurses are doing . We pray for them . They are right in the middle of this — they 're being separated from their families . It 's horrible , ” Glorious Way ’ s pastor Buntrock said . “ But the answer to this is not an entirely natural answer , ” he continued . “ We 've got to bring God into this . He is the answer to this . I want that message to get out . So that 's why we 're staying open. ” ●