This video was produced in collaboration with The New York Times .
Admild , an undocumented immigrant from Haiti , was feeling sick as he approached the deportation plane that was going to take him back to the country he had fled in fear . Two weeks before that day in May , while being held at an Immigration and Customs Enforcement detention facility in Louisiana , he had tested positive for the coronavirus — and he was still showing symptoms .
He disclosed his condition to an ICE official at the airport , who sent him to a nurse .
“ She just gave me Tylenol , ” said Admild , who feared reprisals if his last name was published . Not long after , he was back on the plane before landing in Port-au-Prince , one of more than 40,000 immigrants deported from the United States since March , according to ICE records .
Even as lockdowns and other measures have been taken around the world to prevent the spread of the coronavirus , ICE has continued to detain people , move them from state to state and deport them .
An investigation by The New York Times in collaboration with ███ reveals how unsafe conditions and scattershot testing helped turn ICE into a domestic and global spreader of the virus — and how pressure from the Trump administration led countries to take in sick deportees .
We spoke to more than 30 immigrant detainees who described cramped and unsanitary detention centers where social distancing was near impossible and protective gear almost nonexistent . “ It was like a time bomb , ” said Yudanys , a Cuban immigrant held in Louisiana .
At least four deportees interviewed by The Times , from India , Haiti , Guatemala and El Salvador , tested positive for the virus shortly after arriving from the United States .
So far , ICE has confirmed at least 3,000 coronavirus-positive detainees in its detention centers , though testing has been limited .
We tracked over 750 domestic ICE flights since March , carrying thousands of detainees to different centers , including some who said they were sick . Kanate , a refugee from Kyrgyzstan , was moved from the Pike County Correctional Facility in Pennsylvania to the Prairieland Detention Facility in Texas despite showing Covid-19 symptoms . He was confirmed to have the virus just a few days later .
“ I was panicking , ” he said . “ I thought that I will die here in this prison . ”
We also tracked over 200 deportation flights carrying migrants , some of them ill with coronavirus , to other countries from March through June . Under pressure from the Trump administration and with promises of humanitarian aid , some countries have fully cooperated with deportations .
El Salvador and Honduras have accepted more than 6,000 deportees since March . In April , President Trump praised the presidents of both countries for their cooperation and said he would send ventilators to help treat the sickest of their coronavirus patients .
So far , the governments of 11 countries have confirmed that deportees returned home with Covid-19 .
When asked about the agency ’ s role in spreading the virus by moving and deporting sick detainees , ICE said it took precautions and followed guidelines of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . As of last week , ICE said that it was still able to test only a sampling of immigrants before sending them home . Yet deportation flights continue .