FILE - In this May 1 , 2020 , file photo protesters calling for the end of Gov Gavin Newsom 's stay-at-home orders march around the state Capitol in Sacramento , Calif. More Americans disapprove than approve of protests that have taken place across the country against restrictions put in place to prevent the spread of COVID-19 , according to a new poll by The University of Chicago Divinity School and The ███-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research . ( AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli , File )
FILE - In this May 1 , 2020 , file photo protesters calling for the end of Gov Gavin Newsom 's stay-at-home orders march around the state Capitol in Sacramento , Calif. More Americans disapprove than approve of protests that have taken place across the country against restrictions put in place to prevent the spread of COVID-19 , according to a new poll by The University of Chicago Divinity School and The ███-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research . ( AP Photo/Rich Pedroncelli , File )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — A majority of Americans disapprove of protests against restrictions aimed at preventing the spread the coronavirus , according to a new poll that also finds the still-expansive support for such limits — including restaurant closures and stay-at-home orders — has dipped in recent weeks .
The new survey from the University of Chicago Divinity School and The ███-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research finds 55 % of Americans disapprove of the protests that have popped up in some states as some Americans begin chafing at public health measures that have decimated the global economy . Thirty-one percent approve of the demonstrations .
Texas hair salon owner Shelley Luther was sentenced to seven days in jail last week after refusing to apologize to a judge for opening her salon in defiance of Republican Gov . Greg Abbott ’ s emergency orders . She was released less than 48 hours later after Abbott removed jail as a punishment for defying virus safeguards .
In Michigan , thousands of people rallied outside the state capitol last month to protest Democratic Gov . Gretchen Whitmer ’ s restrictions . Hundreds returned two weeks later , some of them armed , to demonstrate inside the statehouse .
Democrats are more likely than Republicans to disapprove of such protests , 67 % to 51 % . Thirty-two percent of Republicans and 25 % of Democrats say they approve . Only 8 % said public protests , marches and rallies should be unrestricted during the outbreak , while 41 % think they should be allowed only with restrictions and 50 % think they should not be allowed at all .
Dee Miner , 71 , of Fremont , California , said she disapproves of the protests , but also feels people have the right to express themselves .
“ We have to have the right to protest , but I have to tell you , seeing those people with those weapons at the statehouse in Michigan was pretty disturbing , ” said Miner , a Democrat and retired dental office manager . “ I felt sorry for the legislators having to work with that angry mob in the lobby . It seemed like it was just pure intimidation . ”
Adam Blann , 37 , of Carson City , Nevada , said he does not personally favor the protests , but does not believe they should be restricted .
“ Its a tough situation , ” said Blann , a Republican-leaning voter who works in the natural gas industry . “ But I also think that one of the reasons we live in a great country is that we have freedom of expression , freedom of speech , freedom to protest . ”
As some states have begun to slowly ease restrictions on businesses and individuals , the poll finds that 71 % of Americans favor requiring people to stay in their homes except for essential errands . Support for such measures is down slightly from 80 % two weeks earlier .
Similarly , 67 % of Americans now say they favor requiring bars and restaurants to close , down from 76 % in the earlier poll . The poll also suggested dipping support for requiring Americans to limit gatherings to 10 people or fewer ( from 82 % to 75 % ) and requiring postponement of nonessential medical care ( from 68 % to 57 % ) .
Mark Roberts , a retired transportation worker in Abingdon , Virginia , said he ’ s going about his business despite Democratic Gov . Ralph Northam ’ s stay-at-home order . Roberts said people in his southwestern Virginia community are driving the short distance into neighboring Bristol , Tennessee , to patronize restaurants open there .
“ People from Virginia have been crossing over into Tennessee to eat and just get out , you know , and do things , and Virginia is losing out on it , ” said the 61-year-old Republican .
Among Republicans like Roberts , the share supporting stay-at-home orders dipped from 70 % in late April to 57 % in the latest poll . The share supporting other measures also dropped , from 75 % to 63 % for limiting gatherings to no more than 10 people and from 70 % to 53 % for closing bars and restaurants .
Among Democrats , 84 % favor stay-at-home orders , down slightly from 91 % in the earlier poll . Eighty-seven percent of Democrats favor barring gatherings of more than 10 people , and 79 % support bar and restaurant closures , about the same as in the previous poll .
Blann , the Nevada resident , said he didn ’ t mind officials imposing certain restrictions for a short period of time , but fears the potential of authorities being unwilling to roll back some of their newly declared powers .
“ I do think the government should respond to allowing people to make more of their own personal choices without legal repercussions , ” said Blann , who said he doesn ’ t expect to find himself in a crowded bar anytime soon , but is looking forward to being able to go back to church .
The poll found most Americans in favor of some kind of restriction on in-person worship , with 42 % saying that should be allowed with restriction and 48 % that it should not be allowed at all .
Marilou Grainger , a retired nurse anesthetist and registered Republican in Washington , Missouri , said she ’ s torn between the need to take precautions against the virus while also allowing people to make their own decisions .
“ I think we should still be under a bit of quarantine , especially people who are 60 or older , ” said Grainger , 67 , who believes the jury is still out on whether lockdowns and stay-at-home orders have been effective in stemming the spread of the virus .
“ Did we make a mistake ? Did we totally annihilate our economy , or did we actually save some people issuing this quarantine ? ” she asked .
The AP-NORC poll of 1,002 adults was conducted April 30-May 4 using a sample drawn from NORC ’ s probability-based AmeriSpeak Panel , which is designed to be representative of the U.S. population . The margin of sampling error for all respondents is plus or minus 4.2 percentage points .