Madison Elmer got the offer shortly after she and some friends started organizing a protest to oppose Wisconsin 's coronavirus stay-at-home order : An outside group wanted to chip in some money to help pay for the rally she plans this week .
Concerned about the strings that could be attached , Elmer turned it down .
`` We felt like it had a political agenda behind it , ” said the Wisconsin native , who declined to name the group . “ We didn ’ t want to be pawns in somebody ’ s else ’ s game . ”
As protesters across the country plan to challenge statewide coronavirus orders , they fiercely resist a growing narrative that they are aligned with or funded by national groups , gun rights organizations or entities supporting President Donald Trump ’ s reelection – even as some of those groups take part in the events .
The protests , focused on rolling back stay-at-home orders to slow the spread of coronavirus , snarled traffic in Michigan , blocking a hospital entrance . Thousands of cheering , flag-waving drivers cruised around Pennsylvania . Some demonstrations feature Trump campaign flags , but homemade signs – such as one in Tennessee that encouraged Americans to `` fear your government , '' not the coronavirus – are more prevalent .
Fact check : Trump claims coronavirus tests are widely available . They are not
Suspend immigration : Trump 's vow to halt immigration puts industries on edge
They have continued even as some states tentatively began reopening businesses and easing distancing guidelines . More than 46,000 Americans have died from the disease , according to Johns Hopkins University . Trump encouraged states with fewer cases and deaths to begin bringing their economies back online .
Wisconsin had more than 4,800 confirmed cases of the virus by Wednesday and had recorded 246 deaths , according to the state health department .
Elmer said she started organizing a protest for Friday after hearing from friends who were struggling , not because they are sick but because they are running out of money . Friday was the day that Gov . Tony Evers ' social distancing restrictions were initially set to lift .
`` I was listening to all these concerns , and I was sick of not doing anything about it , '' she said . `` There are people suffering on both sides of this . ''
Much like the tea party movement that sprang up a decade ago , the coronavirus protests are a cultural eddy of conservative ideologies , from gun rights advocates to religious groups . Though many organizers insist the `` gridlock '' events and protests are nonpartisan , many have taken on the flavor of Trump rallies – including a smattering of campaign signs and the president 's trademark red `` MAGA '' caps .
The events underscore how efforts to contain the virus have divided millions of Americans along familiar political battle lines .
Nearly 60 % of the nation ’ s voters say they are more concerned about additional deaths from the virus than they are about the economic impact , according to an NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll this week . That sentiment is more prevalent among Democrats than Republicans . GOP respondents are divided – almost half are more concerned with the economy .
Alvin Tillery , a political scientist at Northwestern University , sees the protests – and Trump ’ s exhortations – as an attempt to rally his base when he has faced intense criticism from Democrats for his early handling of the crisis .
“ It ’ s directed toward the blue states . It ’ s meant to distract from Mr. Trump ’ s incredibly poor performance in managing the crisis , ” Tillery said . “ It distracts but also gives them an issue that activates their desire to vote against the Democrats . ”
Trump has encouraged the groups , including from the podium of the White House briefing room . Friday , in a series of tweets , he suggested it was time to `` liberate '' Michigan , Minnesota and Virginia . He has been less clear about what he 'd like those states to do , and he has batted away questions about whether the protesters flout social distancing guidelines he and his aides promoted .
Liberate : Trump seeks to 'liberate ' states as protesters demand easing of orders
The first item in those guidelines is to `` listen and follow '' directions from authorities . The guidance goes on to encourage Americans to work from home , cancel unnecessary travel and avoid gatherings of more than 10 people .
`` Look , people – they want to get back to work , they got to make a living , '' Trump said late Tuesday . `` They have to take care of their family . ''
Georgia : Trump says he disagrees with Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp 's reopening plan
Trump took a different approach a day later , saying he disagreed `` strongly '' with Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp 's decision to move toward reopening parts of that state 's economy . Kemp , a Republican and Trump ally , is pushing to reopen gyms , barber shops and other businesses as soon as Friday .
Trump said Wednesday he thought it was `` just too soon . ''
Elmer stressed that she took no money or help from outside interests , but she 's aware that a group called Wisconsinites Against Excessive Quarantine plans an event Friday at the same place and at roughly the same time as the rally she organized . That entity is associated with a national gun rights group .
`` Cool – if they ’ re supporting our mission , which is reopening Wisconsin , ” she said .
Similarly , organizers reached by ███ in Virginia , Tennessee , Indiana and several other states denied working with national groups but said they were inspired by protests elsewhere . Some tapped into guns rights or tea party organizations to help spread the word but claimed no formal affiliation with wider networks .
There is some overlap : In addition to Wisconsin , rallies in Pennsylvania , Ohio and Minnesota were promoted by Facebook pages started by brothers – Chris , Ben and Aaron Dorr – who have a network of gun advocacy organizations in multiple states .
Pennsylvanians Against Excessive Quarantine , which was launched by the Pennsylvania Firearms Association and led by Chris Dorr , was among a trio of groups that helped organize Monday ’ s rally in Harrisburg .
`` A government that is powerful enough to make unilateral decisions that close down the means of production , well , they ’ re also then able , in a future school shooting or another Pittsburgh shooting , to reinvoke that same power and say we ’ re going to ban constitutional freedoms to bear arms , ” said Dorr , the firearms association ’ s director .
“ These Facebook groups , they are completely free , '' Dorr said . `` All I did was start the page and then invited about 10 or 15 friends into it , and it spiraled out of control from there . There ’ s not even 5 bucks behind this whole thing . ''
Several national groups that fueled the tea party movement during President Barack Obama 's administration said they are helping but not leading the groups . Many of the same charges about `` AstroTurf '' organizing were leveled against that movement , which sprang up partly in response to the Affordable Care Act .
`` There is no central person organizing everything , '' said Adam Brandon , president of FreedomWorks , a conservative group that focuses on economic issues .
Brandon said 25,000 people took his group 's `` grassroots training program , '' and many of them work with groups to stage the demonstrations . The training includes coaching organizers on how to promote their events , such as through writing news releases and contacting reporters .
Jenny Beth Martin , co-founder of the Tea Party Patriots , said the real organizers are `` people who are fed up . ''
Martin described the events as an organic movement that relies on social media . National groups such as hers , she said , blast out announcements posted to social media by local organizers to help spread the word .
`` We want to make sure our supporters are aware events are happening , '' Martin said .
`` It ’ s nonsense , '' said Robert Hall , a longtime conservative figure in Indiana who helped promote a protest in Indianapolis . `` It ’ s all grassroots . ''
Stephen Moore , an outside economic adviser to Trump , applauded the events but said he declined invitations to speak at them because he does n't want organizers to be seen as swayed by national interests . Moore cautioned protesters against wearing MAGA hats and other Trump merchandise , arguing it could turn off some supporters .
`` It really has been a spontaneous combustion , '' he told ███ .
In some cases , the organization of the protests borders on chaotic .
Teo De Las Heras created a `` ReOpen PA '' Facebook page last week after spotting a similar effort in North Carolina . The tech company employee from Langhorne , Pennsylvania , told ███ that the page quickly grew to more than 60,000 members . Within days , other members of the group organized a protest he attended but did n't help to stage .
“ We ’ re basically a grassroots thing right now , ” said De Las Heras , a registered Republican , who said he abstained from voting in the 2016 election . `` All the admin and moderators are basically just small-business owners and people impacted by this . ''
He said an individual reached out to him about having a conversation about `` some kind of national organization , '' but he did n't know the specifics nor the person 's group . `` They 're contacting all the different influencers out there on social media , '' De Las Heras said . He agreed to talk , but the meeting was canceled .
De Las Heras said his Facebook group was initially filled with people looking to impeach Gov . Tom Wolf , a Democrat , but he ’ s sought to keep it focused on the economy .
Keeping protesters on message – and avoiding an association with some of the hate speech that has cropped up – has been a challenge for organizers . Some protesters have reportedly flashed anti-Semitic signs . Organizers have rebuked that behavior , which has been rare , and said it distracts from the intended message .
In Virginia , David Britt , a spokesman for the Reopen Virginia “ gridlock ” rally , said the support keeps getting `` exponentially bigger '' since the event was organized last Thursday . He said his group is `` not getting a dime ” in outside funding or other help .
A self-described `` constitutional conservative '' and `` political big-mouth on Facebook , '' Britt said he was driven to action after watching last week ’ s rally in Lansing , Michigan . He proposed on Facebook that Virginians do the same thing .
`` We ’ re winging this and flying by the seat of our pants , ” said Britt , a mental health counselor from Fairfax , Virginia .
Virginia organizers are particularly upset about the length of Democratic Gov . Ralph Northam ’ s stay-at-home order , which is to run through June 10 . They said it ’ s too extreme and will lead to unemployment and other unintended consequences , from homelessness to domestic violence .
Virginia had more than 9,600 confirmed cases of the virus as of Tuesday and recorded 324 deaths , according to state health officials .
Britt said organizers discouraged people from turning an event planned for Wednesday into a Trump rally or a protest over Second Amendment rights and instead urged them to stay `` laser-focused '' on their message about getting Virginians back to work .
`` We 're trying to discourage that as much as possible , '' Britt said , who described himself as a supporter of the president . `` This isn ’ t a Trump rally . This isn ’ t a Republican rally . ''
Contributing : Jorge L. Ortiz , ███ ; Lansing State Journal ; Milwaukee Journal Sentinel