Home Depot customers carry their purchases as they leave the store , Friday , April 3 , 2020 during the coronavirus pandemic in New York . ( AP Photo/Mark Lennihan )
Home Depot customers carry their purchases as they leave the store , Friday , April 3 , 2020 during the coronavirus pandemic in New York . ( AP Photo/Mark Lennihan )
The outbreak of the coronavirus has dealt a shock to the global economy with unprecedented speed . Following are developments on Friday related to the global economy , the work place and the spread of the virus .
COSTS MOUNT : The pandemic will cost the global economy as much as $ 4.1 trillion , or nearly 5 % of all economic activity , according to new estimates from the Asian Development Bank .
The head of the International Monetary Fund said the recession sparked by the coronavirus pandemic is “ way worse ” than the 2008 global recession . At a press briefing in Geneva on Friday , IMF managing director Kristalina Georgieva described the situation as “ a crisis like no other . ”
AIRLINES : Delta Air Lines , American Airlines , United Airlines , Southwest and JetBlue said they applied Friday for their share of $ 25 billion in federal grants designed to cover airline payrolls for the next six months . None disclosed the amount they are seeking .
The grant money was part of $ 2.2 trillion relief bill approved last week . Delta ’ s CEO says his airline is burning more than $ 60 million cash per day , and United ’ s president puts it at $ 100 million a day . Airline revenue has cratered during the coronavirus outbreak . Delta carried 38,000 passengers last Saturday . On a normal Saturday in late March it flies 600,000 .
The number of travelers screened Thursday at airports nationwide was 124,000 , a 95 % drop from the same day last year .
And the global airline industry passed a milestone Friday : Half of all passenger jets are now grounded as airlines cut flights sharply . Aviation-data firm Cirium said that with another 530 parked since Thursday , there are now 12,635 jets in service and 13,655 grounded . The number of commercial flights is down 75 % , according to tracking service
The Transportation Department , meanwhile , said it is getting more complaints from consumers who say airlines are giving travel vouchers instead of refunds after canceling flights . The department says vouchers aren ’ t easy to use because airlines are cutting so many flights due to the coronavirus outbreak . Airlines can offer vouchers — and usually do , even in normal times — but the Transportation Department said it is reminding carriers of a longstanding requirement to issue prompt refunds to passengers who want them .
SMALL BUSINESS : More than $ 875 million in loan applications had been processed through the new small business loan program , Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said via Twitter , “ almost all from community banks ! ” Mnuchin said in that tweet that big banks were also taking applications and would be submitting them shortly . However , there were signs that the program is off to a rough start .
CROWD CONTROL : Walmart still wants customers , just fewer of them at a time . The nation ’ s largest retailer said it will now allow no more than five customers for each 1,000 square feet at a given time , roughly about 20 % of the average store ’ s capacity . To oversee the restriction , workers will mark a queue at a single-entry door , and direct arriving customers there , where they ’ ll be admitted one by one . Walmart joins Target and others in trying to limit the number of customers in the store to curb the spread of the coronavirus .
HEAVY INDUSTRY : Toyota is halting production at five of its 18 plants in Japan as sales evaporate . The stoppage will last three days for most of the plants , but one plant will close until mid-April .
The affected plants produce vehicles for export , including Lexus luxury models and the Prius hybrid . Other Japanese automakers , such as Honda Motor Co. , have also suspended production .
CORONA SIDELINED BY CORONAVIRUS : The coronavirus pandemic is even closing the taps on Corona beer — along with most other brews across Mexico .
Major breweries announced Friday they are suspending operations in response to government orders for non-essential businesses to keep their workers at home .
Grupo Modelo , maker of Corona among other popular brands , said it will suspend its operations at plants around the country by Sunday . The company pointed out in a statement that thousands of farmers depend on it buying their grain . It said it has a plan that would allow it to continue production with 75 % of its workforce at home if the government decides to allow it to continue operating .
Some Mexican states have also imposed dry laws that restrict the sale of alcohol during the health crisis .
MARKETS : U.S. stocks fell Friday , leaving the S & P 500 down 26.5 % since its record set in February .
The losses came after the government reported that U.S. employers cut 701,000 jobs in March , the monthly decline in nearly a decade . Because of the timing of the spread of COVID-19 , the March report did not capture the extend of the damage . Economists are warning policy makers to brace for worse .
ROUNDING IT OUT : The U.S. typically has a unique response to crisis , and the coronavirus is no different .
Firearm sales spiked 85 % last month compared with the March last year , according an analysis of the FBI ’ s National Instant Criminal Background Check System by Small Arms Analytics and Forecasting .
The laws of supply and demand also apply to arming up , of course , and the cost of adding guns the the shopping list will cost you .
“ Much of the industry ’ s inventory will have been depleted , so that we anticipate that weapons and ammunition prices increased as well , ” said Jurgen Brauer , SAAF ’ s chief economist .