Seven months after Tammie Lewis was granted parole , she is still in Marlin Transfer Facility waiting to go home . Officials won ’ t release her from the Texas state prison until she completes a six-month program focused on decision-making . * But she hasn ’ t been able to finish the program because , after waitlists and other delays , classes normally taught in person were suspended due to coronavirus , says Lewis ’ s sister , Temeka Hildreth . Now that classes have resumed , they ’ re by correspondence . “ They ’ ve got them in their dorm doing packets , ” Hildreth said last week .
Lewis is one of more than 15,000 people in Texas who have been granted parole but still can ’ t go home , according to data published by the state corrections department . While states from Iowa to Arkansas have used the parole process as a way to thin prison populations to fight the spread of COVID-19 , “ there have been no changes ” to the way the Texas parole board makes decisions in light of coronavirus , said Raymond Estrada , a spokesman for the board . As of April 29 , 1,050 Texas prisoners have tested positive for COVID-19 and 12 have died . Texas has one of the lowest testing rates in the country , the Austin-American Statesman reports .
Theoretically , people like Lewis who have already been granted parole are prime candidates for COVID-19-related release . And many states and counties have ordered their officers to stop reincarcerating people for breaking probation and parole rules such as missing appointments or failing drug tests . But according to more than a dozen interviews with defense attorneys , probation and parole experts and corrections officials in seven states , bureaucracies that are unwieldy even in normal times are keeping people under supervision in a dangerous limbo : COVID-19 is raging in prisons but their options for release are stymied by measures designed to stop the spread of the virus .
When people are accused of violating their probation or parole , they often have to wait behind bars for a series of hearings and procedural hurdles to determine if they are guilty and what the consequences will be . Think of a criminal trial , but less formal and with fewer constitutional protections . Even “ one day in custody can totally disrupt someone ’ s life to the point of almost no return , ” says Michael Nail , Georgia ’ s commissioner of community supervision . Now , coronavirus can make custody downright dangerous .
In California , an April 6 emergency court rule meant to keep people out of jail during the pandemic set bail automatically at $ 0 for a wide range of crimes . The rule came two weeks too late for Nolan Myers , who was sent to the Southwest Detention Center in Riverside County , California , in late March after he missed an appointment with his probation officer . His next step would have been to go before a judge , but courthouses are closed .
As of last week Myers was one of 141 people awaiting a violation hearing in the Riverside County jails , according to Lionel Murphy , a spokesman for the sheriff . With a coronavirus outbreak tearing through the jail , “ his life is in danger over a technical violation , ” his girlfriend , Samantha Smart , wrote to ███ in an email . ( Myers finally went home on Friday after a prosecutor and his attorney reached an agreement , according to Marita Ford , a spokesperson for the court . )
Parole violations also make it harder—or impossible—to access reduced bail for new crimes .
After Melinda Morales was caught shoplifting from a New York department store , she could have easily posted the $ 1 bail the judge set in her case . But since the shoplifting was also a parole violation , she ’ s stuck on Rikers Island , where the medical director called the spread of coronavirus a “ public health disaster ” . Morales is now infected with the coronavirus , the local news site The City reported . As of Sunday there were 826 people in New York City jails because of a probation or parole violation , according to city data . More than 600 of them , like Morales , could potentially post bail for the crime they ’ re accused of , but aren ’ t able to because of a parole or probation violation .
Similar situations are unfolding around the country , experts say . The parish jail in New Orleans holds dozens of people who can ’ t address their parole violations until they resolve their new arrests , according to Orleans Public Defender Colin Reingold . But they can ’ t proceed with hearings or trials on the new arrests because courts are closed through at least mid-May . Videoconferences are not available for these types of hearings , Reingold said .
Originally designed as an alternative to incarceration , probation and parole have instead become “ a significant contributor to mass incarceration , ” according to a 2017 Columbia University Justice Lab statement signed by more than 60 prosecutors and community corrections directors across the country . On any given day , supervision violations account for almost a quarter of people in prison nationwide—about 280,000 people—according to an analysis by the Council of State Governments ’ Justice Center .
In Illinois , the parole board had to postpone a week ’ s worth of violation hearings in late March and early April , when a facility-wide quarantine at the Northern Reception and Classification Center , in Joliet , where most accused violators are held , meant that people incarcerated there couldn ’ t appear at their hearings . The plan to remotely video-link parole board members , attorneys and prisoners from three different locations ran into technical problems .
The board has since cleared more than 600 people to go home , but almost 200 of them are still there , because they don ’ t have a parole-approved home to return to , because the local county is still holding them on a new charge , or because the corrections department is delayed in processing their exit paperwork , according to Jason Sweat , a spokesman for the agency .
This is an outrage , says correctional consultant David Muhammad , who served as an independent monitor in a years-long lawsuit against the Illinois Parole Board . “ You all have said they should leave . And they ’ re still there , ” Muhammad said . “ And you have a pandemic worse than anywhere in this place . ”
* An earlier version of this story misstated that Tammie Lewis had to complete a drunken driving course . The program she must complete is `` cognitive pre-release . ''
* * After refusing to answer queries pre-publication , Jeremy Desel , a spokesperson for the Texas prison system , denied delays or changes in pre-release programming .