“ We have to stop the threat of this epidemic , ” says Sherry Glied , a health economist at New York University . “ There ’ s no point rebuilding while the bombs are still dropping . ”
Still , the recent focus on containing the spread of the COVID-19 disease could be key to limiting the ultimate costs both to the economy and to human lives .
Some Americans are chafing already at the restrictions – not least of them President Donald Trump , who this week suggested lifting restrictions at least partially by Easter on April 12 to start revving up the economy . And some economists are also calling for a return-to-work timetable to protect the economy from long-term damage .
It ’ s a sign of how the stay-at-home orders that 21 states will have in place by the end of this week represent a blunt instrument , which may help keep the coronavirus from spreading but is also pounding the economy in unprecedented ways .
On Thursday , the U.S. Labor Department reported that 3.3 million Americans filed initial jobless claims , a record in more than 50 years of data and more than four times the previous record .
Some Americans are beginning to chafe under the coronavirus restrictions that authorities have put into place – not least of them President Donald Trump , who this week suggested lifting restrictions at least partially by Easter on April 12 to start revving up the economy .
It ’ s an ambitious timetable and , to many , a callous one . How dare a president , or anyone , put the health of the economy ahead of the safety of citizens ? But the president ’ s statement highlights another reality that conservatives especially have been grumbling about : The extraordinary stay-at-home orders that 21 states will have in place by the end of this week represent a blunt instrument , which may keep the virus from spreading but is also pounding the economy in unprecedented ways .
The latest evidence came Thursday , when the U.S. Labor Department reported that 3.3 million Americans filed initial jobless claims last week , a record in more than 50 years of data and more than four times the previous record .
A recession is likely , if not already underway . The restrictions on the economy are so far-reaching that businesses have been forced to close , throwing millions out of work , and keeping consumers , a mainstay of the economy , from shopping .
Some analysts are predicting that economic activity could shrink by up to a quarter this spring , a terrifying drop that , were there no recovery the rest of the year , would mean economic dislocation on a scale that would outstrip any single year of the Great Depression .
To many experts , the question is not really if authorities will ease the restrictions , but when . In theory , the sooner that happens , the less damage the economy will sustain . But there ’ s a big caveat . The recent focus on containing the spread of the COVID-19 disease could be key to both limiting the ultimate costs both to the economy and to human lives – including the risk of hospital systems becoming overwhelmed with patients . For now , that focus on containment remains paramount , many say .
“ We will get to a moment where there will be [ only ] so much risk we have to be willing to take , but right now we ’ re not in that world , ” says Sherry Glied , a health economist and dean of New York University ’ s Wagner Graduate School of Public Service . “ We have to stop the threat of this epidemic , ” she adds . “ There ’ s no point rebuilding while the bombs are still dropping . ”
In her view , it makes sense to wait for progress on the scientific front , and for the government to be planning now for how it will reopen the economy in the future , while also making sure basic needs like food and housing are met .
Already , nations including Denmark and Britain are trying to cap economic damage by covering a large chunk of worker salaries for businesses that have seen revenues plunge . A $ 2 trillion relief package moving through Congress Thursday , similarly , throws a lifeline to businesses ( loans ) and workers ( cash payments and stepped-up jobless benefits ) .
SOURCE : Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis ( with data from U.S. Department of Labor ) | Jacob Turcotte/Staff
In weighing how and when to reopen the economy , part of the conundrum is that no one has fully quantified the risks posed by the virus .
“ We don ’ t have that data , ” says Howard Markel , a medical doctor and professor of the history of medicine at the University of Michigan ’ s School of Public Health . The number of reported deaths has triggered alarm in the medical community and suggests that this virus is several times more deadly than a more typical seasonal flu . But public health officials have not been able to establish a concrete fatality rate because testing limitations have made it difficult to get a handle on the number of individuals who have become infected and recovered . When will health authorities have a handle on those numbers ? “ My hope is two to four weeks , ” Dr. Markel says .
It ’ s such timetables that make Mr. Trump ’ s Easter deadline , just over two weeks away , look unrealistic .
Even with the data in hand , health authorities would have to determine the best ways to ease restrictions . Should they target only hard-hit regions ? Or is it better to focus on sheltering the elderly and those diagnosed with other diseases ?
According to the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center , the U.S. has become the global epicenter of the pandemic with nearly 86,000 confirmed cases , more than any other nation .
With the House of Representatives taking up the $ 2 trillion Senate-passed rescue bill , health authorities have some breathing room to determine the best ways to keep the population safe .
The economy can accept a certain amount of risk , and cost-benefit analyses are made routinely , points out Vivian Ho , an economics professor at Rice University and a professor at Baylor College of Medicine , both in Houston . “ It ’ s a tough exercise in this particular situation , but someone needs to put those numbers down . We need to start thinking of maybe we should not shut everything down . ”
“ You ’ re talking about real damage to people ’ s lives , to the 30 million small businesses in America , ” says Chris Edwards , director of tax policy studies at the Cato Institute , a libertarian think tank in Washington . “ People ’ s lives and dreams are in these small businesses and in their careers . And some of them could be ruined permanently . ”
Already , some Americans are beginning to push back on the restrictions , such as by holding social gatherings . A Louisiana pastor continues to defy Louisiana ’ s ban on gatherings of more than 50 by busing in attendees from five different parishes ( counties ) for Sunday services with what he claims are up to 1,000 people .
In Texas , public officials have begun to complain openly about the restrictions .
“ My message is : Let ’ s get back to work . Let ’ s get back to living , ” Lt. Gov . Dan Patrick told Fox News in an interview Monday . “ Let ’ s be smart about it … but don ’ t sacrifice the country . Don ’ t do that . Don ’ t sacrifice the American dream . ”
In Harris County , home to Houston , Republican state Sen. Paul Bettencourt warned that a stay-at-home order restricting business would be “ economically calamitous . ”
There ’ s no real precedent for the economic threat now facing the U.S . The Spanish flu of 1918 occurred in a far different context . The country was coming off a war footing . Restrictions were limited to certain cities .
Even comparisons to sudden recent economic disasters like 9/11 and the 2008 financial crisis are off base , says Jonathan Bydlak , director of the Fiscal and Budget Policy Project at the R Street Institute , a free-market think tank in Washington . “ We ’ re dealing with a very unique situation , and there ’ s not a whole lot in economics books that teach you how to deal with these situations . ”
Nevertheless , many economists continue to stress the importance of taming the virus first before tackling the economy .
“ I think the first order of business will be to get the spread of the virus under control , and then resume economic activity , ” Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell told NBC ’ s “ Today ” show Thursday .
While not opposing that sequence , two high-profile economists called on Monday for a timetable to avoid letting the economy die of neglect .
A quarter of all workers should be back on their jobs within two months , and 75 % of workers within four months , wrote Nobel Prize winner Paul Romer and Alan Garber , a physician and economist at Harvard University , in a New York Times opinion column . The return to work would be coupled with ramped-up testing and widespread use of protective gear by workers , which they said should limit the spread of the virus .
Still , even from a strictly economic point of view , trying to reopen the economy before virus cases have spiked could lead to a longer disruption .
“ We ’ re not anywhere near a flattening of the curve ” of infection , says Joe Brusuelas , chief economist of RSM US LLP , part of a global network of independent audit , tax , and consulting firms . “ Should we move prematurely , it could risk the general spread of the disease that would require subsequent shutdowns . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
As a public service , all our coronavirus coverage is free . No paywall .