As the harms of social distancing become more and more apparent , Americans may start to wonder : Are we overreacting to the coronavirus pandemic ?
A few people ( although not most of the public ) seem to think so . Some federal officials , from President Donald Trump to Rep. Andy Biggs ( R-AZ ) , have asked if “ the cure is proving worse than the disease itself. ” Protesters in several states , including Michigan , Ohio , and Kentucky , have called for lockdowns to end , arguing that the damage to the economy is too much to bear .
This is a question public health experts and officials expected from the start . As Kent State University epidemiologist Tara Smith told me , “ It ’ s the paradox of public health : When you do it right , nothing happens . ”
The problem with proper prevention , the linchpin of many public health strategies , is that there ’ s no clear indication when it works . There ’ s no public celebration when a coronavirus case or death doesn ’ t happen .
And in the meantime , the economic damage of closing down America is readily apparent . Some economists warn that the unemployment rate could surpass 30 percent . About 22 million have filed unemployment claims since social distancing measures took effect in March . The lines for food aid are stretching for blocks across the country . It ’ s now much more difficult — if not impossible — to visit family and friends and partake in many favorite hobbies and activities .
In other words , the benefits of social distancing aren ’ t very visible , while the pain from it is . That creates a situation in which it can be easy to take for granted that social distancing is , according to experts and models , likely preventing hundreds of thousands of deaths in the US .
But it ’ s important to remind ourselves what we ’ re doing here . The US wants to avoid getting to the point where it ’ s obvious we did something wrong and need to correct course . We want to prevent what happened in Italy , Spain , or New York from happening across the country . That means reacting not just to what ’ s visible to us in the present , but what ’ s potentially in the future . Doing that will always at some level seem like an overreaction , even if it ’ s the right call .
“ Anytime you are dealing with an outbreak , if it appears like you overreacted , then you probably did the right thing , ” Krutika Kuppalli , a fellow in the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security Emerging Leaders in Biosecurity program , told me .
That ’ s particularly true for coronavirus . There ’ s still a lot we need to learn about the virus , but we do know it seems to spread at least in part through people who aren ’ t showing any symptoms . That means it can be spreading in communities without anyone — not even the people who are infected — knowing it . That requires taking action before the virus is clearly visible , at least without mass testing , in a community .
There ’ s also evidence from past outbreaks , particularly the 1918 flu pandemic , that reacting quickly and aggressively — even before a disease clearly poses a threat — is crucial both to saving lives and , in the long term , potentially keeping the economy intact .
Yes , it demands a shared sacrifice at this time . But it ’ s worth it . The alternative — that we let up to millions of people , including our friends , family , and peers , die — is so bad we need to do everything we can to prevent it .
It ’ s true that we still don ’ t know enough about the SARS-CoV-2 , the novel coronavirus . That can seem like a reason to not do much : Maybe the virus isn ’ t as contagious or as deadly as we think it is . Maybe it ’ ll die down in the summer with warmer weather . Maybe only specific segments of the general population are really vulnerable .
That ’ s all possible . But remember : Even if all of this and more turns out to be true in the future , the reality is we simply don ’ t know that now and didn ’ t know it before . We have to act with the best information we have . And that information suggests the coronavirus is really bad — whether it ’ s a huge outbreak in Wuhan , China , that forced the country to lock down , the outbreak in Italy that overwhelmed its health care system , or the outbreak in New York that has turned the US into the world ’ s leader in reported cases and deaths ( with more than 639,000 and 30,000 , respectively , as of April 16 — and both figures are likely underestimates ) .
We also know that the coronavirus can spread from people who don ’ t have symptoms yet or will never develop significant symptoms . That could mean the disease is less deadly than we think ; if there are a lot more asymptomatic carriers than we realize , it could mean a way smaller fraction of the people who are infected are dying .
But it also means that the virus can spread before it ’ s even clearly visible in a community . That ’ s been particularly exacerbated by America ’ s poor testing capacity — a result of both poor pandemic preparedness generally and President Donald Trump ’ s slow reaction to the outbreak — leaving the country unable to quickly test people to see if there ’ s asymptomatic spread . ( To this end , we actually underreacted to Covid-19 , and have continued doing so by failing to scale up testing . )
“ Your chance of the first case being the one that comes to your attention is very , very , very , very small , ” George Rutherford , an epidemiologist at the UCSF , told me . “ By the time you have the first death , you have to figure that there ’ s been three full weeks of transmission , and there are at least several hundred cases in the population . ”
So once a city , state , or country is reporting a few Covid-19 cases and especially deaths , it ’ s typically safe to assume there is a much bigger outbreak going on — just one that ’ s not fully visible , at least yet , to the public . Given that coronavirus cases and deaths can double every few days , it ’ s important for the public and officials to act quickly and preemptively to stop exponential growth .
It ’ s in this context that it ’ s so important that countries do what can feel like an overreaction . If you wait until there are already a bunch of cases or deaths in your community , it could be too late to prevent an outbreak that even extreme social distancing might be unable to get under control for weeks .
Consider the stories of California and New York . California actually reported some of the first coronavirus cases and deaths in the country — including the first case of community transmission — but now New York has 14 times the Covid-19 deaths as California . There are important differences between the states , such as New York City ’ s much higher population density and greater public transportation use . It ’ s also possible New York just got unlucky : “ There ’ s the possibility that there were just more introductions of the virus in the East Coast , in the New York area , ” Jeffrey Martin , an epidemiologist at the University of California San Francisco , told me .
But one likely contributor is that California , particularly the San Francisco Bay Area , reacted quicker to the outbreak . The Bay Area issued America ’ s first shelter-in-place order on March 16 , and California issued a statewide stay-at-home order three days later — while New York didn ’ t until March 22 . Even before the government mandates , some parts of California seemed to adopt social distancing early : Restaurant data from OpenTable suggests that seated dining on March 1 was down 2 percent in New York City , but it was down 18 percent in San Francisco . ( Though it was only down by 3 percent in Los Angeles , so not every place in California acted the same . )
The extra days and weeks may not seem like that much time . But when coronavirus cases and deaths can double every few days , that short time span can be important . “ With this virus , days , and even hours , matter , ” Jen Kates , director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation , told me .
It could have been easy at the time to make the case that California and particularly the Bay Area were overreacting , given that the entire state had fewer than 25 deaths when it locked down . But it ultimately seems like it was the right decision .
While there ’ s a lot about the coronavirus and the nature of this outbreak that we still don ’ t know , research from the 1918 flu pandemic , which was linked to as many as 100 million deaths globally and about 675,000 deaths in the US , provides some useful evidence for strong , early action .
A 2007 study in PNAS found that the places that took quicker action on social distancing — closing schools and banning big public gatherings — saw better outcomes :
[ C ] ities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic had peak death rates ≈50 % lower than those that did not and had less-steep epidemic curves . Cities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic also showed a trend toward lower cumulative excess mortality , but the difference was smaller ( ≈20 % ) and less statistically significant than that for peak death rates .
One example cited in the study is the difference between Philadelphia , which was slow to act , and St. Louis , which was faster . As this chart shows , St. Louis did a much better job of flattening the curve and averting excess deaths :
Another 2007 study , published in JAMA , validated the findings — showing places that acted earlier and more aggressively saved lives . But this study also demonstrated the importance of sustaining social distancing measures : When cities , including St. Louis , pulled back their measures too quickly , they saw a spike in deaths .
Here ’ s how that looks in chart form , with the line chart representing excess flu deaths and the black and gray bars below showing when social distancing measures were in place . The highest peak comes after social distancing measures were lifted , with the death rate falling only after they were reinstated .
This did not just happen in St. Louis . Analyzing data from 43 cities , the JAMA study found this pattern repeatedly across the country . Howard Markel , an author of the study and the director of the University of Michigan ’ s Center for the History of Medicine , described the results as a bunch of “ double-humped epi curves ” — officials instituted social distancing measures , saw flu cases fall , then pulled back the measures and saw flu cases rise again .
Notably , the second rise in deaths only appeared when cities removed social distancing measures , the JAMA study found : “ Among the 43 cities , we found no example of a city that had a second peak of influenza while the first set of nonpharmaceutical interventions were still in effect . ”
While invoking social distancing is often presented as a choice between saving lives and sustaining the economy , there ’ s also some preliminary evidence that the early , aggressive actions help the economy in the long term as well . Dylan Matthews covered a recent study along these lines for ███ :
Economists Sergio Correia , Stephan Luck , and Emil Verner released a working paper ( not yet peer-reviewed ) last week that makes this argument extremely persuasively . The three analyzed the 1918-1919 flu pandemic in the United States , as the closest ( though still not identical ) analogue to the current crisis . They compare cities in 1918- ’ 19 that adopted quarantining and social isolation policies earlier to ones that adopted them later . Their conclusion ? “ We find that cities that intervened earlier and more aggressively do not perform worse and , if anything , grow faster after the pandemic is over . ”
The basic problem is that a lot of people getting sick and dying is also pretty bad for the economy — potentially worse than temporarily shutting the economy down .
The risk for us now , by believing we might be overreacting to the coronavirus pandemic , is thinking we can ease up on measures , doing it , and subsequently seeing a spike in Covid-19 cases and deaths . In fact , that already appears to be happening in some parts of the world ; Asian countries that initially contained the outbreak , such as South Korea and Singapore , are now reporting signs of a second wave of cases after easing some of their restrictions .
None of this completely eliminates the possibility that we are overreacting . Maybe a year or two from now we ’ ll realize that we didn ’ t have to close down certain parts of the country . Or maybe certain segments of the population could have remained at their jobs . Or maybe the warmer temperatures could slow the virus ’ s spread more than we think ( though heat hasn ’ t been enough in Singapore , where it ’ s currently 80-plus degrees Fahrenheit ) . We just don ’ t know .
But as public health experts have told me , it ’ d be much better to end up second-guessing ourselves about whether we overreacted than whether we underreacted and maybe caused the deaths of millions . Because that ’ s the risk right now , based on the best evidence we have .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .