Media Matters for America , the George Soros-funded left-wing nonprofit organization , received between $ 1 million and $ 2 million in loans under the federal Paycheck Protection Program ( PPP ) , according to Treasury Department data released Monday .
The loan money , intended to provide relief to small businesses that were shuttered because of the coronavirus pandemic , was approved for Media Matters by Bank of America on April 29 , after the progressive outlet criticized the Trump administration for its handling of the rescue funds , suggesting the administration would not seek “ enough to do the job . ”
Politically-affiliated nonprofits benefiting from the small business loans , which were created as part of the CARES Act and lent $ 521 billion through June 30 , came to light in April , as ███ reported , after several groups such as state affiliates of the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) and the Congressional Progressive Caucus Center filed applications for the loans . Treasury data has so far revealed that branches of the ACLU in Texas , Montana , and North Carolina borrowed between $ 150,000 and $ 350,000 .
“ The PPP is providing much-needed relief to millions of American small businesses , supporting more than 51 million jobs and over 80 percent of all small business employees , who are the drivers of economic growth in our country , ” said Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin .
Critics have pointed to a conflict of interest for groups with political motivations — such as the progressive Media Matters , which has received funding from prominent liberal donors like Soros — pocketing the taxpayer-funded relief money . Media Matters founder David Brock also founded the super PAC American Bridge 21st Century , for example , which funded in key swing states advertisements attacking President Donald Trump ’ s “ incompetency ” in his handling of the coronavirus crisis .
Small Business Administration ( SBA ) Administrator Jovita Carranza emphasized the benefits of the paycheck relief program , saying , “ In three months , this Administration was able to act quickly to get funding into the hands of those who faced enormous obstacles as a result of the pandemic . ”
Although a variety of hard-hit industries from health care to hospitality were able to benefit from the funding , Media Matters received a higher-than-average loan , with the average being $ 100,000 , according to Mnuchin .
The loans provided through the PPP program will be forgiven so long as the money is directed toward payroll — with the stipulation that employees are retained or quickly rehired , and salary levels are maintained — and interest on mortgages , rent , and utilities , according to the SBA .