With courage and elbow-bump caution , lawmakers around the world are trying to carry on their work during the pandemic . The machinery of government still needs the grease of politics . This is particularly true in Iraq where a 17-year attempt to establish a stable , secular parliamentary democracy in the heart of the Arab world shows new promise .
For six months Iraq ’ s politics has been in turmoil following grassroots protests . Young people , still camped out in Baghdad ’ s Tahrir Square , are seeking corruption-free governance and an end to a system that divvies up power by religion and ethnicity . In addition , Iraq continues to be dragged into Iran ’ s maneuvers for influence in the Middle East and the United States ’ response to it . In January , the U.S. assassinated Iranian Gen. Qassem Soleimani on Iraqi soil in retaliation for Iran ’ s targeting of American soldiers .
On Tuesday , Iraq ’ s president named a candidate as prime minister-designate to form a government in parliament . He is Adnan al-Zurfi , a member of parliament who once lived in Detroit and is a dual U.S.-Iraqi citizen . He is also a former governor of the Shiite Muslim shrine city of Najaf . During his tenure , he earned a reputation for integrity , delivering basic services and standing up to Shiite militants .
More important , Mr. Zurfi supports the protesters ’ aims of inclusive , secular rule and an end to Iranian meddling . About 60 % of Iraqis are 27 or younger . They are more globally aware than their elders . They might need a leader who has lived abroad and understands such concepts as rule of law and peaceful transfers of power .
Iraq ’ s unstable government now faces the task of containing the coronavirus , not to mention the effects of declining oil prices on a country highly dependent on oil exports . Mr. Zurfi has until April 16 to persuade factions in parliament to accept him as prime minister . The virus crisis puts the country ’ s divisions in a new perspective . Politics must give way to clean and effective governance in order to , as Mr. Zurfi puts it , “ achieve the aspirations of the Iraqis . ”