“ It was tradition and ceremony—a severe formalism of lamentation as in Aeschylus ’ s Libation Bearers—that reordered the nation ’ s blasted and scattered emotions after the shocking slaughter of its leader , ” writes Camille Paglia in her 1994 essay “ Mona Lisa in Motion : Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis , ” praising the former first lady ’ s masterful management of her husband ’ s assassination in the eyes and spirit of the nation . We are once again facing a crisis , though this time a global one—fitting for our cosmopolitan era . Tragically appropriate as well is that it is one to which the most helpful response is social distancing and self-quarantine , exacerbating in a time of great anxiety the loneliness endemic to our already-atomized age .
Paglia ’ s use of the words “ blasted and scattered ” to describe the feelings of Americans in the wake of that tragedy evoke the images—captured and preserved on film—that have since become ingrained in our cultural memory . While John F. Kennedy was not the first president to be assassinated in office , the effect of his presence on television in the American psyche should not go overlooked when considering the country ’ s response to his murder . Though President Eisenhower had previously held a press conference that was filmed and later televised , President Kennedy was the first to address the nation on live television without delay or editing , and many consider the televised Kennedy-Nixon debates to be the key turning point of his 1960 campaign . The medium allowed him to enter the homes of thousands of families in not just sound but in moving image , penetrating the nation ’ s consciousness in a manner even Roosevelt in his famed Fireside Chats could not hope to achieve . What bitter tragedy that it would be for the same reason that he became such a part of Americans ’ identities that would then make it possible for them to watch , frame-by-frame , his heartbreaking end . But on television they could watch , too , the remarkable state funeral that channeled their grief to a single focal point—solemn and dignified , and set against the backdrop of the nation ’ s capital—and achieve the catharsis necessary to begin healing their shaken spirits .
As some Americans are quarantined and many more practice social distancing in the coming weeks and months , we are sure to experience uncertainty , restlessness , and significant human tragedy as COVID-19 spreads across the country and wreaks havoc on the global economy . The source of our suffering is invisible to the eye and ubiquitous ; there is no established ritual to assist us in channeling our fear and despair , no single body that may be laid to rest as there was in the case of President Kennedy . We have not even a mater dolorosa to preside over our despair , as we did then with the dowager first lady . Without a clear vision of the future and so much at stake , we face not only the physical threats of the coronavirus but also that of an epidemic of hopelessness—one even greater than that which already existed in many parts of our nation .
When I first began mulling the potential role of mythos in this pandemic , I wondered briefly if film and television show production would shut down . Logically , it made sense—but was somehow unthinkable . Yet here we are , with a much larger crisis than the Kennedy assassination and yet deprived of nearly every medium to shape and coalesce what might be called the nation ’ s “ macro-mythos ” : public gatherings , the formal rituals of grief , the high-production-value depictions of unifying narrative stories in movies and on TV . Across social media , however—between the latest bleak , breaking news , partisan finger-pointing , absurdist memes , and personal statements of loved ones suffering or lost to the virus—there are stories of people around the world stepping up to contribute their time , resources , and skills to fight COVID-19 . Heroic doctors , nurses , and other healthcare professionals in every state risk their own well-being to attend the bodies of the afflicted . Policymakers and civil society leaders across America are working tirelessly to soothe the nation ’ s economic concerns , and volunteers , innovators , and heads of industry are mobilizing to meet the material demands necessary for fighting the novel coronavirus .
Even if we are not particularly well-positioned to contribute to this war effort , our duty as individuals must then be to have courage and faith , to contribute to the “ micro-mythos ” through consoling and giving strength to those around us . “ Reflecting today on Jackie ’ s stoical management of self and surroundings in the aftermath of the assasination , we may rue the disrespect with which my Romantic Sixties generation treated the artifice of etiquette , ” writes Paglia . “ Jackie ’ s classy grace under pressure , her cool rejection of complaint or self-pity demonstrate the redemption possible in repression , sublimation , and silence. ” It ’ s natural to feel anxiety , distress , and sadness in the face of disaster—but through self-discipline and restraint we can give meaning to our own suffering , and do our part to prevent each new tragedy from becoming a fresh hell by choosing instead to focus on supporting others .
[ Read “ Why Demonic Forces Are the Best We Can Hope for ” ]
Eventually film studios will reopen , and the stories of these times will be told in technicolor . Even then , when we are finally able to crowd in theaters and the physical threat of the virus has been put at bay , its scars will linger in the psyche of individuals and of nations . The words “ shocked ” and “ overwhelming ” are frequently used together because they describe the neurobiological reality of the brain ’ s inability to process immense amounts of pain or grief at once . Film , literature , and other art can help us make sense of our trauma , and find meaning that allows us to reconcile it with life after crisis . It is the duty of artists and storytellers—and therefore all of us , as we are a storytelling species—to attend to our mythos , to help each other craft narratives of hope , courage , and resolution to guide us through the nightmarish surreality from which now we can ’ t awaken , and which later will haunt us in dreams . As Giovanni Boccaccio writes in the introduction to The Decameron , his classic fourteenth-century collection of novellas based on the Black Death in Florence , Italy :
“ I recognize that , in your judgement , the present work will seem both somber and painful , for its opening contains the sad record of the recent , deadly plague , which inspired so much horror and pity in all who actually saw it or otherwise came to know of it . But I do not want you to be afraid of reading beyond this introduction , as though you would always be going forward amid continual sighs and tears . You will be affected by this horrific beginning no differently than travelers are by a steep and rugged mountain , for beyond it there lies a most beautiful and delightful plain , which will supply them with pleasure that matches the difficulty of both their ascent and descent . And thus , just as happiness at its limit turns to sadness , so misery is ended by the joy that follows it .
This brief pain . . . will be quickly followed by the sweetness and pleasure that I have just promised you and that such a beginning would not , perhaps , led you to expect , had I not explained what is about to happen . And truly , if in all honesty I could have led you where I want to go by any route other than by such a difficult path as this one will be , I would have done so gladly . But because , without recalling these events , I could not explain the origins of the things you will read about later on , I have been forced by necessity , as it were , to write it all down . ”
Like Boccaccio ’ s travelers we have found ourselves in rough terrain , but we must believe that there will yet come a day when we look upon a “ beautiful and delightful plain ” and be grateful—if not for the things that happened then at least for the things we learned and the people we became . Given the option , it ’ s likely Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis would have chosen to avoid her husband ’ s tragic fate and with it the place she took in history for her actions following his death . It might have been forgiven , even expected , for her to crumple and turn inward . But it was this “ baptism by gunfire that deified her , ” in Paglia ’ s words , revealing in her resolve the strength and integrity of her character , and giving solace to a grieving nation—and inspiration to all seeking a model for leadership in times of trial .
Keep a journal and your eyes open . Seek good and be strong . This crisis , like hers , demands that we do our best to be the extraordinary people that can overcome the challenges of these extraordinary circumstances . It demands also that we inspire others so that they may know that they , too , can rise to the challenge ; that heroism—and life after so much death—is possible .
Sloane is a writer in Arlington , Virginia . Her interests include art , culture , and politics .