People line up to vote at Riverside High School during the primary in Milwaukee on Tuesday , April 7 , 2020 . Voters lined up to cast ballots across Wisconsin on Tuesday , ignoring a stay-at-home order in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic to participate in the state 's presidential primary election . ( Mike De Sisti/Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel via AP )
People line up to vote at Riverside High School during the primary in Milwaukee on Tuesday , April 7 , 2020 . Voters lined up to cast ballots across Wisconsin on Tuesday , ignoring a stay-at-home order in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic to participate in the state 's presidential primary election . ( Mike De Sisti/Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel via AP )
MADISON , Wis. ( AP ) — Despite federal health recommendations , thousands of Wisconsin voters waited hours in long lines outside overcrowded polling stations on Tuesday so they could participate in a presidential primary election that tested the limits of electoral politics in the midst of a pandemic .
Thousands more stayed home , unwilling to risk their health even as Republican officials pushed forward with the election amid a stay-at-home order . But many of the potential voters who remained in their homes complained that the absentee ballots they had requested never showed up .
Pregnant and infected with the coronavirus , 34-year-old Hannah Gleeson was still waiting Tuesday for the absentee ballot that she requested last week .
“ It seems really unfair and undemocratic and unconstitutional , ” said Gleeson , who works at an assisted-living center in Milwaukee . “ I think it ’ s voter suppression at its finest . ”
Polls closed Tuesday night , but a court ruling appeared to prevent results from being made public earlier than next Monday to ensure absentee ballots are counted .
Joe Biden hopes the state will help deliver a knockout blow to Bernie Sanders in the nomination fight , but the winner may be less significant than Wisconsin ’ s decision to allow voting at all . Its ability to host an election during a growing pandemic could have significant implications for upcoming primaries and even the fall general election .
The chaos in a premiere general-election battleground underscored the lengths to which the coronavirus outbreak has upended politics as Democrats seek a nominee to take on President Donald Trump . Democrats complained that the state was risking the health of its citizens by not postponing the election . Republicans insisted that the election should go on as scheduled .
After several hours of voting , there were signs that the Wisconsin test was not going well .
Milwaukee , the state ’ s largest city , operated just five of its 180 traditional polling places , forced to downsize after hundreds of poll workers stepped down because of health risks . The resulting logjam forced voters to wait together in lines spanning several blocks in some cases . Many did not have facial coverings .
Milwaukee is home to the state ’ s largest concentration of black voters , a community that has been hit harder than others during the pandemic . Reduced minority turnout would benefit Republicans in a series of state and local elections .
Michael Claus , 66 , was among the many voters who risked their health to vote . Claus , who is black , wore a protective mask and a Tuskegee Airmen cap .
He said he tried to vote absentee and requested a ballot in March , but it never showed up . His only option was to vote in person . He blamed the Republican-controlled state legislature .
“ They could have delayed the election with no problem , ” Claus said . “ They decided if they can suppress the vote in Milwaukee and Madison , where you have a large minority presence , you can get people elected you want elected . And that ’ s sad . ”
Democrats in and out of Wisconsin pressed for the contest to be postponed , yet Republicans — and the conservative-majority state Supreme Court — would not give in . The fight over whether to postpone the election , as more than a dozen states have done , was influenced by a state Supreme Court election also being held Tuesday . A lower turnout was thought to benefit the conservative candidate .
Trump on Tuesday broke from health experts who have encouraged all Americans to stay home by calling on his supporters to “ get out and vote NOW ” for the conservative judicial candidate , Daniel Kelly . He later said Democrats were playing politics by trying to postpone the election .
“ As soon as I endorsed him , the Wisconsin Democrats said , ‘ Oh , let ’ s move the election two months later , ’ ” Trump said . “ Now they talk about , ‘ Oh , safety , safety . ’ ”
Wisconsin has reported more than 2,500 coronavirus infections and 92 related deaths — 49 of them in Milwaukee County , where the voting lines were longest .
The unprecedented challenge created a chaotic scenes across the state — and a variety of health risks for voters and the elected officials who fought to keep polls open .
They included Robin Vos , the Republican speaker of the state Assembly who joined more than 2,500 National Guard troops dispatched to help staff voting stations . While many voters standing in lines for more than an hour did not have protective equipment , Vos donned a face mask , safety glasses , gloves and a full protective gown .
In Madison , city workers erected plexiglass barriers to protect poll workers , and voters were encouraged to bring their own pens to mark the ballots .
State GOP Chairman Andrew Hitt downplayed the health concerns , noting that Wisconsin residents are still going to the grocery store , the liquor store and even boating stores classified as essential businesses .
Christopher Sullivan , a 35-year-old high school teacher from western Wisconsin , said two police officers greeted voters outside his polling site in Holmen , while two members of the county health department instructed him to wash his hands in a makeshift sink inside .
In another room , Sullivan was told to take one of the pens on a table spaced 6 inches apart and not give it back . He was given his ballot by “ an elderly lady wearing a mask and gloves sitting behind a glass wall . ”
“ I have voted many times in my life ( and at this location ) and have never experienced something so eerie , ” Sullivan said .
Catch up on the 2020 election campaign with AP experts on our weekly politics podcast , “ Ground Game . ”