Officials with the American Federation of Government Employees ( AFGE ) , the largest federal employee union in the country , said Tuesday that more than 13,000 federal workers at U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services ( USCIS ) face a possible furlough of at least 30 days .
Nearly three-quarters of the USCIS workforce will be affected by the possible furlough , and notices will reportedly be handed out to USCIS employees between Wednesday and July 3 , The Washington Post reported . The furlough itself is expected to go into effect August 3 .
USCIS , which is a part of the Department of Homeland Security , has seen a reduction in operations due to the coronavirus pandemic , as visa and citizenship services have declined sharply . The Trump administration temporarily halted green card applications in April , and cross-border travel is at an all-time low .
Fees , which make up 97 % of the agency ’ s revenue , are projected to fall 60 % through the remainder of the fiscal year , according to Fox News . The agency also told Congress in May that it required a one-time emergency request for funding in order to continue operations normally .
“ Without congressional intervention , USCIS will need to administratively furlough approximately 13,400 employees , ” a USCIS representative told The Washington Post in an email . ( RELATED : Immigration Offices Closed To The Public , Interviews Canceled Amid Coronavirus Pandemic )
USCIS requested an allocation of $ 1.2 billion in congressional funding over two years , and pledged to repay the funds to the U.S. Treasury Departments , CBS News reported . The agency ’ s proposal , however , would also require an additional 10 % surcharge on immigration petitions .
Without the appropriate financial support , the potential USCIS furloughs could be as widespread as the federal workforce furloughs that took place in 2013 , when sequestration budget limits forced federal agencies to cut pay from employees .
“ With a loss of nearly three-fourths of its workforce , work , student and visitor visa petitions , asylum and citizenship/naturalization applications , green cards , and refugee applications will not be processed , ” AFGE President Everett Kelly told the House Homeland Security Committee last week at a hearing .