Protesters have taken to the streets in states across the US , demanding that governors reopen economies shut by the coronavirus pandemic .
Rallies in Arizona , Colorado , Montana and Washington state took place on Sunday , following earlier protests in half a dozen states .
Agitation for easing restrictions has grown , despite the risk of a Covid-19 resurgence posed by reopening too soon .
US President Donald Trump has signalled support for the protests .
The US has become the centre of the Covid-19 crisis , with over 735,000 cases and some 40,000 deaths - but signs have emerged that it is reaching the apex of the outbreak and that infection rates are slowing in some states .
In Washington state , an early US virus hotspot , hundreds of people gathered in the state capital , Olympia , to demand the governor relax rules restricting the economy .
Police estimated the crowd at 2,500 , making it one of the largest protests in US states against lockdowns over the past week , Reuters news agency reports .
Many of the protesters ignored social distancing guidelines , as well as pleas from rally organisers to wear masks .
Montana saw a few hundred protesters at a rally held in Helena , the Associated Press news agency reports .
There was a similar-sized protest in Denver , Colorado , where protesters descended upon the state capitol building to demonstrate against the social distancing orders .
As protesters clogged streets with cars , healthcare workers in scrubs and face masks stood at crossroads in counter-protest .
Dozens of cars circled the capitol , local media report , while roughly 200 people assembled on the lawn , waving signs and flags .
In Arizona , protesters also took to their cars - estimated to be about 100 - and drove in circles around the state capitol in Phoenix to create gridlock , reports say .
Governors in several states have begun discussions to plan reopening amid signs of the slowdown , but other regions remain under strict lockdown .
California Governor Gavin Newsom was the first in the nation to issue a state-wide stay-at-home order , shuttering the country 's most populous state since 19 March . Neighbouring west coast states Washington and Oregon followed suit days later , putting their combined 11.5 million residents under a stay-at-home order since 23 March .
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo announced this week that the state would extend its stay home measures until 15 May . Speaking at his daily virus briefing on Sunday , Mr Cuomo urged caution to residents , beset with `` cabin fever '' and desperate for their state to reopen .
`` We still have to make sure we keep that beast under control , '' Mr Cuomo said . `` As we all get very eager to get on with life and move on . ''
Mr Trump , a Republican , appeared to endorse protests against strict lockdown measures , which are needed to curb the spread of the virus . He said on Friday that orders in place in Minnesota , Michigan and Virginia were `` too tough '' .
Washington Governor Jay Inslee called the president 's support of the protesters `` dangerous '' , tantamount to encouraging `` insubordination '' to state laws .
`` To have an American president encourage people to violate the law , I ca n't remember any time in my time in America we have seen such a thing , '' he said on ABC news on Sunday .
Nancy Pelosi , the Democratic Speaker of the House , accused Mr Trump of endorsing the protests as a `` distraction '' .
`` The president 's embrace of it as a distraction from the fact that he has not appropriately done testing , treatment , contact tracing and quarantine , '' she told ABC .
On Saturday , protesters gridlocked the streets of Annapolis , Maryland , honking car horns in protest of lockdown measures . More than 200 people rallied outside the residence of the Indiana governor , while about 200 gathered in Austin , Texas . New York state also saw disruption .