Experts have now forecast that there will be 179,106 COVID-19 deaths in the United States by Oct. 1 . But a universal mask-wearing order in the US could save as many as 33,000 lives .
The University of Washington ’ s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation released a model Wednesday with a range of 159,497 to 213,715 deaths nationwide .
Institute Director Dr. Chris Murray , however , said that mask wearing has a “ profound effect ” on the epidemic .
Wearing a mask “ is extremely low-cost , and , for the individual , provides a 1/3 — as high as one half — reduction in the risk of transmission , ” he said in a video press release . “ But at the community level , can save an extraordinary number of lives . ”
The projection comes as more than 34,000 new infections were reported Wednesday by state health departments , the highest daily case count since April .
After public outcry : AMC , the largest movie theater chain , reverses optional face mask policy
While the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advised “ the use of simple cloth face coverings to slow the spread of the virus ” in April , in recent weeks states have started to relax their policies .
Mask-wearing has become politicized , with anti-mask rallies held in Arizona even as Gov . Doug Ducey gave local communities the authority to require masks last week , and both Scottsdale Mayor Jim Lane and the Phoenix City Council issued mask mandates this week .
In Washington on Tuesday , Gov . Jay Inslee announced a statewide mandate requiring facial coverings in public to slow the spread of COVID-19 , while on Wednesday , North Carolina Gov . Roy Cooper signed an executive order requiring face coverings in public .
Arizona hospitals on Tuesday reported the highest-ever number of beds and ventilators used for confirmed or suspected COVID-19 patients , reported the Arizona Republic , a ███ Network publication . Arizona ’ s stay-at-home order expired mid-May .
But as of mid-June , wearing face masks in public has prevented up to 450,000 new cases , according to a study by Health Affairs journal .
In a Facebook live with the Sacramento Press Club Wednesday , the nation 's top infectious disease expert Dr. Anthony Fauci said that `` everybody should wear a mask when out in public . ''
`` It should not be a political issue , '' he added . `` It is purely a public health issue . Forget the politics , look at the data . ''
Arizona , California , Texas , Florida , Oklahoma and South Carolina reported record-high daily coronavirus cases this week , as case counts continue to rise in more than half of U.S. states .
Murray said , however , deaths are not yet rising at the same rate as infections .
`` States reporting the ages of confirmed cases suggest there are more cases being detected in younger people who are at substantially lower risk of death than older people , '' Murray said . `` It remains to be seen how this will unfold over the next few weeks , and if transmission continues to go up , we may see increasing infections in at-risk populations . ''
The CDC said that “ a cloth face covering may not protect the wearer , but it may keep the wearer from spreading the virus to others. ” By wearing a cloth covering in public , the spread of the virus can be slowed by lessening the transmission to others .
The CDC has also released instructions on creating homemade masks .
“ Simple cloth face coverings can be made at home and may help prevent the spread of COVID-19 , ” the site reads .