Support is building among Republicans for reopening the economy sooner rather than later , but not all GOP lawmakers are on the same page .
Some conservatives are pushing more aggressive timelines while some moderates are adopting a more cautious approach .
Republicans are wrestling with the looming threat of a second wave of coronavirus infections and the more immediate reality of rising unemployment , with 4.4 million more Americans applying for jobless benefits last week .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison ( Mitch ) Mitchell McConnellOn The Money : Trump signs 4B coronavirus relief package | CBO projects 39.6 percent quarterly GDP drop , .7T deficit | IRS says it issued 8B in coronavirus payments through April 17 Overnight Health Care : Coronavirus spreads to Trump country | Disinfectant remarks draw blowback | FDA issues warning about drugs touted by Trump OVERNIGHT ENERGY : Trump criticizes banks withholding funds from certain fossil fuel projects | Treasury considers lending program for oil producers| White House uses Arbor Day to renew push for 1 trillion trees initiative MORE ( R-Ky. ) , Sen. Pat Toomey Patrick ( Pat ) Joseph ToomeyGOP senators push for quick , partial reopening of economy NSA improperly collected US phone records in October , new documents show Overnight Defense : Pick for South Korean envoy splits with Trump on nuclear threat | McCain blasts move to suspend Korean military exercises | White House defends Trump salute of North Korean general MORE ( R-Pa. ) and Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael ( Ted ) Edward CruzRepublicans sharply divided over timeline for reopening economy McConnell sparks bipartisan backlash with state bankruptcy remarks Trump seizes on economic crisis to push green card ban MORE ( R-Texas ) are leading the push for state economies to open quickly so that businesses can resume operations and furloughed workers can get off unemployment .
Those senators , however , aren ’ t aligning themselves with Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp ( R ) and his abrupt decision to reopen gyms , hair and nail salons , bowling alleys , tattoo parlors and massage parlors starting Friday .
Trump on Wednesday said he told Kemp that he “ strongly ” disagreed with the governor ’ s timeline . The president went after the governor again at Thursday ’ s White House press briefing .
“ I ’ m not happy about it , and I ’ m not happy about Brian Kemp , ” Trump said , noting that Kemp ’ s decision is in violation of federal guidelines . “ I told him that . I said , ‘ You ’ re not in the guidelines but I ’ m letting you make your own decision . I don ’ t want this thing to flair up because you ’ re deciding to do something that is not in the guidelines . ’ ”
Georgia had reported more than 21,000 cases of coronavirus and at least 871 deaths as of Thursday .
Meanwhile , GOP moderates such as Sens . Lamar Alexander Andrew ( Lamar ) Lamar AlexanderRepublicans sharply divided over timeline for reopening economy Union leader asks Pelosi , Schumer to spike 'surprise ' billing legislation McConnell : Governors should begin reopening states MORE ( Tenn. ) and Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsRepublicans sharply divided over timeline for reopening economy Democratic group reserves million in TV ads against McConnell The partisan divide on crisis aid MORE ( Maine ) are urging caution and for policymakers to pay close attention to the recommendations of public health experts , who are more focused on preventing a second wave of infections than getting the economy back on track .
Alexander , who isn ’ t seeking reelection , says people shouldn ’ t go back to work until health experts have a better sense of who ’ s infected and who needs to be quarantined .
“ I don ’ t think Tennesseans and Americans want to go back to work , back to school , unless we know whether we have the virus or the people who have it have been isolated . I ’ m focused on a new technology to produce tens of millions of diagnostic tests that ’ ll be ready this summer , ” Alexander told News 4 Nashville this week .
He said new testing and treatments are needed , and the process for reopening the economy needs to be methodical .
Alexander said he supports Tennessee Gov . Bill Lee ’ s ( R ) decision to allow a “ safer at home ” order expire at the end of the month but he says it ’ s too soon to allow kids to return to school without more testing .
“ So for phase one , we have enough tests for people who are sick . But for going back to school , I do n't think we do , and we 're going to need a new technology to do it , ” he said Wednesday on Fox Business .
Collins , who is one of the most vulnerable senators up for reelection this year , said Maine doesn ’ t have enough resources to conduct the testing she thinks is necessary to reopen the state economy .
“ Widespread testing will be essential for helping medical professionals determine when it is safe to reopen the economy and for giving people the confidence to go back to school , sporting events , and other public forums , ” Collins said in a statement Wednesday .
She added that increased testing should be a “ joint effort , ” with the federal government playing “ the leading role . ”
“ States like Maine simply lack the resources to conduct the necessary number of tests on their own . We need to act now to scale up production , ” she said .
Sen. Mitt Romney Willard ( Mitt ) Mitt RomneyTwelve things you need to know today about the coronavirus crisis ███ 's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - House clears virus package ; Trump breaks with Fauci Republicans sharply divided over timeline for reopening economy MORE ( Utah ) , another leading GOP moderate , has been in touch with Utah Gov . Gary Herbert ( R ) and other state and local officials but has let them handle the decisionmaking process .
Some Republicans , such as Sen. Bill Cassidy William ( Bill ) Morgan CassidyRepublicans sharply divided over timeline for reopening economy McConnell sparks bipartisan backlash with state bankruptcy remarks State governments face financial abyss with coronavirus MORE ( La . ) , a doctor , agree there needs to be a dramatic increase in testing before state economies are reopened . He is proposing hundreds of billions of dollars in additional federal aid to states to cushion the economic blow of keeping businesses closed .
Cassidy has expressed concern about “ the financial health ” of the country , which he said is getting “ pummeled . ”
But he is leery of reopening the economy along the guidelines unveiled last week by the Trump administration without increased testing .
`` I would like to have , in conjunction with this , though , widespread testing and knowing who is positive , who 's not . If you are at risk and you 're not immune , then by golly you better take real strong precautions . If you are immune and you are no increased particular risk , you have a lot more freedom , '' he said on “ Full Court Press with Greta Van Susteren . ''
A spokesperson for Cassidy said the Louisiana senator `` believes in a more targeted approach '' than what Kemp is advocating in Georgia , adding that Cassidy thinks `` different states will have different approaches . ''
`` If the CDC were using the testing and contact tracing he is calling for , then it could analyze not just states , but cities or even neighborhoods to evaluate the risk of an outbreak in specific areas , '' the aide added .
Cassidy is also pushing a bipartisan plan to set up a $ 500 billion fund for hard-hit states , a plan he pitched during a Thursday conference call with colleagues .
Other Senate Republicans , however , are not fond of sending more money to cash-strapped state and local governments , especially New York , the home state of Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles ( Chuck ) Ellis SchumerState and local governments are going broke People over politics on PPP funding Schumer says he 's focused on job when asked about possible Ocasio-Cortez primary challenge MORE ( D ) .
McConnell on Wednesday said he would be in favor of allowing some states to declare bankruptcy if they face irrecoverable fiscal shortfalls . That comment drew bipartisan backlash , particularly from Republicans such as Maryland Gov . Larry Hogan .
Senate GOP aides acknowledge there are conflicting views within the GOP conference over how to proceed .
“ Everybody will have their own position . Everyone will be reliant on what their state does . We will trust governors to make decisions that are based on whatever their needs are , ” said a Senate GOP aide after Republican senators held a conference call Thursday .
“ I think that most Republicans would like the economy to be open sooner rather than later . But we ’ re not going to come out with a unified Republican plan , ” the aide said .
Many Senate Republicans are pushing for their states to start loosening restrictions on businesses immediately .
Toomey , who last week called the economic lockdown “ draconian , ” released a plan Thursday calling for two-thirds of Pennsylvania to resume some economic activities .
He argued that many hospitals , especially in central and western Pennsylvania are at low capacity .
He has introduced a three-phase plan to reopen Pennsylvania , which has had more than 38,000 coronavirus cases .
Phase one would allow businesses to open if they can adopt social distancing and hygiene protocols and if they ’ re located in counties with declining or limited coronavirus cases .
The second phase would allow higher-trafficked establishments such as restaurants , bars and gyms to open with proper social distancing and hygiene protocols and allow schools to resume under the supervision of state and school districts .
The final phase would relax restrictions on restaurants , bars and gyms and allow entertainment venues like theaters and concert halls to begin reopening . The third phase would depend on increased testing capacity and the development of effective therapies .
Other Republicans , however , have voiced support for a more aggressive timeline .
McConnell said he is urging Kentucky Gov . Andy Beshear ( D ) to begin allowing businesses to reopen .
“ The ultimate solution to this is to get the economy back up and running . I ’ m encouraging our governor , for example , and he ’ s already doing it , to begin to make steps in the direction of opening up the economy , '' the GOP leader told Fox News .
Cruz has been at the forefront of calling for workers to be allowed to return to their jobs .
`` If we continue shelter-in-place , that 's going to be devastating for the economy , '' Cruz told the Temple Chamber of Commerce on Tuesday . `` For young healthy people , it makes sense to go back to work . ''
The Texas conservative said the health quarantines have accomplished their goal in making “ meaningful progress in flattening the curve and slowing the rate of transmission . ”
Sen. James Lankford James Paul LankfordRepublicans sharply divided over timeline for reopening economy GOP senator warns Trump against sidelining watchdogs GOP senators press Trump to cooperate with watchdogs following shake-up MORE ( R-Okla. ) has echoed the argument that social distancing and quarantine guidelines have kept the virus in check enough to allow businesses to start reopening .
`` What we 've talked about all along , flattening the curve and limiting the spread — that has occurred . We 've significantly flattened the curve in Oklahoma and several other states , '' he told Fox 25 in Oklahoma City .