The White House on Monday said America ’ s coronavirus-testing is in far better shape and the administration is ready to work with governors to meet their diagnostic demands , “ dramatically ” increasing the number of tests to help states reopen safely .
“ The testing is not going to be a problem at all , ” Mr. Trump said in the White House Rose Garden . “ In fact , it ’ s going to be one of the great assets that we have . ”
Members of the coronavirus task force said they will marshal the public and private sector to expand rapid testing at pharmacies like CVS and Walgreens , tap unused lab capacity and make sure governors have the supplies they need , such as swabs , to check people for the virus after governors said they had a hard time navigating supply chains .
The guidance also calls for identifying new clusters of cases , isolating people who might have been exposed and ramping up “ serological ” tests that check for antibodies , signaling a more collaborative effort than previous calls for governors to figure out a way forward .
“ We ’ re deploying the full power and strength of the federal government to help states , cities , ” Mr. Trump said .
The coronavirus has upended life in America and around the globe . The domestic case count of COVID-19 neared 1 million Monday and the death toll exceeded 55,000 , though the White House says the broad picture is beginning to improve .
“ Things are moving along — really a horrible situation that we ’ ve been confronted with , but they ’ re moving along , ” Mr. Trump said .
Mr. Trump pointed to corporate efforts as a sign of progress in the fight to expand testing so that states aren ’ t flying blind as they tell residents it ’ s OK to go back to work , get a haircut or see a movie .
For instance , CVS President and CEO Larry Merlo said it is expanding its testing operation , which checks 35,000 per week , at the start of May . The company will start testing operations in up to 1,000 pharmacies , using its drive-thrus and parking lots .
Adm. Brett Giroir , the U.S. testing “ czar , ” said the administration worked with individual companies to produce 20 million swabs and 50 million testing tubes .
“ Early in April , the United States averaged approximately 150,000 tests per day . That ’ s up very , very substantially from a couple of weeks before , and the 150,000 a day has gone to way over 200,000 tests per day since Wednesday , ” Mr. Trump said at a meeting with retail executives earlier Monday . “ This includes a 122 % testing increase in Michigan , 124 % increase in Maryland and many other locations are right in that vicinity . ”
The administration touted its efforts and goals as it faces criticism for early stumbles in developing a COVID-19 diagnostic tests and its failure to meet prior benchmarks for expanded testing .
Vice President Mike Pence said the gap between promises and results was due in part to the gulf between having the tests and being able to process them .
The U.S. has performed 5.4 million tests , or far more than any other nation , Mr. Trump boasted Monday .
Mr. Trump ’ s coronavirus task force outlined its ambitions as governors continued to roll out their plans for gradually getting life back to normal .
Texas Gov . Greg Abbott said he will let his stay-at-home order expire Friday , without restrictions . That means restaurants , retailers , libraries and movie theaters are allowed to operate at 25 % capacity as of May 1 . Places that host non-contact sports , like tennis , can also resume operations .
Salons , bars and gyms were not among the businesses told they can reopen .
Ohio Gov . Mike DeWine said manufacturing , distribution , construction companies and general business offices can reopen starting May 4 , with retailers to follow May 12 .
The reopening businesses will have to practice social distancing measures , such as ensuring at least six feet of distance between people and installing barriers if that ’ s not possible . Employees must wear face coverings while they ’ re working .
“ We ’ ve gotten this far . We ’ ve got a ways to go . These are first steps , ” said Mr. DeWine , a Republican . “ A lot of moving parts , a lot of things going on — this is the beginning . ”
In Louisiana , however , Gov . John Bel Edwards said Monday he had no choice but to extend his stay-at-home order until May 15 , when he promised a “ phased re-opening ” would begin .
Mr. Edwards , a Democrat , said he decided to continue the state ’ s economic shutdown after speaking with the White House .
He left open the possibility of extending shelter-in-place orders that are shattering the state ’ s economy past May 15 .
“ While this is not the announcement I want to make , I am hopeful , and all of Louisiana should be hopeful that we will enter into the next phase of reopening soon , in mid-May , ” Mr. Edwards said . “ I am anxious to get all areas of our economy reopened , but if we accelerate too quickly we may have to slam on the brakes . That will be bad for public health and for businesses , bad for our people and bad for our state . ”
New Jersey Gov . Phil Murphy said his stay-at-home order will remain in place “ until further notice , ” though he ’ s coloring in the lines of a plan to reopen . It ’ s unclear when the state can return to normal , yet the announcement in one of the country ’ s hardest-hit states is notable .
“ We will move as quickly as we can , but as safely as we must , ” Mr. Murphy said .
The governor reported positive trends in terms of hospitalizations , but said the “ curve ” needs to stay down before moving further along in the process .
Over 6,000 people have died of COVID-19 in New Jersey , the nation ’ s second-worst toll after New York , where the virus has killed over 22,000 .
New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo on Monday said 337 people in the state had died in the previous 24 hours .
His stay-at-home restrictions last until at least May 15 . On Monday , he said he would likely extend them for at least some parts of New York beyond that date .
While New York City has an incredibly high number of cases , “ higher than some countries globally , ” upstate New York is “ a very different reality , ” the governor said .
“ In some parts of the state , some regions — you could make the case we should un-pause on May 15 , ” Mr. Cuomo said . “ But you have to be smart about it . ”
Likewise , Florida Gov . Ron DeSantis said it might make more sense to approach things region-by-region , since areas like Miami-Dade County are significantly harder-hit than other parts of the state .
“ For Florida , it really is a different ballgame when you compare southeast Florida to the rest , ” he said . “ I think pretty much the rest of the state has really handled this very well — there ’ s never been even close to a stress on capacity of health care resources . ”
Mr. DeSantis , a key Trump ally , vowed to be “ methodical ” and “ data-driven ” moving forward .
“ I think that people want to have confidence that things are going in a good direction , ” he said .
Out West , Nevada and Colorado said they are joining a West Coast pact with California , Oregon and Washington that seeks to coordinate plans on opening the region ’ s economies .
Alaska , Colorado , Georgia , Minnesota , Mississippi , Montana , Oklahoma , South Carolina and Tennessee have announced a partial reopening of some kind , while a handful of states — particularly rural ones — never really shut down their economies at all , according to a New York Times analysis .
Economist Stephen Moore , who is advising the White House on reopening plans , on Monday described the coronavirus as an “ urban disease . ”
“ That ’ s not anything that ’ s a big surprise — every pandemic hits urban areas , ” Mr. Moore said on Fox Business Network . “ So you have about half of the counties in the United States that were hardly affected at all — in some cases , no cases whatsoever . ”
Mr. Moore said moving forward on reopening plans now should get the U.S. to recovery by the end of the summer .
While a vaccine probably won ’ t be widely available until 2021 , federal and state leaders hope to see effective drug treatment for the virus later this year .
There are myriad clinical trials of different therapies across the country . While the administration does not comment on specific products , an existing antiviral drug from Gilead Sciences , known as remdesivir , is widely considered a contender .
“ I think remdesivir is still a leading candidate , ” said Dr. Michael Mina , assistant professor of epidemiology at Harvard T.H . Chan School of Public Health . “ It ’ s a true anti-viral , versus something like hydroxychloroquine . ”
Hydroxychloroquine is typically used to treat malaria . It was pushed hard by Mr. Trump earlier this month , though hasn ’ t touted it much of late , as studies raise questions about its effectiveness and possible side effects on the heart .
Dr. Mina said monoclonal antibodies — lab-produced molecules that can enhance the body ’ s immune system — might be another promising path .
“ I personally think monoclonals are a good way to go , ” he said . “ Our bodies know how to handle them . ”