The Trump administration ordered hospitals to bypass the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and send all COVID-19 patient information to a central database in Washington , starting Wednesday , according to a Health and Human Services document updated July 10 .
The handoff had an immediate effect . Wednesday afternoon one of the important CDC pages that tracked changes over time in how many hospital beds in the nation are occupied by COVID-19 patients ceased working . The CDC confirmed the page 's disappearance was a consequence of the switch .
It was first noted by Charles Ornstein from the news non-profit ProPublica .
The data came from the National Healthcare Safety Network , the most widely used hospital infection tracking system in the United States . It is run by the CDC .
In a call with reporters Wednesday , CDC director Dr. Robert Redfield said the agency has agreed to remove the NHSN from the collection process in order to streamline reporting .
The disappearance of the site takes away a useful metric of the pandemic for health care workers .
Changes in time of the number of hospital beds being occupied by COVID-19 patients tells public health officials how close to being unable to accept new patients a hospital or a region is , or if things are getting better .
Michael Caputo , HHS assistant secretary for public affairs , said in a statement earlier Wednesday the new coronavirus data collection system would be “ faster , ” and the CDC has a one-week lag in reporting hospital data .
“ The President ’ s Coronavirus Task Force has urged improvements for months , but they can not keep up with this pandemic , ” he said . “ Today , the CDC still provides data from only 85 percent of hospitals ; the President ’ s COVID response requires 100 percent to report . ”
Caputo added : `` The CDC , an operating division of HHS , will certainly participate in this streamlined all-of-government response . They will simply no longer control it . ''
Wednesday afternoon , Redfield described the data collection system as a way to streamline the process and make it easier for the nation 's hospitals to get information to state and federal authorities .
`` We at CDC know that the life blood of public health is data , '' he said . `` Collecting , disseminating data as rapidly as possible is our priority and the reason for the policy change we ’ re discussing today . ''
The CDC , along with many federal agencies , has long struggled to provide state-of-the-art data systems with lagging funding and sought to upgrade its systems .
Redfield indicated the change would not be detrimental , saying the new system would streamline the process , reduce duplication and the reporting burden on medical providers and `` enable us to distribute the scarce resources , using the best possible approach , '' he said .
`` We ’ ve merely streamlined data collection for hospitals on the front lines , '' he stressed . `` No one is taking access or data away from CDC . ''
Public health experts and infectious disease scientists sounded an alarm on the protocols , noting that further politicization of the pandemic will hurt health workers and patients .
“ Placing medical data collection outside of the leadership of public health experts could severely weaken the quality and availability of data , add an additional burden to already overwhelmed hospitals and add a new challenge to the U.S. pandemic response , ” Dr. Thomas File , president of the Infectious Diseases Society of America , said in a statement .
He said collecting and reporting public health data is a “ core function of the CDC , ” and bypassing the agency would “ undermine our nation ’ s public health experts . ”
“ As infectious diseases physicians , front-line providers and scientists , we urge the administration to follow public health expertise in addressing this public health crisis , ” File said .
Coronavirus updates : CDC chief says masks could halt outbreak in 4-6 weeks ; more relief checks possible ; vaccine candidate shows promise
A Tuesday Washington Post op-ed written by four former or acting CDC directors criticized President Donald Trump for “ politicizing science . ”
“ These repeated efforts to subvert sound public health guidelines introduce chaos and uncertainty while unnecessarily putting lives at risk , ” they wrote .
During a video meeting Wednesday with the ███ editorial board , one of the authors , former U.S . Surgeon General David Satcher , called the sidelining of the agency “ very scary . ”
“ There is conflict right now between the CDC and the White House , ” Satcher said . “ Somehow we ’ ve got to get past the conflict in the interest of saving lives . ”
As of Wednesday , the USA surpassed 3.4 million cases and 136,000 deaths , according to Johns Hopkins University . Globally , there have been 13.3 million cases and more than 579,000 deaths .
Health and patient safety coverage at ███ is made possible in part by a grant from the Masimo Foundation for Ethics , Innovation and Competition in Healthcare . The Masimo Foundation does not provide editorial input .