University of Pittsburgh professor Dr. Bing Liu , 37 , was shot multiple times inside his home around noon on May 2 , 2020 . ( University of Pittsburgh )
Researcher Killed in Apparent Murder-Suicide Was Close to ‘ Very Significant Findings ’ Regarding COVID-19
A Pittsburgh medical researcher killed in an apparent murder-suicide was close to “ making very significant findings ” in the field of COVID-19 , his department said .
Dr. Bing Liu , 37 , was shot multiple times inside his home around noon on May 2 , police said , as cited by Pittsburgh ’ s Action News 4 . Investigators cited in the report believe that after shooting Liu , the gunman left the residence , walked over to his car , and shot himself .
Liu was a research assistant professor with the department of computational and systems biology at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine , according to his profile . In it , Liu wrote , “ As an integral part of my research , I collaborate with a number of biologists and clinicians to study a variety of crucial biological processes related to human immunity and cancer . ”
“ He was a very talented individual , extremely intelligent and hardworking , ” said Ivet Bahar , head of the computational and system biology department in university ’ s School of Medicine , according to the Post-Gazette .
His department said in a statement that Liu “ was on the verge of making very significant findings toward understanding the cellular mechanisms that underlie SARS-CoV-2 infection and the cellular basis of the following complications . ”
“ We will make an effort to complete what he started in an effort to pay homage to his scientific excellence , ” it added .
The scientific designation for the Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) virus is SARS-CoV-2 .
Bahar said Liu had recently engaged his talents in mapping COVID-19 infection processes .
“ He was just starting to obtain interesting results , ” she said . “ He was sharing with us , trying to understand the mechanism of infection , so we will hopefully continue what he was doing . ” ’
“ His loss will be felt throughout the entire scientific community . Please keep his family , friends , and colleagues in your thoughts . Thank you , ” the department said in the statement .
“ We are all shocked to learn what happened to him . This was very unexpected , ” Bahar told the Post-Gazette .
Neighbors cited by the publication said Liu and his wife were quiet and mostly kept to themselves .
A formal ruling on the cause of death is pending , but CBS reported that Liu was found with apparent gunshot wounds to his head , neck , and torso .