Stopping the spread of the pandemic is in the hands of the people now . But what if the information about how to slow the spread authorities have been giving them for months is insufficient ?
With cases spiking around the country , testing and tracing operations falling behind everywhere and getting completely snowed in where they ’ re needed most , and most states not considering re-entering lockdown , the primary factor that will determine whether things begin to improve or get even worse will be the conscientiousness of Americans in taking individual action to stop new infections .
The primary forms that action should take are the same as ever : maintaining social distance as much as possible , and wearing masks in public . But some scientists are growing worried that these two factors don ’ t present a complete picture of what reasonable steps should be taken to reduce viral spread .
The evidence is beginning to accumulate that the virus is transmitted from person to person via means that are subtly more different than we ’ d long assumed—with substantial ramifications for what everyday anti-viral precautions should entail .
In the early days of the pandemic , with bad news about the virus ’ s deadliness and contagiousness piling up every day , one reassuring data point stood out : At least this thing ’ s not airborne ! “ The virus that causes COVID-19 is mainly transmitted through droplets generated when an infected person coughs , sneezes , or speaks , ” World Health Organization messaging maintained in March . “ These droplets are too heavy to hang in the air . They quickly fall on floors or surfaces. ” Frequently wash your hands , disinfect potentially contaminated surfaces , and stay at least six feet away from potential carriers , the conventional wisdom went then , and you ’ d be in good shape .
As early as May , we had discovered that half that prescription was wrong : The Centers for Disease Control announced that month that the virus did not spread easily via contaminated surfaces , reducing the ubiquitous “ wash your hands ” mantra from an anti-COVID battle cry into a simple piece of good-hygiene advice .
This summer , the evidence has been accumulating that the other half of that WHO guidance was wrong , too . It ’ s becoming clear that many of the droplets the virus attaches to are small and light enough to hang in the air for hours—and that these “ aerosols , ” as they ’ re called , are a significant contributor to the person-to-person infection driving the pandemic .
Earlier this month , 239 scientists in more than 30 countries sent an open letter to the WHO imploring them to update their guidance about the threat of airborne spread .
“ Studies by the signatories and other scientists have demonstrated beyond any reasonable doubt that viruses are released during exhalation , talking , and coughing in microdroplets small enough to remain aloft in air and pose a risk of exposure at distances beyond one to two meters from an infected individual , ” the letter reads . “ Hand washing and social distancing are appropriate , but in our view , insufficient to provide protection from virus-carrying respiratory microdroplets released into the air by infected people . ”
Last week , the global health body acknowledged the letter , telling reporters there was “ evidence emerging ” that the virus might linger in the air longer than originally thought .
Two major questions that have lately bedeviled COVID-watchers have been : Why do some people with coronavirus infect very few people , while others ( so-called “ superspreaders ” ) infect dozens ? And why is the virus dramatically more contagious indoors than outdoors ?
The scientists who signed the letter maintain that both phenomena can be most easily explained with reference to aerosols . If COVID is primarily transmitted via ballistic droplets—I breathe out , or yell , or sneeze , and fire off droplets that happen to hit your eyes , mouth , or nose before they hit the ground—then that should be able to happen outdoors as easily as in , and superspreader events would have to be attributed to really rotten ballistic luck .
If transmission takes place in large part via particles small enough to hang in the air , however , both superspreaders and increased indoor transmission risk make a great deal of sense . Two people six feet apart , no matter the setting , are largely safe from one another ’ s ballistic droplets . In addition to those droplets , however , each of them will also exhale a gradually growing and expanding cloud of aerosols , which given enough time in an unventilated room will spread throughout the space . If viruses can be carried by vapor that small , then the longer an infected person and uninfected people share the same space , the greater number of particles will be transmitted and the greater the infection risk grows . Give it enough time in a small enough space with enough other people around , and presto—you ’ ve got your superspreader event .
Outdoors , the slightest touch of a breeze will likely be enough to sweep those aerosols away , thinning the cloud until the particles are extremely unlikely to give anyone enough of a dose of the virus to make them sick .
Dr. Jose-Luis Jimenez , a chemistry professor at the University of Colorado-Boulder and aerosols researcher who signed the letter , explained the distinction with reference to smoke .
“ If you ’ re smoking indoors , and you keep smoking , the entire place is going to look like a cloud , ” he told ███ . “ If you smoke outdoors , the smoke follows the plume but goes away , and someone who ’ s 50 feet away or who passes you briefly may not smell the smoke . ”
On the face of it , the fact that the coronavirus may be even more transmissible than previously thought is extremely lousy news . But the updated understanding also offers hope that the next round of social combat against COVID-19 may be more effective in arresting the spread than the current one has been .
What might that next round of combat look like ? Well , for starters , we should keep doing the same stuff we ’ ve already been doing . The apparent presence of aerosol transmission doesn ’ t mean ballistic droplet transmission isn ’ t happening too , so judicious social distancing remains important . Regular hand-washing might not do much to defeat coronavirus , but it does battle a host of other diseases , and the less we have to worry about them the more we can focus medical resources on the pandemic . And wearing a mask helps cut down on the number of aerosols a person flings out as well as droplets—although with aerosols it becomes much more important to wear a mask that fits snugly across the nose and over the chin .
Other aerosol-avoiding considerations are new . When entering indoor public spaces , it would behoove a person to consider not only the distance they keep from others , but also the duration of their stay . A single puff smokes up a room a whole lot less than a whole cigar .
There are ramifications for those who sanitize and maintain public spaces too . Moving people through indoor spaces quickly can help prevent the accumulation of enough aerosols to infect others . Not for nothing are bars , where people tend to sit unmasked for extended periods of time , the face of the new spike in COVID cases . Unfortunately , there are ramifications here for larger gatherings like worship services too .
Efforts could be made to increase ventilation of indoor spaces as much as possible . The more virus-laden aerosols are ushered outdoors where they can ’ t hurt anybody , the better . Finally , buildings that make use of recirculated air might seriously consider equipping those systems with HEPA filters capable of trapping tiny particles like COVID aerosols .