“ We closed down for a reason , and I haven ’ t seen enough change yet to reopen . ”
Others are more cautious . Alonzo Wright Jr. knows Georgia has not yet met the guidelines laid out by the White House to safely lift stay-at-home orders . The state isn ’ t even close , really . And so when the decision to reopen his Beastmode Fitness came , he had a realization . He would clean . He would expand to create more space for social distancing . But he wouldn ’ t reopen , not yet .
After Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp said businesses could start to reopen this weekend , the Peach State offered a taste of what America might look like when it emerges from its coronavirus lockdowns . “ I ’ m excited and , yes , I ’ m nervous , ” says the owner of The Crab Shack , capturing the atmosphere around Savannah .
For starters , the restaurant will have about 300 seats , not the usual 700-plus . The breezes that blow through the screened-in windows will hopefully offer plenty of circulation . And all the servers , of course , will have masks and gloves . But make no mistake , The Crab Shack is preparing to open Monday .
One day the parking lot of Nottingham Plaza off Skidaway Road was empty – as it had been for nearly five long weeks of a pandemic lockdown .
Then the next day , on Friday , at 11:13 a.m. , cars appeared – lots of them . “ Like a regular summer day , ” one shopkeeper observed .
This weekend , Georgia began rolling back stay-at-home coronavirus restrictions in hopes of restarting the U.S. economy . And Nottingham Plaza ZYS Hair Studio owner LaZharia Morris could palpably feel the stakes – for her customers , for her stylists , and for a thriving business she grew from the ground up .
As appointments flooded in , Ms. Morris scrambled to manage expectations and check off a list of requirements put out by the state cosmetology board . Hand-washing and mask-wearing would be required . Importantly , customers are being asked to sign a “ hold harmless ” waiver so that business owners can ’ t be sued if someone becomes ill .
Before long , she had to run to Walmart , out of printer ink . As customers flocked in , she realized she needed more waivers , more posters , more information .
Ms. Morris ’ harried morning offers a glimpse into how America might begin to reemerge from isolation – hair askew , facing a world where the barber makes you sign a contract and where sit-down diners will , for the foreseeable future , be greeted by servers in masks and gloves .
The question is how quickly it should happen . In beginning to reopen , Georgia defied White House guidelines , which call for , among other things , declining COVID-19 cases for 14 days and a robust testing system . Georgia has neither .
But there are signs of restlessness in some parts of the country . In the South , other states are beginning to reopen . An anti-lockdown protest brought thousands to Madison , Wisconsin , this weekend . And in Southern California , some beaches were crowded .
In coastal Georgia , the mood was one of buzzy excitement . For Ms. Morris , this weekend marked a return to clarity and purpose after weeks of wandering through a kind of fog .
“ My boyfriend is an entrepreneur , too – he owns a recording studio – and he was begging me not to reopen , but I told him , ‘ I ’ ve got six ladies here who have mouths to feed and rents to pay. ’ I ’ m not going to say the governor is stupid . We needed this . This virus isn ’ t going away . We have to learn to live with it at some point . We ’ ve got to do what we ’ ve got to do . ”
The decision is a controversial one , among some here and certainly in other parts of the United States . The concern is that the desire to return to something like normal could undo the gains made by social distancing .
Indeed , health officials say that until there is a vaccine or an effective means of treatment , social distancing is the only viable medical path . A study by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington suggests Georgia should begin reopening after June 22 .
“ The ethical issue here isn ’ t a question of right and wrong – as it usually isn ’ t – but how do you balance two competing rights ? ” asks Paul Root Wolpe , a bioethicist at Emory University in Atlanta , referring to health and economic welfare . “ We have to decide which one we ’ re going to favor – and when . ”
Those choices are playing out on both sides at Nottingham Plaza . From the outside , it ’ s just another nondescript L-shaped strip mall on an urban fringe in America . But behind mirrored shop doors , whole worlds are coming back to life .
Patrik Jonsson/The ███ Alonzo Wright Jr. sits on a bench at Beastmode Fitness , his Savannah , Georgia , gym , on April 24 , 2020 , the day hard-hit Georgia began to reopen select businesses amid the coronavirus crisis . Mr. Wright , however , is not opening yet . `` Not enough has changed , '' he says . `` We 're not ready . ''
At 11:33 a.m. on Friday , all eight chairs are occupied at Fatou ’ s , an African hair-braiding shop . In the tattoo shop next door , A Fifth of Ink , the owner is cautiously reopening – by appointment only at first , but already with customers in chairs .
Yet as his plaza colleagues rush to open , Alonzo Wright Jr. raises his head as the front door opens at Beastmode Fitness , his gym .
He ’ s in touch with six local gym owners , and only one opened Friday . After preemptively closing his gym in March , Mr. Wright , newly married , moved into a new house . The idling hours were spent painting walls and otherwise nesting . The gym benches began gathering dust , and for weeks he didn ’ t care . But when GOP Gov . Brian Kemp “ threw his curveball ” last Monday , announcing that businesses could reopen Friday , Mr. Wright returned to the gym and had a realization .
He knew Georgia remained far behind on testing and setting up contact tracers to track the spread of the virus . He knew the tension between Mr. Kemp and federal guidelines , and the deadlier impact the virus has had on working-class African American communities . He had soaked up every news detail of the pandemic . Mayors , governors , and the president were openly bickering over a way forward . And here he was , faced with the question of reopening the country – by opening his gym .
As he looked around at the well-worn green carpeting , he saw what he must do : His trainers were already using Zoom and FaceTime to do one-on-one workouts . “ I realized that this is something else . It requires bigger thinking . ”
So he called in his trainer crew – “ the muscle ” – to start moving equipment around . The carpet is coming up , a deep clean commencing . And shortly after noon that day , Mr. Wright ’ s attorney appeared to start discussions about expanding the gym into a soon-to-be-vacant unit next door .
“ Each person has to do what they think is right , knowing that you can ’ t be mad at any one person , ” says Mr. Wright . “ I also think that this is part madness . But if I ’ m speaking only for myself , we ’ re not opening the gym because we ’ re just not ready . We ’ re not ready . ”
“ We closed down for a reason , and I haven ’ t seen enough change yet to reopen , ” he adds .
Such personal deliberations in part of Savannah point to similar deliberations nationwide . Polls released in recent weeks say Americans are wary of reopening too soon . But many American also say they can be responsible if shown a little more trust .
“ This is us playing out over and over again – the inherent tension in the American psyche of not really being good at understanding and balancing collective sacrifice , ” says Dr. Wolpe . “ Yes , we do it in war and extreme situations . But what makes this so interesting is that we ’ re not sure how extreme this is . ”
Patrik Jonsson/The ███ Capt . Jack Flanigan , owner of the sprawling Crab Shack restaurant on Tybee Island , Georgia , peers at his open-air dining area on April 25 , 2020 , to inspect what he calls `` a new start '' for restaurants -- including cutting the capacity in half in order to allow for social distancing between dining groups . Still , the restaurant will be able to seat 300 at one time . Staff will wear gloves and masks as the restaurant opens for the first time in nearly six weeks at noon on Monday .
Some 20 miles from Nottingham Plaza , beneath sprawling canopies of live oak , power washers roar , glasses clink in dishwashers , people shout across parking lots and lean into truck windows to talk .
It is Saturday at 10:33 a.m. , two days before the region ’ s largest restaurant , The Crab Shack , resumes dine-in service .
After nearly six weeks of being laid off , one server waves and grins as she reports for a deep-clean shift . “ I am ready to work ! ” she shouts for all to hear . “ Plus , I can ’ t take my wife anymore ! ”
Thirty years ago , Capt . Jack Flanigan , an offshore charter fisherman , turned a weekend crab boil at his fish camp dock on Chimney Creek into what became a 728-seat institution . The Crab Shack serves mounds of low-country boil – Old Bay-infused new potatoes , shellfish , sausage , corn hunks – amid moss-draped sunsets and clacking marsh hens . It is , as general manager Justin Fowler points out , “ an experience as much as a meal . ”
But what experience can The Crab Shack offer ? As he readies to open at noon Monday , Mr. Fowler has halved the number of seats to about 300 . Given that the restaurant is essentially a massive screened-in porch with breezes from the creek , “ we ’ re hoping that will make people more comfortable , ” he adds . Servers will be in masks and gloves .
Mr. Flanigan says he knows the importance of this decision .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ I ’ m excited and , yes , I ’ m nervous , ” he says . “ In one way , it feels like all of us are suddenly living in a petri dish . But I also know that we ’ ll survive . We ’ ll make it . It ’ s a new start for us , but we ’ re going to approach it the same way we always have : Let the customer tell us what they want . ”