Last week , this column addressed the expectation of revolution and the exhilaration of freedom that pervaded the 13 colonies during the summer of 1776 .
This summer in America , we are approaching the end of a civilized and free society as we have known it .
The freedom to walk outside without worrying for your life and the reliance that constitutional freedoms are guarantees that the government will honor have dissipated .
The effects are anarchy in the streets and a loss of liberty for everyone .
The root cause of both is the failure of government .
The anarchy was born in legitimate dissent and has morphed into deadly violence .
The dissent was provoked by the public torture and murder of George Floyd , a Black man , by a white Minneapolis police officer . For many folks — I among them — this was too much to bear .
It was the final public impetus to the release of pent-up rage over the disparate treatment of the races by the government in general and the police specifically , and over public officials who have known of this for generations and looked the other way .
Since the adoption of the Civil War Amendments to the U.S. Constitution , the governmen — local , state and federal — was supposed to have become colorblind .
But the death of one innocent Black man by one vicious white cop may have succeeded in achieving what 150 years of legislation and litigation have failed to achieve : turning the tide of public opinion against a culture that looked the other way in the face of governmental racial abuse and disparity .
But what began as legitimate , constitutional and laudatory dissent has become , in some places , violence and anarchy . The longer the violence remains unabated , the more pervasive it will become . It is largely unabated because many public officials rely on those committing the violence and their supporters for political backing .
Hence , the utter anarchy in Seattle , where a mayor and a governor declined to restore basic legal protections on the streets . A group of armed thugs , claiming to be liberators , took over a six-block area of that once beautiful city .
They destroyed property , prevented travel and commerce and even caused the deaths of innocents . Until death reared its unforgiving head , the police stayed away because the mayor told them to leave the neighborhood alone .
At the other end of the societal breakdown are the profoundly unconstitutional power grabs by mayors and governors in the name of public health . They have effectively nullified the Bill of Rights by using the police to infringe upon religion , speech , assembly , travel , self-defense , privacy , commercial intercourse , due process and the sanctity of voluntary contracts .
These government leaders have concocted their own rules and had them enforced as if they were law . The hypocritical New Jersey Gov . Phil Murphy violated his own social distancing rules by marching arm-in-arm with protestors , and his own restaurant lockdown orders by visiting a restaurant secretly serving food indoors — and he famously mocked the Bill of Rights as above his paygrade during an appearance on Fox News .
It is exquisitely wrong for mayors and governors to write their own laws . It is also unconstitutional ; in America , only a popularly elected representative body — not the entity that enforces the laws — can write them .
New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo takes refuge in legislation enacted at the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic giving him the power to regulate private behavior . But that legislation is unconstitutional because it violates the Guarantee Clause of the Constitution .
That clause mandates that the states have the same separation of powers as the federal government does , and thus only the legislative branch writes the laws .
When the governor both writes a law and enforces it , he ceases to be a governor and becomes a prince .
James Madison 's constitutional genius irretrievably separated these two functions , just as it separated the judicial function from the legislative and the executive .
American civilization is being squeezed this summer by two factions — anarchists , enabled by politicians who want their support , and tyrannical mayors and governors .
Often — in an irony that history will find to be bitter — by same folks .
Their victim is personal liberty in a free society . The liberty to walk the streets of Seattle or New York City unmolested and the liberty to be oneself and take chances .
The liberty to be free from thugs in the streets and the liberty to exercise our formerly guaranteed fundamental rights .
The Supreme Court needs to invalidate its opinions that hold that the police have no duty to protect life and property . That would mean that their moral and legal duty to enforce the laws would transcend the mayoral and gubernatorial interference with those laws . Stated differently , the law would supersede the decision of the Seattle mayor that kept the cops off — and the thugs on — the city 's streets .
And state legislatures need to abrogate the concept of qualified immunity for the police .
That doctrine has immunized cops from being sued personally when they commit crimes or engage in psychotic behavior . Might the uniformed thug who took eight and a half minutes to choke the life out of George Floyd have thought twice about it were he to have been financially liable for his terror ?
The same legislatures need to enact laws absolutely prohibiting governors from trampling the Bill of Rights , because the Constitution has no emergency exceptions .
Will a pliant majority accept uniformed and nonuniformed thugs in the streets ? Will it accept tyrannical governance in the name of public health ? Will the tyrants return our freedoms when the pandemic has passed ? Will this lead to vigilantes or martial law ?
Judge Andrew P. Napolitano was the youngest life-tenured Superior Court judge in the history of New Jersey . He is Fox News ’ senior judicial analyst . Napolitano has been published in The New York Times , The Wall Street Journal , and numerous other publications . He is the author of the best-seller , `` Lies the Government Told You : Myth , Power , and Deception in American History . '' Read Judge Andrew Napolitano 's Reports — More Here .