Tips and tricks for finding household items that are back in stock
— Recommendations are independently chosen by Reviewed ’ s editors . Purchases you make through our links may earn us a commission .
Although we 've adjusted to a `` new normal '' of social distancing , online grocery shopping , and finding new ways to fill our time , it can still be challenging to order the household items we need like hand sanitizer , cleaning wipes , and toilet paper . While we were once able to easily add these items to our Amazon cart or pick them up during a Target run , these items now seem to sell out as soon as they come in stock . It 's frustrating , I know .
I 've spent the past couple of months looking for all the hard-to-find products—from cleaning products to flour for baking to Nintendo Switches—that will actually arrive in a reasonable time and not in weeks . Some days I can spot something like hand sanitizer right away , but other times I 'm digging for hours to find a reliable one . Hot items like this tend to sell out as soon as it 's restocked , so it 's important to act fast and diligently to make sure it makes it into your virtual cart .
To help you actually find the household items you need , I 'm breaking down the tips and tricks that I use every single day to find these items in-stock .
From my constant refreshing of various sites that sell household items , I 've found that these retailers typically restock early in the morning or late at night . I recommend setting an alarm for 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. to remind you to take a look for your essentials . Sometimes I 've been able to find bulk orders of cleaning wipes and hand sanitizer and when I do , I feel like I 've struck gold .
Desperately searching for cleaning wipes but literally ca n't find them anywhere ? Believe me , I 've been there . Simply subscribe to an in-stock alert , so you 'll get emailed immediately when the product is in-stock , which retailers like Walmart and Office Depot will offer . The only caveat is that you 're going to want to check your email frequently for these hot ticket items and I recommend subscribing to several different versions of the same items to maximize your likelihood of getting it .
When 's the last time you went into a Staples or Office Depot for the specific purpose of buying toilet paper ? Probably never . But in this new world , it 's become my go-to for finding everything from hand sanitizer to cleaning spray to the coveted TP . These office supply stores often sell items in bulk , which is more expensive up front but also means you wo n't have to go hunting for them again for a while . Plus , I 've found that these stores—as well as home improvement stores like Home Depot and Lowe's—tend to have more household items in stock compared to big box stores like Target , Walmart , and Amazon .
When searching for a particular product , like , say , disinfectant spray on a retailer 's site , you might find that the entire first page of products will say `` Out of Stock '' in big bold letters . But do n't let that deter you . I find that after looking through every single product page , you 'll be able to find at least one product for what you 're looking for . It may not be your preferred brand , but it 's better than nothing .
Unfortunately , there are third-party sellers selling fraudulent products on sites you trust that may never reach your door . This is especially the case on Amazon and Walmart , and I would heed these items with caution . Many of these products are overpriced anyway and often times are n't worth the risk , so trust your gut on this one .
You can tell if an item comes from a third-party by checking the product page to see if it 's shipped from elsewhere . If you 're desperate , read through the reviews for these products throughly before purchasing , but I would steer clear of these items if you can .
The product experts at Reviewed have all your shopping needs covered . Follow Reviewed on Facebook , Twitter , and Instagram for the latest deals , reviews , and more .
Prices were accurate at the time this article was published but may change over time .