As governments fight the COVID-19 pandemic , ███ is fighting an “ infodemic ” of rumors and misinformation , and you can help . Browse our coronavirus fact checks here . Tell us about any questionable or concerning rumors and “ advice ” you encounter here .
Compared to the output of most other developed countries , the United States ’ ability to test for COVID-19 , the disease caused by the novel coronavirus , has been extremely limited . This reality has led to rumors that President Donald Trump ’ s administration , or some of its members , have a financial interest in promoting specific tests as opposed to others that would be more widely available or more easily distributed .
One claim that has emerged in this vein came from a report by Raw Story that asserted “ the Kushner family is trying to cash in on the pandemic that could kill millions of us. ” The basis for this claim concerns the health insurance startup Oscar co-founded by Jared Kushner ’ s brother , Joshua Kushner . Jared Kushner is the son-in-law of and special adviser to Trump .
On March 13 , 2020 , Oscar announced that it would be launching a testing-center locator for COVID-19 :
Today , Oscar , a tech-driven health insurance company , launched the first testing center locator for COVID-19 in the U.S. , featuring more than 100 centers today . It is accessible to the general public and more testing centers are being added every day .
However , the details of Oscar ’ s testing locator have been described incorrectly in several viral social media posts alleging profiteering from the Kushners during the coronavirus pandemic . A well-shared post by a user named “ Boston Judy , ” for example , asserted that “ we didn ’ t have testing because the Trump family circle wanted to wait till they could make a profit . ”
Even if this assertion had merit , the actions Oscar took merely help locate unaffiliated testing centers . As an insurance company , Oscar does not manufacture , perform , analyze , or sell any actual COVID-19 test . Further , the test-center locator that Oscar developed is open to the general public and is not limited to people who get insurance through Oscar . Once a user has taken a short survey , the locator will provide the closest locations for testing in areas in which they operate . While the service also acts as a promotion for the company , it can serve as a testing center locator for any interested party .
“ Boston Judy ” later clarified that Oscar was not producing tests , but that the company would get to “ bill the feds for evaluating people for COVID and referring them to a testing center if they meet the criteria [ for testing ] . ” While the legislation that would allow for such a reimbursement likely will include a fund for covering the cost of these tests , the legislation has not yet been finalized , and it ’ s unclear that it would really be a windfall for Oscar , either .
On March 13 , 2020 , U.S. House Democrats and the White House reached a deal on a package of legislation that included a requirement that insurance companies cover the full cost of COVID-19 with no cost sharing . As described by the Brookings Institute , this legislation , if and when it is passed by the Senate and signed by the president :
Would offer financial support to state governments by temporarily increasing the share of Medicaid spending financed by the federal government , require almost all forms of health insurance to cover COVID-19 testing without cost-sharing , and create mechanisms to pay for COVID-19 testing for uninsured people .
In other words , while the government will likely be subsidizing insurance companies like Oscar , they are doing so to cover losses incurred by the requirement for full reimbursement to members . These laws , and the federal reimbursement they would authorize , would apply to any health insurance company in America , not only Oscar .
Joshua Kushner co-founded Oscar in 2012 . His venture capital firm , Thrive Capital , holds a significant ownership share . According to financial-disclosure forms released by Jared Kushner and his wife , Ivanka Trump , covering the year 2018 , the couple owned and received profit from shares of Thrive :
This document also appears to assert that the couple divested from Thrive during the 2018 financial year :
Jared Kushner recently divested from another of his brother ’ s enterprises : the “ real estate crowdfunding platform ” Cadre . In that instance , the Center for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington ( CREW ) obtained a certificate of divestiture documenting Jared Kushner ’ s involvement in that company . Thus far , however , no certificate of divestiture has been produced publicly that documents Jared Kushner ’ s divestment in the company that owns Oscar .
That being said , the assertion that the Kushners as a family are involved in the business of COVID-19 testing is not entirely accurate . The company ’ s coronavirus response so far is limited to an online form that allows users to find a testing location if their symptoms call for it . Health insurance companies are likely to be reimbursed for covering the cost of COVID-19 testing once legislation is passed , but this would apply to all insurance providers , not just Oscar . For these reasons , we rank the truth of this claim as a “ Mixture . ”