Elsewhere in the country , other Amazon sellers were doing the same .
Chris Anderson , an Amazon seller in central Pennsylvania , said he and a friend had driven around Ohio , buying about 10,000 masks from stores . He used coupons to buy packs of 10 for around $ 15 each and resold them for $ 40 to $ 50 . After Amazon ’ s cut and other costs , he estimates , he made a $ 25,000 profit .
Mr. Anderson is now holding 500 packs of antibacterial wipes after Amazon blocked him from selling them for $ 19 each , up from $ 16 weeks earlier . He bought the packs for $ 3 each .
Eric , a truck driver from Ohio who spoke on the condition that his surname not be published because he feared Amazon would retaliate , said he had also collected about 10,000 masks at stores . He bought each 10-pack for about $ 20 and sold most for roughly $ 80 each , though some he priced at $ 125 .
“ Even at $ 125 a box , they were selling almost instantly , ” he said . “ It was mind-blowing as far as what you could charge. ” He estimates he made $ 35,000 to $ 40,000 in profit .
Now he has 1,000 more masks on order , but he ’ s not sure what to do with them . He said Amazon had been vague about what constituted price gouging , scaring away sellers who don ’ t want to risk losing their ability to sell on its site .
To regulators and many others , the sellers are sitting on a stockpile of medical supplies during a pandemic . The attorney general ’ s offices in California , Washington and New York are all investigating price gouging related to the coronavirus . California ’ s price-gouging law bars sellers from increasing prices by more than 10 percent after officials declare an emergency . New York ’ s law prohibits sellers from charging an “ unconscionably excessive price ” during emergencies .
An official at the Washington attorney general ’ s office said the agency believed it could apply the state ’ s consumer-protection law to sue platforms or sellers , even if they aren ’ t in Washington , as long as they were trying to sell to Washington residents .