There is another variable that may well tip in our favor , says Herman B . “ Dutch ” Leonard , a professor of public management at Harvard Kennedy School . That ’ s America ’ s ability to innovate its way through crisis . “ We are just beginning to do our best thinking , ” he says .
So far , there isn ’ t enough data to provide definitive transmission or fatality rates . Wide-ranging variations in the adoption of and adherence to social distancing further complicate the picture .
“ I think we could be doing a lot of harm , ” says John Ioannidis , an epidemiologist and statistician at Stanford University , who adds that that stress affects susceptibility to viral and respiratory infections . Others defend sobering models as essential to helping leaders and health care systems brace for a surge in demand and saving lives .
Ideally , scientific advisers can help officials understand the underlying assumptions that modelers have used to piece together fragmentary data . But often those assumptions get lost in the fray , creating an aura of certainty – and dread – when projections are splashed across the news with grave images .
Where can public officials turn for trusted advice on COVID-19 when models of the pandemic ’ s arc have offered such divergent projections of death rates and hospital shortages ?
As mayors , governors , and presidents weigh how best to guide their communities through the coronavirus crisis , they must navigate dramatically divergent models of the arc of the pandemic .
In the United States alone , leaders have already made decisions that have disrupted millions of citizens ’ lives and cost trillions of dollars , with a disproportionate economic impact on low-wage earners and their families . As citizens across the country wonder whether they and their loved ones will be safe , how they ’ ll pay their bills , and when they 'll be able to return to work , some are pressing their leaders to take stricter measures while others are questioning the models that prompted such unprecedented steps .
The modeling debate within the scientific community is due in part to uncertainty around key questions , including transmission and fatality rates . And the challenge is further complicated by wide-ranging variations in adoption of and adherence to preventative measures like social distancing and voluntary home quarantine .
“ I think we should use all data to inform our views , but we shouldn ’ t be overconfident in the results from any one data set or even any combination of data sets , ” says Marc Lipsitch , a professor of epidemiology and director of the Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics at the Harvard T.H . Chan School of Public Health . “ I think we ’ re still at the stage of , ‘ Here are the caveats . ’ ”
But the caveats and underlying assumptions are sometimes lost in the fray . For average citizens , the charts depicting expected spikes in fatality rates or hospital shortages can take on an aura of certainty – and dread .
“ No matter what the numbers are , if they are accompanied by pictures of people dying and of graves and trucks carrying the dead ... [ people ] read the numbers through these narratives , through these stories , ” says John Ioannidis , a professor of epidemiology at Stanford University . Such packaging in the media compounds an already stressful environment , he adds , noting that stress affects susceptibility to viral and respiratory infections . “ In such a situation , with panic and horror being disseminated , I think we could be doing a lot of harm . ”
Two of the most prominent COVID-19 models are from Imperial College London and the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation ( IHME ) in Washington state .
Imperial ’ s Neil Ferguson and his colleagues garnered headlines with their projection that if nothing were done , COVID-19 deaths in the United Kingdom and U.S. over two years would total 510,000 and 2.2 million , respectively , and demand for critical care beds would peak at 30 times actual capacity .
Their March 16 report , which advocated social distancing , is widely credited with prompting Britain and many U.S. states to close schools , churches , and nonessential services . The Trump administration issued guidance the same day recommending that employees work at home and gatherings be limited to 10 or fewer people .
Dr. Ferguson , who is one of the most highly respected figures in his field , came under fire for allegedly reversing course nine days later when he told British Parliament that due to the U.K. ’ s lockdown and social distancing policies , he estimated the death toll at 20,000 and possibly substantially less .
The 20,000 estimate was in fact included in the original report – but as one of 46 different projected death tolls ranging from 5,600 to 120,000 depending on the rate of transmission and the scope of societal restrictions . ( See page 13 in this PDF . )
It ’ s unclear how effective such restrictions are . A survey of 14 studies on quarantine in past disease outbreaks , for example , found that rates of adherence varied from 0 % to 92 % .
“ I think we need to be very careful with narratives that say ... ‘ Only 20,000 died because we did the right thing , ’ ” says Dr. Ioannidis , who has made a career out of finding holes in medical research and cautions against a “ bandwagon ” effect among researchers .
Last month he published a provocative article in STAT warning of a once-in-a-century “ evidence fiasco ” around COVID-19 , asking how policymakers could be sure they weren ’ t doing more harm than good by implementing draconian countermeasures based on patchy data . Dr. Lipsitch wrote a rebuttal piece arguing that despite the lack of data , inaction was not an option given the exponential nature of infection .
One of the key unknowns is the infection fatality rate . Under ideal circumstances , fatality rates are a matter of simple arithmetic – divide the number of deaths by the number of infections . But without widespread testing of the general population , it ’ s difficult to produce a reliable denominator . What ’ s more , the number of fatalities isn ’ t entirely certain , either . In Italy , for instance , there have been indications that deaths may have been either overstated or understated , casting doubt on totals elsewhere as well .
The World Health Organization initially estimated the fatality rate for global cases at 3.4 % . But more recent estimates have come in lower . A March 13 article in the journal Science , for example , concluded that China ’ s fatality rate was closer to 0.5 % . Imperial ’ s study put the U.K. rate at 0.9 % .
The other model garnering a lot of attention , from IHME at the University of Washington , didn ’ t attempt to calculate fatality rates . It focused on projecting total deaths and the strain on health care systems , initially using data from Wuhan , China , and then other locations as more data became available .
IHME ’ s March 25 forecast projected lower death tolls than numerous other models – in part because it assumed that within one week , all U.S. states would have adopted four social distancing measures that China implemented . But two weeks later , 41 states have implemented two or fewer . Nevertheless , IMHE has since reduced its projections to 60,415 U.S. deaths by August , and lowered its estimate of total hospital beds needed at peak demand by nearly half .
John Locher/AP Medical students Claire Chen ( center left ) and Miranda Stiewig ( center right ) take people 's temperatures to screen for possible coronavirus cases at a makeshift camp for homeless people on March 28 , 2020 , in Las Vegas .
So how are public officials supposed to make sense of the debate within the scientific community – and fast ?
Ideally , their scientific advisers can help sort through the relevant studies or models , including the fine print , says John Holdren , former White House scientific adviser under President Barack Obama .
“ It ’ s the responsibility of the modelers [ individuals and their agencies ] to make the assumptions and associated uncertainties clear when they describe their results , and the responsibility of science advisors to policy makers to try to make sure these points are understood , ” says Dr. Holdren in an emailed comment .
The Trump administration showed IMHE ’ s model at a March 31 press conference when it unveiled its own estimate of 100,000 to 240,000 fatalities , also citing studies from Imperial College , Harvard , and others . But the White House gave little visibility into how it arrived at those numbers .
“ I ’ m not quite clear – and I ’ m a pretty experienced pandemic watcher – about the process of deliberation , ” says Howard Markel , a physician and professor of the history of medicine at the University of Michigan who has studied pandemics from the Black Death to the 1918 Spanish flu and was part of a group of experts tapped to evaluate the Obama administration ’ s H1N1 influenza policies on a daily basis from 2009 to 2011 .
One of the critical performance factors in handling a crisis is how successfully the scientific community and political actors interface with each other , says Herman B . “ Dutch ” Leonard , a professor of public management at Harvard Kennedy School who is working with mayors from around the world through the Bloomberg Harvard City Leadership Initiative .
Politicians are sometimes skeptical of scientists ’ projections , he says , while scientists can underestimate the political difficulty of enforcing something like social distancing .
“ The scientists often act as if the mayor has a wand and can order the public to stay home , but she ’ s using up really scarce political capital , ” which could undermine her ability to act as the pandemic worsens , says Professor Leonard .
But Dr. Markel says that a public health official changing strategy as new data comes in is analogous to a physician who adjusts his treatment of a patient as symptoms change , and that should be communicated to the public . “ It ’ s the patient-doctor relationship writ large because you ’ re taking care of a community , ” he says .
As leaders strive to give an unvarnished view of the facts without creating undue fear , Professor Leonard says one variable may be higher than people realize : America ’ s ability to innovate its way through crisis .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ We consistently underpredict the resilience in our political and economic system because we can ’ t ourselves figure out what the answer is , ” he says , even as an automotive factory is figuring out how to produce masks , for example . “ We are just beginning to do our best thinking . ”