Here is today ’ s ███ brief : India sees a record daily number of coronavirus cases , an unexplained explosion rocks a U.S. Navy vessel , Poland ’ s ruling party narrowly wins presidential election , and what to watch in the world this week .
If you would like to receive Morning Brief in your inbox every weekday , please sign up here .
On Sunday , the World Health Organization announced another record number of cases recorded in one day , with more than 230,000 cases reported globally .
The United States remains the world ’ s hotspot , with some states seeing huge spikes in cases . If the state of Florida were a country , the 15,300 new cases reported there on Sunday would have put it in the top ten globally .
In the United States , the search for a scapegoat appears to have led to Anthony Fauci , the top infectious disease expert and lead public health official on U.S. President Donald Trump ’ s coronavirus task force . A White House official told CNN on Saturday that “ several White House officials are concerned about the number of times Dr. Fauci has been wrong on things. ” Fauci has a chance to speak for himself during an appearance at an event hosted by Georgetown University this Tuesday .
India ’ s ignominy . For the first time , India outpaced Brazil in new cases after the country recorded almost 30,000 on Sunday . Although delays in reporting can distort any one-day figures , the continued rise in cases shows how India has still failed to bend its curve . Writing in ███ on June 22 , Kunal Purohit wrote about the country ’ s “ bungling ” response to its coronavirus outbreak and the sorry state of its healthcare system even before the pandemic struck .
Modi ’ s reckoning ? On July 6 , Kapil Komireddi wrote about Prime Minister Narendra Modi and how “ the dire state in which India finds itself today is the direct consequence of his ineptitude. ” Komireddi warns of a wider press crackdown in the country as its coronavirus crisis worsens .
Explosion at U.S. naval base . At least 21 people were injured , including 17 sailors , after an explosion and fire occurred on a U.S. Navy amphibious assault ship while undergoing maintenance at port in San Diego . Although the cause is still unknown , the incident is believed to have taken place on the ship ’ s well deck , where small craft board and disembark the ship .
PiS wins close Polish election . Incumbent Polish President Andrzej Duda has claimed victory in Sunday ’ s presidential runoff election pitting him against Warsaw Mayor Rafal Trzaskowski . With 99 percent of precincts reporting , Duda is leading with 51.2 percent of the vote . Despite coronavirus fears , voter turnout was approximately 68 percent—the highest in 25 years .
Thaci heads to the Hague . Kosovo President Hashim Thaci visits the Hague today to be interviewed after he was indicted on charges of crimes against humanity and war crimes . Thaci , who led an ethnic Albanian guerilla group in the 1998-99 Kosovo war , has defended his conduct . “ Our war was clean and just , ” he told Albanian television on Sunday .
Okinawa coronavirus cases cause tension . More than 60 U.S. Marines on the Japanese island of Okinawa have tested positive for the coronavirus , angering local officials after they had struggled to obtain exact figures from the U.S. military . Okinawa ’ s governor , Denny Tamaki , has demanded that the U.S. military stop sending soldiers from the U.S. mainland and for the bases to be sealed off . A Marine statement said that off-base activities would be restricted due to the outbreak , but stopped short of a full lockdown of bases . Okinawa has had roughly 150 cases of the coronavirus so far .
Russia advances Syria policy at U.N. Russia scored a diplomatic victory on Saturday when it successfully reduced the number of border crossings for United Nations aid to enter Syria from two to one , following a vote from the U.N. Security Council on Saturday . The move closes a humanitarian aid route from Bab al-Salam in Turkey to Aleppo . Bab al-Hawa , another Turkish crossing point which supplies Idlib , will remain open to aid until July 2021 .
The cost of Brexit . The United Kingdom announced plans to spend $ 890 million on border infrastructure to better facilitate trade after its transition deal with the European Union , according to Cabinet Secretary Michael Gove . Talks between the two sides are ongoing , with another formal round of trade talks set to begin on July 20 . How the British government plans to handle the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland , a sticking point in EU negotiations , will be announced “ later this month , ” Gove said .
Norilsk spills again in Arctic . Norilsk Nickel has caused another environmental incident in Russia ’ s far north after roughly 45 tons of aviation fuel leaked from a pipeline near Tukhard , close to the Arctic port of Dudinka . The leak follows a massive fuel spill in Siberia on May 29 , when 21,000 tons of diesel leaked into nearby rivers after a fuel tank collapsed . Norilsk was fined a record $ 2 billion by the Russian government for the destruction caused by the spill . The company plans to appeal the financial penalty .
Sudan puts some laws in the past . Sudan ’ s Justice Minister Nasredeen Abdulbari announced a slate of new policies that dismantle laws put in place by the previous Islamist regime . Female genital mutilation will be banned , women will no longer need permits from male family members for travel , and apostasy will be decriminalized , Abdulbari told state television . The country ’ s non-Muslims—who amount to roughly 3 percent of the population—will now be allowed drink alcohol in private , although the Muslim majority is still banned from drinking .
On Tuesday , hearings begin in a case brought by Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology against the Department of Homeland Security and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement . The two higher-learning institutions are seeking to block a rule , announced last week , that would leave foreign students open to deportation if they attend colleges that do not offer in-person classes for the fall semester .
On Wednesday , North Macedonia votes in parliamentary elections . The elections had been scheduled for April 12 but were postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic .
On Thursday , the European Court of Justice will issue its judgment in a case brought by privacy activist Max Schrems , over the transfer of his personal data from Facebook Ireland to Facebook Inc. in the United States . Schrems contends that Facebook is violating the EU ’ s data protection laws by allowing U.S. intelligence services to access his personal data .
On July 17 , the leaders of EU member states will meet in Brussels for the first in-person European Council summit since the coronavirus pandemic began . The revised multi-annual financial framework ( MFF ) and economic recovery proposal are expected to top the agenda .
A part of Indian history has been unearthed in the French Alps after a local café manager discovered a batch of newspapers hailing the election of Indira Gandhi among the melting ice of the Mont Blanc glacier . The newspapers are thought to have come from the wreckage of an Air India Boeing 707 that crashed into the mountain in 1966 . Timothee Mottin , who found the time capsule , plans to display the papers—along with other found items from the crash—at his café near Chamonix .