`` The weeks go by in a meaningless blur , '' my wife complained . `` What difference does it make if it 's Thursday , or Tuesday or Saturday ? '' She expressed the frustration most of us feel as we hunker down at home , venturing out only to buy necessities and living without human contact . I bumped into a friend the other day and he instinctively stuck out his hand to shake—as I shuddered at that once-common greeting .
My occasional errands reflect the new , post-apocalyptic universe . The Post Office was draped in plastic sheeting to divide customers from clerks , providing the feel of a nuclear-waste disposal site . Everyone is walking around with masks . Stores allow customers to enter in dribs and drabs , as each person stands in taped-off spots six feet from one another . I 've watched dystopian movies with a less-ominous vibe .
So , it 's an odd time to be looking on the bright side of a societal shutdown that is distorting our lives , killing businesses and obliterating jobs . But eventually the infections will drop and officials will lift the `` stay at home '' orders . While it may take a long time before we 're hugging and shaking hands again , life eventually will approach normal . At that point , we might be ready to rethink some of the stodgy ways that we 've been conducting our lives .
As a slow adopter of new technologies , I still remember going into a record store to buy some new vinyl—only to realize that the store no longer sold LPs . It sold compact discs and cassette tapes only ( remember them ? ) . We 'd head to the video store on a Saturday night and peruse the racks of VHS and Betamax tapes . It was n't long ago , either , when a few of us gathered around a colleague looking at his nifty new device called a `` smart phone . ''
During a period of incomparable technological revolutions , however , our public services—and many of our work lives—have remained remarkably unchanged . Sure , all businesses and agencies use the Internet and new technologies in most aspects of their work . But , judging by rush-hour traffic and commuter patterns , most people still queue up on the freeway to work at an office park or shop at a brick-and-mortar business .
Government agencies and public utilities are the most preposterous examples of stasis . We can ( kind of , sort of ) complete some tasks on the Department of Motor Vehicles website . We can pay our electric bill online . You can check on the status of your traffic ticket on the court website . You can even track an overnight package that you sent via the Postal Service . Mostly , though , these agencies operate as they operated in 1983 , or 1965 for that matter .
Even odder , the public schools are n't appreciably different from when the first public school systems were created eons ago . Oh yeah , we now bus kids to the school room , float bonds to build fancy gyms and prosecute the parents of truants . But the model is the same . Your kids sit in a classroom for a set period of time , learning whatever it is the educational authorities have determined that they must learn . Colleges have n't changed too much , either .
In COVID-19-ravaged New York City , the schools are shut down for obvious reasons . An unintentionally humorous New York Times article reported on the trials and tribulations of a school system that 's figuring out how to implement some form of distance learning so students could still graduate on time . The article quoted one teacher who `` had never heard of Zoom until two weeks ago '' but `` had some familiarity with Google Classroom , unlike many colleagues who only used their computers for email . ''
Yikes . At least the New Yorkers are trying , even if the effort has the feel of the old Soviet GUM department store trying to figure out how to compete with Costco . As that state 's schools shut down , the Pennsylvania Association of School Administrators called for a moratorium on enrollments in cyber charter schools , according to a recent Washington Examiner report .
That crystallized why so little ever changes in the public sector : the system is designed to protect the current system and its workers , not to provide the most effective form of education . Why do you think that most government agencies , which have suddenly closed operations during this crisis , are n't offering many ways to provide services ? Because you are n't a customer but a subject—there 's no incentive for them to make your life easier .
The big question is whether , after this crisis ends , Americans are willing to look at what has worked and what hasn't—and take on the vested interests that protect the government , in particular , from innovating and serving us better . I 'm not suggesting that we emerge from this crisis by spending even more time with our faces plastered to a computer screen , but rather that we come out of it with a new sense of creativity and possibility .
This column was first published in the Orange County Register .