The fight against COVID-19 is being waged on many fronts . Mr. Mignosa is fighting to keep his community and his workforce whole . His day is a window into what that looks like in an American town in a pandemic .
But these are not normal times , not when shoppers are panic-buying , employees are calling in sick , and suppliers are struggling to keep up . “ Will our food keep showing up ? ” the customers ask him , politely , from a safe distance .
Mr. Mignosa likes to know his customers , his competitors , and just about everything about the grocery business . He ’ s in constant motion on the shop floor and in the storeroom , working long days . In normal times , that workload keeps him busy .
Maybe you have a local store , not a national chain , where you buy some , if not all , of your groceries . You probably know some of the staff by now , perhaps the store manager too , if he ’ s anything like Mark Mignosa , who runs a bustling grocery south of Boston .
The grocer gets up at 5 a.m. , and washes his hands .
In the dark he dresses , eats something , tries “ to clear [ his ] mind , ” and opens his email . He begins .
On another day , in other times , this is when he would have looked at numbers – order sizes maybe , sales by hour , prior-year traffic . He would have been planning , imagining innovations , thinking hard about customer demands and employee needs and competitor strategies . He would have been thinking hard about how he might make his store better , as he loves to do .
The grocer ’ s name is Mark Mignosa . And right now his grocery store – Fruit Center Marketplace , in Hingham , Massachusetts – could be almost any grocery store in locked-down America , and his story almost any grocer ’ s story . Except that his store isn ’ t any store .
And like anybody , I need it to keep getting me food .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Mark Mignosa , co-owner and president of the Fruit Center Marketplace , an independently owned grocery store , poses in front of the fully stocked produce aisle in his store on March 25 , 2020 , in Hingham , Massachusetts . Grocery stores are considered essential businesses during the coronavirus crisis .
By 6:30 a.m. , after the emailing from home about health department updates , tactical questions from managers , and the day ’ s “ directives ” ( “ Even more handwashing ! ” ) , he ’ s in the Fruit Center ’ s aisles . “ And from the moment you hit the store , you ’ re on , ” he says . The doors will open at 7 , instead of 8 , for a newly added hour restricted to “ 60-and-over ” shoppers , and away the day will race .
Agenda : Get enough goods on the emptying shelves , keep customers safe and calm , keep employees healthy and committed , and keep himself from getting sick . Ready , set , go .
Mr. Mignosa knows what I ’ m thinking , because he knows everybody ’ s thinking it . Will our food keep showing up ?
Sometime in the past few weeks , as coronavirus cases and social lockdowns spread , Mr. Mignosa watched Americans decide they could no longer trust groceries to be available when they needed them . Hence the hoarding . Almost half the stores responding to a national Progressive Grocer poll likened their customers to frantic prospectors in a river running out of gold . The Fruit Center was no exception ; foot traffic rose between 100 % and 200 % , and average checkout tallies doubled . Business still remains at “ holiday levels , ” says Mr. Mignosa , which is hard to manage in the best of times , and brutally hard when the “ holiday ” refuses to end .
Of course his customers , like shoppers everywhere , have questions : How can we expect the food system to keep working when it seems like most people don ’ t go to work ? Will we ever actually see toilet paper again ?
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Customers shop at the Fruit Center Marketplace during the coronavirus crisis , on March 25 , 2020 , in Hingham , Massachusetts . The store is limiting the number of people allowed inside at one time to allow for social distancing .
According to supply chain analysts and grocery industry insiders – as well as Mr. Mignosa ’ s own instincts and experience – the answers are easy :
Yes , there will be toilet paper ; in fact there were a few rolls yesterday . ( “ Fred found some from an industrial paper distributor . The crew we have , they ’ re veterans . They can find things. ” ) It sold out . More ’ s coming .
And yes , the U.S. food supply chain will keep getting us food . Just not everything we ’ re used to .
The Fruit Center and its sister location in nearby Milton – both co-owned and co-managed by Mr. Mignosa and his brother , Michael – are about half the size of average supermarkets but still need deliveries from 30 distributors and some 200 vendors . Supply isn ’ t perfect , Mr. Mignosa says . “ But honestly , I ’ m impressed by the product flow . ”
The morning goes both fast and slow . Fast because of so much work , “ and with very short staff . We ’ re down a few people in every department. ” Employees have begged off due to illness , or discomfort with the exposure , or the need to care for others at home . ( “ Which is absolutely understandable , and what you expect , ” Mr. Mignosa says . “ We need people to do what ’ s right for them . ” )
Slow because it ’ s just a few weeks since the national emergency declaration and already you can see the accumulating weariness among the staff – the wish for the days to hurry up and the bad dream to be over . Massachusetts is among the worst-hit states so far , with more than 5,700 confirmed cases of COVID-19 .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Liam Carey stocks produce at the Fruit Center Marketplace during the coronavirus crisis , on March 25 , 2020 , in Hingham , Massachusetts . He says he is happy to still have a job .
In the store , Mr. Mignosa likes to move – constantly circulating with short quick steps . When he stops to talk , his torso tilts forward a little , as though to catch any words that might fall between you . He ’ s the kind of boss who wears the same outfit the clerks and stockers do . If there ’ s a sudden need for baggers at the checkout , he ’ s the kind of boss who bags .
Before all this , says Mr. Mignosa , “ everything about our days was completely different . The whole focus would have been customer service , quality , freshness , the personal development '' of employees . ( The Fruit Center has 300 . )
Then there ’ s the scramble to keep up with orders and find new sources of must-have items . Cleaning goods and paper products remain hard to get , along with backroom store supplies like bathroom soaps and sanitizers , and sometimes deli meats and water , “ like before a storm. ” The other day there wasn ’ t any canola oil or dried black beans . “ A lot of comfort food is going on , ” Mr. Mignosa says .
Meanwhile , the store ’ s processes and tactics are changed almost daily . The salad bar is closed . The soup table is closed . To facilitate safe social distancing , the store is metered now ; 50 or 60 shoppers are allowed in ; after that it 's one in , one out . Plastic glass barriers have been erected at checkouts , and hourly wages have been hiked $ 2 ( as has become increasingly common industrywide ) . In front of the fish counter and deli counter and checkout stations , there ’ s blue tape on the floor to keep people at a distance . There are signs up .
By lunchtime Mr. Mignosa has no idea how many times he has washed his hands . Nor how many conversations he has had – with staffers , with customers . “ All centered on the same issue. ” Sometimes it feels like the conversations are all he does .
“ We ’ re all a little frightened , because we ’ re all on the front line . I don ’ t even want to say that because I don ’ t want to scare anybody , but it ’ s the truth. ” In Italy , an infected grocery clerk has died ; the news reports are everywhere .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Signs at the Rocky Neck Fish counter instruct customers to stay behind a line at the Fruit Center Marketplace during the coronavirus crisis , on March 25 , 2020 , in Hingham , Massachusetts .
So he circulates and he talks . “ It ’ s the time you have with every individual that matters . They need it , they ’ re sacrificing so much , they ’ re such pros , ” says Mr. Mignosa . He tries to reach everybody . “ Could be three minutes , 10 minutes . Could be a couple people , could be one at a time . ”
Customers , too , seem hungry to talk . All day they ask Mr. Mignosa and his Fruit Center colleagues , “ How are you ? You guys doing OK ? ” The questions are repeated so often that one might imagine they grow stale when there ’ s so much work to do . “ No ! ” Mr. Mignosa says . “ No , no , we need people to ask us that . We need to ask them how they ’ re doing , too . With customers there ’ s more of a connection now than ever – because we ’ re all going through this together . It helps everyone .
Afternoon . Mr. Mignosa is in the parking lot , where there are too many cars . He ’ s traffic-copping , smiling – directing people in his simultaneously decisive and self-effacing way .
Outside the main door , shoppers are lined up in the manner we ’ ve all now learned – spread out like fence posts that got abandoned before the actual fencing went up .
I recognize some of them by sight if not name ; 20 years of patronage among others just as loyal will do that . They seem calm . I ask them how they ’ re doing .
One couple – Christine and Alden – tell me , “ This is nice. ” Nice ?
“ Yeah , I feel better here , ” explains Christine . “ I mean this is our store . At home , the news – it can seem like nothing is working . Anywhere . And the isolation ... ” She looks around ; the sky is gray but it ’ s not too cold .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Customers leave with their purchases from the Fruit Center Marketplace .
“ Well , normal-ish , ” Alden revises . He changes the subject . “ I seriously want to thank these guys for their service . Is that weird ? ” I say I know what he means .
Inside the store a fully masked customer at the checkout waves his arm to indicate his filled cart and gives me a muffled , “ This is great , ” the skin around his eyes crinkling with a smile you can ’ t see . Meanwhile people keep floating slowly through the aisles , nodding to one another as they calculate just what 6 feet looks like . There ’ s still no toilet paper . “ Or flour or chicken stock , ” Mr. Mignosa says . It troubles him .
It isn ’ t normal , though . The shelves may look serene but the duck ’ s feet are windmilling frantically below the surface , just as they are behind the scenes at other supermarkets and food distributors and loading docks across the country . Mr. Mignosa can ’ t get his staff to leave on time . “ It ’ s overwhelming , the amount of load coming in [ for restocking ] , ” he tells me . The store closes at 6 p.m. instead of its previous 8 p.m. to allocate hours for sanitizing and stock handling , but there ’ s still not enough time to get the work done , “ and they don ’ t wan na leave . ”
Mr. Mignosa adds , “ I keep insisting it ’ s important to leave . You have to get rest . You have to take care of yourselves . ”
Sometime between 5:30 and 6 p.m. , he goes home . He has been at the store for 11 hours .
Maybe you feel about some store that ’ s local to you the way I feel about the Fruit Center . Especially now .
On occasion over the past two decades I feared for it , as a Whole Foods and a Trader Joe ’ s and a Fresh Market came to town ( joining two other supermarkets already here ) . But the Fruit Center just kept getting better , and thrived . It ’ s the kind of store where if you ask a stocker for the location of the capers , he doesn ’ t tell you or point ; he drops what he ’ s doing and takes you to them , no matter how many aisles away .
The store is good , is the thing . Flagrantly competent , delightful to be in , easy to count on . You can count on it without even thinking about it . You can take it for granted .
Over the phone , I tell Mr. Mignosa about the customers who wanted to thank him and his people for their service , and I hear him exhale .
“ You know , ” he says , “ we get a lot of that now . Seems ridiculous but I almost feel like a first responder , or a fireman , whatever . It ’ s not like we ’ re depended on for survival or anything . ”
Yet you kind of are , I remind him , because : food .
“ People are so grateful . It keeps you going . And when we get that support , in an email or a conversation , we immediately try to blast it around the store to everyone . It ’ s like : This is it . This is why . We can do this . ”
And of course , I know they can . I know they will . It ’ s a grocery store , but right about now it feels a little heroic .
Mr. Mignosa is home for the night , his phone on ( “ always ” ) but his computer off . He and his wife have three kids – two in college and a high school freshman – and now the whole family is back together in the lockdown . “ My family ’ s great ; they ’ re very balanced , ” he says , his voice making it sound as though “ balanced ” might be the hardest and most precious thing in the world . “ It ’ s a good reset for me . ”
So , he resets . Does he worry about how long he and his crew can keep going ? “ No . I ’ m just not at that point ; I don ’ t think about that . Nothing past tomorrow matters .
“ There ’ s no doubt that we can keep this going for our community . ”
So tomorrow , like today , he ’ ll do the best thing he can think to do , which is to do his job as well as he can do it .
But first , he needs some rest . So he ’ ll go to bed .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy