WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - New U.S. COVID-19 cases rose by more than 47,000 on Tuesday according to a ███ tally , the biggest one-day spike since the start of the pandemic , as the government ’ s top infectious disease expert warned that number could soon double .
California , Texas and Arizona have emerged as new U.S. epicenters of the pandemic , reporting record increases in COVID-19 cases .
“ Clearly we are not in total control right now , ” Dr. Anthony Fauci , head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , told a U.S. Senate committee . “ I am very concerned because it could get very bad . ”
Fauci said the daily increase in new cases could reach 100,000 unless a nationwide push was made to tamp down the resurgent virus .
“ We can ’ t just focus on those areas that are having the surge . It puts the entire country at risk , ” he said .
Fauci said there was no guarantee of a vaccine , although early data had been promising : “ Hopefully there will be doses available by the beginning of next year , ” he said .
COVID-19 cases more than doubled in June in at least 10 states , including Texas and Florida , a ███ tally showed . In parts of Texas and Arizona , hospital intensive care beds for COVID-19 patients are in short supply .
More than 126,000 Americans have died from COVID-19 and millions have lost their jobs as states and major cities ordered residents to stay home and businesses closed . The economy contracted sharply in the first quarter and is expected to crater in the second .
The European Union has excluded Americans from its “ safe list ” of countries from which the bloc will allow non-essential travel beginning on Wednesday .
The fresh rise in cases and hospitalizations has dimmed hopes that the worst of the human and economic pain had passed , prompting renewed criticism of U.S. President Donald Trump as he seeks re-election on Nov. 3 .
His rival , Democrat Joe Biden , on Tuesday said that Trump ’ s “ historic mismanagement ” of the pandemic cost lives and inflicted more damage than necessary to the U.S. economy .
“ It didn ’ t have to be this way . Donald Trump failed us , ” the 77-year-old former vice president said in a speech in Delaware , where he unveiled an updated plan to tackle the pandemic calling for more testing and the hiring of 100,000 contract tracers .
In the past week California , Texas and Florida have moved to close recently reopened bars , which public health officials believe are likely one of the larger contributors to the recent spikes .
On Tuesday , New York , New Jersey and Connecticut added travelers from California and seven other states to those who must self-quarantine for 14 days upon arrival . Texas and Florida were named last week .
South Carolina also has also emerged as a hot spot , reporting a record single-day increase of 1,755 cases on Tuesday .
In Texas , where the number of new cases jumped to a one-day record of 6,975 on Tuesday , Houston hospitals said beds were quickly filling up with COVID-19 patients .
Dr. Marc Boom , chief executive of Houston Methodist Hospital , told CNN on Tuesday that his hospital beds have seen a “ very significant ” increase in COVID-19 patients , although the death rate has lowered .
Boom said he was worried about Independence Day celebrations this weekend , when Americans traditionally flock to beaches and campgrounds to watch fireworks displays .
Dr Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases , testifies during a Senate Health , Education , Labor and Pensions ( HELP ) Committee hearing on Capitol Hill in Washington , U.S. , June 30 , 2020 . Kevin Dietsch/Pool via ███
( GRAPHIC : Tracking the novel coronavirus in the U.S. - here )
( GRAPHIC : The lifeline pipeline , COVID-19 treatments , vaccines in development - here )