The coronavirus pandemic is threatening the lives of millions of Americans , including two members of Congress , and it 's wreaking havoc on the economy . The government is now taking massive action even as there 's been a surprising twist for victims of the virus .
Capitol Hill is not immune to COVID-19 . Out of the thousands of US patients with the virus , two are members of Congress . Florida Rep. Mario Diaz Balart , 58 , and Utah Rep. Ben McAdams , 45 , released statements Wednesday night saying they 've tested positive .
And now there 's a troubling report out from the Centers for Disease Control saying 38 percent of patients known to be hospitalized in the US are younger – between 20 and 54 years old . And 12 percent of intensive care patients are between 20 and 44 .
Dr. Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institutes of Health 's Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , said , `` We 're asking the young people to help us with this mitigation strategy by staying out of the bars , staying out of the restaurants , really trying to distance yourself . ''
This comes as President Trump signed a coronavirus aid package Wednesday night , providing free testing and two-week paid sick leave for full-time workers who come down with the virus . `` We are all in this together , and we will come through together . It 's the invisible enemy , '' he said .
The next step in the president 's economic plan is to put money straight into the hands of the American people . Trump is pushing Congress to approve a trillion-dollar-plus economic recovery package . It could include $ 500 billion in direct payments to Americans , $ 300 billion for small businesses , and $ 50 billion for the hard-hit airline industry .
But will it all be enough ? Economist Stephen Moore tells ███ News the economy will recover . `` We ’ ve lived through these crises before , '' Moore said , saying there could be a short recession but `` then the economy will boom out . ''
Meanwhile , a federal government plan to combat COVID-19 warns of a worst-case scenario in which the pandemic could possibly `` last 18 months or longer . '' It also predicts widespread shortages that would strain the nation 's health care system .
Trump said America is at war with the disease , saying , `` I view it as , in a sense , a wartime president . ''
The president has now invoked a wartime law , the Defense Production Act , allowing him to direct American industries to produce critically needed medical equipment and protective gear .
The shut-down has been taking a big toll on investors who fear a recession . Stocks tumbled again on Wednesday , and oil dropped below $ 21 per barrel for the first time since 2002 . In the latest round of shutdowns : the largest owner of shopping malls in the nation , the Simon Property Group , is closing the doors of all its malls and retail properties . Ford , General Motors and Chrysler-Fiat are also closing all of their factories in the US , Canada , and Mexico , sending 150,000 workers home .
Christian leaders continue to issue calls to prayer . `` These issues are bigger than we can handle ourselves , we need divine direction and divine intervention , '' said Tony Perkins , president of the Family Research Council .
Meanwhile , some hope and the good news are coming in from Wuhan , China , the initial epicenter of the virus . Chinese authorities , said Thursday , that the city and its surrounding provinces had no new cases to report for the first time in many weeks .