“ The 360 ” shows you diverse perspectives on the day ’ s top stories and debates .
One of the most intensely debated topics in the U.S. since the start of the coronavirus pandemic has been testing , specifically whether the country is doing enough testing to accurately track the outbreak . Health experts agree that testing capacity is critical , but they also point to another element in an effective virus response that hasn ’ t gotten nearly as much attention : contact tracing .
Contact tracing is the process of tracking down anyone who has come into contact with an infected person , letting them know they may be at risk and telling them to isolate themselves so they don ’ t pass it on to more people . Effective tracing can break the chain of transmission and limit isolated outbreaks before they spread into the broader community .
Experts agree that a robust tracing system will be a key part of containing the virus in the U.S. as lockdown restrictions are gradually lifted . The Trump administration ’ s coronavirus plan calls for national contract tracing , but the programs are being carried out by individual states .
New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo said his state will hire an “ army of people ” to trace the contacts of positive cases . Estimates suggest the U.S. will need anywhere between 100,000 to 300,000 contact tracers to successfully contain the virus . In addition to human tracers , some tech companies have developed apps to aid contact tracing using phone data .
A major reason why epidemiologists believe contact tracing will help fight the coronavirus is because it ’ s worked in the past . In the 1940s , the U.S. government enlisted an elite cadre of highly trained health experts to track a pervasive outbreak of venereal disease . Since then , contact tracing has been a key element of efforts to combat a variety of pathogens , including smallpox , AIDS and Ebola . More recently , contact tracing has been a major part of the response of the most successful coronavirus response plans , like those in South Korea and Germany .
With proper investment , the U.S. has the opportunity to mobilize a nationwide corps of contract tracers , public health experts say . Though tracing can be complex , it requires no special skill or experience , meaning the country has a vast potential workforce of recently unemployed workers who could be hired .
Despite its potential , some experts express doubt that the U.S. can carry out an effective contact tracing program . Without a nationwide plan , tracing programs have been left up to the states , leading to a patchwork of systems across the country . There ’ s also concern that the country is too late in getting tracing systems up and running . According to research by NPR , there were 11,000 tracers working in the U.S. , and most states ’ plans for future hiring fell well short of estimates of how many tracers would be needed . Others say the U.S. still doesn ’ t have the testing capacity to identify asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 , a step that ’ s necessary before tracing can begin .
Even a properly staffed system could be overwhelmed by the size of the outbreak in the U.S. , especially if lifting lockdown restrictions leads to a surge in new infections , some experts fear . The effort may also be hampered because years of persistent robocalls have made people reluctant to answer calls from unknown numbers . Those who do answer may consider questions about personal health as a violation of privacy and refuse to answer .
Democrats in the House of Representatives passed a $ 3 trillion stimulus bill that includes money to fund states ’ contract tracing programs . The Republican-led Senate is expected to consider its own legislation to boost the economy when it returns from recess at the beginning of June . It ’ s unclear whether additional funding for contact tracing will be included in that bill .
Contact tracing is critical to any plan to reopen the country
“ If we don ’ t have extensive contact tracing in every community in America , it ’ s going to be really hard not to see this virus when we open back up . It ’ s not a ‘ nice to have ’ — it ’ s an ‘ absolutely fundamental to have. ’ ” — Public health expert Dr. Ashish Jha to PBS Newshour