My academic subspecialty is the psychology of judgment and decision making . The foundational experiment in this discipline began with the prompt : “ Imagine that the United States is preparing for an outbreak of an unusual Asian disease. ” ( The glibly xenophobic use of “ Asian ” as a shortcut to inducing fear and confusion is a subject for another article . ) The experiment asked participants to choose between two public-health policies : In option A , one-third of the population survives for sure , but no one else makes it ; in option B , there is a one-third chance that all survive , but a two-thirds chance that none do . For some participants , these options were described in terms of how many lives would be saved ; for others , how many would die . Participants consistently chose option A , which offered certainty , if they were thinking in terms of potential gains ( saving lives ) but option B , which involved more risk , if they were thinking about potential losses ( dying ) . A weighty decision was swayed dramatically by the semantic framing . ( This observation earned one of the experimenters the Nobel Prize for economics . )
The cognitive-science canon is replete with uncanny predictions relevant to the coronavirus era . Researchers have studied the human tendency to discount preventable harms that arise from nature and to overreact to harms that arise from human action . The literature predicts that people will take comfort when a coronavirus fatality is attributed to “ underlying conditions ” —for instance , a patient ’ s age or chronic maladies—that they do not share , and they will be tempted by the quick dopamine hit associated with shaming those who fail at social distancing . Cognitive scientists even have experiments to explain the “ declining marginal disutility ” that people associate with others ’ deaths—the feeling that the difference between no deaths and one death is really bad , but the difference between 110,000 and 111,000 deaths is negligible . Evocatively termed “ psychophysical numbing , ” this confounding juxtaposition of the mathematical and the existential is where Americans live now .
As states gradually reopen , seemingly simple judgments are likely to grow more fraught . What does six feet between people look like ? The literature suggests that I am more confident I ’ m six feet away from a friend than from a stranger , that I ’ m more likely to blame people not of my race for standing too close , that I overestimate my compliance with public-health guidance but underestimate yours . Humans have difficulty calculating exponents , which is particularly crucial to understanding the speed of disease spread . They struggle to estimate the correct answer to a problem without drifting toward the answer that best serves their own interest . With more freedom of movement , Americans also have more opportunities to make judgments of others—who always seem to be doing it wrong . How can people be sitting in groups , chatting , at an outdoor bar ? Who would take their kid to swim in a public pool ? Are you inviting those people inside your house ?