Having failed to lead the best-prepared nation in the world against one pandemic , Donald Trump has made it more vulnerable to another . He has , for example , frayed international bonds further by trying to pull the U.S. out of the World Health Organization . Whether he has the legal authority to do so is still unclear , but even if the threat is empty , “ some of the effects will be immediate , ” says Loyce Pace , the president of the Global Health Council . U.S. officials and experts will start disengaging from international institutions , and that might encourage other nations to follow suit .
This won ’ t just harm the WHO at the time when it is most needed , but will also further diminish America ’ s already damaged international standing . A country that has badly mishandled its own outbreak , that has bought up the world ’ s stock of important drugs , and that has petulantly withdrawn from global alliances is less likely to receive warnings or support if a new crisis emerges .
There is an optimistic scenario if a second virus begins to spread : The new pathogen finds it harder to move around an alert world , is rapidly detected wherever it arrives , and fizzles out because cautious citizens have their guard up .
As long as people stay vigilant against the current pandemic—keeping their distance , wearing masks , avoiding indoor crowds—they should theoretically be guarded against a second respiratory virus . It used to be common for measles and pertussis to interfere with each other , so that if one spiked , the other would subside . That might be because kids who got one disease would stay home , reducing their risk of the other . “ It ’ s nothing to do with a vaccine or the immune system , ” says Sarah Cobey , an immunologist at the University of Chicago . “ It ’ s just people being careful . ”
The same tests that are being used to diagnose COVID-19 could also be tweaked to cover the new pathogen . One company is already developing a fast “ multiplex ” test that could look for four respiratory viruses—the new coronavirus , two types of flu , and respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) —in a single nasal swab . And if the new pathogen is a flu strain , existing vaccines could be tweaked to protect against it . That would still take several months , but the existence of a seasonal flu vaccine offers an invaluable head start .
Read : We don ’ t even have a COVID-19 vaccine , and the conspiracies are here
This future is easier to imagine in countries like South Korea , New Zealand , and Germany , which have successfully controlled COVID-19 . It seems less likely in nations like the U.S. , Brazil , Russia , and India , which are stretched and struggling .
In such places , COVID-19 would effectively cloak the spread of any new respiratory virus with similar symptoms , which “ could have a chance to take off before we realized it had , ” Cameron said . A new virus would also be harder to spot because “ all the resources we would normally use to detect potential viruses of concern have been redirected for COVID-19 , ” says Lauren Sauer , who works on disaster preparedness at Johns Hopkins Medicine . She means everything from physical equipment like swabs and storage tubes , to health-care workers who administer and process tests , to public-health experts who analyze the data or conduct contact tracing . These are either running out or burning out . A second respiratory virus would further tax the same resources that the U.S. has already failed to adequately marshal for COVID-19 .