WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - After passing $ 3 trillion of coronavirus relief in a rare run of bipartisanship , Republicans and Democrats in the U.S. Congress girded for a new battle over federal assistance to states and local governments grappling with the deadly outbreak .
Spurred on by governors and local officials , Democrats have put out the word they want to provide a sizable rescue package as part of a broader bill - one that could total at least $ 2 trillion in coming weeks .
Some Republicans have pushed back hard against the idea as unreasonably expensive and unwarranted .
House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi warned on Friday , “ There will not be a bill without state and local ” aid .
Pelosi , the top U.S. Democrat , added in a news conference that the legislation she is having prepared will be ready soon and that it will be “ expensive . ”
She said she was not yet certain how much money the House Democrats ’ bill would offer to state and local governments , but said , “ Probably a number equivalent to what we ’ ve done for small businesses . ”
So far , about $ 730 billion in aid has been made available to small businesses , including approximately $ 380 billion as part of a broader coronavirus measure President Donald Trump signed into law earlier on Friday .
Leaders of the National Governors Association earlier this month asked Congress for $ 500 billion in new aid for states and U.S. territories . Pelosi said she was checking on whether that request has changed .
The Democrats ’ agenda has some Republicans seething , with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell telling a conservative talk-radio host on Wednesday that he “ would certainly be in favor ” of letting states enter bankruptcy rather than send them cash .
Trump , a Republican who is seeking re-election in November , followed up on Thursday , noting during his daily coronavirus briefing : “ It is interesting that the states that are in trouble ... happen to be Democrat . ”
Republican Senator Bill Cassidy of Louisiana wants Washington to open a $ 500 billion stabilization fund for state and local governments . Republican Senator Rob Portman also has urged robust aid to states and local governments .
With U.S. coronavirus cases approaching 900,000 and deaths passing the 50,000 mark , some governors say that allowing states such as Michigan and Illinois to declare bankruptcy would be a recipe for collapsing the U.S. economy .
With so much dissension , one senior Senate Republican aide wondered whether any legislation would be brought up in the Senate anytime soon .
No . 2 Senate Republican John Thune on Friday said that instead of an aid package to state and local governments , the U.S. Treasury Department might be able to allow greater flexibility in the way those governments could use $ 150 billion in aid enacted at the end of March .
But a second senior Senate Republican aide , who also asked not to be identified , sketched out a scenario in which lawmakers and the White House could be forced into a fast-track negotiation . Here is how that might unfold :
On Thursday , Congress completed work on a $ 484 billion emergency bill allowing more federally backed loans to small businesses . The second aide said that even before Trump signed it into law , estimates swirled around Washington that this money could be gobbled up within a week .
If yet another small-business bailout was urgently needed , Pelosi could then be able to get Republicans back into dealmaking mode and push for the state aid .
The environment could be ripe for Trump and Pelosi , following three years of sputtering negotiations , to agree on a massive infrastructure investment plan for roads , bridges , rural broadband access and other public works projects .
“ If you ’ re spending another trillion dollars , unpaid for , Republicans would rather spend it on infrastructure than on direct aid to prop up states , ” the staffer said .