As the coronavirus ( COVID-19 ) pandemic continues to grow , public health officials warn that people of all ages can be affected by the virus — including young people — and urge everyone to follow social distancing precautions .
The World Health Organization says the coronavirus could put young adults — not just older populations — in the hospital for weeks or even cause death , and recent data from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) shows a significant percentage of people between ages 20 and 54 have been hospitalized .
The CDC now advises everyone to wear a cloth face cover when going out in public , such as going to the grocery store or to pick up other necessities .
The cloth face cover is meant to protect other people in case you are infected . You could spread COVID-19 to others even if you do not feel sick .
Do NOT use a facemask meant for a health care worker .
In addition , do NOT place cloth face coverings on young children under age 2 , anyone who has trouble breathing , or is unconscious , incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance .
Continue to keep about 6 feet between yourself and others . The cloth face cover is not a substitute for social distancing .
For more information , see CDC guidelines , including how to create your own cloth face cover .
Social distancing is critical to help curb the spread of the coronavirus and avoid overwhelming the nation ’ s health care system . Public health officials ask people to stay at least six feet away from others . Listen to and follow the directions of your state and local authorities , and follow these tips :
Stay home as much as possible and avoid non-essential travel , including shopping trips or social visits .
Don ’ t eat or drink at restaurants , bars or food courts . Instead use drive-thru , pickup or delivery options .
Distancing doesn ’ t mean disconnecting . For many of us , COVID-19 has disrupted our routines , and it ’ s important to stay connected with family and friends during this challenging time . You can still :
Connect with loved ones through video calls , phone calls , texts or social media .
Unless you are showing signs of illness or have tested positive for COVID-19 , go outside to exercise and walk pets while keeping at least six feet away from others .
If you are religious or spiritual , follow practices at home that provide you with comfort and emotional strength .
These safe practices can also help you cope with any stress that you may be experiencing . More tips and safety information are available at ███/coronavirus .
Thanks to the many who gave blood and scheduled upcoming appointments , the American Red Cross has been able to meet immediate patient needs . During this uncertain time , we encourage individuals to keep scheduled blood donation appointments and to make new blood donation appointments for the weeks ahead to ensure a stable supply throughout this pandemic .
We should all practice social distancing , and it ’ s important to know that blood drives are not considered “ mass gatherings ” because these are controlled events with trained staff and appropriate safety measures to protect donors and recipients . At each blood drive and donation center , Red Cross employees follow thorough safety protocols to help prevent the spread of any type of infection . Learn more .
FIND COVID-19 SAFETY UPDATES Visit ███/coronavirus for more information on COVID-19 safety . For the latest information , please visit the CDC website at cdc.gov/covid19 .
If you live outside the United States , health and safety tips can be found through the World Health Organization and by following your local Red Cross or Red Crescent society ’ s social media channels ( directory ) .