Rebekah Jones , the Florida data scientist who in May claimed that she was fired for refusing to manipulate state coronavirus data to meet the Republican governor 's reopening criteria , has issued a new warning : The ongoing outbreak is `` much , much worse '' than it has been painted by the administration .
In a Monday interview with MSNBC host Lawrence O'Donnell , Jones , who built the state government 's coronavirus data portal , identified a number of failures since she left her state job . Florida recently posted the highest daily caseload in a single day across all 50 U.S. states .
For instance , the southern state combined antibody test data with viral test data . ███ reported in May that the practice , which can obscure hotspots and misrepresent percentages , warps data not only at the state level . It may also trickle up to the national level at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention .
A number of states have now revised this practice after criticisms of juked stats , but Florida apparently has not joined them . The recent surge in cases threatens to disrupt plans to fully reopen its economy .
Jones also said the Florida Agency for Health Care Administration ( AHCA ) only began to release hospitalization data at the county level last week , and the information contradicts the state department of health 's data .
The AHCA numbers , which are available on Jones ' own data portal , show that many counties have more people hospitalized than reported by the DOH . Jones wrote in an op-ed last week that the misuse of DOH hospitalization data stretches from bloggers all the way up to The New York Times .
`` Taking the number of people hospitalized today versus the number reported yesterday does n't tell you how many more people were hospitalized in the last day , '' she said . `` It tells you how many reports of hospitalizations DOH received , which could include hospitalizations from cases back in March . The same is true of death data , as well . ''
Jones noted that the state did not release testing and case numbers in either jails or state prisons . Further , she said the health department stopped publishing testing demographic data after her firing in May .
`` We have no idea if recent surges in cases by age , gender , race or ethnicity are truly spikes , '' she said , `` or if they 're proportional to the number of people being tested within those demographic groups . ''
On Sunday , Florida set a national record when it posted more than 15,300 cases in one day . As of Monday , the state had recorded nearly 270,000 total cases and more than 4,300 deaths due to COVID-19 . If Florida were a country , it would currently rank ninth worldwide in cases .
Republican Gov . Ron DeSantis , whom Jones has accused of interfering with state data in the interest of his own political reopening agenda , dismissed the surge as a `` blip '' in a Friday news conference .
`` We 've got the census today . I think between 10 and 12 or 13,000 — somewhere like that — beds are available , '' DeSantis said in reference to the delayed release of county hospitalization data . `` There 'll be articles saying , 'Oh , my gosh . They 're at 90 % . ' Well , that 's how hospitals normally run . ''
DeSantis explained that his state has had `` a lot of different blips . ''
`` We 're now at a higher blip than where we were in May and the beginning of June , '' he said .
Protesters shouted down DeSantis at a Monday press conference , demanding he resign . They yelled , `` Shame on you ! '' and `` You 're doing nothing ! ''
On June 15 , the day DeSantis announced that Florida would fully reopen K-12 schools come August , Scott Pritchard , the lead epidemiologist on Florida 's COVID-19 response team , quit the DOH after 15 years of service . A former department employee told The Miami Herald that Pritchard left because he was afraid DeSantis would blame him when cases `` started exploding . ''
And cases have begun to surge . A nurse at Cleveland Clinic in Pembroke , Fla. , told The Daily Beast that `` counting [ COVID and ] non-COVID patients , we went from seeing 100 people to 200 people a day . That is how many come in to get checked . ''
AHCA data shows that Cleveland Clinic had 25 available beds , nine of which were for adult ICU patients , as of Monday .
DeSantis ' defiance in the face of data and death stands out even among conservative governors , such as Texas ' Greg Abbott . On June 30 , as Florida cases spiked , DeSantis declared that his state was `` not going back '' to tighter statewide constraints . Since then , Abbott , his own state at crisis levels , has shuttered bars , cut restaurant capacities and issued a statewide face-mask mandate . DeSantis , his critics suggested , has done little except cheerlead further reopening .
The Harvard Global Health Institute recommended last week that several states , including Arizona , Georgia , Florida , Louisiana and South Carolina , invoke mandatory stay-at-home orders . Fifteen others should consider it , the researchers said .
The New York Times released its own study chronicling global daily infections between June 28 and July 5 . Arizona and Florida were the two most affected areas in the world . South Carolina was third , followed by Bahrain and Louisiana .
The U.S. reported at the national level the first weekly increase in deaths since mid-April last week . To date , the U.S. has recorded more than 3.3 million cases and more than 135,000 deaths .