It began with one clap , then two , then three – then dozens resonated in unison above the streets of Boston on April 3 , 2020 as part of the # ClapBecauseWeCare initiative encouraging people around the globe to pause and show appreciation and encouragement for essential workers helping to fight the coronavirus outbreak .
While some people simply clap as others sing , cheer , or bang pots , the intention is clear : a `` thank you '' to those tirelessly working to care for the ill , keep grocery stores open , and city streets safe .
Community cheer events first started in Wuhan , China , in mid-January when quarantine measures took effect . Then the practice took off in Italy , where residents added singing and waving flags . As the pandemic swept the globe , citizens around the world have continued cheering together .
The sounds of gratitude can be heard from windows and balconies all around the world . France , Spain , Canada , England , Italy , Turkey , and India have all been clapping in unison regularly these past few weeks – even the British royals from inside Kensington Royal Palace joined the movement .
Usually organized through local social media groups , there are little instructions other than enthusiasm and gratitude .
“ Feeling frustrated sitting at home , while others are risking their lives on the frontlines of the coronavirus outbreak ? Well , there is something you can do as you continue – hopefully – self-quarantining , ” says the Facebook event description for Massachusetts , which hopes to draw people to cheer every Friday evening at 7 p.m. “ Clap . That ’ s right , clap for the health care workers , first responders , nurses , grocery store employees , those keeping our public transit running , truck drivers & many more who are stepping up to keep us safe during these unprecedented times . ”
Round of applause for health care workers on front lines of COVID-19 crisis heard across Boston tonight ! # Boston25 # SouthEndBoston # ClapBecauseWeCare # CoronavirusPandemic pic.twitter.com/xTaeM2OiYd — Drew Karedes ( @ DrewKaredes ) April 3 , 2020
Many city neighborhoods are also breaking into song , such as this rendition of “ Lean on Me ” that reverberated across the skyline in a New York neighborhood , a timely tribute to its composer Bill Withers , who died on March 30 :
The rooftop of a building I have been taking pictures of for 2.5 years acquires a surprising personality . # ClapBecauseWeCare # Jambecausewecare
( Instagram # bedroomspective ) pic.twitter.com/SJpG8TpjJJ — Maya Ber Lerner ( @ MayaBerLerner ) April 3 , 2020
“ It warms my heart . It has been really good to hear . I know people are grateful for my friends on the front lines doing this work , ” mental health nurse Matt Mendelow , who is quarantined in his apartment as he recovers from COVID-19 , told CBS New York . “ Like clockwork , the last few nights there ’ s been this intense noise hooting and hollering . ”
And the cheers do n't come solely from outside hospitals . In a video from the Sant Joan de Déu Hospital of Barcelona , hospital staff can be seen applauding their cleaning staff – reminding everyone of their importance in this battle . In another video , workers in a Spanish hospital gather to give a round of applause after their first patient recovered from the virus and left the facility .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
In some cases , health care workers themselves are singing between shifts . Dr. Elvis Francois of the Mayo Clinic performs a soulful John Lennon 's “ Imagine '' on YouTube wearing hospital scrubs , as a colleague accompanies on the piano . And in a hospital in Cambridge , England , a nursing apprentice sings `` Rise Up , '' by Andra Day , on the piano , a powerful song of hope : `` All we need , all we need is hope . And for that we have each other . ''