House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said Thursday she will form a bipartisan select committee on the coronavirus crisis to oversee the spending of $ 2 trillion that Congress has approved to respond to the pandemic .
In a conference call with reporters , Democrat Pelosi also said she believed the administration of Republican President Donald Trump was `` more inclined to be supportive '' than Senate Republican leaders of her push for infrastructure spending as part of a fourth major bill in response to the coronavirus crisis .
Nonetheless she hoped to work on the fourth measure together with Republicans , despite skepticism expressed by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell .
`` We 'll have our bill ... I would hope that we could do it together , '' Pelosi said .
Pelosi said she spoke with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin on Wednesday evening about tax matters , but `` they know that I want to go forward '' on infrastructure spending .
`` Whatever communication we need to move forward , that will be happening , whether I talk to the president or not , '' said Pelosi , who has a strained relationship with Trump .
Democrats have outlined a roughly $ 760 billion , five-year infrastructure bill that would fund road repairs , water system improvements , broadband and other projects . They also want $ 10 billion for community health centers .
Pelosi said lawmakers have to make sure the aid that has been approved already gets to working families who need it most , and a committee was needed to ensure that the funds allocated to the response to the virus `` are spent wisely and effectively . '' She stressed there must be transparency and accountability in the process .
She did not expect any resistance from Republicans to the idea .
But House Republican Leader Kevin McCarthy said that a select committee could not be created without a vote and he does not know when that would be . Congress is out until April 20 . `` It raises questions to me , what the Speaker is trying to do with that , '' McCarthy said .
Pelosi said she also favored an `` after action review '' later to examine the handling of the pandemic , but the select committee will be for the `` here and now '' to guard against waste , fraud and abuse . It will have subpoena power , she said . `` We want to make sure there are not exploiters out there ... Where there is money there is also frequently mischief . ''