The world woke up Monday to the reality that the coronavirus epidemic is going to have a much bigger impact on the global economy than investors and policy makers had assumed . Just how big , no one really knows .
Last week , it seemed as if financial markets believed that COVID-19 would be contained . But new cases in Italy , South Korea and Iran over the weekend undermined that belief . The World Health Organization tried to reassure the public on Monday , saying the disease was not yet a pandemic because it was not spreading in an uncontained way .
No matter , stock markets GDOW , +4.67 % SPX , +9.28 % and other financial markets BUXX , +1.00 % TMUBMUSD10Y , 0.981 % GC00 , +0.80 % were quickly recalibrating the worst-case scenario , one in which hundreds of millions of people would be infected , and millions would die .
Also read : Dow down more than 800 points loss as coronavirus spread stirs fears of global economic hit
Investors are just beginning to price in the possibility of a sharp and nasty global recession that would be followed by a rapid rebound once the disease has run its course . Whenever that will be .
In the longer run , of course , a pandemic could have more far-reaching effects , including a smaller and less productive workforce and even a reordering of globalization .
“ A pandemic ‘ could produce a short-run impact on the worldwide economy similar in depth and duration to that of an average postwar recession in the United States , ’ the CBO found . ”
We ’ d like to think that we can know the worst that could happen , but there is still so much that isn ’ t known about COVID-19 , the disease caused by the new coronavirus that emerged in China and now spreading around the world . Most of the economic analysis is based on past pandemics , such as the 1918 global influenza pandemic , and more recent bouts with avian flu , SARS and MERS .
But none of those examples fit the current situation perfectly . For one thing , unlike the flu , no one in the world has any natural immunity to this disease , nor is there a vaccine . The coronavirus is quite contagious , and many more people are likely to get COVID-19 than is assumed in these generic pandemic simulations .
The more recent pandemics weren ’ t nearly as widespread or deadly as this one seems to be . People who don ’ t appear to be sick can transmit the virus , making efforts to contain its spread magnitudes more difficult .
What ’ s more , the 1918 flu pandemic occurred in a different world , the world before airlines shrank the world , the world before globalization knitted our economies closer than ever , and the world before the internet , a technology that can spread misinformation and fear virally around the globe in an instant .
For example , the 1918 pandemic didn ’ t seem to have much impact on global trade or financial markets . Compare that to what we ’ ve already seen with COVID-19 . Here ’ s what Apple , Procter & Gamble , Walmart and other U.S. companies are saying about the coronavirus outbreak .
That means the economic impact of a global pandemic of these proportions could be much larger than what investors and policy makers have assumed .
Many economists have tried to model the economic consequences of a pandemic .
CBO did a study in 2005 and 2006 , modeling the impact of a 1918-sized flu pandemic on the economy . They found that a pandemic “ could produce a short-run impact on the worldwide economy similar in depth and duration to that of an average postwar recession in the United States. ” Specifically , a severe pandemic could reduce U.S. gross domestic product by about 4.5 % , followed by a sharp rebound .
The CBO assumed that 90 million people in the U.S. would get sick , and 2 million would die . There would also be demand-side effects , with an 80 % decline in the arts and entertainment industries and a 67 % decline in transportation . Retail and manufacturing would drop 10 % .
The U.S. wasn ’ t prepared for a flu pandemic then , the CBO said , and it isn ’ t now .
Also read : White House seeks $ 2.5 billion in emergency funds to fight coronavirus
“ If a pandemic were to occur in the near term , the options for the United States would be limited to attempts to control the spread of the virus and judicious use of limited medical facilities , personnel , and supplies , ” the bipartisan agency concluded . “ In the longer term , more tools are potentially available , including an increased treatment capacity , greater use of vaccines and antiviral drug stockpiles , and possible advances in medical technology . ”
Other simulations of the U.S. and non-U.S. economies have found similar economic impacts , although that research came at an earlier stage of globalization , when our economy was not quite so reliant on far-flung supply chains .
Much of the immediate economic impact of a pandemic can be traced to the efforts to contain it , rather than from the effects of the disease itself . As we attempt to quarantine those who might spread the disease , we shut down a lot of economic activity .
The quarantines might be the only way to slow the spread of COVID-19 , but they could also hamper our response . Our health-care system also relies on vital inputs for medicines , supplies and equipment produced all over the world , including China and other hard-hit Asian economies . And of course we rely on the free flow of thousands of other goods and services .
The potential for disaster is sobering . The economies of the world are extraordinarily resilient , yet extraordinarily dependent upon each other in a crisis . Sadly , the things we need most to get us through this — wise leadership , global cooperation and clear thinking — are harder to find than a surgical mask .