( ███ ) - The United States has reported more than a million coronavirus infections only because of its testing , President Donald Trump said on Wednesday , hailing the effort as being “ much better than any other country in the world ” .
A Detroit resident is tested for free for the coronavirus disease ( COVID-19 ) and antibodies at the Sheffield Center in Detroit , Michigan , U.S. , April 28 , 2020 . ███/Rebecca Cook
The Twitter comments came amid warnings from state public health officials that shortages of trained workers and materials have limited testing capacity .
“ The only reason the U.S. has reported one million cases of coronavirus is that our testing is sooo much better than any other country in the world , ” Trump said on Twitter .
“ Other countries are way behind us in testing , and therefore show far fewer cases . ”
A ███ tally reut.rs/2WVPxuE shows the United States has by far the world 's largest number of confirmed cases at more than a million , with total deaths topping 58,000 by late Tuesday .
Cases exceeded 3.1 million worldwide , with more than 216,000 deaths , ███ calculations show tmsnrt.rs/3cBeEYg .
The rise pressures efforts to boost testing capacity and health officials flagged the challenge of getting tests to those who need them most .
“ One of the problems has been is the tests getting to the people who need them , ” U.S. infectious diseases expert and health official Anthony Fauci told CNN in an interview on Tuesday .
Fauci , head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , said every American in need of a virus test should be able to get one by the end of May or the beginning of June .
“ Everyone who needs a test , according to the way we ’ re approaching the identification , isolation , contact tracing - keeping the country safe and healthy , hopefully , we should see that as we get toward the end of May , the beginning of June , ” Fauci said .
The virus has taken an unprecedented toll of the U.S. economy , with a likely contraction in the first quarter at its sharpest pace since the Great Recession , as stringent measures to slow the virus spread almost shut down the nation , ending the longest expansion in its history .
The number of Americans seeking jobless benefits over the past five weeks has soared to 26.5 million , or nearly one in six U.S. workers , and the Trump administration has forecast an April unemployment rate exceeding 16 % .
( Interactive graphic tracking global spread of coronavirus : open tmsnrt.rs/3aIRuz7 in an external browser . )