Negotiations over a mammoth stimulus package to address the coronavirus crisis spilled over into Monday as top members of leadership and administration officials tried to revive hopes of a bipartisan deal .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison ( Mitch ) Mitchell McConnellOn The Money : Trump looks at easing coronavirus restrictions | Health , economic advisers divided | Senators show frustration as stimulus talks stall | Fed rewrites crisis playbook Overnight Health Care — Presented by PCMA — Trump signals easing coronavirus restrictions | Tensions boil over as Senate fails to advance stimulus bill | Pelosi previews .5T House stimulus package Stimulus talks to miss McConnell 's Monday deadline MORE ( R-Ky. ) , Minority Leader Charles Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin left the Capitol around midnight , still unable to clinch a bipartisan agreement despite three days of around-the-clock negotiations .
White House director of legislative affairs Eric Ueland , asked where the divides are , said there were still a “ handful of issues ” that remained as sticking points to an agreement .
“ Well , we 're hopeful for a quick resolution because as you know the president wants to deliver relief to the American economy and support to the American people , ” Ueland added , asked if the issues could be resolved on Monday .
The negotiations , which appeared close to a bipartisan deal on Saturday , quickly unraveled on Sunday as Democrats accused Republicans of walking away from the negotiations and drafting the massive bill without a bipartisan agreement .
Hopes of a quick deal soured further after a meeting between Mnuchin , Schumer , McConnell , House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) and House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyWebsite documents anti-Asian discrimination amid coronavirus crisis Pelosi previews House coronavirus stimulus as Senate hits roadblocks House Democrats plead with key committee chairman to allow remote voting amid coronavirus pandemic MORE ( R-Calif. ) failed to break the stalemate . Hours later , Democrats blocked the coronavirus stimulus package on a procedural hurdle , sparking visible outrage from McConnell .
“ All of a sudden the Democratic leader and the speaker of the House shows up , and we ’ re back to square one . We ’ re fiddling here , fiddling with the emotions of the American people , fiddling with the markets , fiddling with our health care , ” McConnell said after the failed vote .
They ’ re under intense pressure to reach a deal after the Dow futures fell 5 percent on Sunday after chances of a deal faded . The United States now has 33,276 confirmed cases of the coronavirus , according to Johns Hopkins University .
Now , talks will resume around 9 a.m. on Monday , according to Ueland , as negotiators try to clinch an agreement .
“ 9 a.m. , and pass the ammunition , ” he sang back to reporters as he walked away from them , in an apparent reference to a 1942 song .
But negotiators appeared cautiously optimistic that they would be able to get a deal on Monday .
Mnuchin , leaving the Capitol for the night , told reporters that he thought talks were “ very close . ”
“ The teams are going to work through the night . We ’ re going to regroup the principals in the morning , ” he said .
Asked if he was frustrated by how talks had played out , he added : “ We ’ re going to work very hard to get this done tomorrow . ”
Schumer noted that he had been meeting with Ueland and Mnuchin throughout Sunday . Mnuchin , late Sunday night , told reporters they were “ this close ” to an agreement , holding up a thumb and a finger approximately an inch apart .
“ We are making progress . We ’ re getting closer and closer and I ’ m very hopeful … that we can get a bill in the morning , ” Schumer told reporters as he left the Capitol around 12:30 a.m. on Monday .
“ We ’ re making progress in the areas of concern , ” Schumer said . “ I ’ m more optimistic than I was this morning that we will get something done . ”
Democrats have outlined a laundry list of objectionable provisions , arguing that the bill does not expand paid sick leave and actually caps how much employers have to pay , and walks back an agreement Sens . Ron Wyden ( D-Ore. ) and Chuck Grassley ( R-Iowa ) had reached on expanding unemployment insurance .
A source familiar with the GOP bill text also said Republicans are “ refusing to add strong worker protections ” and have included language requiring companies keep employees “ to the extent possible . ”
Democrats worry the language is vague enough that corporations could take federal help and still fire workers . Democrats also wanted strong restrictions on corporations who take federal help , but the source said the GOP bill included “ very weak ” stock buyback restrictions that could be waived by Mnuchin .
The GOP bill , according to the source , also increases a “ corporate bailout fund ” to $ 500 billion . Senate Banking Committee Chairman Mike Crapo ( R-Idaho ) had pushed to increase the $ 208 billion proposed in the original GOP plan to ensure distressed industries have access to capital .
If they aren ’ t able to reach a deal in the morning , McConnell has vowed to hold a vote after the Senate comes in at noon to try for a second time to advance the stimulus package . Democrats blocked the bill — technically a shell that the coronavirus legislation will be swapped into — arguing that they had not made enough progress .
“ Maybe there will be some coming together tonight , I hope so , ” McConnell told reporters as he left the building around midnight . “ If not , we will now be voting at noon . ”