Ten governors in the Northeast and the West Coast announced Monday that they are crafting joint plans for reopening schools and businesses in their states , putting them on a collision course with President Trump , who said he has “ the ultimate authority ” on when to reopen states after the coronavirus crisis eases .
“ When somebody is president of the United States , the authority is total , ” Mr. Trump said .
In a move led by New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo that blindsided White House officials , the Democratic governors of New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Connecticut , Delaware and Rhode Island banded together to form a Northeast regional task force to immediately begin designing a plan for reopening .
“ You need the best public health plan and the best economic reactivation plan , ” Mr. Cuomo said . “ It has to be both . To the extent we can do that together , that is the best course . There ’ s no doubt about that . ”
He said they would be “ guided by experts and data and science , and not in a political way . ”
Later on Monday , the Northeast coalition said Massachusetts Gov . Charlie Baker , a Republican , was joining the group .
In the West , Govs . Gavin Newsom of California , Kate Brown of Oregon , and Jay Inslee of Washington announced their own partnership . They said they have an agreement on a “ shared vision ” when the time comes to reopen their respective states ’ economies .
“ COVID-19 doesn ’ t follow state or national boundaries , ” the three Democratic governors said . “ It will take every level of government , working together , and a full picture of what ’ s happening on the ground . ”
Mr. Newsom said he plans to offer more details on California ’ s reopening plan Tuesday . California has more than 23,500 confirmed cases of COVID-19 and nearly 700 deaths , but the number of hospitalizations has stabilized in recent days .
The 10 states have a combined population of about 106 million , nearly one-third of the U.S. total .
None of the six governors in the Northeast mentioned a goal of reopening by May 1 , which is the president ’ s soft target for getting at least portions of the country back in business .
The governors made their announcements hours after the president said he had the authority to decide when states should reopen for business .
“ For the purpose of creating conflict and confusion , some in the Fake News Media are saying that it is the Governors decision to open up the states , not that of the President of the United States & the Federal Government , ” Mr. Trump said in a series of tweets . “ Let it be fully understood that this is incorrect . It is the decision of the President , and for many good reasons . ”
He said the administration is “ working closely with the Governors , and this will continue . ”
“ A decision by me , in conjunction with the Governors and input from others , will be made shortly ! ” the president said .
Jonathan Turley , a constitutional law professor at George Washington University , said Mr. Trump is “ constitutionally wrong ” with his declaration about his authority to reopen states for business .
“ The President has persuasive , not command , authority , ” Mr. Turley tweeted . “ It remains a state decision under our system of federalism . ”
The president insisted later during his daily televised coronavirus briefing that he will be calling the shots .
“ I have the ultimate authority , ” Mr. Trump said . “ We ’ re very close to completing a plan to open our country , hopefully even ahead of schedule . We will soon finalize new and very important guidelines to give governors the information they need to start safely reopening their states . ”
Mr. Cuomo said he will listen to what the president wants to do but added that Mr. Trump has generally left decisions up to the states during the crisis .
“ I just want clarity , ” Mr. Cuomo said . “ It is an interesting construct that it wasn ’ t the federal responsibility to close the economy , but it is the federal government ’ s responsibility to open the economy . If it ’ s your authority to open , why [ wasn ’ t ] it your authority to close ? ”
Delaware Gov . John Carney thanked Mr. Cuomo for his leadership in New York “ and across the country ” during the crisis .
Pennsylvania Gov . Tom Wolf also rejected the president ’ s claim of authority on decisions when to reopen . “ Seeing as how we had the responsibility for closing the state down , we probably have the primary responsibility for opening it up , ” he said .
Rhode Island Gov . Gina Raimondo said their move won ’ t change the states ’ relationship with the administration .
“ Throughout the crisis , the governors are the ones who have been showing great leadership and taking action to keep our residents safe , ” she said . “ And so I think it ’ s only appropriate that we do the same thing now by coming together and showing regional leadership to reopen the economy . ”
Connecticut Gov . Ned Lamont said he doesn ’ t want actions to be taken prematurely . “ There ’ s nothing worse than a false start , ” he said . “ That would be so demoralizing for our economy . ”
Mr. Trump is introducing a task force Tuesday to make recommendations to him about how and when to get the country back to work and school . He has mentioned the option of reopening in phases , starting with regions that haven ’ t been hit as hard by the virus as the Northeast .
The president ’ s task force will include Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin ; Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross ; White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow ; U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer ; and White House chief of staff Mark Meadows .
The president said last week that the group would be bipartisan and would include outsiders such as governors , business leaders and health care specialists .
Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin said that by Wednesday , about 80 million Americans will receive direct payments of up to $ 1,200 this week , plus $ 500 per child , to help with the economic shutdown from the pandemic .
Mr. Trump has had a mixed relationship with governors during the crisis . He has alternated between basking in their praise and bristling when they complain about a slow or confused federal response on delivering medical supplies .
At a low point , the president acknowledged that he had urged Vice President Mike Pence , head of the White House coronavirus task force , not to talk to Democratic Govs . Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan , calling her “ that woman , ” and Mr. Inslee , referring to him as a “ snake . ”
During the White House briefing , Mr. Trump showed a “ sizzle reel ” of video clips of various governors , including Mr. Newsom , Mr. Cuomo and New Jersey Gov . Phil Murphy , praising the president for quick action on their requests . It was produced Monday by White House staffers .
“ We could give you hundreds of clips like that , ” Mr. Trump said . “ They [ governors ] can ’ t find anything to complain about . And honestly , many of them didn ’ t do their jobs . We help some of the ones that don ’ t know what they ’ re doing . ”
Each of the Northeast governors will name a health and economic official for their states , plus each governor ’ s chiefs of staff , to form a working group to design a reopening plan .
Mr. Murphy , whose state ’ s cases of COVID-19 are still rising , spoke of reopening “ whenever it is . ”
“ We do know this : An economic recovery only occurs on the back of a complete health care recovery , ” Mr. Murphy said . “ This is the fight of our lives . Reopening ourselves back up will be equally challenging . ”
The debate over how and when to reopen businesses , restaurants and schools has grown increasingly urgent . Nearly 17 million Americans have filed for unemployment benefits in the past three weeks , and a $ 350 billion fund for small businesses to retain their workers is expected to run dry this week .
No visible progress was made Monday on a $ 250 billion administration request to replenish the fund . Senate Democrats blocked quick action on the proposal last week .
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , and Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat , dug in on the list of demands Democrats want to see in the next round of coronavirus legislation , including money for national rapid testing and protective equipment .
“ We have real problems facing this country , and it ’ s time for the Republicans to quit the political posturing by proposing bills they know will not pass either chamber and get serious and work with us towards a solution , ” they said in a joint statement .
The Paycheck Protection Program was part of the $ 2.2 trillion economic rescue package that recently cleared Congress , but it is in danger of running out of money because of the overwhelming demand .
Republican Gov . Larry Hogan of Maryland , chair of the National Governors Association , led another teleconference Monday with Vice President Mike Pence and White House officials in which he asked for $ 500 billion more for states .
“ Without sufficient federal relief , states will have to confront the prospect of significant reductions to essential services , which will in turn devastate the economic recovery and our efforts to get people back to work , ” Mr. Hogan said .
He said he also spoke to congressional leaders in both parties .
“ This is not a time for politics , ” Mr. Hogan said . “ We have asked the administration to weigh in so that we can break this logjam in the Senate and get this done for the American people . ”