FILE - In this March 20 , 2020 file photo , extremely light traffic moves along the 110 Harbor Freeway toward downtown mid afternoon , in Los Angeles . For the millions of Americans living under some form of lockdown to curb the spread of the new coronavirus , not knowing when the restrictions will end is a major source of anxiety . ( AP Photo/Mark J. Terrill )
FILE - In this March 20 , 2020 file photo , extremely light traffic moves along the 110 Harbor Freeway toward downtown mid afternoon , in Los Angeles . For the millions of Americans living under some form of lockdown to curb the spread of the new coronavirus , not knowing when the restrictions will end is a major source of anxiety . ( AP Photo/Mark J. Terrill )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — For the millions of Americans living under some form of lockdown to curb the spread of the coronavirus , not knowing when the restrictions will end is a major source of anxiety . Will life events — weddings , funerals , even just simple nights out with friends — be delayed for a few weeks , a few months or much longer ?
President Donald Trump gave one answer this week , saying he hoped businesses would reopen by Easter , on April 12 , citing the severe damage restrictions have done to the economy . Most public health experts , however , caution that it would be reckless to lift restrictions before COVID-19 infections have peaked and begun to ebb — unleashing a second wave of cases that could be just as damaging to the economy .
Scientists are reluctant to predict exactly when restrictions could be safely loosened , but based on what they ’ ve observed in China — the first country struck by the new virus — some relief could come approximately six to eight weeks after lockdowns are implemented . That is based on the assumption that cases could peak two or three weeks after lockdowns begin , and gradually decline for the next two or three weeks .
While we may yearn for a clear timeline for when life will return to normal , scientists say that isn ’ t exactly the right question . Routines won ’ t resume exactly as they were for several months , or longer – but that doesn ’ t mean we ’ ll all be stuck in total lockdowns until then .
“ We can ’ t simply wait inside for two years for a COVID-19 vaccine ” to be developed , said Stephen Morse , a disease researcher at Columbia University . “ We have to find some way to return to normal life . ”
Decisions on how and when to lift restrictions , he added , should be based on information about infection rates that can only be learned by increasing testing . That will allow policymakers to tailor restrictions to fit the outbreak in different areas .
Rather than imagining the lockdown as having an on/off switch – where the only choice is between completely shutting down the country or throwing all rules out the window — many scientists advocate for charting a course in between , where restrictions can be ramped up or down . Imagine that the lockdown has a volume dial that can be twisted up or down .
“ With more information , we can target our responses to be the most impactful , ” said Nadia Abuelezam , a disease researcher at Boston College . That might mean introducing people back into the workforce in stages , she suggested .
Scientists are closely watching what happens in other countries that were struck earlier by the coronavirus to see what happens when those places loosen restrictions .
Restaurants and offices have begun to reopen in many Chinese cities , about two months after the country began to lock down . There are still restrictions in place — such as limits in how many people can occupy an elevator or a conference room — and widespread testing for the disease continues .
“ People should be prepared for the fact that we are not going back to completely normal life for a while , ” said Mark Jit , a disease researcher at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine . “ But we also need to allow people to see the light at end of the tunnel . ”
The metaphorical dial of restrictions could be set in different positions , depending on what expanded testing reveals about how many people in an area are currently infected — and how many have recovered from past infections .
The goal would be to allow people to partially return to their daily routines , while limiting the chances of new infections .
The new coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms in many people , but even if only a fraction of cases are severe enough to require hospitalization — between 14 % and 20 % — the sheer scale of the epidemic puts enormous strain on hospitals , health care workers and other patients who may see unrelated procedures delayed .
On Thursday came a grim milestone and reminder that the United States has not begun to flatten the curve of the epidemic : The total number of confirmed infections — more than 83,000 , according to Johns Hopkins University — surpassed China ’ s toll .
In a letter Thursday to America ’ s governors — who have largely been the ones implementing the restrictions in the U.S. — Trump said that his administration was planning to expand “ robust surveillance testing , which allows us to monitor the spread of the virus throughout the country . ”
The information would be used to “ suggest guidelines categorizing counties as high-risk , medium-risk , or low-risk , ” the letter said .
Dr. Anthony Fauci , the government ’ s top infectious disease expert , and White House adviser Dr. Deborah Birx have recently outlined the approach in media briefings and interviews .
“ What we are trying to do is utilize a laser-focused approach , ” Birx said at Thursday ’ s White House briefing .
While few details are available , this approach seems to differ from other countries that have focused on identifying and isolating infected individuals and their close contacts .
In South Korea , which managed to curb an early outbreak without fully shutting all businesses and schools , widespread testing allows health workers to find infected people and aggressively track down people they came into contact with — thus allowing them to contain the spread of infection .
For the U.S. to learn from this example or adopt a similar approach , the first step is more widespread testing , said Elizabeth Halloran , a biostatistician at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle .
In addition to tests that check whether people are currently infected , experts are also honing tests to detect whether someone has had the disease in the past . Scientists expect that people who have recovered from COVID-19 will have some immunity to it , though they aren ’ t sure for how long .
This information could better inform decisions . Perhaps people with immunity could be among the first to return to work — or maybe the data would reveal what locations or behaviors are the riskiest for disease spread , said Abuelezam .
Before relaxing social-distancing restrictions , there will also need to be ample supply of protective gear for health care workers , said Halloran . Shortages of masks and other supplies have put them in jeopardy and threatened to slow or halt their work .
There are no easy answers , but scientists say it ’ s misleading to imagine a choice between public health and jobs .
“ If you don ’ t do enough about the virus , you ’ re going to get steamrolled by it — which would also steamroll the economy , ” said Jeffrey Shaman , a data scientist at Columbia University .
The ███ receives support for health and science coverage from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ’ s Department of Science Education . The AP is solely responsible for all content .
Follow AP coverage of the virus outbreak at https : //apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and https : //apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak .