Dr. Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , listens during the daily coronavirus task force briefing at the White House , April 4 , 2020 . ( Joshua Roberts/Reuters )
He ’ s an epidemiologist providing expert opinions . It ’ s absurd to say he ’ s manipulating the president .
For his critics , Dr. Anthony Fauci cemented his status as the Rasputin of public health with his Senate testimony Tuesday .
The National Institutes of Health official gently , but unmistakably , struck a different tone than President Donald Trump , earning rebukes from radio talk-show hosts and Fox News anchors , as well as fueling the outrage of the # FireFauci claque on Twitter .
Although Fauci ’ s every utterance is now examined with the same care as pronouncements of the pope , his words weren ’ t exactly earth-shattering . He said that if there are careless reopenings , “ we will start to see little spikes that might turn into outbreaks. ” Does anyone doubt that ’ s a possibility ?
No serious person would argue that there are no hazards to reopening , only that some level of risk is worth taking to begin to ease the nation ’ s economic calamity .
Fauci is an important voice in this debate , if only one voice . He is neither the dastardly bureaucratic mastermind imposing his will on the country that his detractors on the right make him out to be , or the philosopher-king in waiting that his boosters on the left inflate him into . He ’ s simply an epidemiologist , one who brings considerable expertise and experience to the table , but at the end of the day his focus is inevitably and rightly quite narrow .
This is why it ’ s a tautology for Fauci ’ s critics to say that he ’ s focused on the disease above all else . This is like saying the commerce secretary is too consumed with finding business opportunities for American companies , or the head of the Joint Special Operations Command has an unhealthy obsession with killing terrorists . What else are they supposed to do ?
As a breed , epidemiologists tend to focus on the worst case . They don ’ t want to be wrong and contribute to some deadly pathogen getting loose when their entire job is to keep that from happening . So , they are naturally cautious . This , too , is as it should be . You probably don ’ t want a risk-taking epidemiologist any more than you want a highly creative , envelope-pushing accountant .
For all these reasons , you wouldn ’ t choose an epidemiologist to run your country , either . And Fauci isn ’ t .
Trump has remained completely undomesticated in the White House . The idea that he has now , as some of his supporters imply , been seduced , bullied , or otherwise manipulated by a mild-mannered , nearly 80-year-old doctor is bonkers .
The reason Trump issued his shutdown guidance was that the prospect of uncontrolled spread of the virus was too risky to contemplate .
Since populist critics of the shutdowns don ’ t want to criticize Trump , let alone say that they think he blew one of the most consequential decisions of his presidency , they focus their ire on the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases instead .
In the attention-getting exchange between Rand Paul and Anthony Fauci at the Senate hearing , both were right . Senator Paul is obviously correct that we shouldn ’ t elevate one person as the authority to whom everyone submits , and Fauci was right that he ’ s a scientist who doesn ’ t even try to give advice on matters outside his ambit .
Part of the Right ’ s hostility to Fauci is an understandable reaction to progressives putting him on a pedestal . His views should be taken seriously , but they can ’ t be determinative .
The coronavirus crisis is a radically different phenomenon from , say , the Ebola outbreak because it implicates our entire society . What relative weight to give to the economy and public health — among many other weighty public-policy questions — is way above Fauci ’ s pay grade .
This is what we elect presidents , governors , and mayors to decide . It ’ s their responsibility to balance the competing considerations , and if they are found wanting , they lose their jobs .
Anyone in this position obviously wants to hear from experts , though . Which is why if Trump really did fire Fauci , some other meddlesome epidemiologist would emerge soon enough . If Fauci didn ’ t exist , we ’ d have to invent him .