Jobless claims soared to a record 3.28 million in the past week , the Labor Department said Thursday , as the coronavirus outbreak affected wide portions of the economy .
The figure was an increase from 281,000 unemployment claims during the previous week in March . And it was more than four times higher than the previous weekly record of 695,000 , set in October 1982 .
Most economists had forecast about 1.5 million people filing for unemployment benefits . The true number of out-of-work Americans is likely much higher ; self-employed people and gig workers don ’ t file for unemployment benefits .
The Senate late Wednesday night approved a $ 2.2 trillion economic rescue package that includes $ 250 billion in expanded unemployment benefits and increased eligibility . It would cover the self-employed and gig workers .
The measure also has $ 350 billion for small businesses to retain their workforce . The House is expected to vote on the package on Friday ; President Trump has said he ’ ll sign it immediately .
Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin said on CNBC that the unemployment numbers “ are not relevant ” right now because the relief package will enable employers to rehire workers .
Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said Thursday the economy may well be in a recession already .
“ We know that economic activity will decline probably substantially in the second quarter , ” Mr. Powell said on NBC ’ s “ Today ” show . “ I would expect economic activity to resume and move back up in the second half of the year . ”
He said there is “ nothing fundamentally wrong ” with the U.S. economy .
“ The economy performed very well right through February , ” he said . “ This is a situation where people are being asked to step back from economic activity , close their businesses , stay home from work . The sooner we get through this period and get the virus under control , the sooner the recovery can come . ”
Labor Secretary Eugene Scalia suggested the crisis is another reason to keep President Trump at the helm of the economy .
“ We had such a strong economy just a few weeks ago , with record low unemployment and rising wages — and by the way , with a president who helped bring those conditions about and who remains our president and who can help us grow the economy as we pull through this , ” Mr. Scalia told Fox Business host Maria Bartiromo .
“ We have purposely decided that some workplaces have to take a pause , ” he said . “ We ’ ve never done that before , so that makes this different than other slowdowns we ’ ve had . It ’ s purposeful and short-term . ”
Erica Groshen , a visiting scholar at the ILR School of Cornell University , said a loss of 3 million to 4 million jobs or more in one month “ would dwarf the previous all-time largest decrease in payroll jobs , minus-1.96 million in September 1945 , at the end of World War II . ”
A former commissioner of Labor Statistics , Ms. Groshen said the jump in claims implies that the unemployment rate in March will increase somewhere in the range of 5.4 % to 6.0 % . The jobless rate in February was 3.5 % .