With so many states now deep in crisis , the signs of provisional success in the Seattle area offer a lesson for other cities and regions that are just beginning to see the onset of the coronavirus : Early and aggressive action to contain the spread may help lower the trajectory of a virus that could otherwise overwhelm health systems .
Officials in Washington State first began to plead with people to keep their distance from one another at the end of February , after discovering that the virus had infected people in the Seattle area with no known exposure or history of foreign travel , followed by an outbreak at a suburban nursing home now linked to dozens of deaths .
Within a week , the county was asking organizations to consider postponing large events and for people to work from home if possible . People over 60 were encouraged to remain indoors . Some of the region ’ s major employers , including the headquarters campuses of Amazon and Microsoft , responded by encouraging workers to work from home , quieting workplace hubs that would otherwise be bustling during commutes and lunchtime .
The demographics of those workplaces , with tens of thousands of tech workers who were able to telecommute , may have given the region an early edge in keeping people separated . Perhaps the city ’ s social norms helped , too , as local residents have long had a reputation for keeping to themselves or within circles of longtime friends — a phenomenon often explained to newcomers as the Seattle Freeze .
Ms. Durkan said the region also benefited from a robust network of researchers who were able to do early modeling to assess the reach of the virus in the community . Without that , she said , policymakers may not have taken the drastic steps to shut down the city as quickly as they did .
The region has also benefited from more widespread testing than most states , helping feed data to the researchers ’ models and give a sense of how much infection might be missed .
After scientists found evidence that the virus had been circulating weeks before some of the earliest cases were identified , researchers from local groups , led by the Institute for Disease Modeling , began looking at what it would take to slow the progress of the virus . On March 10 , they developed projections showing that significant changes in human-to-human contact would be needed to avert hundreds more deaths by April 8 .