From The New York Times , I ’ m Michael Barbaro . This is “ The Daily . ”
archived recording 1 Michigan has been one of the most aggressive states when it comes to taking steps to combat the coronavirus . archived recording 2 Bans on all gatherings outside a single household , travel to in-state vacation homes , and the use of motorboats —
Michigan ’ s restrictions on its citizens movements have been at the center of a national debate about public health versus economic survival .
archived recording Protests in Michigan are growing because the governor , Democrat Gretchen Whitmer , has told us citizens they can ’ t leave the city and stay in their summer homes . archived recording ( donald trump ) Don ’ t buy paint , don ’ t buy roses , don ’ t buy — I mean , she ’ s got all these crazy things .
Today : A conversation with the governor who ordered those restrictions and a demonstrator who is protesting them . It ’ s Wednesday , April 29 . So I just want to start by asking you to introduce yourself . Your name and where you ’ re talking to us from .
My name is Phillip Campbell and I ’ m coming to you from Jackson County , Michigan , which is about an hour west of Detroit and about an hour away from the capital of Lansing .
I ’ ve been here in this particular location for five years , but I ’ m a born and raised Michigander my whole life .
Yeah , 39 . I ’ m turning 40 in June . I had a massive party planned . I was inviting everyone I know and now I just don ’ t know what ’ s happening with that , so .
I invited 1,000 people so , we were going to be —
I have five acres and I was going to rent Port-a-Johns . And we were going to camp . And it was going to be a multi-day bash , you know ?
[ LAUGHS ] Well , I ’ ve made a lot of friends over the years .
So tell me about what you do for a living .
I ’ m the vice president of a pest and wildlife control company . We are the ones you call if you wake up at 1:00 a.m. and there ’ s a bat flying around your kid ’ s bedroom , and you need somebody to go get it . We will climb on your roof and pull down the hornet ’ s nest . We will take care of the mice in your basement . We ’ ll do this sort of work .
We have about 30 employees . I ’ ve been with the company for about 10 years now . I think I ’ m one of the most senior employees there . We started when we were in the basement of the owner ’ s house . And now we have a very large industrial building with a depot and a shop . So it ’ s been cool to see that grow over the years .
So at this point , how would you describe the company and its success ?
I mean , I think we ’ re on the threshold of breaking through to the next level of growth . We ’ re grossing about $ 3 million a year .
Just this year we ’ re able to for the first time provide health benefits for our employees . So we ’ ve been working towards that for a long time , trying to get to where we have the sort of revenue and the growth that we could take on those costs , which are not insignificant , you know ? We like to think that we ’ re one of the companies or industries that can still offer regular old Joes without a college education a very decent middle class livelihood with insurance benefits , things like that .
The majority of technicians are what I would just call blue-collar people , you know ? They like to hunt , they fish . They go out on the lake on the weekends and drink beer on their pontoons and listen to music . And just regular old folks , you know ?
Mm-hm . And what kind of a living do the people generally make ?
I mean , many of the people in our company , they provide for their families . You know , they ’ re the breadwinner . You know , a new technician like starting might make 35 .
And then a technician who ’ s been with us for a while and knows what he ’ s doing , he can make in the high 50s or 60s . So with the 30 employees we have , we feed about 100 mouths , with their children and families . So we feel responsible for about 100 people ’ s well-being .
And what did the first Michigan lockdown , the one ordered by Governor Whitmer — what did it mean for your pest control business ?
Her order did not exempt us . The text of the order itself , it did not make an exemption for wildlife control , pest control . And we were preparing to shut down . And then I noticed that it said for its definition of essential services , for further clarification , see this document by the Department of Homeland Security . And we found that we were allowed to stay open .
But very quickly after that we had to furlough a couple people after that , because even though we were allowed to stay open , our customer base , many of them aren ’ t working . So if your customers aren ’ t working , they ’ re not spending money . And it doesn ’ t really matter if you ’ re open if all the people you serve aren ’ t working , you know what I mean ?
Right . I don ’ t want to pry too much , but if you were bringing in — I think you said almost $ 3 million a year in revenue — before this , what did it start to look like once the lockdown was in place and the calls from customers began to taper off ?
Again , this is for a company that was allowed to stay open .
And then around this time , the second shutdown order came in , which was the one that everybody started protesting about .
Yeah , the second shutdown order just ramped down on the first . This was the one that went in and shut particular sections of stores that were still open . So like it said , you can ’ t buy paint products , you can ’ t buy gardening products . Because what was happening is people thinking , OK , I got to stay home , I might as well work on my house , you know ? So a lot of those people were going to Home Depot , were going to whatever to get their supplies . And then the governor said , no , you can ’ t get that stuff . So this was the order that said you can ’ t go out on a lake by yourself in your boat in your private lake , if the boat has a motor . But if it doesn ’ t have a motor , you can go . Things that seemed a lot more arbitrary . The one that said you can ’ t have someone come mow your lawn , even though they pull up in a truck , they drive the lawnmower off , they don ’ t touch you , they don ’ t go into your house . It ’ s just one guy mowing your lawn . You know , things that people started thinking , like , the economy ’ s already in freefall , is it really necessary to go this far with it ? From my own experience , if the economy takes a dump and we can ’ t get back to where we were , we have to cut their health insurance or we ’ re going to have to lay people off . We ’ re going to take other measures to stay afloat . I don ’ t know what we ’ re going to have to do . I don ’ t want to hypothesize . I don ’ t want my employees to listen to this and be like , what did you say is going to happen ? I don ’ t know , we ’ re going to have do something . We can ’ t just suddenly take a 30 percent to 50 percent decline . That ’ s huge . What if you got a 50 percent pay cut ? It would affect your life . And so I ’ m thinking about the ripple effect . We take a 30 percent to 50 percent drop . Our employees take a dip . Maybe they can ’ t afford to pay their debts . Maybe they can ’ t afford to pay their own mortgages or whatever . I don ’ t know . I haven ’ t assessed the financial situation of each of my employees . But I guess what I am frustrated about — and I don ’ t want to minimize the risk of Covid-19 or the people who ’ ve had it — but as someone who ’ s worked for 10 years in this business trying to build it up , get it to where it is , I ’ m frustrated with the attitude of some people that we can just shut it off for a while , and then just turn it back on when everything ’ s safe , and just pick up where we left off . Like , no , that ’ s not how business works . That ’ s certainly not how small business works . If you take a big enough hit , it ’ s hard to recover from it , you know ?
So I ’ m curious when you first hear about the possibility of a public demonstration , a protest , in Michigan of these lockdown rules ?
I saw an event on social media , I think , or I saw people talking about it — like , hey , let ’ s go down to Lansing and protest . So the owner and I — work ’ s been slow , so we said , hey , we got time . Let ’ s drive down to Lansing on Thursday . The way I understood it , we were going to drive by the capitol and honk our horn , basically .
The honked horn was going to mean like , we are workers , and we want the freedom for people to be able to work . Please consider opening things back up a little more . The capitol in Lansing , it ’ s on a loop , so you drive around in like a circle around the capitol . So I thought that all the traffic would come in , we ’ d kind of loop around and we ’ d honk , and then we ’ d go back home , you know ? But they were anticipating a certain amount of people — I think 10 times more than they anticipated showed up . So it took us two hours to get to Lansing . We got in Lansing , and then we were just — Michael , it was a traffic jam . That ’ s what it was . It was just a big traf — it was like an organized traffic jam .
But what did it feel like to be in that traffic jam ? Because it ’ s a particular kind of traffic jam with like-minded people there to protest something .
It was really neat . It was nice to not feel so alone , because I was really sick of people on social media telling me I ’ m selfish because I don ’ t want the company I helped build for 10 years to just collapse .
Oh , just people on social media , my friends . People in my broader circle . You know , not people I ’ m necessarily close to , but I ’ d say I lost some friends over this , honestly . When the governor shut the economy down , I said this is going to be very hard on businesses and this is going to be very hard on us . And a lot of people ’ s response seemed to be like , what , do you want people to die or something , you know ? And it kind of degenerated into , like , either you want people to die or you hate my business and stuff like that . And I was really glad , because I was starting to feel kind of isolated , to see a solidarity of so many other Michiganders who were similarly frustrated at the situation . Afterwards , when I got home , I saw there was a lot of people with a lot of Trump stuff , and I was kind of thinking , like , no , this isn ’ t political . Don ’ t make it into a political thing because this isn ’ t about the governor happens to be a Democrat or a woman or something . Because I would have gone down there if it was a Republican , you know ? It wasn ’ t about her party affiliation . So I was frustrated —
What did you make of the flavor of the protest ? It seems like you didn ’ t see this yourself in your car , but as you ’ ve hinted , there were strong strains of libertarianism and conservatism , and pro-Trump posters , as well as people with guns , as well as some , you know , some more vulgar and extreme sentiments . Some people compared Governor Whitmer to Hitler .
Oh , like Governor Whitler ? [ LAUGHS ] Oh , I don ’ t know , I think that ’ s just juvenile . I mean , I think it ’ s pretty juvenile in public discourse when the only thing you go to is compare your opponent to Hitler . I wish it wouldn ’ t have been so much anti-Whitmer , because this isn ’ t about like Governor Whitmer , the person , you know ? I wish that it would have been more on point and focused about “ let me work , ” you know ?
I wonder where you fall in the political spectrum . Did you vote for Trump ? Did you vote for Whitmer ? And how did your political views apply to this event ?
My political views didn ’ t apply to this event really at all . You know , like , I would ’ ve been there if this was a Republican . I did vote for Trump . I don ’ t particularly think he ’ s doing that great of a job . So I ’ m not a gung-ho Trump supporter . I didn ’ t vote for Whitmer , but I didn ’ t like the guy running against her , either . So .
You ’ re saying you ’ re not seeing this crisis or the lockdowns through a political lens ?
No , no , not at all . Not at all . The little match between President Trump and Governor Whitmer is making it more political . When Trump tweets , “ Liberate Michigan , ” when he refers to her as that woman from Michigan , obviously , that sets Governor Whitmer up as a foil against President Trump , which politicizes it . When rumors start coming out that Biden wants to consider her as V.P . material , that politicizes it . I really liked when I was there that it simply seemed like a spontaneous expression of working class frustration .
Phil , I want to tick through what your governor said when she began this process of locking down the state and basically enforcing social distancing . And here ’ s what she said : “ The only tool we have to fight the virus at this moment and to support our health care system is to give them the opportunity by buying some time . ”
And she went on to say , “ Without aggressive measures , more people will get sick , more people will die , and our economy will suffer longer. ” And in her telling , the disease spreads if people are out there . If people aren ’ t out there , the disease doesn ’ t spread . So she is making the case in the beginning that these sacrifices are required to prevent a system overload . What do you think of that ?
Well , we were willing to go along with that , because we were all expecting this huge crunch on all our hospitals . We were worried about not enough beds , not enough ventilators . But the fact is the curve is flattened now . We now have hospitals , they ’ re not overwhelmed anymore . So what we ’ re saying is that was all well and good , but now , we can start to open up again because we flattened the curve . Even if infections go back up at this point , as I grant they could if we start being more economically active , it seems highly unlikely , given all the empty hospitals , that were going to get to another crush where we don ’ t have enough beds or something like that .
So I want to make sure I understand what you ’ re saying when you talk about where things are in Michigan . The Times has maps about where the virus is in each state . And just pulling this up , Michigan has about 38,000 infections , and there ’ s been about 3,300 deaths .
So when you talk about your frustrations with the different phases of this lockdown , how do you square it with those numbers ?
Well , I square it because my understanding is that the lockdown wasn ’ t supposed to be like , we ’ re going to lockdown until this goes away . What we were told was that this lockdown was to distribute those amount of cases over a longer period of time , so that the health system doesn ’ t get overwhelmed . So I look at the total number of deaths and infections and say , OK , this thing is here to stay whether we like it or not . The hospitals do have the ability to take people in . So it seems like to me that the goal has been met . The goal is not to —
It sounds like you ’ re saying that if we assume that the measures taken so far have flattened the curve to some degree in Michigan , that you ’ re willing to accept the risks of restarting the economy , even if that means that the curve might go up a little bit . That you think that so far the measures taken have done enough to merit that kind of experimentation with , essentially , taking the risk of reopening .
I think so . And again , I ’ m not saying just a full , like — the economy isn ’ t a switch , you just turn it on , everybody comes back out , you know ? But I think people who want to work and can work in a way that is maintaining safe protocols , I think they should be able to . Because the thing is , what I would like people to understand is that it ’ s not like either we stay home and stay safe , or we all get the coronavirus and die . It ’ s like staying home and nobody working has its own inherent risks and dangers and devastation that ’ s going to come . When I talk about the economy , I ’ m not saying I ’ m worried about the stock market or the financial sector . I ’ m talking about the ability of the average person to provide sustenance for himself and one ’ s family . So we could have negative outcomes because of the shutdown , not because of Covid — negative outcomes that dwarf Covid .
Mm-hm . So we ’ re now talking on Monday , April 27 . And that protest was about two weeks ago .
And I ’ m curious if you think that protest , which was one of the very first protests , had any kind of impact ?
Yeah , I think it did . I mean , this is just me kind of blue skying this , but I think it let her see that she only had a limited amount of political capital that she could keep carrying this out indefinitely . She started to say , we ’ ll let lawn service in again , we ’ ll let various things start .
She rolled back some of the more , in your mind , problematic restrictions .
Yeah . She rolled back some of the more problematic restrictions and she started talking about an end game , you know ? So in that respect , I think it was helpful . I think it got the message across .
We plan to talk to Governor Whitmer and I wonder what you most want to communicate to her about what you think she may not understand , what she might not be getting in this moment ?
Well , first , I would say to her , Americans are responsible people . We ’ re creative people . Tell us what social distancing guidelines you think we should be maintaining when we ’ re out there , and let us find a way to do it . If you think we need to be six or seven feet apart , if you think we shouldn ’ t have more than six people in a room , give us a safe paradigm of personal behavior and let us work within it . Don ’ t lock us down and say that we can ’ t provide for ourselves . That ’ s the most basic human right — is to provide for your own well-being . Just let us find some way to work .
Well , Phil , thank you very much . We really appreciate your time .
Yeah , thank you . I was very happy to be with you today .
I ’ m doing great . Where are you right now ? That looks like it might be home .
Yes . Yes , I ’ m at the governor ’ s residence in one of the rooms .
Is that a sign of you that says , “ The Gov “ ?
It ’ s a beer that was named after me . So yes , that ’ s the poster .
[ LAUGHS ] So governor , over the past few weeks , it feels like a lot of people have learned your name . But I sense a lot of Americans , a lot of our listeners don ’ t know all that much about you , and how it is you became the governor of Michigan . So in brief , what is that story ?
You know , I ’ m a lifelong Michigander . I ’ ve lived here my whole life . I was brought up in a household with a father who was kind of a Republican , a mother who was kind of a Democrat . I decided to run for governor after spending some time practicing law and teaching , and I did a stint as a prosecutor in my hometown . But I think that part of my nature is when I see a problem , and I don ’ t see the right people there to fix it , I just kind of want to jump in and do it . The tagline of the campaign was “ fix the damn roads. ” And it wasn ’ t because it was poll-tested . It ’ s how everyone in the state talks about their frustration with infrastructure that hasn ’ t been attended to properly for a long period of time . And it is the most visceral daily reminder of government that ’ s not getting the fundamentals right .
That was kind of the call to action . And I won by almost 10 points after Donald Trump had won my state by less than 11,000 votes just two years before , I think , because we really were trying to rally around getting the fundamentals right .
Right . So it ’ s fair to say that you did not run in that race for governor as somebody who would become a polarizing and partisan figure in a national debate over the future of the American economy .
Correct . [ LAUGHS ] To the contrary , I went out of my way to not go down that path . And so to be right here in this moment , in the midst of a global pandemic , to be trying to pull people together — where things have gotten so polarized in ways that I think many people would say they couldn ’ t have ever predicted , if they were being honest — is kind of surreal .
So let ’ s talk about how that happened , how you have gotten to this point where there ’ s so much polarization over your decision-making . As the pandemic unfolds , soon enough , you begin imposing restrictions on the movement of Michigan residents and what feels like a pretty standard version of a lockdown .
But then at a certain point , you introduce a second wave of restrictions that are a little bit different , right ? Banning travel to second homes , banning motor-boating , limiting what kind of non-essential goods stores can sell . And governor , what was your thinking there with that second wave of restrictions ?
So what we knew at the time was that Covid-19 was ravaging southeast Michigan .
We also know that we have an incredibly high death count compared to our population — 10th largest population , but the third highest number of positive cases and number of deaths . We also know that Covid-19 doesn ’ t recognize boundaries of a county . That this is a disease that is highly communicable . There are studies that will tell you Covid-19 can stay active and communicable for 72 hours on a stainless steel surface . And so as the weather starts to warm up here in Michigan , we know people want to head north and go to the lake .
One of the lakes — we got lots of beautiful freshwater lakes . And the more people that are on the road , the more likely Covid-19 will be spread at a gas station . I often would invoke the visual of that gas pump . So you think about all the nurses and doctors and people that have to touch that gas pump because they ’ re going out to get groceries , or they ’ re going out to pick up medication . The more people that are on the road , the more likely Covid-19 spreads to other parts of the state , too . And that ’ s why these restrictions made sense .
So your thinking was , let ’ s shut down anything that might contribute to the spread , and let ’ s make sure that people in the most populous parts of Michigan don ’ t end up basically exporting it to less populous parts of the state , where outdoor activities are concentrated . And let ’ s do this even if it might seem a little bit extreme .
Let ’ s shut down what ’ s not life-sustaining activity . That was the thought process of why we went more aggressive than some other states .
So you think those second wave measures were the right call ?
Governor , the protests that broke out in your state , I ’ m sure you were aware of them because you ’ re in Lansing . Protesters very much by design came to you . Did you sympathize at all with the protesters , who said that they found these restrictions to be too onerous , to be unfair , to be — in their minds — undemocratic ?
I ’ ll say this . I respect people ’ s right to disagree with me . I do . And I will defend anyone ’ s right to say what they want to say . Their ability and right to do that is absolutely something that I have a great deal of respect for .
The fact of the matter is , congregation is the biggest threat to containing Covid-19 . Because when people come from all different parts of the state , congregate , don ’ t observe C.D.C . best practices , and then go back to all parts of the state , that ’ s precisely what we ’ re hoping to avoid in terms of continuous transmission and growth in other parts of Michigan .
But when you look at these protests , there were a variety of different political groups that came together . It had a rally feel to it . It was right outside the office . I saw , I watched a bit of it . People were open carrying automatic rifles . There were demonstrations , anti-choice demonstrations . They ’ re displaying Confederate flags and Nazi symbolism , and I think very partisan rhetoric . Was more about a political statement rather than a statement of the sacrifices that I ’ ve asked people to make .
Well , yesterday , Governor , I spoke with a man who was at that protest . He stayed in his car . His name was Phil Campbell . He manages a kind of moderate-sized business that he says is suffering right now under these restrictions . And he said that he didn ’ t arrive as a partisan . That he would have gone to Lansing and protested whether you were a Democrat or a Republican . And in his mind , the shutdown is creating its own health and safety costs , right ? He says his employees may soon lose their health insurance because business is suffering so much they can ’ t afford to provide it much longer . I mean , what do you say to someone like that — who says this is not about politics , this is not about you being a Democrat , this is not about the Tea Party ? This is about a view that this is just not right ?
The reality is , unrestrained activity would have made what was a hard time a catastrophe that would have taken a lot longer to start to re-engage from .
What our modeling told us , we would have 220,000 people who would need to be hospitalized this week . We have 3,000 people who are hospitalized . It ’ s worked . And the vast majority of people are doing their part and doing the right thing . It hasn ’ t been easy , but they ’ ve stepped up to do it . And we ’ ve saved lives in the process .
This gentleman I spoke with , Phil , the protester , his ultimate message — and it was directed very much at you as governor — is , trust us . Let us start to go back to work not like a band-aid being ripped off , but gradually . And trust us to be able to work and follow social distancing guidelines . And I think his question to you would be , do you trust Michiganders to do that ?
I am so inspired by what the people of this state have done in this crisis . They ’ ve stepped up . They ’ ve made sacrifices . I have incredible faith and confidence in the people of the state . But we have a duty to make sure that we get this right .
And it ’ s got to be guided by the best medical experts as well as business leaders . And that ’ s what we ’ re working to do . I have a council of business leaders and medical leaders who are helping us determine how do we start to re-engage our economy in a way that avoids a second wave . Because whether Phil and I agree on how quickly that should be done or not , I think we can both agree — I hope so — that none of us ever wants to do this again . You know , in states that are moving , some would say too fast , one of the issues that small business is confronting is that the public is not confident that it ’ s safe to re-engage . And so they ’ ve lifted the protections for small business while you ’ re in a crisis . And yet , the public ’ s not coming out to patronize . And that could be even worse for small business . So what we want to do is get it right . And that means working with the business community and public health . And turning up the dial together so we don ’ t have to turn it back .
Well , let ’ s talk about how it is that you get it right when it comes to reopening and how you ’ re thinking about that . I mean , is there a data set you ’ re looking at ? Is there a set of measurements you ’ re monitoring ? And I ’ m curious — and I ’ m sure lots of people Michigan are , too — what ’ s the thing or things that trigger the reopening ?
So we ’ ve started to reengage . We are looking , of course , at rolling averages on hospitalizations . We are looking at our ability to ramp up testing . We need to build out when it comes to tracing , so that if someone does test positive for Covid-19 , that we ’ re able to trace all their contacts and keep it from spreading . I would also add that we in Michigan are assessing different sectors of our economy for risk , asking questions like , is the work done in a region of our state that ’ s been devastated by Covid-19 , or a region that has been untouched by Covid-19 ?
Does the type of work require that multiple people use the same instruments or machinery ? Is the work done indoors or outdoors ? That makes a difference .
Mm-hm . Right , one of the examples that I think Phil gave was around this idea of , is there a work that can be done — that just feels fundamentally safer by nature — that those might come back soon ?
And I think that ’ s interesting , because what I want to make sure we do is go with data , and make sure that as we are reengaging , we ’ re continually measuring . I know Phil doesn ’ t want to be back in a stay home order in August and neither do I .
And so I want to get this right for him , for his employees — lawnscaping , lawn care , that is already permitted . That was in our first wave that I announced on Friday . In this next one , we could have construction — that is often in big spaces outdoors with P.P.E . and the protocols necessary . That could be a lower risk one that we can mitigate the risk further through protocols around face masks , or separators between workers who can ’ t be six feet apart but can have plexiglass separators , for instance . And so all of these are pieces to starting to turn the dial up and what it looks like in waves .
You know , we started by talking to you about the fact that when you first ran for governor , it was as somebody literally talking about fixing the roads and fixing infrastructure in Michigan . And through these actions that you ’ ve taken in response to the pandemic , you have become a national figure , a national Democratic figure , right ? You ’ re , whether you wanted to or not , sparring with the president . And whether it ’ s fairly or unfairly , you ’ re now seen through a partisan lens , as a partisan figure . Are you comfortable now in that role ?
No ! [ LAUGHS ] I ’ m not . I mean , you know , I was thrown into the national spotlight being criticized or attacked by the President of the United States . I didn ’ t ask for that . I did not like it . I didn ’ t sleep —
— frankly , because I was worried that this would preclude my ability to get the help that I need for Michigan .
Hm . You fear that you might actually suffer some kind of retribution that might make it harder to get through this pandemic ?
Yeah . And I think that that was a legitimate fear with some of the statements that have been made .
Yeah . That if you ’ re not nice , you might not get the help you need . And so I ’ ve bent over backwards to try to smooth that over , not throwing a punch back . I would hate for anyone in Michigan to not have the help they need because I ’ m not popular with the president for some reason .
Do you worry that with the divided state of this country , some of your constituents will come away from this pandemic seeing your actions as partisan no matter what happens and no matter what your intentions ?
I think that ’ s the unfortunate reality that we live with . I do think , though , that when we have gotten through this when we look back on it , that we ’ re going to be comfortable in the fact that the decisions that were made save lives .
The hard thing about public health is when you do it well , you never know how many lives would have been lost otherwise .
But we can see it when you look at the curves where we were headed , and where we are today , that there ’ s no question lives were saved . There ’ s no question that these actions made a difference . And that ’ s what centered everything that we ’ ve done .
Not the partisan stuff , not the fear of that , but the determination to do everything in our power to save lives and to keep our health care system working so that it ’ s there when we all need it .
Well , Governor Whitmer , I want to thank you very much for your time . And I hope you ’ re getting a little more sleep now .
Thank you . We appreciate it . We ’ ll be right back . Here ’ s what else you need to know today . On Tuesday , the number of confirmed cases of the coronavirus in the United States reached 1 million , meaning that roughly one in every 330 Americans has tested positive for the virus . But The Times reports that the actual number of infections is even higher since thousands of Americans have never been tested because of a shortage of testing supplies . And —
archived recording ( nancy pelosi ) We had intended to come back next week . It has been previously scheduled . But once the Capitol physician told us that it was not a proper for us to do that in the interest of not only members and staff , but the custodians , the people who maintain the Capitol , the press who cover us , the staff of the actual legislative chamber , there was no choice for us but to say we will put this off .
The House of Representatives has canceled plans to call lawmakers back into session after members complained that returning to Washington would pose an unnecessary health risk and set a bad example for the country . The Senate , however , is expected to reconvene in Washington on Monday . Finally .
In New York , jets from the Air Force Thunderbirds and the Navy Blue Angels flew over the city on Tuesday in a tribute to medical workers and first responders involved in fighting the pandemic .