To say that we have seen a spike in domestic violence during the coronavirus pandemic would be an understatement . In the weeks since populations worldwide have been directed to “ stay home ” to prevent the virus ’ s spread , cases of domestic violence have surged — and that ’ s reported cases . This should come as no surprise : Women — and it is predominantly women who are victimized — are confined to isolated homes with abusive partners whose coercive and physically violent tendencies are enabled and further inflamed by economic stressors . Supportive community ties are severed , while emergency services , shelter systems , and social services are overwhelmed and congenitally underfunded . According to statistics released by the United Nations , reports of domestic violence in France increased 30 percent following the country ’ s lockdown on March 17 ; during the first two weeks of lockdowns in Spain , the emergency number for domestic violence received 18 percent more calls ; and help lines in Singapore have received 30 percent more calls . As NBC News reported , law enforcement agencies across the U.S. have seen domestic violence cases rise up to 35 percent in recent weeks .
We can ’ t think of the pre-pandemic prevalence of domestic violence as a tolerable “ normal ” to aim towards .
This “ shadow pandemic , ” as U.N. experts are calling it , knows no borders . Keep in mind that before the pandemic hit , one in five women who had ever been in a couple reported experiencing sexual or physical violence by an intimate partner in the last year . Consider , too , that 50 percent of domestic abuse cases go unreported . As with so many devastating consequences of the coronavirus pandemic , this moment has revealed and exacerbated underlying , preexisting conditions of structural violence . The staggering recent statistics should produce a societal reckoning with the presumption that the nuclear household is a place of safety to be preserved — only occasionally a site of violence . But we can ’ t think of the pre-pandemic prevalence of domestic violence as a tolerable “ normal ” to aim towards .
Instead , there need to be longer-term responses offering social and economic infrastructure and services , so that women and children are not dependent on the patriarchal household structure for survival . Safer spaces of cohabitation and community must be recognized and supported . “ Far from a time to acquiesce to ‘ family values ’ ideology , ” feminist theorist Sophie Lewis wrote last month , “ the pandemic is an acutely important time to provision , evacuate and generally empower survivors of—and refugees from—the nuclear household. ” This means recognizing governmental responses to the dramatic spike in domestic violence as insufficient stopgaps . On Sunday , U.N. Secretary-General António Guterres delivered a public statement , calling on governments to “ put women ’ s safety first as they respond to the pandemic. ” His message was accompanied by a set of recommendations , including that governments “ increase investment in online services and civil society organizations , ” “ declare shelters as essential services , ” and continue to prosecute abusers and hold in prisons individuals convicted of violence against women . Numerous national and local governments , alongside nongovernmental organizations , are already acting on such advice . Canada is keeping domestic violence shelters open and diverting $ 50 million to support shelters for victims of domestic and gender-based violence . The U.K. , France , and Australia have dedicated funding to organizations providing services . France is also covering the cost of temporarily housing survivors in empty hotel rooms . Yet the recommendations — from the practical to the carceral — are short-term responses to a heightened state of emergency . It ’ s a grim state of affairs , when it ’ s deemed necessary for the safety of survivors to keep convicted abusers behind bars , while prisons become petri dishes for Covid-19 . The need for well-funded and robust support services for survivors , including psychological care and economic resources , can not be underestimated . But interventions can not begin and end after the point of abuse : The conditions of gender-based and sexual violence must be disrupted . In his Sunday statement , the U.N. secretary-general said , “ I appeal for peace in homes around the world. ” His comment brought to mind the words of late philosopher Bernard Williams : “ To say peace when there is no peace , ” wrote Williams , “ is to say nothing. ” The long-term plague of domestic violence is too deadly and rampant for responses that amount to nothing . Tackling this scourge will be no easy task ; it requires no less than critiquing the nuclear household and the traditional family form . Those lucky enough to live in happy family units and intimate partnerships are not nearly in a great enough majority to consider these sorts of households de facto safe sites , which are only occasionally ruined by abusive bad apples .