This May 3 , 2020 , photo released by Shelly Solomon shows , from left , Steve Turner and his sisters , Carla Paull and Lisa Fishman , holding up a Mother ’ s Day banner emblazoned with images of their mom , Beverly Turner , in front of her assisted living facility in Ladue , Missouri . They were “ practicing ” how their Mother ’ s Day surprise will look on the holiday as their mother peers down from a window . Isolation due to the coronavirus outbreak has led mothers and offspring to find creative ways to celebrate . ( Shelly Solomon via AP )
This May 3 , 2020 , photo released by Shelly Solomon shows , from left , Steve Turner and his sisters , Carla Paull and Lisa Fishman , holding up a Mother ’ s Day banner emblazoned with images of their mom , Beverly Turner , in front of her assisted living facility in Ladue , Missouri . They were “ practicing ” how their Mother ’ s Day surprise will look on the holiday as their mother peers down from a window . Isolation due to the coronavirus outbreak has led mothers and offspring to find creative ways to celebrate . ( Shelly Solomon via AP )
NEW YORK ( AP ) — Treats made and delivered by neighbors . Fresh garden plantings dug from a safe 6 feet away . Trips around the world set up room-to-room at home .
Mother ’ s Day this year is a mix of love and extra imagination as families do without their usual brunches and huggy meet-ups .
As the pandemic persists in keeping families indoors or a safe social distance apart , online searches have increased for creative ways to still make moms feel special .
Absent help from schools and babysitters , uninitiated dads are on homemade craft duty with the kids . Other loved ones are navigating around no-visitor rules at hospitals and senior-living facilities .
Some medical facilities are pitching in by collecting voice and video recordings from locked-out relatives when patients are unable to manage the technology on their own .
In suburban St. Louis , Steve Turner and his family hope to FaceTime with his 96-year-old mother , Beverly , but they plan something more , too . Her birthday coincides with Mother ’ s Day this year .
“ We ’ re going to create a big Mother ’ s Day-birthday banner signed by the kids and grandkids who live here , ” Turner said . “ She loves butterflies and we ’ ll draw some on . We ’ re working with the home to find a place where we can stand outside a window so she can see us . ”
Anna Francese Gass in New Canaan , Connecticut , is hunkered down with her husband and three children and will enjoy her usual Mother ’ s Day breakfast in bed of rubbery eggs , slightly burnt toast and VERY milky coffee . But the day won ’ t include her own mom , who lives nearby .
“ I ordered a bunch of daffodil and tulip bulbs online , and me and the kids are planning to plant them in her flowerbed . She can supervise from the window . I just know it will put a huge smile on her face , ” Francese Gass said .
In Alameda , California , 23-year-old Zaria Zinn is sheltering at home with her parents and younger sister . Knowing how much their mother loves and misses traveling , they ’ re turning their house and neighborhood into a trip around the world with help from decorations and virtual tours online .
“ We made a DIY passport for her and we ’ re creating stamps for each location , ” she said .
Their itinerary : Machu Picchu , Paris and Iceland , with some DIY spa time and a Hollywood-style movie night .
Making the most of Mother ’ s Day in isolation is top of mind for Google search users . The company said the term “ Mother ’ s Day gifts during quarantine ” recently spiked by 600 % in the U.S . Among Pinterest ’ s 335 million users , searches for “ Mother ’ s Day at home ” have jumped by 2,971 % , the company said .
In Rochester , New York , Melissa Mueller-Douglas and her 7-year-old daughter , Nurah , had planned to get together with mom and daughter friends at a hotel for a Mother ’ s Day sleepover . When it was canceled because of the pandemic , they got busy on Pinterest searching for ideas to bring the party home , just the two of them .
They have eye masks with rhinestones to decorate , thread for mother-daughter bracelets , instant film for a photo shoot and a chocolate fountain purchased at Walmart . Dad and Nurah ’ s 3-year-old brother will paint together downstairs after a mom-son bike ride earlier in the day .
“ We ’ ve repurposed a shimmery tablecloth and made giant flowers out of tissue paper for a photo shoot backdrop . We ’ ll be creating a secret handshake and writing in top secret journals to each other , ” Mueller-Douglas said . “ We ’ re calling it The Best Day Ever Slumber Party . ”
Kayla Hockman , 26 , in Los Angeles has been worried about her 77-year-old grandmother in Fontana , California , about 50 miles away . Usually , she and her sister treat her and their mom to brunch or an adventure out .
“ My grandma ’ s been quite depressed lately since she hasn ’ t left her house in two months , and she ’ s slowly losing hope , ” Hockman said . “ She and my grandpa have a lot of problems with walking now . This whole thing of not being able to see anyone has been really taking a hard toll on them . ”
To cheer her up , they ’ re planning a party on her lawn .
“ It ’ s going to be a surprise pop-up Mother ’ s Day brunch with ` momosas ’ and painting , ” Hockman said . “ We ’ re going to set it up for all of us to paint a sunflower , her absolute favorite . She ’ ll paint on her porch and we ’ ll be on the lawn , all 6 feet apart . ”
Willie Greer in Memphis thought food , enlisting the help of a neighbor to make his mom ’ s recipe for pecan pie and deliver it to her in Dallas to brighten her isolation Mother ’ s Day . He said the neighbor was happy to do it after he sent her the recipe .
“ My siblings and I will also create a ` thank you ’ video for mom . Since we can ’ t all be together , each of us will record a short message and at the end we ’ ll all sing ` A Mother ’ s Love ’ by Gena Hill , ” he said . “ I ’ m pretty sure this is the part where my mom cries her eyes out . ”
These days , virtual experiences are all we have , so Lisa Hill in Portland , Oregon , decided to embrace that notion for her 79-year-old mom in Stuart , Florida , after she met a cooking instructor while volunteering to prepare meals at a shelter .
Hill has been cooking alongside Lauren Chandler , who has taken her usual in-home cooking sessions online with a twist : She ’ s throwing in a free 45-minute session for clients to donate .
“ I feel so far away from her . I can ’ t cook for her . I can ’ t visit , ” Hill said . “ She ’ s nervous about everything going on right now and it will be a good social interaction . ”