President Trump 's leadership has always been inconsistent and erratic . He takes a position one day , only to reverse himself the next . This has been frustrating since the beginning of his tenure , but now , it is positively dangerous to Americans trying to survive during a global pandemic — and it is a threat to the futures of local politicians trying to follow his lead .
Trump 's tendency to flip-flop was on display Wednesday at his daily news briefing . After days of signalling his support for protesters who are trying to get their states to lift quarantine conditions , the president suddenly reversed course , criticizing Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp ( R ) , who earlier this week announced his state is lifting its lockdown .
`` Would I do that ? No , '' Trump told reporters . `` But I 'm going to let him make his decision , but I told him , I totally disagree . ''
You could n't blame Kemp for being confused . Last week , Trump unveiled his administration 's official guidelines for states to return to normalcy when the pandemic subsides , but then almost immediately undermined those guidelines by tweeting his support — `` LIBERATE Michigan ! '' — for anti-lockdown demonstrators in states run mostly by Democratic governors .
`` They have got cabin fever , '' Trump said about the protesters Sunday . `` They want their life back . Their life was taken away from them . ''
Considering Trump 's comments , plus congressional Republicans ' refusal to approve aid for states and cities — an attempt to incentivize local leaders to reopen their economies — you could almost understand why a GOP stalwart like Kemp thought the smart political thing to do would be to go ahead , despite the recommendations of health experts , and try to put this state back to business .
Among the president 's defining characteristics is a certain malleability — he has shifted , on a dime , on issues like DACA , Syria , and health care . His positions are based on whatever he believes gives him an advantage in the moment , and attempts to hold him to account for these inconsistencies are often met with lies and bluster .
And it 's only gotten worse since the pandemic arrived . The president has flipped frequently between pushing to end quarantine conditions and acceptance of expert recommendations to hold off . He has asserted `` total authority '' to order governors to reopen states , then deferred to them . Trump ca n't even pick a tone — in some briefings he tries to act presidential , calm , and measured , but most other days he is defensive and antagonistic . The overall impression is that he wants to claim credit but avoid responsibility .
Changing one 's mind can be a good thing , if done in response to new and better information . It is less desirable to shift back-and-forth on a whim , or in response to the latest polls . Trump 's decision-making is often in the second category , and is too unreliable to be considered actual `` leadership . ''
Democratic governors , like California 's Gavin Newsom and New York 's Andrew Cuomo , have learned to deal with Trump during this crisis by flattering him when possible and working around him where prudent . They know at this point not to trust the president 's unreliable leadership . Republican governors like Kemp , though , may feel less free to act independently — Trump is hugely popular among GOP voters , and the party 's elected officials fear crossing him . So if he signals that the economy should open sooner rather than later , it is likely they 'll follow his lead .
When Trump changes his mind , though , he has no problem throwing such followers under the bus . Just ask Kemp .
The Georgia governor has decided to expose his state 's 10.62 million citizens to a heightened chance of death and illness from the COVID-19 virus , and now he is doing it without the political backing of the most popular figure in his party — support he had reason to believe was forthcoming . Given that most Americans are n't ready to lift the lockdown , Kemp 's decision is a loser both in terms of public health and politics .
Inconsistency is n't Trump 's only shortcoming . On Wednesday , he displayed his penchant for magical thinking , shoving aside assessments that a second wave of coronavirus infections could occur in the fall . `` We may not even have corona coming back , '' he said , even though Dr. Anthony Fauci , the nation 's top infectious disease expert , immediately contradicted him . That suggests the United States is in danger of being inadequately prepared — again — when and if that next outbreak happens .
But hey , the president might change his mind about that forecast in the next day or two , depending on which way the wind blows .
Want more essential commentary and analysis like this delivered straight to your inbox ? Sign up for The Week 's `` Today 's best articles '' newsletter here .