GENEVA ( ███ ) - The World Health Organization on Tuesday acknowledged “ evidence emerging ” of the airborne spread of the novel coronavirus , after a group of scientists urged the global body to update its guidance on how the respiratory disease passes between people .
“ We have been talking about the possibility of airborne transmission and aerosol transmission as one of the modes of transmission of COVID-19 , ” Maria Van Kerkhove , technical lead on the COVID-19 pandemic at the WHO , told a news briefing .
The WHO has previously said the virus that causes the COVID-19 respiratory disease spreads primarily through small droplets expelled from the nose and mouth of an infected person that quickly sink to the ground .
But in an open letter to the Geneva-based agency , published on Monday in the Clinical Infectious Diseases journal , 239 scientists in 32 countries outlined evidence that they say shows floating virus particles can infect people who breathe them in .
Related Coverage Japan supercomputer suggests changes to travel , work amid airborne virus threat
Because those smaller exhaled particles can linger in the air , the scientists in the group had been urging WHO to update its guidance .
“ We wanted them to acknowledge the evidence , ” said Jose Jimenez , a chemist at the University of Colorado who signed the paper .
“ This is definitely not an attack on the WHO . It ’ s a scientific debate , but we felt we needed to go public because they were refusing to hear the evidence after many conversations with them , ” he said in a telephone interview .
Speaking at Tuesday ’ s briefing in Geneva , Benedetta Allegranzi , the WHO ’ s technical lead for infection prevention and control , said there was evidence emerging of airborne transmission of the coronavirus , but that it was not definitive .
A logo is pictured on the headquarters of the World Health Orgnaization ( WHO ) in Geneva , Switzerland , June 25 , 2020 . ███/Denis Balibouse
“ ... The possibility of airborne transmission in public settings - especially in very specific conditions , crowded , closed , poorly ventilated settings that have been described , can not be ruled out , ” she said .
“ However , the evidence needs to be gathered and interpreted , and we continue to support this . ”
Jimenez said historically , there has been a fierce opposition in the medical profession to the notion of aerosol transmission , and the bar for proof has been set very high . A key concern has been a fear of panic .
“ If people hear airborne , healthcare workers will refuse to go to the hospital , ” he said . Or people will buy up all the highly protective N95 respirator masks , “ and there will be none left for developing countries . ”
Jimenez said the WHO panel assessing the evidence on airborne transmission was not scientifically diverse , and lacked representation from experts in aerosol transmission .
Any change in the WHO ’ s assessment of risk of transmission could affect its current advice on keeping 1-metre ( 3.3 feet ) of physical distancing . Governments , which rely on the agency for guidance policy , may also have to adjust public health measures aimed at curbing the spread of the virus .
Van Kerkhove said the WHO would publish a scientific brief summarising the state of knowledge on modes of transmission of the virus in the coming days .
“ A comprehensive package of interventions is required to be able to stop transmission , ” she said .
“ This includes not only physical distancing , it includes the use of masks where appropriate in certain settings , specifically where you can ’ t do physical distancing and especially for healthcare workers . ”