Lots of people are looking back at that presumed cold or flu that recently spread through their household or office and asking : Did I already have the novel coronavirus ? And if so , what does it mean for me now ?
A meme circulating on social media takes these questions even farther , asking : “ Who got sick in November or December and it lasted 10 to 14 days ? … If you can answer ‘ yes , ’ then you probably had the coronavirus . … You guys lived through that . Quit letting the media control you . Now give me back my toilet paper , sports , parades , etc . ”
Like so many posts that go viral , experts say this one mixes a bit of encouraging potential truth with some inaccurate and potentially dangerous misinformation .
There ’ s a very real chance that some Southern Californians who had dry coughs , fevers and other symptoms of the coronavirus as far back as December might have already recovered from the disease , according to both Brandon Brown , a public health professor at UC Riverside who specializes in infectious diseases , and Dr. Robert Kim-Farley , an epidemiology professor at UCLA .
If people did beat the virus , both experts said there ’ s a chance those patients can ’ t get it again or spread it to others . That , in turn , means those people might be able to start to return to their usual routines sooner rather than later .
Most people don ’ t know if they actually had the coronavirus because they haven ’ t been tested , and there isn ’ t a test available yet that can tell if someone already recovered from the disease . Even if they did get a coronavirus test , or an antibody test to show a past infection , scientists don ’ t yet know for sure if beating novel coronavirus once means long-term immunity . And assuming otherwise could expose more vulnerable people to a potentially fatal disease and extend the pandemic .
Researchers now believe the new coronavirus emerged in mid-November or early December , with a transfer from wildlife to humans at an open-air market in Wuhan , China . The first identified case in the United States was mid-January , in a Washington state man who ’ d recently returned from Wuhan .
“ It is possible that travelers to or from China may have already been exposed and transmitting COVID-19 to others a few months ago , ” Kim-Farley said .
But given the slow roll-out and limited supply of test kits — combined with the good news that perhaps 80 % of coronavirus cases are mild enough that people recover on their own — experts say it ’ s a near certainty that lots of people who ’ ve had the virus simply haven ’ t been tested .
It ’ s risky , though , for people to assume what they had was the coronavirus .
“ There are other diseases , influenza being one of them , that may have similar symptoms to mild COVID-19 , ” Kim-Farley said . “ Therefore , it would not be wise to assume that an illness with symptoms compatible to COVID-19 is definitely COVID-19 . ”
If people assume they ’ ve beaten the virus and resume their usual routines , Brown said they can inadvertently spread the infection to others , including older people with compromised immune systems and others who are much more likely to have serious complications or die from the coronavirus . Hence , experts are pushing for physical distancing until the virus subsides .
It ’ s also not 100 % clear whether people who ’ ve had the coronavirus can or can ’ t get it again .
As with most viruses , Kim-Farley said it ’ s believed that people who ’ ve beaten the coronavirus will produce antibodies that will protect them against the current strain of COVID-19 .
“ The question of how long that protection will last is still unknown , but is being studied over time , ” Kim-Farley said .
Also , there have been a few cases , Brown noted , where people tested positive for COVID-19 , recovered from the disease , but later tested positive a second time .
“ It could be that these individuals did not completely clear the virus , ” he said .
“ We don ’ t know enough , at this point , ” Brown added . “ But we believe that once you are infected and mount an immune response , you are less likely to get sick a second time . ”
That ’ s one reason experts say antibody tests currently in development will be helpful . Such tests could show if someone had the virus previously and has built up a defense .
“ Once testing becomes more widespread and it is possible to routinely test people , there may be a point at which such people who are immune can be easily identified and they could go back to work — even in healthcare settings , ” Kim-Farley said . “ That will help us to re-start getting back to normal . ”
Antibody testing also could help cut down on new transmissions , since Brown said health officials could quarantine those who ’ ve been in contact with someone who previously had the virus .
For now , both Brown and Kim-Farley said everyone should continue to follow physical distancing and other safety guidelines recommended by public health officials .
“ We don ’ t know enough about the virus at this time to believe if we get sick we can go back to our normal lives , ” Brown said .