“ There is no simple answer to this tragic dilemma between two humanitarian crises – the spread of the virus and the devastation caused by the lockdown – but some basic principles apply , ” says Jean Drèze , an activist and visiting economics professor at the University of Ranchi . “ One of them is that no one should be allowed to starve . ”
Officials have since set up assistance , such as soup kitchens , and forbidden migrants ’ landlords from demanding rent for the month . But the crisis has shone a spotlight on existing inequalities and resulting challenges that could endure beyond the lockdown .
Here , as elsewhere , officials are wrestling with how to balance public health with the economy ’ s health , particularly for society ’ s most vulnerable . That question has especially high stakes in India , where some 80 % to 90 % of the workforce are informal workers , often left out of safety-net schemes . And the challenges perhaps have been most dire for 100 million internal migrant workers , many of whom attempted to walk hundreds of miles home after losing work , and often shelter , during the lockdown .
Like much of the globe , 1.3 billion people in India are under orders to stay inside due to the coronavirus pandemic .
Late last month , as India ’ s transport came to a halt and its residents prepared for lockdown , Prakash Meghwal began a long walk home . With roughly a dollar and a half in his pocket , and three other people for company , he traced his way through forested land , careful to avoid the main roads whenever possible . Small roadside shops provided them some food during the day and shelter outside their shuttered fronts at night .
“ We were scared , ” Mr. Meghwal says . “ ‘ What just happened ? ’ we wondered . We have never experienced anything like this before in our lifetime. ” Six days later , having covered more than 90 miles on foot , he reached his village in Rajasthan state .
For over a decade , Mr. Meghwal worked as a waiter in the tourist hill town Mount Abu , and sent money to his family of six back home . But suddenly , with the new coronavirus shutting down business , there was no work or wages , and he was forced to return home . His household no longer has a source of income .
In the face of a pandemic , a third of the global population is under some form of lockdown , and countries are grappling with how to balance health and the economy – particularly for society ’ s most vulnerable . And on March 24 , with only four hours ’ notice , India began the world ’ s biggest test yet : Prime Minister Narendra Modi ordered the entire country of 1.3 billion people to stay indoors for 21 days .
The announcement did not include any concrete transport , safety , or economic measures for India ’ s roughly 400 million informal workers , who are estimated to make up 80 % to 90 % of the total workforce and live without a safety net . With businesses and establishments shut down , they lost their daily wages ; many of the country ’ s roughly 100 million migrant workers have also lost the roof over their head . Balancing either the belongings on their heads or young children on their shoulders , hundreds of thousands tried to walk back home .
Many have faced hunger and police brutality . At least 22 migrants have died on the way .
Adnan Abidi/Reuters Migrant workers and homeless people rest inside a sports complex turned into a shelter , during a 21-day nationwide lockdown to slow the spread of COVID-19 , in New Delhi , India , April 4 , 2020 .
Some states organized buses to help the migrants , but bus stops quickly became overcrowded . A few days later , fearing a surge in coronavirus cases due to the movement of migrants , the central government ordered states to seal their borders . It announced food and cash assistance , forbade migrants ’ landlords from demanding rent for a month , and ordered that businesses must pay wages for the duration of the lockdown . But the crisis has shone a spotlight on inequalities that predate COVID-19 . Those disparities are likely to endure beyond this particular crisis .
“ India ’ s economic growth model is based on the cheap labour of rural-to-urban migrants who often work for less than minimum wages in its high growth sectors . Yet they remain an unenumerated , unrecognized presence in cities , ” excluded from many welfare programs , says Nivedita Jayaram of the nonprofit Aajeevika Bureau , which advocates for migrants and laborers . “ There is an absolute gap ... the inability of the governments to be able to tell how many migrants are in a city , let alone reach them . The pandemic and lockdown has only exposed this fundamental flaw in India 's policy design . ”
Most migrants are not included in the Public Distribution System , which entitles poor families to subsidized grains . Owing to the long list of intermediaries involved in employing a migrant worker , the order to pay wages is difficult to enforce too .
Some states have tried to boost migrants ’ support : Kerala , for example , was one of the first states to enhance social security pensions and set up shelters , and New Delhi has opened more than 1,000 food centers . But more is needed , especially in smaller towns and far-flung areas “ where hunger is more stark and fear is more prevalent , ” says Suroor Mander , a lawyer and activist with the nonprofit Karwan-e Mohabbat .
“ There is no simple answer to this tragic dilemma between two humanitarian crises – the spread of the virus and the devastation caused by the lockdown – but some basic principles apply , ” says Jean Drèze , an activist and visiting economics professor at the University of Ranchi . “ One of them is that no one should be allowed to starve . ”
Living in overcrowded homes or shelters , India ’ s workers have been left more vulnerable to the pandemic . But with such a large population already struggling with hunger , additional measures to address their health and safety have been pushed to the brink . In one state , returning migrants were asked to squat on the road , and sprayed with a bleaching agent .
According to Manisha Dutta , a public health professional in Udaipur , there continues to be inconsistent , inadequate information about the pandemic , which has led to confusion and fear among migrant workers . Returning migrants are reportedly being screened for the coronavirus in a number of states , but she is worried it isn ’ t rigorous enough .
Teachers and health workers have hurriedly been asked to step in and screen returnees . Most of them are at the front lines without safety gear and have not received proper training , Ms. Dutta says . In addition , “ there are also a number of horrible rumors doing the rounds , some that refer to migrants being disease carriers and taken away by the police . ... So this has all been really intimidating for them . ”
At the best of times , accessing health care is challenging for many migrants . Among Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development members and partners , India has the fewest number of hospital beds per 1,000 people . Mr. Meghwal said his young children are frequently ill , but he is no longer able to take them to the nearest health center , about 15 miles away , because of the lockdown .
Health experts are especially concerned about tuberculosis among migrant workers , particularly at a time when many will be malnourished . India has the highest TB burden in the world , according to the World Health Organization , and the disease disproportionately affects poor and marginalized people .
Once India has provided adequate rations and cash distributions , experts warn , it needs to confront long-term challenges , including job creation .
“ The migration system is broken now and this means there will be a shortage of labour in many sectors , ” says Dipa Sinha , professor of economics at Delhi ’ s Ambedkar University . “ For instance , this is harvest season in northern India , which relies on migrant farm labourers from states like Bihar . The crops can ’ t be allowed to simply go to waste . ”
The Mahatma Gandhi National Employment Rural Guarantee Act , which provides at least 100 days of paid employment per year to unskilled laborers , has come to a halt under the lockdown . In the longer run , however , workers ’ advocates view it as a crucial system to provide income to migrant workers who ’ ve returned to their villages , and officials are asking for the strengthening of the act .
An ambitious One Nation One Ration Card scheme , which aims to make subsidized food available to workers who are currently left out , is scheduled to be operational in June . On-the-ground implementation remains a challenge , however .
The lockdown is scheduled to end Tuesday , but is likely to be extended . As the number of cases rises , many are calling for continued , but more humane , social distancing measures . But for now , many migrant workers ’ main concern is their livelihood . With many rural areas ’ economies focused on agriculture , returned workers face few job prospects .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ The plan is to go back as soon as I can . What other option is there ? ” Mr. Meghwal says . “ I have to work and feed my family after all . ”