As for the cratering economy , which on Friday produced the worst jobs numbers on record , Trump shrugged . “ We ’ re in no rush , we ’ re in no rush , ” he said .
The president ’ s shiftlessness in the face of the greatest crisis of his presidency , and the greatest political threat during it , is confounding . Of course , Trump has faced mortal political threats before ; less than five months ago , he became only the third president in American history to be impeached . He ’ s shown a remarkable ability to survive damaging situations . And his plans have often been derided by skeptics as unwise , unrealistic , or simplistic . This situation is different , though : Grappling with a multifront crisis , Trump seems to have no plan at all .
Let ’ s begin with efforts against the illness itself . The 45 days during which Trump recommended social distancing were meant to prevent hospitals from being swamped with patients , and give the government time to devise more effective measures . But when that period ended at the end of April , Trump simply let his recommendations lapse , opting not to extend them in favor of vague calls for reopening the economy .
Those six weeks didn ’ t actually buy the country much time , because the White House wasted them . With New York City removed from the numbers , the national curve hasn ’ t flattened at all . States continue to fend for themselves on tests and personal protective equipment . Trump held a White House event yesterday to tout growth in testing in the U.S. , but the president ’ s rhetoric was misleading . The U.S. does not , as he claimed , lead the world in testing , on a per capita basis . He also continues to compare the U.S. rate favorably to South Korea ’ s , eliding that South Korea was able to control its outbreak sooner by testing faster , and thereby reducing its need for testing .
As my colleague Robinson Meyer has reported , based on figures in the COVID Tracking Project , which is housed at ███ , the U.S. has increased testing but still needs to expand it dramatically to match expert recommendations . “ To an almost astonishing degree , the U.S. has no national plan for achieving this goal , ” Meyer writes . “ There is no effort at the federal level that has mustered anything like the funding , coordination , or real resources that experts across the political spectrum say is needed to safely reopen the country . ”
One possible problem is that to muster the kind of government effort required to catch up , Trump might have to acknowledge that his various premature “ Mission accomplished ” announcements were grievously wrong . Instead , he has repeated them . “ We have met the moment . And we have prevailed , ” he said yesterday .
Having declared victory , Trump has begun calling for the country to reopen . He is correct to note that social distancing has knocked the American economy flat , but once again , he has no plan for how the reopening should occur . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention did have a plan—but as the Associated Press first reported , the White House quashed it , telling the CDC its guidelines would never “ see the light of day , ” then lied about the process by which they were killed .