President Trump has been mocked relentlessly for suggesting that ultraviolet light could be brought “ inside the body ” to kill the coronavirus , but there is ongoing research to do just that .
For example , the pharmaceutical firm Aytu BioScience announced on April 20 , four days before the Trump remarks , that it has signed an exclusive licensing deal with Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles . The center has developed and is testing a UV-A “ Healight ” designed to be inserted via a catheter inside the trachea to kill pathogens , including the coronavirus .
Ultraviolet , or UV , light is commonly used by physicians to treat skin diseases . Cedars-Sinai says UV-A phototherapy potentially could be employed in internal organs .
Aytu BioScience said : “ The Healight technology employs proprietary methods of administering intermittent ultraviolet ( UV ) A light via a novel endotracheal medical device . Pre-clinical findings indicate the technology ’ s significant impact on eradicating a wide range of viruses and bacteria , inclusive of coronavirus . The data have been the basis of discussions with the FDA for a near-term path to enable human use for the potential treatment of coronavirus in intubated patients in the intensive care unit ( ICU ) . ”
At Thursday ’ s White House pandemic task force briefing , Mr. Trump talked of possible future therapies . On the dais , William Bryan , acting director of the Department of Homeland Security ’ s science and technology sector , briefed reporters on how UV light can kill surface viruses . Mr. Byran also spoke of experiments with bleach and isopropyl alcohol eliminating viruses in expelled saliva and respiratory fluids .
This prompted Mr. Trump to say , “ I see the disinfectant where it knocks it out in a minute . One minute . And is there a way we can do something like that by injection inside or , or almost a cleaning ? ”
“ Question that probably some of you are thinking of if you ’ re totally into that world , which I find to be very interesting , ” he said . “ So supposing we hit the body with a tremendous , whether it ’ s ultraviolet or just very powerful light . And I think you said that hasn ’ t been checked but you ’ re going to test it . And then I said , supposing you brought the light inside the body , which you can do either through the skin or in some other way . And I think you said you ’ re gon na test that , too . ”
The president was roundly mocked for both suggestions , more so for disinfectant than for UV light .
The Drudge Report said at the top of its home page : “ Trump : Inject Disinfectants into Body ? Test UV Light Inside Patients . ”
Inserting UV light is exactly what Cedars-Sinai is investigating and is talking to the Food and Drug Administration about securing emergency approval for Healight .
The Aytu BioScience ’ s statement quoted Dr. Mark Pimentel , who is leading the project : “ Our team has shown that administering a specific spectrum of UV-A light can eradicate viruses in infected human cells ( including coronavirus ) and bacteria in the area while preserving healthy cells . ”
Dr. Ali Rezaie , one of the Healight inventors , said : “ Our lab at Cedars-Sinai has extensively studied the effects of this unique technology on bacteria and viruses . Based on our findings we believe this therapeutic approach has the potential to significantly impact the high morbidity and mortality of coronavirus-infected patients and patients infected with other respiratory pathogens . We are looking forward to partnering with Aytu BioScience to move this technology forward for the benefit of patients all over the world . ”
Aytu Bioscience web page states , “ The Healight is a catheter embedded with small LED lights that emit UVA light in a specific way . ”
The Cedars-Sinai Healight team published an article last year in the United European Gastroenterology Journal , titled “ Internally Applied Ultraviolet Light as a Novel Approach for Effective and Safe Anti-Microbial Treatment . ”
“ These findings suggest that UVA therapy can potentially provide a safe and effective novel approach to antimicrobial treatment via phototherapy on internal organs , ” Aytu BioScience says on its website .
Unfiltered UV light is dangerous to humans . But filtering out the harmful UV-C and leaving just UV-A , makes it safe , the company says .
A video animation shows a catheter being inserted inside the trachea , stopping at the bronchial tubes and the light being administered .
Infection is one of the most common and serious side effects for intensive care patients on tracheal intubation to breath .