Army Sergeant Marlenny Medin asks a patient about his medical history at the Javits New York Medical Station , which supports local hospitals during the coronavirus outbreak in New York City , April 8 , 2020 . ( Specialist Nathan Hammack/US Army/Handout via Reuters )
There ’ s some good news on the coronavirus front . We ’ re not out of the woods , but maybe we ’ re no longer headed deeper in .
The CDC ’ s director says we ’ re “ nearing the peak. ” Daily death counts , after climbing for some time , seem to have leveled off at around 2,000 , though these data are often revised as more deaths are reported . The much-watched University of Washington model says we ’ re a few days past the peaks of deaths and hospital usage . Estimates of the virus ’ s “ reproductive number ” in the U.S. ( from the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine ) are headed toward one , the magical threshold beneath which the problem starts to decline rather than spreading further .
Nothing much can change immediately , because holding steady isn ’ t great : It ’ s a sign that the severe measures we ’ ve put into effect are controlling the virus , not beating it . In the coming week or two , though , we ’ ll hopefully see deaths decline and the reproductive number go below one . And that means it ’ s time to start thinking of the next steps .
That situation will put us at a crossroads . There ’ s a lot of uncertainty about how many COVID-19 cases are asymptomatic and never detected , but with only 550,000 or so known cases in a population of 330 million , we can be pretty confident that a very low percentage of the country has survived the virus and gained some immunity . This means that if we simply go back to life as it was before , the virus will start spreading again .
But at the same time , the calculus changes . The longer we try to force the country to stay cooped up , the more damage we do to the economy , the more resistance the lockdowns will provoke , and the worse the cost-benefit calculations will start to look . And subsequent waves of the epidemic might be weaker than the first one , both because some share of the population will probably be immune and because immunity will be concentrated among the people with the most social contacts .
My admittedly subjective guess is that mass lockdowns can last at most about month longer , until mid May . If cases and deaths indeed start to decline rapidly , Americans are not going to stay home unemployed while the hospitals are empty and medical staff are furloughed for lack of work . We have to start opening up soon , and we have to do it intelligently . There are numerous plans to do so — Ezra Klein has a good rundown over at Vox — but they all rely on a fairly straightforward selection of tools . My view is that we should aggressively pursue all of them at once , both federally and at the state level , until it ’ s clear which are delivering the most bang for the buck :
Open selectively , and use additional lockdowns only as a last resort . This one is pretty obvious . If a given area hasn ’ t gotten its problem under control , it can ’ t reopen , and highly vulnerable individuals should still stay home when an area first reopens . Scott Gottlieb suggests that a decline in case loads for 14 days , plus adequate hospital capacity , are a practical threshold . On the other side of things , areas that have hardly been affected should be freed up as quickly as possible . And of course , if reopening leads to a fresh explosion of death , new lockdowns in the affected areas might be the only option . Test , test , test . There are many things we can do with tests besides just checking people who are showing symptoms of the disease or who came into contact with known cases . We can conduct surveillance throughout the country to see where new outbreaks are popping up . We can test people and clear them to work if they ’ re okay . Etc . But we can ’ t do any of this well without a lot more tests than we have right now . There are reasons that testing capacity has been slow to build up , but frankly , screw that : We ’ re the United States of America , dammit , and we excel at making stuff . Let ’ s ramp up capacity as quickly as possible , make the needed investments , and dangle huge incentives in front of everyone who is able to help . Don ’ t take no for an answer . Depending on where we end up , we might be able to pursue any number of testing-based strategies . Creepy phone apps . Everyone hates ( but not enough to turn off our cellphones ) the fact that Google and Apple track our every movement . But the tech giants are teaming up to put those capabilities to good use . Phone apps could keep track of which users come in contact with one another , and when someone reports an infection , the app could notify everyone they ’ ve been near . Mandating the use of this technology should be out of the question , except perhaps for known cases , but at the same time these apps should be strongly encouraged once they come online . The more we can focus testing and quarantines on people who are actually at risk , the less we have to rely on indiscriminately placing everyone in the country under house arrest . Keep your breath to yourself . Seriously : If you ’ re going to public places where you ’ ll repeatedly walk within six feet of other people , cover your face , period . You don ’ t need a fancy mask to do that . A dish towel , bandana , scarf , or other piece of clothing will do wonders by itself . ( The higher the thread count , the better . ) Businesses , including nonessential ones when they reopen , should — among other steps to stop the virus from spreading in the workplace — require employees as well as customers to stop openly breathing all over one another . Push for treatments and eventually a vaccine . There ’ s a lot of work ongoing here , and none of it has come together as quickly as one might hope . But if we can treat severe cases , the risks of opening up will be a lot lower , and the sooner we get a vaccine , the better ( though that will probably be in a year or two ) .
I don ’ t know about you all , but I ’ m getting impatient locked up with three kids under the age of six , and I don ’ t want the virus to start spreading again and force us back to Square 1 , either . It ’ s time to unleash American ingenuity on all fronts at once .