President Donald Trump recently slammed the World Health Organization ( WHO ) for how it has handled the coronavirus pandemic , pointing out that the agency had `` literally called every shot wrong . '' He 's right about that . But then , so did officials at every level of government , starting with Trump himself .
If there is any ███ for the WHO to exist , it is to alert the world to burgeoning health threats . The WHO 's director-general , Tedros Adhanom , did the opposite . He ignored early signals that this virus was spreading , assuring everyone that China , which had lobbied aggressively for him to head the WHO , had everything under control . He rejected Taiwan 's pleas in mid-January to declare a `` public health emergency of international concerns '' after it witnessed an alarming rise of disease clusters among visitors from the mainland .
Nor did Tedros hit the alarm button after the WHO conducted its own fact-finding mission to China at the end of January . Instead he declared that the Chinese had `` rolled out perhaps the most ambitious , agile and aggressive disease containment effort in history , '' thus `` creating a stronger first line of defense '' for the global community . He reached this remarkably inaccurate conclusion by swallowing Beijing 's official tally for COVID-19 case and mortality rates . British analysts estimate that those may have undercounted the actual numbers by a factor of anywhere from 15 to 40 .
Obscenely , Tedros even complimented China 's leadership for the `` transparency it had demonstrated '' —after the government had arrested researchers for telling their international peers about the growing threat . Tedros finally declared corona a global pandemic on March 11 .
Tedros was n't alone in falling for Chinese propaganda . Donald Trump did too .
The president lavishly complimented China 's coronavirus response five times from late January to late February . On January 24—around the time his economic adviser Peter Navarro was warning in internal White House memos that coronavirus could take more than half a million American lives and cost close to $ 6 trillion—Trump tweeted that `` the United States greatly appreciates their [ Chinese leadership 's ] efforts and transparency '' and assured Americans that `` it will all work out well . '' Trump limited travel from China six days later , but that did n't stop him from complimenting President Xi Jinping on February 7 as `` strong , sharp and powerfully focused on leading the counterattack on the Coronavirus . ''
Trump did n't just overestimate Xi 's competence . He overestimated the competence of his own health agencies , the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) .
Trump is not coy about dissing executive agencies that he dislikes . ( Just ask all the inspector generals he keeps threatening , such as Christi Grimm , who investigated the shortage of protective gear . ) Yet even though the CDC foisted a defective test on the country—botching America 's early response to the epidemic—Trump declared in early March that the `` tests are all perfect '' and `` anybody that wants a test can get a test . '' ( That is not true even now . )
Remember , the virus genome was publicly available by mid-January and the first tests were available shortly thereafter . In fact , one of the few things the WHO did right was to send hundreds of thousands of tests to dozens of labs around the world within a few weeks . If the United States had done what South Korea , Taiwan , and Germany did and allowed private and state labs to get these tests ready for mass production , we would have been able to conduct country-wide screening almost immediately . Instead the CDC decided to reinvent the wheel and develop its own test . It ordered private labs to desist and told them to wait for its test—and when the agency finally rolled the test out , it did n't work . By the end of February , only 4,000 tests had been conducted and the country had no idea how fast the virus was spreading .
Meanwhile , the feds were bungling reporting procedures , causing even more waste and delay . In early March , when private testing had yet to come up to speed and public labs were the only game in town , the FDA issued a directive requiring the CDC to retest every positive coronavirus result by these labs before certifying it . This meant that for several crucial weeks , America 's coronavirus tally was lagging and everyone was underestimating how bad things were . Worse , it meant that lab resources and chemical agents , which have been in acutely short supply , could n't be used for new tests . The FDA was apparently afraid that false positives would make the spread look worse than it was .
It was n't just global and national authorities who screwed up . Many state and local authorities performed poorly too . Just look at New York , the worst hit state in the country .
Gov . Andrew Cuomo is trying to turn himself into the hero of the republic with his straight talk at press briefings about just how dire things are in New York . But in early March , like Trump , Cuomo and New York Mayor Bill de Blasio publicly and repeatedly underestimated the seriousness of the outbreak and overestimated their ability to cope with it . De Blasio even urged city residents to go about their daily business without changing their behavior . Meanwhile , in a rare joint press conference the two held , Cuomo bragged : `` Excuse our arrogance as New Yorkers—I speak for the mayor also on this one—we think we have the best health care system on the planet right here in New York . ''
The two were blasé not just in their words but in their actions . They both promised that health investigators would track every person who had come in contact with the first two confirmed victims—a woman who had returned from Doha and a New Rochelle lawyer—but they failed to fully follow through , The New York Times reports . Both lagged as well in seeing the need for social distancing . San Francisco and Ohio closed their schools on March 12 when the former had only 18 confirmed cases and latter a mere five . De Blasio waited another few days , until his city 's case count touched 329 .
Just as Tedros and Trump will admit no misgivings about their initial handling of the situation , neither will the New York duo . Cuomo insists that he took action that everyone at the time regarded as `` premature . '' And de Blasio pooh-poohs critics with the usual bromides about `` hindsight '' being perfect .
There 's plenty of blame to go around , but will anyone take any responsibility ?