The Labor Department doesn ’ t release jobless claims by industry . So , building on the work of economist Ben Zipperer and his colleagues at the Economic Policy Institute , we analyzed industry-specific new unemployment-benefit claims from 14 states that publish them . ( For a full list , see the charts below . )
By looking at claims for the past five weeks as a share of each industry ’ s employment , we see who has been hit hardest — more than 1 in 4 food-service workers filed for unemployment from March 15 through April 18 . But that doesn ’ t tell us as much about how the pandemic labor market evolved from one week to the next .
For that , we need to focus in on the weekly changes in jobless claims to distinguish between industries where claims are falling and those where claims are steady or increasing . The data can also help us estimate how the labor market will change in coming months .
( Highest week-to-week change included : accommodation and food services ; arts entertainment and recreation ; hairdressers , auto mechanics and laundry workers )
The first week of closures slammed headfirst into industries that require the most face-to-face customer contact — America ’ s hospitality sector . More than 7 percent of all restaurant , hotel and bar workers filed for unemployment in this first week alone .
For public officials looking to enforce social distancing , bars , hotels and movie theaters were obvious targets : They ’ re discretionary spending and require significant human interaction . Another category , which the government calls “ other services ” but is primarily made up of hairdressers , auto mechanics and laundry workers , also suffered swift and significant losses .
The number of newly unemployed filers in all these high-contact industries fell off in subsequent weeks , but they remain the biggest casualties of the crisis . And unemployment claims probably understate the pain of lower-earning Americans . Low-wage workers often don ’ t qualify for benefits because they haven ’ t spent enough time on the job , or aren ’ t being paid enough , Zipperer said .
A survey released Tuesday by Zipperer and his colleague Elise Gould implies unemployment numbers may be significantly worse than government statistics show . For every 10 people who successfully applied for unemployment benefits during the crisis , they show , another three or four couldn ’ t get through the overloaded system , and two more didn ’ t even apply because the system is too difficult .
By the second week , the shutdown moved from businesses where the primary danger is interacting with customers to those , like construction and manufacturing , that require in-person interaction with large crews of colleagues .
On March 26 , for example , Spokane , Wash.-area custom-cabinet maker Huntwood Industries , laid off around 500 employees , according to Thomas Clouse of the Spokesman-Review . As a manufacturer whose sales depend on the construction industry , it was hit doubly hard by the shutdowns .
“ It is a scary time , ” Amy Ohms , 37 , told Clouse . “ It ’ s kind of unfair . I think construction is essential . There is a lot of uncertainty . ”
Manufacturers were among the first publicly traded companies to note travel and supply-chain risks related to the coronavirus outbreak in China in financial filings , according to a separate analysis by Oxford researchers Fabian Stephany and Fabian Braesemann and collaborators in Berlin . By March , manufacturers were noting domestic production issues .
Their analysis also shows that , in the middle of March , concern about the coronavirus and its disease , covid-19 , from retail corporations eclipsed that of manufacturers . Indeed , retail struggled mightily in the second week of the crisis . More workers were told to stay home , and folks realized foot traffic was often incompatible with social distancing .
The retail sector wasn ’ t hit as quickly or as forcefully as food services or entertainment , presumably because the sector includes grocery stores and others who employ workers who were deemed essential .
Week 3 , March 29 to April 4 : The supply chain
( Highest week-to-week change included : wholesale trade ; retail trade ; administrative and waste management )
In the third week , the pain worked its way up the supply chain , as wholesale trade — a sector that includes some sales representatives , truck drivers and freight laborers — got slammed .
In theory , the lockdowns created near-perfect trucking conditions : traffic vanished , diesel keeps getting cheaper and the roads are safer than they have been in decades . Only one problem : There ’ s not much to haul right now .
Don Hayden , president of Louisville trucking firm M & M Cartage , feared he would have to lay off about 70 percent of his 400 employees — drivers , mechanics and office staff — in early April . Orders from his customers in heavy manufacturing evaporated .
But , just in time , he got a Payroll Protection Program loan through his local bank . He was shocked at how rapidly his loan was approved and the money arrived , and he said the Treasury Department had done an outstanding job .
“ We ’ re good through May and into June , ” he said . “ We have a good workforce . We ’ re proud of them . We sure would like to retain them . ”
At this point in the crisis , the focus shifted from huge , industry-eviscerating swings in jobless numbers to gradual weekly trends that help us guess where the jobless claims will settle in the weeks and months to come .
As industries fall like dominoes , policymakers need to realize the damage isn ’ t contained to a few specific sectors , said University of Tennessee economist Marianne Wanamaker , a former member of Trump ’ s Council of Economic Advisers .
She said there may be a temptation to extend benefits for difficult-to-reopen industries such as food service and hospitality , but “ it doesn ’ t comport with the data because the damage is so widespread . It ’ s not fair to say , ‘ Hotel and restaurant workers , you get these really generous packages and everybody else has to go back to work . ’ ”
( Highest week-to-week change included : management ; finance and insurance ; public administration )
White-collar industries have been shedding jobs since mid-March , albeit at a much lower rate than lower-income sectors . But as losses in low-income sectors subsided , white-collar jobless claims stayed flat or even intensified . By week four , categories that contain managers , bookkeepers , insurance agents and bank tellers saw some of the worst weekly trends of any sector .
On April 9 , the online review site Yelp laid off 1,000 workers and furloughed 1,100 more ( about a third of its workforce ) as traffic on the site plunged while businesses were locked down .
“ The physical distancing measures and shelter-in-place orders , while critical to flatten the curve , have dealt a devastating blow to the local businesses that are core to our mission , ” CEO Jeremy Stoppelman wrote at the time .
Jane Oates , president of the employment-focused nonprofit organization WorkingNation , used to oversee the Labor Department wing that coordinates unemployment claims and training . “ The big difference between coronavirus and the Great Recession is that this has completely stopped the economy across so many sectors , ” she said .
During the Great Recession , she and her team had the luxury of flooding support into areas that were being hit hardest in a particular week or month . They went from state to state and industry to industry , putting out fires as they arose .
The Labor Department can ’ t address individual problems like that during the coronavirus recession , she said , because everybody ’ s getting shellacked simultaneously .
( Highest week-to-week change included : oil , gas and mining ; utilities ; public administration )
In the week ending April 18 , the most recent for which we have data , we can no longer avoid one of the most ominous trends in the entire analysis : a rise in public-sector layoffs . Utilities , public administration and education services — all of which have close implicit or explicit ties to state and local government , were among the worst-faring sectors on a weekly basis .
To stem the tide of what could be millions of job losses and furloughs , the National League of Cities is pushing for a $ 250 billion bailout of cities throughout the country , colleague Tony Romm reports .
In Broomfield , Colo. , a Denver-area suburb of about 70,000 residents , 235 city and county employees were furloughed on April 22 , according to Jennifer Rios in the Broomfield Enterprise .
“ The impact of the COVID-19 coronavirus is more significant than any of us could have ever expected for our well-being , as well as our municipal financial stability , ” Rios reports that officials wrote in a letter to furloughed employees. “
State and local governments are typically required to balance their budgets . Now that they ’ re staring down the barrel of a huge tax-revenue shortfall , “ these revenue losses are going to cause government budgets to fall and they ’ re going to lay people off , ” Zipperer said .
“ You ’ re seeing the beginnings of a big contraction in the public sector , ” he said . “ That ’ s going to be the next huge thing . ”