President Donald Trump at a campaign rally at Drake University in Des Moines , Iowa , January 30 , 2020 . ( Leah Millis/Reuters )
Trump ’ s greatest advantage in 2020 may be his most likely opponent , the unapologetic socialist Senator Bernie Sanders .
Donald Trump has at least five strong historical arguments for his reelection .
One , he is an incumbent . Incumbent presidents have won 14 of 19 reelection bids since 1900 .
The few who lost did not enjoy positive approval ratings . In a Gallup poll from earlier this month , Trump enjoyed his highest approval rating since his inauguration , squeezing out a 49 percent favorable rating vs. 50 percent unfavorable .
Two , the public perception of the economy usually determines any presidential election — as incumbents Gerald Ford , Jimmy Carter , George H. W. Bush , and Herbert Hoover learned the hard way . Currently , the U.S. is enjoying low inflation , low interest rates , positive economic growth , near-record low unemployment , rising workers ’ wages , and record gas and oil production .
The quagmire in Vietnam convinced Lyndon Johnson not to run for reelection in 1968 . Jimmy Carter was tarnished by the seemingly never-ending Iranian hostage crisis of 1979–1981 . The Iraq War drove down George W. Bush ’ s second-term approval ratings and helped derail his would-be Republican successor , John McCain .
Four , scandals also can destroy a presidency , as when Watergate forced the resignation of Richard Nixon .
Five , the opponent matters . Barry Goldwater was caricatured as an out-of-touch extremist and made incumbent Lyndon Johnson ’ s election a sure thing in 1964 . George McGovern ’ s radicalism ensured that Richard Nixon would be reelected in 1972 . Ronald Reagan was assured of a second term by Walter Mondale ’ s anemic candidacy .
His poll numbers have climbed steadily since Democrats began impeachment proceedings against him in September 2019 . His Gallup approval rating is now four points higher than when he was inaugurated in January 2017 .
Trump now has far more campaign money than he did in 2016 . And unlike then , he has the full backing of the Republican Party , a mostly positive record of economic achievement , lots of campaigning and governing experience , and presidential incumbency .
True , the U.S. continues to borrow about $ 1 trillion per year . Trump has followed the profligate spending habits of his predecessors , George W. Bush and Barack Obama , who both dramatically increased the national debt during their eight-year tenures .
China is reeling from the Hong Kong protests , the coronavirus , the trade war with the U.S. , and the global outcry over its forced imprisonment of minority groups . If the Chinese economy crashes , it could take down global commerce a notch . Both the stock and housing markets here in America are overheating . At some point , they will be due for a reset .
All that said , few economists are predicting a recession in the next eight months before the election — given the near-record employment and increased disposable income from rising wages and lower taxes . Gallup found that 63 percent of the public approves of the Trump economy — the highest rating for any president in that category over the last 20 years .
Will Trump get into a war ? China , Iran , and North Korea would benefit if Trump were not reelected . Any of them might seek a confrontation over the summer to provoke Trump into an unpopular pre-election shootout .
Yet Trump ’ s record suggests that he is unlikely to favor preemptory attacks , nation-building , or the use of U.S. ground troops in large numbers . So far , he has used mostly air and sea power to accomplish limited objectives , without committing U.S. ground troops to the usual nasty places in the Middle East .
Scandal-wise , Trump has already been impeached by the House but was acquitted by the Senate . Special counsel Robert Mueller ’ s team spent 22 months and some $ 35 million to investigate collusion between the Trump campaign and Russia in the 2016 election — and came up short .
The more Democrats have sought to abort the Trump presidency through impeachment , congressional investigations , lawsuits , and sheer hysteria , the more Trump seems Teflon-like and his approval ratings go up .
Trump ’ s greatest advantage in 2020 , however , may be his most likely opponent : the unapologetic socialist , Senator Bernie Sanders . The various agendas of the radical Sanders turn off a majority of the public . Even mainstream Democrats are terrified of Sanders ’ s redistribution schemes .
Former front-runner Joe Biden appears befuddled on the campaign trail and has been hurt by revelations about his son Hunter ’ s Ukrainian shenanigans .
The only other serious Democratic contender is multibillionaire Mike Bloomberg . Compared with his rivals , Bloomberg is a moderate , with unlimited financial resources and ample experience as a three-term New York City mayor .
Yet Bloomberg ’ s first debate was a disaster . He has variously posed as a Democrat , Republican , and Independent . His strength as a moderate in a sea of extremists was nullified by his decision to apologize for , or disown , many of the decisions that made him an effective mayor .
Bloomberg has been more reckless in speech than even Trump . Almost daily , an embarrassingly crass quote pops out of his past .
Add it all up , and if one looks at 2020 dispassionately and historically , the election appears to be Trump ’ s to lose .