CBS host Scott Pelley fact-checked Democratic presidential candidate Mike Bloomberg on air after the former New York City mayor tried to claim that President Donald Trump described the coronavirus outbreak as a “ hoax . ”
Michael Bloomberg repeated the false claim that President Trump referred to the coronavirus as a “ hoax. ” CBS News ’ Scott Pelley pointed out that President Trump actually said the media & Democrat hysteria about the government coronavirus response was a hoax , NOT the virus . pic.twitter.com/HmSWsnaQFw — Francis Brennan ( Text TRUMP to 88022 ) ( @ FrancisBrennan ) March 1 , 2020
“ I find it incomprehensible that the president would do something as inane as calling it a ‘ hoax ’ which he did last night in South Carolina , ” Bloomberg said when Pelley introduced the topic during a “ 60 Minutes ” interview set to run Sunday evening .
“ He said that the Democrats making so much of it is a Democratic hoax , not that the virus is a hoax , ” Pelley responded .
Not seeming to understand what the CBS host was getting at , Bloomberg pressed on .
“ This is up to the scientists and the doctors as to whether there is a problem , ” he continued . “ They all , around the world , say that it is in some places , and has enormous potential to become one elsewhere . And it is just ignorant and irresponsible to not stand up and be the leader and say , ‘ We don ’ t know , but we have to prepare for the fact that , if it is , we have the medicines and the structure and the knowledge to deal with it . ' ” ( RELATED : ‘ You ’ re A F * * king Fascist ! ’ — Second Amendment Activists Heckle Mike Bloomberg In Virginia )
Despite the fact that the president was actually using the word “ hoax ” to criticize Democrats for how they are reacting to his administration ’ s coronavirus response during his February 28 rally in South Carolina , Politico published an article that claimed he called the virus itself a “ hoax. ” The article was fact-checked by ███ ’ s own “ Check Your Fact ” division , and was later even labeled as “ false information ” by Facebook ’ s fact-checkers .