House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ’ s ( D-CA ) plan to fight the coronavirus includes a national mandate for ballot harvesting , same-day voter registration , and federally-mandated early voting provisions just in time for the 2020 presidential election .
As part of Pelosi ’ s coronavirus plan , House Democrats slipped in multiple measures from their H.R . 1 legislation that would implement nationwide ballot harvesting for federal elections — effectively allowing political operatives to collect and deliver an endless number of absentee ballots from voters .
Pelosi ’ s coronavirus plan allows “ any person to return a voted and sealed absentee ballot ” to a designated election office or post office and does not limit the number of absentee ballots that any one person can collect .
California is the only state in the United States to legalize ballot harvesting , though the practice occurs in other states as well . Pelosi ’ s coronavirus plan would legalize California-style ballot harvesting in every state for federal elections .
Pelosi ’ s coronavirus plan also mandates nationwide same-day voter registration , where eligible voters are allowed to register to vote on the same day as the 2020 presidential election and every federal election after that . Pelosi would also ban states from requiring voter registration applicants to provide more than the last four digits of their Social Security Numbers when applying to vote .
Early voting in every state for 15 consecutive days , open for at least 10 hours a day
Pelosi ’ s coronavirus plan uses the pandemic to cram provisions of the House Democrats ’ H.R . 1 legislation into federal law . That legislation went even further in its efforts to create loopholes for voter fraud , allowing convicted felons to vote in federal elections .
House Democrats on Monday blocked the passage of the Families First Coronavirus Response Act , which would have provided direct relief to American workers , citizens , and small businesses impacted by the coronavirus crisis .
John Binder is a reporter for ███ . Follow him on Twitter at @ JxhnBinder .