The incredible uptick of COVID-19 is like a raging California wildfire . Earlier this week Dr. Anthony Fauci surmised the U.S. could experience 100,000 new coronavirus cases per day . With the U.S. population at roughly 337 million , it would take just over nine years for everyone in the U.S. to get this virus if its trajectory doesn ’ t change . *
Assuming more Americans take hold of safer social distancing and other preventive practices and the miracle vaccine is just around the corner , maybe the COVID-19 trajectory drastically drops . Even so , how long can renters , homeowners , landlords and mortgage servicers hold out ?
COVID-19 is a killer , in sickness and lives lost and financial health .
The U.S. had 119 million total households in 2017 , 36 % of which were renters , according to Richard Gollis , president of the Concord Group . It is not clear how exactly how many residential renters can ’ t pay their rent . Or , how many simply refuse to pay their rent .
To my knowledge , they refuse either because they are afraid of running out of money as their savings are dwindling or they fear an income cut .
On top of all that , the extra $ 600 per week of unemployment insurance goes bye-bye this month .
Since eviction is not an option for most landlords , some renters are strategic defaulters .
The Federal Housing Finance Agency recently extended the eviction moratorium for properties owned by Fannie and Freddie until Aug. 31 , and Gov . Gavin Newsom extended California ’ s eviction moratorium through September 30 .
Good luck to landlords collecting back rent from those strategic defaulters .
The same fears apply to property owners . Landlords may face the additional burden of their renters not ponying up . Domino effect indeed !
What we do know is that almost 8.5 % of mortgage holders are in forbearance , according to the Mortgage Bankers Association ’ s most recent loan servicer survey . That number has been stable in recent weeks but will quickly spike as lockdown orders return around the country .
Hence , more angst , less cash-flow , dwindling savings and another spike in business shutdowns and job losses are sure to follow . Not good !
The Cares Act offered mortgage payment forbearance for up to 12 months for all federally insured mortgages . Separately , no foreclosures on Fan or Fred loans until at least Aug. 31 . About two-thirds of all mortgages are federally insured , according to the National Consumer Law Center .
California ’ s suspension of foreclosure actions remains in effect until 90 days after the pandemic emergency is lifted or the judicial authorities otherwise suspend the rules .
Locally , 2,663 properties in Los Angeles , Orange , Riverside and San Bernardino counties were in some stage of the foreclosure process as of January , according to Attom Data Solutions — meaning they either have received a notice of default , have an auction date set or have been foreclosed and reverted to the lender . That ’ s up from an average of 2,438 properties in some stage of foreclosure .
Fast forward to May figures for those four Southern California counites . There were just 632 in the foreclosure process or just one out of every 10,123 properties . That ’ s a 75 % decrease , likely due to forbearance .
How long can the mortgage servicers hold out before they have to raise the white flag ?
Mortgage servicers may need to advance up to $ 3.5 billion per month to holders of government-backed mortgage securities on COVID-19 related forbearances .
That ’ s on top of up to $ 1.4 billion in property tax and homeowner insurance payments that must be made on behalf of borrowers , according to Black Knight .
Mortgage servicers separately face up to $ 8.4 billion of P & I payment advances ( four months of forbearance ) to Fannie and Freddie , also according to Black Knight .
Once the foreclosure moratorium is lifted , will the foreclosure numbers explode ?
“ It ’ s hard to imagine anything but an increase , and possibly a big one-in foreclosures , ” said Todd Teta , Attom ’ s chief product and technology officer . “ At some point , banks are going to need mortgage holders to pay what they owe and go after those who don ’ t . ”
The longer it takes to corral COVID-19 , the more I worry about the consequences for renters , landlords and lenders . COVID-19 may outlast the this extend-and-pretend strategy.We need a more sustainable solution — before we all fall-down .
Freddie Mac rate news : The 30-year fixed-rate mortgage averaged 3.07 % , down 6 basis points from last week to the lowest rate in almost a half century . The 15-year fixed rate averaged 2.56 % , down 3 basis points from last week and tying the all-time low last reached in May 2013 .
The Mortgage Bankers Association reported a 1.8 % decrease in loan application volume from one week earlier .
Bottom line : Assuming a borrower gets the average 30-year fixed rate on a conforming $ 510,400 loan , last year ’ s payment was $ 192 more than this week ’ s payment of $ 2,172 .
What I see : Locally , well-qualified borrowers can get the following fixed-rate mortgages with 1 point cost : A 30-year FHA ( up to $ 442,750 in the Inland Empire , up to $ 510,400 in Los Angeles and Orange counties ) at 2.75 % , a 15-year conventional at 2.25 % , a 30-year conventional at 2.75 % , a 30-year conventional high-balance ( $ 510,401 to $ 765,600 ) at 2.875 % , and a 30-year jumbo adjustable-rate mortgage that is locked for the first five years at 3.125 % .
Eye catcher loan of the week : A 30-year fixed rate conventional mortgage at 2.5 % with 2 points cost .