Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
Dr. Anthony Fauci , the face of the White House coronavirus task force , warned in testimony Tuesday before the Senate Health Committee that reopening the economy before certain `` checkpoints '' set up in the Trump administration 's coronavirus recovery plan are met could bring `` serious '' consequences .
`` As I have said many times publicly , what we have worked out is a guideline framework for how to open America again , ” Fauci said , referencing a set of guidelines the White House has released for states and localities to begin opening their economies . In order to proceed to the first of three stages , states would need to see an uninterrupted decrease in coronavirus cases over a 14-day period .
`` Depending on the dynamics of an outbreak in a particular region , state , city or area , that would really determine the speed and the pace with which one does reenter or reopen , '' Fauci said . `` If some areas – cities states or what have you – jump over those barriers , checkpoints and prematurely open up without having the capability of being able to respond effectively , and efficiently , my concern is that we will start to see little spikes that might turn into outbreaks . ''
GOP SEN. ALEXANDER : 'STAYING AT HOME INDEFINITELY IS NOT THE SOLUTION '
Fauci warned that prematurely lifting coronavirus restrictions closing schools and businesses and limiting travel would lead to `` suffering and death '' and `` turn the clock back instead of going forward . ''
When asked by Sen. Patty Murray , D-Wash. , what could happen if areas do ignore the `` checkpoints , '' Fauci said , `` The consequences could be really serious . ''
Further , when asked by Sen. Elizabeth Warren , D-Mass. , if the virus was under control , Fauci said it is not .
`` Right now it depends on what you mean by containment , '' Fauci said , noting the virus is not completely under control . `` So when you look at the dynamics of new cases , even though some are coming down , the curve looks flat with some coming down . So I think we 're going in the right direction , but the right direction does not mean we have by any means total control of this outbreak . ''
He added that without proper measures , the U.S. could face a `` resurgence '' in cases . He said the U.S. should be in a much better place by the fall , but said if adequate measures are not taken , `` there will be problems . ''
`` The time for magical thinking is over here , '' Warren said of President Trump 's pushes to reopen the economy quickly and optimism that the virus `` will go away . ''
The hearing , which features Fauci , the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases ( NIAID ) , as well as three other top administration health officials , is the biggest congressional hearing since the coronavirus crisis began . It comes as states across the country are plotting their own courses for reopening their economies , with some already opening sectors and others maintaining strict lockdowns . President Trump himself has stressed the importance of getting America back to work , leading to criticism from some Democrats that this approach could be too risky .
Fauci did not rip on the Trump administration 's response to the pandemic in his planned remarks , instead emphasizing efforts by the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) to develop vaccines and other medical means to fight the coronavirus .
NATIONAL PARK SERVICE TESTS REOPENING , PREPS VISITORS FOR 'NEW NORMAL ' : HERE 'S WHAT TO EXPECT
`` Hopefully our research efforts , together with the other public health efforts , will get us quickly to an end to this terrible ordeal that we are all going through , '' Fauci said .
`` NIH is focused on developing safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics , and sensitive , specific , and rapid point-of-care diagnostic tests , '' Fauci also said in written remarks submitted to the committee . `` These efforts will improve our response to the current pandemic and bolster our preparedness for the next , inevitable emerging disease outbreak ''
FAUCI , OTHER HEALTH OFFICIALS TO TESTIFY BEFORE SENATE PANEL VIA VIDEOCONFERENCE AMID CORONAVIRUS CONCERNS
On one point , Fauci said the government is focusing on several different vaccine candidates , using the hockey term `` multiple shots on goal '' to describe the increased chances that one would work . Additionally , he said if more than one is successful that would help increase the availability of the vaccines globally .
But , Fauci noted , `` there 's no guarantee that a vaccine is going to be effective . ''
Given the chance to attack Trump in an exchange with Sen. Tim Kaine , D-Va. , Fauci declined to . Kaine pushed Fauci on whether South Korea 's success on fighting the coronavirus showed that the U.S. response to the pandemic was inadequate . Fauci noted that there is a `` big difference '' between the U.S. and South Korea .
Fauci appeared remotely due to concerns that he might have been exposed to the coronavirus . Multiple senators also appeared virtually for the hearing , including Sen. Lamar Alexander , R-Tenn. , the chairman of the committee , and Murray , the ranking member .
`` After consulting with Dr. Fauci , and in an abundance of caution for our witnesses , senators , and the staff , all four Administration witnesses will appear by videoconference due to these unusual circumstances , '' Alexander said in a statement .
Alexander , in his opening remarks , emphasized the necessity of testing and also said the government might make an effort to mass-manufacture a vaccine before it ’ s been proven to work so it can be quickly distributed once it ’ s officially approved .
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI : CORONAVIRUS TESTING AVAILABILITY , SPEED WILL PLAY PART IN FOOTBALL 'S RETURN
“ Those vaccines , those treatments , are the ultimate solution , ” he said . “ But until we have them , all roads back to work and school go through testing . ''
Murray wasted no time hitting the president in her opening remarks .
`` Families across the country are counting on us for the truth about the COVID-19 pandemic , especially since it is clear they will not get it from President Trump , '' she said . `` Truth is essential ... The president is n't telling the truth . We must . And our witnesses must . ''
STEAK ' N SHAKE PERMANENTLY CLOSES NEARLY 10 PERCENT OF ITS RESTAURANTS AMID CORONAVIRUS CRISIS
She also criticized the Trump administration 's tangible response to the virus , saying it has been marked by delays and insufficient assistance to states and health professionals . Additionally , she advocated for another coronavirus stimulus bill to help ease the burden of the economic shutdowns across the country aimed at slowing the spread of the virus .
Fauci , when questioned by Alexander , said it would not be reasonable to expect a vaccine to be ready for back-to-school season this year . Trump has said he would like to have a vaccine by the end of the year .
`` The idea of having treatments or a vaccine ... ready by the fall ... would be something of a bridge too far , '' he said .
RED LOBSTER CUSTOMERS TURNED AWAY DUE TO LARGE VOLUME OF MOTHER 'S DAY ORDERS
Fauci also added that there is a good chance to see further rebounds in the disease , but that he hopes the U.S. will be better prepared to deal with them .
`` I would hope that if we do have the threat of a second wave , we will be able to deal with it very effectively to prevent it from becoming an outbreak . Not only what we 've seen now , but much , much less , '' he said .
Admiral Brett Giroir , the Assistant Secretary for Health , emphasized that the U.S. had conducted `` more than 9 million COVID-19 tests , a number far greater than any other country and double the per capita tests performed to date in South Korea , '' a nation that many have held up as the model for handling the coronavirus ' effects .
He noted that by the late summer and early fall , he expected the U.S. to be able to perform between 40 and 50 million coronavirus tests per month .
Fauci got into a dustup with Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , over Paul 's criticism of some of the prognostications that have come from public health experts and the push to reopen schools quickly .
`` The history of this will be wrong prediction after wrong prediction after wrong predicition , '' Paul said , mentioning , among several other examples , Sweden , which left its schools open . `` I do n't think you 're an end-all , I do n't think you 're the one person that gets to make a decision . ''
`` I have never made myself out to be the end-all and only voice in this , '' Fauci said . `` I 'm a scientist , a physician and a public health official . I give advice , according to the best scientific evidence . ''
He continued , emphasizing that it is not clear children are generally immune from the harmful effects of the coronavirus : `` We should be humble about what we do n't know . And I think that falls under the fact that we do n't know everything about this virus , and we really got to be very careful , particularly when it comes to children . Because the more and more we learn , we 're seeing things about what this virus can do that we did n't see from the studies in China or in Europe . ''
During questioning , self-proclaimed Democratic socialist Sen. Bernie Sanders , I-Vt. , pushed the witnesses on whether or not a vaccine , once developed , would be broadly available to people regardless of their income .
`` If , God-willing , a vaccine is developed , and if we 're able to produce it as quickly as we all hope we can , I imagine that that vaccine would be distributed to all people free of charge , or at least make sure that everybody in America that needs that vaccine will get it regardless of their income ? '' Sanders asked Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Stephen Hahn .
Hahn said that issue was not under his purview as the FDA commissioner , but Giroir said he would advocate within the Trump administration to make sure the vaccine is accessible .
`` They should gain access to it ... I will certainly advocate that everyone is able to receive the vaccine regardless of income or any other circumstance , '' Hahn said .
Democrats , ahead of the hearing , made clear they saw it as an opportunity to separate Fauci from President Trump , whom the medical expert is almost always with when he appears publicly , so that Fauci will feel free to criticize Trump . Critics of the president have argued his response to the coronavirus crisis was wholly inadequate , alleging Trump initially downplayed the threat before letting petty politics get in the way of helping states and then moving too quickly to reopen the economy .
`` Until now , we 've mostly heard from the members of the coronavirus task force through the distorted lens of the White House press conference where the president often prevents them from answering fully , interrupts their response , or even contradicts their fact-based evidence , '' Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , said on Monday .
`` This will be one of the first opportunities for Dr. Fauci to tell the American people the unvarnished truth without the president lurking over his shoulder . Dr. Fauci , let it rip , '' he added .
Trump previously blocked Fauci from appearing before a House committee , saying the members of the Democrat-controlled House are `` haters . ''
Fauci , like he had previously , avoided criticizing Trump directly on Tuesday , but did issue stern warnings on what could happen if measures to slow the disease 's spread are lifted too soon .
Under questioning from Sen. Kelly Loeffler , R-Ga. , all four witnesses said their relationships with the president are not `` confrontational '' and said they felt free to give their opinions and advice on the coronavirus pandemic .
Fauci was joined by Dr. Robert Redfield , the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , Hahn and Giroir .