( CNN ) The number of cities and states ordering people to distance themselves over the coronavirus pandemic is rising Tuesday as health officials tout a consistent message : Limit your interactions now or overwhelm the health systems meant to take care of you .
As these measures are taking hold , the Trump administration is exploring ways to send money directly to Americans , possibly within two weeks , in a bid to curb the economic fallout , Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin said Tuesday .
While the White House has suggested limiting gatherings to 10 people or less , state and local officials are giving orders for an altered American reality as coronavirus cases across the US reachat least 5,010 -- a jump of more than 1,500 from Sunday -- with 87 deaths .
• About 7 million people in and around San Francisco have been told to `` shelter in place , '' generally requiring them to stay inside and leave only for essential needs .
• States including New York , New Jersey , Connecticut , Ohio , Michigan and Wisconsin put a ban this week on gatherings of 50 people or more . Some of these are closing restaurants , though some are allowing drive-through and pickup service .
• Florida Gov . Ron DeSantis said Tuesday the state was allowing no more than 10 people to gather on beaches statewide .
• Miami says that , by Wednesday , it will close all entertainment businesses , like theaters , as well as fitness centers . Dine-in restaurants may sell food for takeout or delivery .
Public health officials say the US has reached a tipping point -- warning that if residents do n't take the call to action seriously , the country may approach the situation in Italy , which went on total lockdown last week and where hospitals have been overwhelmed with more than 24,000 cases .
The faster the disease spreads , the faster physicians will get sick , leading to a difficult scenario , Dr. Carlos Del Rio , a professor at Atlanta 's Emory University School of Medicine , told CNN Tuesday .
`` I 'm really worried about ... having the worst possible combination : too many patients ; too ( few ) doctors , nurses ... to take care of them . ''
`` Stay home . Do not leave , '' Del Rio said . `` The economic pain is going to be significant , but we can stand it as a nation . We can do it for a month and stand it .
In Washington , Mnuchin expressed some support for an idea gaining backing among lawmakers : Sending $ 1,000 checks to Americans . It will be discussed in Capitol Hill meetings , he said .
`` I think it 's clear we do n't need to send ( checks to ) people who make $ 1 million a year ... but that 's one of the ideas we like , '' Mnuchin said .
Stocks have whipsawed up and down Tuesday , a day after the Dow saw its worst one-day point drop in history .
It should be weeks before we see a peak , Dr. Anthony Fauci says
The federal government had released a new set of guidelines Monday for the next 15 days to fight the spread of the virus . One part of those guidelines : steering clear of groups with more than 10 people .
How soon that could help the country reach its peak in cases is up for debate .
On Tuesday at the White House , a reporter asked when the number of US cases could peak if the public adheres to social distancing .
`` It probably would be several weeks or maybe longer before we know whether we had an effect , '' Dr. Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , said . `` And maybe , at the end of the day , we 'll see a curve that would 've been way , way up .
Fauci said persuading younger people -- who researchers say may be less likely to show symptoms but still be able to pass on the virus to more vulnerable people -- to stay out of gathering places such as bars and restaurants was key .
He hopes to say sooner rather than later that `` we 've seen that inflection and we 're coming down , '' Fauci said .
Dr. Deborah Birx , the White House task force response coordinator , also urged people Tuesday to cancel elective surgeries to ease strains on physicians and hospitals .
The federal guidelines came largely after governors across the country signed new orders and directives in response to the virus -- and called on the federal government to step up its efforts .
Department of Health and Human Services officials said in a call with medical professionals Monday there is n't enough stockpiled medical equipment like masks , gowns and gloves in the national stockpile to fill in the gaps that states and local communities may see , a source on the call told CNN .
On Tuesday , Vice President Mike Pence urged construction companies to donate construction-grade N95 masks to local hospitals and forego additional orders as the nation 's hospitals work to procure masks for healthcare workers .
`` Those industrial masks that they use on construction sites are perfectly acceptable for healthcare workers to be protected from a respiratory disease , '' Pence said .
HHS officials said the government did n't yet have a solution for possible equipment shortfalls but was working on one .
`` We have been transparent that more supplies are needed -- hence the request to Congress for additional funding so we could procure more and scale up production , '' an HHS spokesperson said in a statement to CNN .
One Georgia hospital ripped through months ' worth of supplies while tending to coronavirus patients , its president has told CNN .
Scott Steiner , president and CEO of Phoebe Putney Health Systems , told CNN that despite being well-prepared in terms of protective gear -- with six months ' worth of inventory stockpiled -- the system has gone through five months ' worth of that inventory in just six days .
The mayor of New York City said he will limit all bars , restaurants and cafes to take out or delivery services .
`` You have to think of this as something where you 're going to see a massive mobilization to save lives , to help people through their suffering with this disease , '' New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said Monday .
In San Francisco , Mayor London Breed issued `` shelter in place '' guidance Monday , requiring the city 's residents to stay inside and leave only for things like grocery shopping , and going to the police , bank , gas stations and pharmacies .
Health officials also issued these orders for surrounding areas , altogether encompassing about 7 million people : San Mateo , Santa Clara , Marin , Alameda , and Contra Costa counties , along with the city of Berkeley .
`` This is going to be a defining moment for our city and we all have a responsibility to do our part to protect our neighbors and slow the spread of this virus by staying at home unless it is absolutely essential to go outside , '' Breed said .
Public health officials in Colorado ordered restaurants , bars , gyms , theaters and casinos to close their doors for 30 days . Facilities will still be allowed to sell food and beverages through options like drive-through and delivery services .
`` Based on the experience of other countries , the state of Washington , and modeling data , the sooner we begin social distancing measures on a large enough scale , the more quickly we can slow transmission of the virus , '' Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Executive Director Jill Hunsaker Ryan said .
Similar orders were issued in states including Michigan , Maryland , Kentucky , Louisiana and Indiana .
Meanwhile , states such as New York , New Jersey , Connecticut , Michigan , Ohio and Wisconsin put a ban this week on gatherings of 50 people or more .
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Sunday recommended no gatherings with 50 people or more take place for the next eight weeks .