CHICAGO ( ███ ) - Scientists are only starting to grasp the vast array of health problems caused by the novel coronavirus , some of which may have lingering effects on patients and health systems for years to come , according to doctors and infectious disease experts .
Besides the respiratory issues that leave patients gasping for breath , the virus that causes COVID-19 attacks many organ systems , in some cases causing catastrophic damage .
“ We thought this was only a respiratory virus . Turns out , it goes after the pancreas . It goes after the heart . It goes after the liver , the brain , the kidney and other organs . We didn ’ t appreciate that in the beginning , ” said Dr. Eric Topol , a cardiologist and director of the Scripps Research Translational Institute in La Jolla , California .
In addition to respiratory distress , patients with COVID-19 can experience blood clotting disorders that can lead to strokes , and extreme inflammation that attacks multiple organ systems . The virus can also cause neurological complications that range from headache , dizziness and loss of taste or smell to seizures and confusion .
And recovery can be slow , incomplete and costly , with a huge impact on quality of life .
The broad and diverse manifestations of COVID-19 are somewhat unique , said Dr. Sadiya Khan , a cardiologist at Northwestern Medicine in Chicago .
With influenza , people with underlying heart conditions are also at higher risk of complications , Khan said . What is surprising about this virus is the extent of the complications occurring outside the lungs .
Khan believes there will be a huge healthcare expenditure and burden for individuals who have survived COVID-19 .
Patients who were in the intensive care unit or on a ventilator for weeks will need to spend extensive time in rehab to regain mobility and strength .
“ It can take up to seven days for every one day that you ’ re hospitalized to recover that type of strength , ” Khan said . “ It ’ s harder the older you are , and you may never get back to the same level of function . ”
While much of the focus has been on the minority of patients who experience severe disease , doctors increasingly are looking to the needs of patients who were not sick enough to require hospitalization , but are still suffering months after first becoming infected .
Studies are just getting underway to understand the long-term effects of infection , Jay Butler , deputy director of infectious diseases at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , told reporters in a telephone briefing on Thursday .
“ We hear anecdotal reports of people who have persistent fatigue , shortness of breath , ” Butler said . “ How long that will last is hard to say . ”
While coronavirus symptoms typically resolve in two or three weeks , an estimated 1 in 10 experience prolonged symptoms , Dr. Helen Salisbury of the University of Oxford wrote in the British Medical Journal on Tuesday .
Salisbury said many of her patients have normal chest X-rays and no sign of inflammation , but they are still not back to normal .
“ If you previously ran 5k three times a week and now feel breathless after a single flight of stairs , or if you cough incessantly and are too exhausted to return to work , then the fear that you may never regain your previous health is very real , ” she wrote .
Dr. Igor Koralnik , chief of neuro-infectious diseases at Northwestern Medicine , reviewed current scientific literature and found about half of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 had neurological complications , such as dizziness , decreased alertness , difficulty concentrating , disorders of smell and taste , seizures , strokes , weakness and muscle pain .
Koralnik , whose findings were published in the Annals of Neurology , has started an outpatient clinic for COVID-19 patients to study whether these neurological problems are temporary or permanent .
Khan sees parallels with HIV , the virus that causes AIDS . Much of the early focus was on deaths .
“ In recent years , we ’ ve been very focused on the cardiovascular complications of HIV survivorship , ” Khan said .
( This story corrects spelling of doctor ’ s name to Khan instead of Kahn in last two paragraphs )