It is just the nature of the market that the coronavirus pandemic has forced every fund manager and analyst to become an amateur epidemiologist .
So here are some of the COVID-19 thoughts of Christopher Wood , global head of equity strategy at Jefferies . He is actually encouraged by the latest week of coronavirus data that has seen cases spike outside of the New York metropolitan area .
He notes , for example , the median age of new positive cases in Florida has declined from 50 in April to 33 in recent days , and that , crucially , deaths are declining even as new cases pile up . Besides the point that new cases are being detected more because testing has increased , and that younger and healthier people are getting the disease , Wood raises the possibility that , like severe acute respiratory syndrome , COVID-19 could simply burn itself out as it mutates into a less virulent form over time .
“ If such is indeed the case , it is extremely bullish . Investors should certainly keep an open mind on such a possibility , ” Wood says . More good news on the coronavirus front comes from Western Europe , as new cases and deaths , outside of the U.K. , are roughly 90 % lower eight weeks into reopening .
Wood recommends a barbell strategy of owning both growth and value stocks . Growth stocks have outperformed of late because of second-wave concerns , while value stocks should rally when V-shaped recovery talk hits the market , he says . A renewed move in cyclicals should also lead to renewed outperformance by Europe and Japan , given the greater cyclical gearing of their indexes , he adds .
If he ’ s wrong about the virus , Wood still doesn ’ t think widespread shutdowns will result . That point was reinforced by President Donald Trump himself in a tweet , who said the U.S. economy won ’ t be shut down again .
Personal income slumped 4.2 % in May — the federal government ’ s $ 1,200 checks were mostly sent out in April — while consumption shot up 8.2 % , the Commerce Department reported . The personal savings rate fell to a still high 23.2 % from 32.2 % .
Friday is the annual reconstitution day for the Russell stock-market indexes and typically is one of the highest volume days for the year .
After conducting stress tests on big banks , the Federal Reserve said it is requiring large lenders to preserve capital by suspending share repurchases — 70 % of payouts in recent years — and it is also capping dividend payments . Bank stocks had rallied on Thursday on a loosening of restrictions .
Related : The Federal Reserve ’ s bank stress tests put dividend payments at risk
E-commerce giant Amazon AMZN , +4.34 % is going to announce the purchase of self-driving car developer Zoox , according to reports in The Information and the Financial Times . The FT report put the price tag at $ 1.2 billion .
Cannae Holdings CNNE , -0.60 % and Senator Investment Group said they ’ re offering $ 65 per share in cash for the 85 % they don ’ t already own in CoreLogic CLGX , -1.16 % , the real estate data and analytics company .
Apparel maker Nike NKE , -0.66 % swung to a fiscal fourth-quarter loss on a 38 % revenue fall . Close-out retailer Big Lots BIG , -2.88 % said sales were well ahead of expectations .
The Trump administration urged the Supreme Court to overturn the Affordable Care Act .
U.S. stock futures ES00 , +0.02 % YM00 , +0.09 % lost ground as the open approached .
Oil futures CL.1 , -0.22 % also turned lower . Gold GC00 , -0.11 % edged higher .
Bank of America did the math on where the markets would go from here if they followed previous bear-market rallies , and that projection would land the S & P 500 SPX , +0.50 % between 3300 and 3600 . The strategists said they are tactically bullish on expectations second-quarter earnings may surprise to the upside — “ big downside rarely happens when everyone so keen on it , ” they wryly note — but strategically bearish . They say 2020 is likely to be seen as secular low for both inflation expectations and bond yields and advise investor diversification into 25/25/25/25 asset allocation of stocks/bonds/cash/gold or factor allocation of growth/yield/quality/inflation before 2021 .
A $ 20,000 prize is being offered by NASA — for a space toilet that can work on the Moon .
Need to Know starts early and is updated until the opening bell , but sign up here to get it delivered once to your email box . Be sure to check the Need to Know item . The emailed version will be sent out at about 7:30 a.m. Eastern .