As the COVID-19 pandemic spreads across the U.S. – canceling major events , closing schools , upending the stock market and disrupting travel and normal life – Americans are taking precautions against the new coronavirus that causes the disease sickening and killing thousands worldwide .
The World Health Organization and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advise the public be watchful for fever , dry cough and shortness of breath , symptoms that follow contraction of the new coronavirus known as SARS-CoV-2 .
From infection , it takes approximately five to 12 days for symptoms to appear . Here 's a step-by-step look at what happens inside the body when it takes hold .
According to the CDC , the virus can spread person-to-person within 6 feet through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes .
It ’ s also possible for the virus to remain on a surface or object , be transferred by touch and enter the body through the mouth , nose or eyes .
Dr. Martin S. Hirsch , senior physician in the Infectious Diseases Services at Massachusetts General Hospital , said there ’ s still a lot to learn but experts suspect the virus may act similarly to SARS-CoV from 13 years ago .
“ It ’ s a respiratory virus and thus it enters through the respiratory tract , we think primarily through the nose , ” he said . “ But it might be able to get in through the eyes and mouth because that ’ s how other respiratory viruses behave . ”
When the virus enters the body , it begins to attack .
It can take two to 14 days for a person to develop symptoms after initial exposure to the virus , Hirsch said . The average is about five days .
Once inside the body , it begins infecting epithelial cells in the lining of the lung . A protein on the receptors of the virus can attach to a host cell 's receptors and penetrate the cell . Inside the host cell , the virus begins to replicate until it kills the cell .
This first takes place in the upper respiratory tract , which includes the nose , mouth , larynx and bronchi .
The patient begins to experience mild version of symptoms : dry cough , shortness of breath , fever and headache and muscle pain and tiredness , comparable to the flu .
Dr. Pragya Dhaubhadel and Dr. Amit Munshi Sharma , infectious disease specialists at Geisinger , say some patients have reported gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and diarrhea , however it 's relatively uncommon .
Symptoms become more severe once the infection starts making its way to the lower respiratory tract .
The WHO reported last month about 80 % of patients have a mild to moderate disease from infection . A case of `` mild '' COVID-19 includes a fever and cough more severe than the seasonal flu but does not require hospitalization .
Those milder cases are because the body ’ s immune response is able to contain the virus in the upper respiratory tract , Hirsch says . Younger patients have a more vigorous immune response compared to older patients .
The 13.8 % of severe cases and 6.1 % critical cases are due to the virus trekking down the windpipe and entering the lower respiratory tract , where it seems to prefer growing .
As the virus continues to replicate and journeys further down the windpipe and into the lung , it can cause more respiratory problems like bronchitis and pneumonia , according to Dr. Raphael Viscidi , infectious disease specialist at Johns Hopkins Medicine .
Pneumonia is characterized by shortness of breath combined with a cough and affects tiny air sacs in the lungs , called alveoli , Viscidi said . The alveoli are where oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged .
When pneumonia occurs , the thin layer of alveolar cells is damaged by the virus . The body reacts by sending immune cells to the lung to fight it off .
`` And that results in the linings becoming thicker than normal , '' he said . `` As they thicken more and more , they essentially choke off the little air pocket , which is what you need to get the oxygen to your blood . ''
“ So it ’ s basically a war between the host response and the virus , ” Hirsch said . “ Depending who wins this war we have either good outcomes where patients recover or bad outcomes where they don ’ t . ”
Restricting oxygen to the bloodstream deprives other major organs of oxygen including the liver , kidney and brain .
In a small number of severe cases that can develop into acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) , which requires a patient be placed on a ventilator to supply oxygen .
However , if too much of the lung is damaged and not enough oxygen is supplied to the rest of the body , respiratory failure could lead to organ failure and death .
Viscidi stresses that outcome is uncommon for the majority of patients infected with coronavirus . Those most at risk to severe developments are older than 70 and have weak immune responses . Others at risk include people with pulmonary abnormalities , chronic disease or compromised immune systems , such as cancer patients who have gone through chemotherapy treatment .
Viscidi urges to public to think of the coronavirus like the flu because it goes through the same process within the body . Many people contract the flu and recover with no complications .
`` People should remember that they 're as healthy as they feel , '' he said . `` And should n't go around feeling as unhealthy as they fear . ''