Americans Are Generally Skeptical Of Government , But Want It To Intervene In A Crisis
Americans are generally skeptical of too much government intervention . Over the past three decades , the number of people saying they want the government to do less usually outnumbers those saying they want it to do more , according to Gallup .
The times when that has n't been true or when that gap has shrunk have roughly coincided with times of national crisis . However , over the past several years , those saying government should do more to solve the country 's problems has crept up to almost being on par with those saying government is doing too much .
This is one of those times when government counts . This is when government is called upon to fill the gaps that individuals and private industry ca n't . Hurricanes , tornadoes , floods , economic and health crises — these are the times people especially depend on their government and need it to function properly .
They also need to trust the information they 're hearing , so there 's no confusion . President Trump has struggled on this front . In an effort , he says , to tamp down potential hysteria and fear , Trump initially downplayed the coronavirus . His messages have been mixed . And he has floated unproven treatments and experimental ideas . Why ?
`` You have to understand , I 'm a cheerleader for this country , '' Trump said earlier this month . `` I do n't want to create havoc and shock and everything else . ''
But the result has been that most Americans do n't trust what he says about the coronavirus , according to the latest NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll . The good news is Americans do trust what their local officials and government health experts are saying about the virus .
Trump and members of his coronavirus task force did not hold press briefings Saturday or Sunday this past weekend . That follows Friday 's short briefing . In fact on Saturday , Trump tweeted that they 're not worth the time and effort .
A briefing was planned for Monday evening at 5 p.m . ET , but then was removed from the White House schedule late Monday morning .
White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany told reporters Monday that Trump and the task force will hold briefings later in the week . But , she said : `` They may have a different look . ''
— On NPR 's All Things Considered on Sunday , House Speaker Nancy Pelosi criticized Trump 's effort to withhold funding from the World Health Organization and other steps his administration is reportedly taking to sideline the global health agency .
— Ex-Officials Call For $ 46 Billion For Tracing , Isolating In Next Coronavirus Package : Two leading former federal health officials , who served in recent Republican and Democratic administrations , are spearheading a call for a $ 46 billion public health investment in a next coronavirus aid package to safely reopen the economy .
— When Is It Safe To Ease Social Distancing ? Here 's What One Model Says For Each State : Researchers have suggested one standard : 1 new infection per million people in a given state . They estimate that states with this level of transmission should be able to keep outbreaks from flaring up even after people start mingling again , though the researchers stress that states would still need to limit large gatherings .
— 'No Evidence ' Yet That Recovered COVID-19 Patients Are Immune , WHO Says : `` There is currently no evidence that people who have recovered from COVID-19 and have antibodies are protected from a second infection , '' the organization wrote .
— NYC Poison Control Sees Uptick In Calls After Trump 's Disinfectant Comments : New York City 's Department of Health and Mental Hygiene said that in an 18-hour period ending at 3 p.m. Friday , the poison control center recorded 30 cases . That compares with 13 cases for the same time frame one year ago .
— Science Becomes A Dividing Issue In Year Of Election And Pandemic : As COVID-19 takes over the political conversation , Americans ' ambivalence about science — and experts in general — is likely to come to the forefront .