Three years before the coronavirus pandemic , corrections officers in Texas begged the prison system to prepare for such a disaster . A series of mumps outbreaks had just swept through three lock-ups near the southern border , and the worried staff began complaining to their union reps : the agency wasn ’ t answering their questions , they said . They feared bringing the disease back into their communities , worried they lacked training on how to protect themselves and said they couldn ’ t get adequate protective gear because they ’ d been told the agency couldn ’ t afford it .
Union officials eventually took their complaints to state lawmakers . Outbreaks continued , and a fews months later legislators made several recommendations , asking the state ’ s prison agency to ensure everyone understood appropriate infection control measures and had access to enough personal protective equipment , like high-quality masks and gloves .
That was in 2018 . But union leaders and prison workers say not much had changed by the time COVID-19 arrived this March .
“ It angers me , ” said Cheri Siegelin , a former officer who now works with the Combined Law Enforcement Associations of Texas union organization . “ This is life and death , this is not just everyday routine behind the fence . ”
A prison system spokesman pushed back on those claims , saying the agency is always concerned for both its workers and those in its custody , and also that ample protective equipment has been available—for those deemed to need it .
“ We don ’ t have a PPE issue as far as supply goes at the moment , ” spokesman Jeremy Desel said last week , using the acronym for personal protective equipment . “ We ’ ve had well over 100,000 N95 masks , and we have 2.5 million pairs of gloves. ” More has since arrived , but it ’ s not clear how much of that equipment has been handed out to corrections staff , and he said those figures include gear kept for the agency ’ s medical providers . Some officers said they have not been permitted to use equipement designated for medical staff .
For officers who complained they didn ’ t have adequate protection equipment , Desel said : “ That ’ s because they didn ’ t need it , ” citing Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines that recommend prioritizing N95 masks only for officers in direct contact with people with confirmed or suspected COVID-19 .
Several officers told ███ they have not always had protective equipment when they needed it , including an officer who said she had to share one plastic face shield with her partner when they escorted a sick prisoner to a hospital .
The lack of respirator masks is not unique to Texas lock-ups ; other prisons , medical providers and first responders across the country have grappled with shortages . The federal prison system recently drew criticism for trying to fill that gap by ordering knock-off N95 masks that do not offer protection from the virus , VICE reported .
As of early Wednesday , four corrections officers , one chaplain and at least 12 COVID-positive prisoners had died , according to the state , with more than 900 prisoners and 350 staff testing positive . More than 37,000 men and women in 40 prisons are in lockdown to restrict movement . The agency has also ordered officers and prisoners to wear cloth masks , which are not considered personal protective equipment because they don ’ t fully protect the wearer , but do shield others from the wearer and thus help slow the spread of disease .
The viral outbreak that made its way into prisons in 2017 came as a particularly bad mumps season struck Texas . After spreading west from Arkansas , the disease cropped up at three South Texas prisons north of Corpus Christi and near McAllen : Lopez State Jail , Garza West Unit and the 2,900-person McConnell Unit .
That June , representatives from a different worker union—a branch of the American Federation of State , County and Municipal Employees—showed up at a meeting of the system ’ s health care providers and told the more than two dozen doctors and prison officials in attendance about their concerns , detailing how staffers frequently reported a lack of protective gear and that sometimes they had to buy their own .
After outbreaks emerged again later that year and into the next , union reps aired their concerns to the Texas House Corrections Committee .
“ In many units across the state there are shortages of basic sanitary products , such as soap , ” union representative Lance Mondragon told lawmakers in August 2018 . “ In some instances employees have been told they must go without PPE such as gloves , due to shortages . ”
In response , legislators recommended that the prison system should make sure every facility had the “ appropriate quality , quantity and sizes of PPE for staff ” as well as adequate procedures to distribute it . Lawmakers also suggested that the state agency should take better measures to educate workers .
“ During testimony , we found out that some infectious disease responses that correctional officers request , such as gloves , are not effective , ” they wrote in the first of six recommendations . “ If this is the case supported by science , [ the Texas Department of Criminal Justice ] must ensure that our correctional workforce is informed of all appropriate responses to expected infectious diseases . ”
Desel , the prison spokesman , said as the COVID-19 pandemic spread the agency created posters and training videos regarding the proper use of protective gear . Some of the guards , however , raised questions about the effectiveness of such training . Some officers said they hadn ’ t actually watched the videos or couldn ’ t remember what they said , and one wrote in a text message to ███ that the “ training sux ” and that “ many officers are clueless about cross-contamination issues ” involving the use of personal protective equipment .
Prison officials have said they ’ re providing gloves and N95 masks for any staff who interact directly with sick or quarantined prisoners . Staffers said that is true now in some units , but that has not always been the case . According to two officers , guards stationed at a local hospital to accompany prisoners hadn ’ t been consistently getting or wearing respirator masks . A third officer said staff working quarantine units didn ’ t receive masks for a number of days after prisoners were isolated for possible infections . All three officers asked to remain anonymous for fear of retaliation from prison administrators .
A fourth officer , who also asked not to be named for the same reason , said the staff at a medical unit had not been given gloves as of mid-March , and only received cloth masks even though multiple prisoners appeared sick , including two that were in isolation . The facility ran out of disposable thermometer covers and had instead begun using ziplock-style plastic bags when screening incoming staff each shift , the officer said .
“ Even though they ’ re saying there is , there ’ s not enough PPE out there , ” said Jeff Ormsby , the Texas corrections leader of the American Federation union . “ They 're giving staff cloth masks . It ’ s embarrassing , is what it is . ”
Some experts say not everyone needs high-quality protective gear in a prison . Dr. Marc Stern , a former assistant secretary of health care at the Washington State Department of Corrections , said it is not necessary for officers to wear respirator masks unless they ’ re interacting directly with sick or medically isolated prisoners , pointing to the CDC guidelines . But how much exposure officers elsewhere in a prison could face depends on how much they move around the unit , and how well segregated sick people are . `` It would be more prudent where possible for officers who are going to have close and sustained contact [ with sick patients ] to have N95 ’ s instead of surgical masks , ” Stern said . “ It ’ s not an easy question . ''
Mandating N95 masks too broadly could be less effective at reducing the spread than cloth masks , he added ; the tighter-fitting respirators are uncomfortable to wear and more difficult to breathe in , so officers might be more likely to take them off .
One officer assigned to a medical unit said last week that the staff on floors designated for COVID-19 patients typically had respirators , but still frequently visited other floors and other areas of the prison .
“ The only people that get the N95 are the lieutenants , sergeants , warden and the officers on the floor where the sick people are , ” she said . “ They ’ re telling us they ’ re going to fit us with them—but they ’ re not . They ’ re just hoarding them . All we get is a little blue mask . ”
Instead of waiting , she said she bought an N95 mask on her own .