“ Contact tracing for COVID is primarily going to work well before you get into a huge spike of cases . Right now , with the daily case count [ in Florida ] it ’ s unlikely that any health department is going to keep up , ” says Marissa Levine , a former state health commissioner in Virginia .
In Florida , the state health department has about 1,600 contact tracers , and has contracted a company to provide 600 more . But by one estimation , the state ought to have 33,000 contact tracers . Texas has around 2,800 contract tracers , well below the goal of 4,000 that the state ’ s governor set in April as a metric for reopening .
Contact tracing is a tried-and-tested method for quashing outbreaks , but , as cases surge across the South and West , the capacity is buckling , sending a stark warning to other states that were bracing for a fall wave of infections .
Since the novel coronavirus began to spread in the United States in February , health departments across the country have recruited and trained armies of contact tracers , workers who locate and speak with people who have been exposed to the virus .
When a novel coronavirus first began to spread in February , U.S. public health officials reached for a tried-and-tested method : contact tracing . By isolating potential spreaders and finding out who else they may have infected , “ coronavirus detectives ” try to tamp down outbreaks .
In hard-hit cities like New York and Boston , contact tracers were quickly overwhelmed by the growth in cases , and politicians turned instead to lockdowns to slow transmission and lessen the pressure on hospitals .
Since then , health departments across the country have built up their tracing capacity , training a corps of workers , including students and volunteers , in how to contact people who have been exposed to the virus , and to monitor and support those who isolate themselves .
But as cases surge across the South and West , this capacity is buckling , sending a stark warning to other states that were bracing for a fall wave of COVID-19 infections . Far from quashing outbreaks , tracers in states like Texas and Arizona are playing catch-up , stymied by social norms , political discord , and the dizzying rate of post-lockdown infections . Even California , which has trained thousands of new contact tracers since May , has been caught flat-footed .
Perhaps nowhere is this tension more acute than in Florida , where a surge in positive cases is blamed on young revelers flocking to bars and beaches and partying with friends and strangers .
“ Contact tracing for COVID is primarily going to work well before you get into a huge spike of cases . Right now , with the daily case count [ in Florida ] it ’ s unlikely that any health department is going to keep up , ” says Marissa Levine , a former state health commissioner in Virginia .
Florida ’ s state health department has about 1,600 people working on contact tracing and has contracted a company to provide 600 more . In a state of 21 million people , that ’ s roughly two-thirds of a recommended baseline of 15 tracers per 100,000 people . But when adjusted for Florida ’ s COVID-19 case count , that ratio rises to 156 per 100,000 , or more than 33,000 tracers , according to an online contact tracing workforce estimator at George Washington University .
Texas has around 2,800 contract tracers , compared with a goal of 4,000 that Gov . Greg Abbott set in April as a metric for reopening . That workforce has declined in recent weeks as state workers were deployed to other COVID-19 response jobs , The Texas Tribune reported .
Ideally , contact tracers will both locate people exposed to an infectious disease and plot the chain of infection back to the source , says Dr. Levine , who directs the Center for Leadership in Public Health Practice at the University of South Florida . “ The whole idea is to identify places where people have been congregating and it has been spreading . ”
Nationally , the U.S. now has between 27,000 and 28,000 contact tracers , Robert Redfield , the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , said last month . Some experts have concluded that at least 100,000 tracers are required , and pointed to the success of countries like South Korea and Germany in deploying rapid testing and tracing to contain COVID-19 .
In April , Congress allocated $ 631 million for contact tracing , testing , and surveillance efforts at local health departments , which some have used to train staff or volunteers who can then be called up when cases spike . Others have tapped state workers idled during lockdowns .
But secondments aren ’ t a substitute for a standing army , says Mike Reid , an assistant professor of medicine at the University of California , San Francisco who has trained more than 4,000 tracers for California ’ s health departments . In San Francisco “ many of our contact tracers are librarians and city attorneys and environmental scientists . Some of them are feeling the pressure to go back to their day jobs , ” he says .
For now , San Francisco has told city workers to keep working on contact tracing amid a surge in positive cases in Los Angeles following the lifting of a statewide lockdown in May . Gov . Gavin Newsom said Monday that young adults who believed themselves “ invincible ” were catching and spreading the virus .
The Bay Area ’ s caseload has risen more slowly , and tracers are reaching most of those who test positive , but Dr. Reid is watching other hot spots warily . “ If the numbers continue to grow we ’ re going to have to continue to train more people [ to contact trace ] , and that will require greater investment , ” he says .
Nearly half of the tracers hired for the Bay Area are Spanish speakers , a reflection of its demographics and of the disease ’ s unequal toll on minorities . Contact tracers must navigate cultural and linguistic barriers , and build a rapport with people who equate tracing with immigration enforcement and for whom self-isolation could be a crushing burden .
One way to do that , says Joia Mukherjee , the chief medical officer at Partners in Health , a global health nonprofit in Boston , is to ensure you can properly support those whom you ask to isolate , such as finding temporary housing or supplying baby formula . “ Contact tracing is about care . It ’ s not about surveillance , ” she says .
In Massachusetts , Partners in Health has worked with Gov . Charlie Baker who committed $ 44 million to build a central COVID-19 tracing force to supplement local health departments . After hitting a peak of 1,900 people , this force has fallen to 400 as the state ’ s caseload has declined to fewer than 200 a day , but it can scale up again quickly when needed , says Dr. Mukherjee .
Partners in Health is supporting contact tracing at health departments in several other states , including in at-risk communities of color , including agricultural workers in Immokalee , Florida .
Dr. Mukherjee , who has worked for decades on infectious diseases in developing countries , says social trust is always a challenge . What is “ uniquely American ” in tackling the pandemic “ is the erosion of a belief in science and an erosion of trust in government . ”
In Palm Beach , contact tracers are only reaching 72 % of people who tested positive . ( Massachusetts has averaged 90 % . ) Of their close contacts whose details were shared , tracers were able to contact about half , the county health director said last month , adding that many of the people who were infected had refused to tell tracers where they worked .
As the virus surges in Sun Belt cities , others are only now starting to ramp up contact tracing . In Illinois , Cook County last week unveiled a $ 41 million initiative for Chicago ’ s suburbs that would expand its tracing team from 25 to 400 staff , working with universities and community-based organizations . The first cohort is expected to start work in early August , said a spokeswoman for the county department of public health .
That timeline may seem leisurely , as states reopen and COVID-19 hot spots flare across the South and West . Epidemiologists say building tracing capacity and getting the message out to at-risk communities is simpler and more effective during lockdowns than after , when social interactions multiply .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Still , Dr. Mukherjee says it ’ s never too late to start . Pandemics are marathons not sprints , and when tracers and health systems are put in place , “ we can jump on outbreaks much more rapidly , ” she says .