“ The 360 ” shows you diverse perspectives on the day ’ s top stories and debates .
President Trump last week called for the U.S. to withhold funding for the World Health Organization over what he claimed were missteps that perpetuated the coronavirus pandemic . “ The reality is that the WHO failed to adequately obtain and share information in a timely and transparent fashion , ” Trump said .
The WHO is an agency within the United Nations established after World War II to promote health and fight disease around the globe . The U.S. provides the WHO with more than $ 400 million a year , the most of any nation . Trump called for a halt in those funds while a review of the WHO ’ s handling of the pandemic is conducted .
Trump has accused the WHO of uncritically parroting misinformation pushed by the Chinese government that underplayed the risks posed by the virus during the early weeks of the outbreak . The organization ’ s deference to China allowed the virus to spread internationally , resulting in thousands of unnecessary deaths , he said .
The WHO ’ s director-general defended the agency in response to Trump ’ s criticism . “ This is a time for all of us to be united , ” he said . “ When we are divided , the virus exposes the cracks between us . ”
Trump isn ’ t alone in critiquing the WHO ’ s handling of coronavirus . Infectious disease experts have been critical of the agency ’ s failure to challenge China ’ s optimistic claims about the virus , most crucially doubting evidence from Taiwan in mid-January that it could be transmitted from human to human .
For this and other perceived mistakes , the president ’ s attacks on the WHO have been echoed by his Republican lawmakers and conservative media figures . GOP Sen. Lindsey Graham accused the agency of “ severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus. ” Supporters of the decision to defund the WHO say the move is necessary to force change in an organization that is too mired in politics to complete its mission .
Trump ’ s critics say he ’ s using the WHO as a scapegoat for his administration ’ s own mismanagement of the crisis . The agency ’ s mistakes are in no way an excuse for the government ’ s inability to properly prepare for the virus ’ s inevitable emergence in the U.S. , they argue .
The choice to defund the WHO has received especially pointed criticism . For all its flaws , the WHO still plays a critical role in protecting the world from a long list of dangerous health risks . Denying the agency a major source of funding will cause unnecessary deaths , some experts say .
Trump didn ’ t provide details on how the funding freeze would be carried out . There ’ s some question about whether it ’ s within his authority to do so , since the money is appropriated by Congress . It ’ s also unclear when a review of the WHO ’ s actions might begin or how that process might be carried out .
The WHO should carry most of the blame for the severity of the pandemic
“ As the death toll climbs above 100,000 , the global economy remains in crisis , and billions of lives are disrupted , it 's important to remember that if the World Health Organization had done its job , the nightmare we 're living through might not have happened at all. ” — Zach Weissmueller , Reason
The WHO is part of a broken system that needs to be fixed
“ The president ’ s action is the first step needed to spark meaningful reform of the United Nations organization and the global health architecture. ” — Gordon G. Chang , Fox News
The U.S. has a right to investigate the WHO ’ s mistakes
“ The question is : Why ? Why is the WHO so willing to look the other way with regard to China ’ s faults , even though it is plainly obvious that the regime ’ s communist leaders bear primary responsibility for this pandemic ? This is a question that demands an answer , and Trump is right to pursue it. ” — Kaylee McGhee , Washington Examiner
Trump is attacking the WHO because he can ’ t be as aggressive with China
“ Trump is correct that the WHO has failed to perform one of its most important functions : Serving as the world ’ s early-warning system for new infectious diseases . But his anger is misdirected . It is China that is still not being fully transparent about the outbreak . The problem is that Trump has fewer options and less leverage with China. ” — Eli Lake , Bloomberg