Hundreds of thousands of people die of the flu every year , some say , and people need to calm down about coronavirus , which was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization this week . On Friday , President Trump declared a national emergency .
So what do we do now ? Everyone should wash their hands for 20 seconds , elbow bump , stop buying face masks because they don ’ t protect against the virus , note that airplane air is filtered 20 to 30 times an hour , avoid cruise ships , and just relax .
That appears to be the accumulated advice of exasperated Americans on Twitter and Facebook FB , +2.02 % just a week or two ago who despaired at the long lines at Trader Joe ’ s and Whole Foods AMZN , +7.53 % ( where people apparently have been stocking up on oat milk ) , and the panic buying and empty shelves at Costco COST , +7.02 % .
“ Toilet paper is golden in an apocalypse , ” one customer told MYNorthwest.com .
Trump last week announced that he was “ marshaling the full power of the federal government ” by suspending all travel from Europe to the U.S. for one month . It may seem like a lifetime ago now , given declarations of “ bearmaggedon ” and that airlines face their biggest financial crisis in a generation , but a couple of days earlier , Trump wrote on Twitter TWTR , +3.91 % , “ Last year 37,000 Americans died ” from the flu : “ Nothing is shut down , life & the economy go on . ”
“ ‘ This is additive , not in place of . Yes , the flu kills thousands of people every year , but we ’ re going to have more deaths. ’ ” — Amesh Adalja , Infectious Diseases Society of America
As this dramatic change-of-heart illustrates , we still have a lot to learn about the novel coronavirus and , experts say , that alone should be enough to motivate communities to work together to slow its progress . Studies suggest the differences between the flu and coronavirus are more nuanced than some people suggest .
In fact , health professionals point out important distinctions between COVID-19 , the disease caused by coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 , and other viruses . They don ’ t advise mass hysteria , obviously , but nor do they believe doing nothing and/or going about your business as usual is a smart move either .
WHO finally said last week that coronavirus has become a pandemic . WHO had characterized the illness late last year as a series of epidemics . An epidemic is a disease that infects regions or a community . The 1918-19 “ Spanish flu ” and Black Death from 1347 to 1351 were two of the most extreme pandemics recorded in modern and medieval times .
Dispatches from the front lines of a pandemic : ‘ They ’ ve likened it to a war where the number of casualties just keep on coming ’ : Italians find solidarity , resilience and music during the coronavirus lockdown
So what are the differences between coronavirus and the flu ? For starters , there is no vaccine for COVID-19 and it could take many months or years to get one to market , and , unlike the influenza viruses for which there are several vaccines , humans have not built up an immunity over multiple generations . What ’ s worse , doctors fear the virus will mutate .
The first known person was reported to have contracted the virus on Dec. 1 in China . Today , it ’ s spread to approximately 130 countries or territories . Experts advise changing your behavior to limit its spread . Public officials in New York have said people should avoid taking mass transit , if possible . Italy has effectively quarantined its entire population . Israel , among other countries , has closed its land borders .
Of course , there are similarities between influenza and COVID-19 . Both viruses are untreatable with antibiotics , and they have almost identical symptoms — fever , coughing , night sweats , aching bones , tiredness and , in more severe cases of both viruses , nausea and even diarrhea . They can be spread by touching your face , coughing and sneezing .
But doctors say their differences are just as varied . “ It ’ s a little simple to think the novel coronavirus is just like flu , ” Amesh Adalja , a senior scholar at the John Hopkins Center for Health Security and a spokesman for the Infectious Diseases Society of America , told ███ .
“ We don ’ t want another flu , ” he said . “ This is additive , not in place of . Yes , the flu kills thousands of people every year , but we ’ re going to have more deaths . ”
Dispatches from the front lines of a pandemic : ‘ The lack of an all-island response has also rattled communities on both sides of the Irish border. ’ Pubs close due to coronavirus , government issues new strict rules for funerals
There are reported to be some 1 billion influenza infections worldwide each year , with up to 45 million cases in the U.S. per year , tens of thousands of U.S. deaths , and 291,000 to 646,000 deaths worldwide .
Seasonal flu has a fatality rate of less than 1 % . Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases on Capitol Hill , estimates that the fatality rate of flu is closer to 0.1 % . But even accounting for the mild , yet undiagnosed cases of COVID-19 , he said Wednesday , it would still make it “ roughly 10 times more lethal than the seasonal flu . ”
Another reason not to compare the two viruses : Influenza has likely been around for more than 2,000 years . Scientists say the “ novel influenza A viruses ” in humans lead to a pandemic approximately once every 40 years . But , again , flu vaccines exist . “ The flu has been with us since the birth of modern medicine , ” said Adalja .
“ Flu has likely been around for 2,000 years . This coronavirus is three months old and , as yet , there is no vaccine . ”
Hippocrates of Kos , the Greek physician who was born around 460 BC , mentioned what we now know as the modern influenza virus in his writings , some historians say . He called it the “ Fever of Perinthus. ” Others wonder whether this was flu , another illness , or a combination of illnesses .
“ In 1173 and 1500 , two other influenza outbreaks were described , though in scant detail . The name ‘ influenza ’ originated in the 15th century in Italy , from an epidemic attributed to the ‘ influence of the stars , ’ ” which , according to historical documents , “ raged across Europe and perhaps in Asia and Africa , ” a 2016 paper in the Journal of Preventive Medicine and Hygiene reported .
“ Scholars and historians debate whether influenza was already present in the New World or whether it was carried by contaminated pigs transported on ships , ” it added . “ Some Aztec texts speak of a ’ pestilential catarrh ’ outbreak in 1450-1456 in an area now corresponding to Mexico , but these manuscripts are difficult to interpret correctly and this hypothesis seems controversial . ”
What has all this got to do with COVID-19 ? There is an advantage to coming down with a virus that has been around for hundreds , if not a couple of thousand , years . Humans , ideally , will have built up more natural defenses to fight it .
Complicating matters : influenza and COVID-19 come from different virus families , and COVID-19 is brand new . “ There are four other strains of the coronavirus , but the attack rate of this virus is relatively high as there is no immunity to it , ” Adalja said .
Dispatches from the front lines of a pandemic : As coronavirus cases rise in Switzerland , residents keep wary eye on Italy ’ s worsening situation next door
To put that in perspective : In 2017–18 , the worst flu season on record in the U.S. outside of a pandemic , approximately 80,000 Americans died . The four other coronavirus strains that already exist are responsible for around 25 % of our common colds , Adalja added .
“ But it doesn ’ t seem like there is cross-immunity with this coronavirus as there are with the other coronaviruses , ” he added . In other words , the natural defense systems in our body that help us ward off flu are unlikely to apply here .
Luis Ostrosky , a member of the Infectious Diseases Society of America , said humans have a “ herd immunity ” to flu . “ When there are enough people in the community who are immune it protects people who are not immune. ” That is the case with flu , but not with COVID-19 . Ostrosky said this is especially critical when no vaccines or therapeutic treatments for a virus .
“ Both can be spread from person to person through droplets in the air from an infected person coughing , sneezing or talking , ” Lisa Maragakis , senior director of infection prevention at Johns Hopkins Medicine in Baltimore , wrote . Based on the estimated distance viruses travel , scientists recommend “ social distancing ” of at least six feet in enclosed public spaces .
In the meantime , the virus continues to spread , likely helped by people who have mild symptoms or who are asymptomatic .
As of Tuesday afternoon , there were 190,140 confirmed cases globally and 7,519 deaths , according to data the latest rally from the database of Johns Hopkins University ’ s Center for Systems Science and Engineering ; the database also reported 80,648 recoveries . The U.S. has had at least 5,218 confirmed coronavirus cases and 94 deaths .
Neither the flu nor COVID-19 viruses is treatable with antibiotics , and the two illnesses have roughly identical symptoms . ███ photo illustration/iStockphoto
While estimates of coronavirus fatality rates vary , they remain far higher than those for the flu . COVID-19 has a fatality rate of 3.4 % , WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said earlier this month . That ’ s more than previous estimates of between 1.4 % and 2 % , although some observers say his analysis was a blunt interpretation of incomplete data , and were probably skewed by a higher death rate in China .
COVID-19 rates may fall closer to those of the flu , assuming many more people are infected . JAMA recently released this paper analyzing data from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention on 72,314 COVID-19 cases in mainland China last month , the largest such sample of this kind . The sample ’ s overall case-fatality rate was 2.3 % , in line with the earlier estimates .
“ ‘ As coronavirus spreads it threatens to put a much greater burden on health systems than flu does. ’ ” — Antigone Barton , ScienceSpeaks
Fatality rates also varied dramatically depending on the age of the individual . No deaths occurred in those 9 and younger , but cases in those aged 70 to 79 carried an 8 % fatality rate , and those aged 80 years and older had a fatality rate of 14.8 % . The rate was 49 % among critical cases , and elevated among those with pre-existing conditions , to between 5.6 % and 10.3 % , depending on the condition .
Other differences between coronavirus and flu lie in what we don ’ t know . Adults with the flu , which has an average incubation period of two days , can infect others 24 hours before symptoms develop and 5 to 7 days after becoming sick . Novel coronavirus has a median incubation period of 5.1 days , longer than that other human coronaviruses ( 3 days ) that cause the common cold .
The agency said the number of cases outside China has increased tenfold and the number of countries affected has tripled . “ We expect to see the number of cases , the number of deaths and the number of affected countries climb even higher . WHO has been assessing this outbreak around the clock , ” Tedros told reporters . “ And we ’ re deeply concerned . Most by the alarming levels of spread and severity . And by the alarming levels of inaction . ”
Coronavirus appears to be transmitted with ease to around 2.3 people by each person infected in the community , said Antigone Barton , editor of ScienceSpeaks , a medical website . Drug companies and the medical community , she said , are scrambling to come up with a vaccine before more people die , and health services are overwhelmed with sick people showing up at their doors .
The potential demand for hospital beds , ventilators , masks and medications , and the pressure all of this would put on staff worries her . “ Because there ’ s no proven therapy or vaccine ; as coronavirus spreads , ” Barton said , “ it threatens to put a much greater burden on health systems than flu does , and greater than most or many are prepared for . ”