The United Nations secretary-general , who seeks $ 2 billion in aid , called this week for united action . “ This human crisis demands coordinated ... and innovative policy action from the world ’ s leading economies , ” he said , “ and maximum ... support for the poorest and most vulnerable . ”
The second involves international political ramifications . With the United States having retreated , and Europe initially fumbling , China and Russia launched high-profile initiatives to help Italy . Now , the European Union is moving more assertively . But the wider international response remains a question , especially regarding war-ravaged , vulnerable countries and the some 70 million people worldwide fleeing hardship .
But if governments worldwide are now adapting in similar fashion , two areas remain murky . One involves national politics . China , for example , has broadened an already wide array of electronic surveillance measures . Hungary gave Prime Minister Viktor Orbán open-ended emergency powers . Egypt forced out a Western correspondent who reported the government was understating COVID-19 cases .
When it comes to COVID-19 , autocratic and democratic governments alike were slow to respond . For the former , merely acknowledging the scope of the epidemic risked denting their image of strength . For the latter , initial reluctance was more about upending lives and economies .
For hundreds of millions of us across the globe , much of life as we ’ ve known it is now on hold . Not so , however , politics . Or geopolitics .
And in recent days , some striking patterns have emerged as governments – autocratic and democratic , mainstream and populist – deal with a public health challenge every bit as novel as the COVID-19 virus itself .
With few exceptions , they ’ ve been playing catch-up , in part because of an initial political reluctance to take steps widely accepted as critical in limiting the terrible loss of life : testing and tracking those exposed to the virus and promoting “ physical distancing ” or even full-scale lockdowns to stem its spread .
For autocratic governments – those , for instance , of Russian President Vladimir Putin or Egyptian military ruler Abdel Fattah al-Sisi – or populist leaders like U.S. President Donald Trump and Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro , merely acknowledging the scope of the epidemic risked denting their long-projected image of strength , self-confidence , and control .
And not just for them , but for many free-market democracies like Australia or Britain , Italy or Spain , the initial reluctance was also about upending people ’ s everyday lives and bringing their national economies to a grinding halt .
But the result was broadly the same : a significant delay before acting to keep the number of cases from overwhelming the capacities of caregivers .
Now , with each passing day , the imperative to act has been setting in for more countries . Last week , Prime Minister Narendra Modi ordered a lockdown of all India ’ s 1.3 billion people , setting off a flight on foot of huge numbers of migrant workers across the country .
Russia has become the latest example of a tightening of restraints . President Putin announced a few days ago that this week would be “ non-working , '' with the country ’ s nearly 150 million people urged to stay home . But with the Kremlin still insisting there was “ no epidemic , ” many took the announcement as simply a week ’ s holiday . So on Monday , the mayor of Moscow directed all but essential workers to remain in their homes . The prime minister urged regional governments to follow suit .
Politically , for now , there ’ s been no price to pay for the delays . As in wartime or national emergencies , the initial popular response has been to pull together , recognize the need for extraordinary measures , and , for the most part , support their governments .
In a video message , British Prime Minister Boris Johnson , himself in self-isolation after contracting the virus , enthused about the country ’ s uniting in response to his stay-at-home directive . In a clear reference to a 1980s remark by then-Conservative leader Margaret Thatcher that any country was just an amalgamation of individual citizens and families , he said that this crisis had proved that “ there really is such a thing as society . ”
In Europe , polling has shown an initial boost not just for Mr. Johnson , but for French President Emmanuel Macron , German Chancellor Angela Merkel , and , in the hardest-hit European Union state , Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte . President Trump ’ s approval rating , too , has ticked upward .
But if governments worldwide are now adapting in similar ways to the pandemic , there are two areas where the picture remains less clear – one involving national politics , the other international .
The first concerns authoritarian states , where there are signs the crisis could be used as cover for further tightening controls on dissent . In China , an already wide array of electronic surveillance measures was increased to track people ’ s movements and contain the virus .
In Hungary , right-wing Prime Minister Viktor Orbán is poised to impose an open-ended state of emergency allowing him to rule by decree . He also wants prison sentences for anyone publishing “ false information ” about the epidemic or his government ’ s response . Egypt last week forced out the correspondent for Britain ’ s Guardian newspaper after she reported that President Sisi ’ s government was understating the numbers of COVID-19 cases .
And the international political ramifications of the pandemic are still playing out .
For at least two major countries – China and Russia – the initial response has been out of a familiar playbook . Especially with the United States having retreated from its previous leadership role in such crises , both the Chinese and Russians have launched high-profile initiatives to provide assistance to Italy ’ s hard-hit public health system .
Yet after an initially fumbled response , the EU has begun to move more assertively to frame a shared response . As with the fallout from the 2008 economic crisis , the European Central Bank has now vowed to do “ anything it takes ” to deal with the financial effects . There have also been efforts to coordinate the procurement of urgently needed equipment like ventilators .
The still-open – and potentially serious – question is whether there will be a wider international response .
Reports emerging of the first cases in war-ravaged Syria and Afghanistan are a reminder that COVID-19 may before long spread to dozens of states with less developed economies and less resilient health care networks , not to mention the some 70 million people worldwide fleeing conflict or economic hardship .
With this in mind , U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres last week issued a $ 2 billion appeal for international aid . This week , he called for everyone to `` act together . ''
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ COVID-19 is the greatest test that we have faced together since the formation of the United Nations , ” he said . “ This human crisis demands coordinated , decisive , inclusive , and innovative policy action from the world ’ s leading economies – and maximum financial and technical support for the poorest and most vulnerable people and countries . ”