Washington ( CNN ) Coronavirus task force member Dr. Anthony Fauci issued a stark warning on Tuesday to lawmakers on Capitol Hill , telling them he would n't be surprised if the US sees new cases of coronavirus rising to a level of 100,000 a day .
`` We are now having 40-plus thousand new cases a day . I would not be surprised if we go up to 100,000 a day if this does not turn around and so I am very concerned , '' Fauci told the Senate Health , Education , Labor and Pensions Committee during a hearing on the pandemic on Tuesday .
Fauci expressed dismay over people congregating in crowds and not wearing masks and inadequate attention being paid to guidelines on reopening .
`` We 're going to continue to be in a lot of trouble , and there 's going to be a lot of hurt if that does not stop , '' he said .
The urgent message came during a hearing on the latest efforts by the US government to contain the pandemic , as several states struggle to contain the virus amid rising cases and state reopenings . The US reported more than 40,000 new Covid-19 cases on Friday , its biggest daily jump yet .
Asked if the pandemic is under control , Fauci said , `` I am not satisfied with what 's going on because we are going in the wrong direction if you look at the curves of the new cases , so we 've really got to do something about that and we need to do it quickly , '' adding , `` Clearly we are not in total control right now . ''
Fauci said that he ca n't make an accurate prediction of the number of cases and deaths the US will see before the pandemic is over , but said , `` It 's going to be very disturbing , I will guarantee you that . ''
Fauci and US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Dr. Robert Redfield stressed the importance of wearing masks during testimony before a Senate committee on Tuesday , with Fauci saying `` we recommend masks for everyone '' and `` masks are extremely important . ''
Redfield singled out younger Americans in particular to deliver a message that they are not exempt from the necessity of wearing a mask .
`` It is critical that we all take the personal responsibility to slow the transmission of Covid-19 and embrace the universal use of face coverings , '' he said . `` Specifically , I 'm addressing the younger members of our society , the Millennials and the Generation Zs -- I ask those that are listening to spread the word . ''
`` We are all in this together , '' he said , adding , `` We recommend masks for everyone on the outside , anyone who comes into contact in a crowded area . You should avoid crowds where possible and when you 're outside and not have the capability of maintaining distance , you should wear a mask at all times . ''
Fauci indicated that he would support an effort to increase the production of high-quality masks in the US and distribute them free of charge to the American public in response to a question from Vermont independent Sen. Bernie Sanders .
`` Masks are extremely important , '' Fauci said , adding , `` There 's no doubt that wearing masks protects you and gets you to be protected . So it 's people protecting each other . Anything that furthers the use of masks , whether it 's giving out free masks or any other mechanism , I am thoroughly in favor of . ''
More than half of all states are seeing a rise in cases , and Florida , Texas and Arizona are getting hit particularly hard . Texas has begun scaling back its reopening , and beaches in Florida have closed for the upcoming holiday weekend .
Experts testify on vaccine development as the FDA gets more involved
Dr. Stephen Hahn , commissioner of the US Food and Drug Administration , said the FDA is taking action to help coronavirus vaccine developers get through the approval process faster .
`` I am pleased to announce that today , FDA is taking action to aid the timely development of a safe and effective vaccine to prevent Covid-19 by providing guidance for developers , with recommendations on the data needed to facilitate manufacturing , clinical development , and approval , '' he said .
Hahn said the FDA is committed to `` help expedite this work , '' but added , `` We will not cut corners in our decision making . ''
Hahn said the guidance will `` provide regulatory clarity around what FDA expects with respect to those data . We want to see certain parts of those data so that we can demonstrate to the world , to the nation , to the American people , that we are following our rigorous standards with respect to safety and efficacy . ''
`` This is particularly as important as we know that some people are skeptical of vaccine development efforts , '' he continued , adding that `` public confidence in vaccines is so important . ''
Separately , Redfield said there was `` substantial disappointment with American Airlines '' when the airline announced it would stop limiting seat sales on airlines .
`` I can tell you that when they announced that the other day , obviously there was substantial disappointment with American Airlines , '' Redfield said . `` I can say this is under critical review right now by us at CDC . We do n't think it 's the right message . ''
Last week , American Airlines said it plans to begin selling every seat on flights , something it has not done since the pandemic struck this spring .
The airline responded to criticism of the decision , saying in a statement Tuesday that it is committed to the `` safety and well-being of ( its ) customers and team members . '' The airline said that it has `` multiple layers of protection '' for passengers and that it provides flexibility to those who want to change flights .
Fauci and Redfield testified before lawmakers last week , when Fauci said `` we 're going to be doing more testing , not less , '' in response to President Donald Trump 's recent claim that he asked his administration to slow down testing during the pandemic .
Senators have been weighing another stimulus package in recent weeks as unemployment numbers remain worrisome and economic hardship stemming from the pandemic persists . Republicans remains divided on the size and scale of the next stimulus bill and while it has been discussed for months , the next phase of economic relief is still weeks away . But there is now broad agreement something has to be done -- something that was n't always the case .
In Capitol Hill 's last round of aid , Congress boosted unemployment checks by $ 600 a week and added 13 weeks of pay , beyond what states offer . The additional money will expire on July 31 without congressional action , but the 13-week extension will remain in place until the end of the year . A second round of stimulus payments is on the negotiating table in Washington , but some of the 160 million Americans who got money the first time could be left out , according a more targeted approach the administration is pushing for .
Republicans have zeroed in on the last week of July to reach agreement on the next round of stimulus legislation . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has been adamant for weeks on that timeline and the administration is on board .