███ is making its essential coronavirus coverage free for all readers . Subscribe to support our journalism . Start your free trial .
As the U.S. begins to restart portions of what was daily life before the arrival of the coronavirus , a new model on the virus ’ s spread estimates that if the country had responded more quickly—even by a single week—in shutting down and social distancing , tens of thousands of lives could have been saved . The Columbia University model shows the importance of timing in containing the exponential growth of a virus ; it also implicitly reaffirms the need for decisive leadership from engaged and informed public officials .
As things currently stand , with the U.S. having initiated a shutdown in mid-March , more than 93,000 Americans have died of the coronavirus ( though that number is likely higher ) , out of more than 1.5 million confirmed cases . According to the new model ’ s tally , if that shutdown had been started a week earlier , the virus ’ s spread would have been sufficiently curtailed to cut the number of deaths by roughly 36,000 people—more than half of the fatalities recorded through May 3 , the timeframe the study examined . If the U.S. had responded two weeks earlier than it did—so on March 1—most of the country ’ s deaths could have been avoided ; 54,000 lives would have been spared , an 83 percent reduction in the death toll .
These numbers will surely be debated , discussed , and dismissed by some , but as we collectively reemerge from isolation , they must help inform our collective decision-making in the months and even years to come . The first time around , in early March , America ’ s leaders floundered in different ways in the face of the coming pandemic . “ Nothing is shut down , life & the economy go on , ” Trump tweeted on March 9 , minimizing the potential impact of the virus . “ At this moment there are 546 confirmed cases of CoronaVirus , with 22 deaths . Think about that ! ” A week later , on March 16 , the president was telling Americans to stay home to save lives . In New York , the city ’ s mayor , Bill de Blasio , didn ’ t close schools until March 15 , and Gov . Andrew Cuomo ’ s stay-at-home order wasn ’ t in place until March 22 .
We obviously know much more about the virus now and much more about ourselves : what we ’ re capable of when faced with individual and collective harm . While there appears to be a summer reprieve coming from isolation and a bulging curve , the Columbia model is a reminder that it ’ s not just how we respond that matters—it ’ s when .