Centers for Disease Control and Prevention director Dr. Robert Redfield said Wednesday that he supports reopening the country and that he believes states are “ ready ” to return to more normal operations , albeit with some key changes , including social distancing and contact tracing .
Speaking to The Hill , Redfield said that states are making significant strides in bringing down the number of coronavirus cases , and the drop , from March and April when cases peaked , is noticeable — and something to celebrate .
“ I want to clarify that the community-based transmission , the community-to-community transmission that overwhelmed the public health departments in late February , March , April , that ’ s really coming down , ” Redfield said .
He added that “ the CDC is working with state public health agencies to contain outbreaks in nursing homes , among homeless populations , in meatpacking facilities and in other areas . He signaled states will have sufficient testing and contact tracing to follow the White House ’ s guidelines for reopening . ”
The CDC is heavily focused on “ contact tracing , ” which involves using data , available through cell phone applications ( most of which is provided voluntarily to apps like Facebook ) , and voluntary connections with individual Americans , to track individuals who test positive for the virus and track their movements , warning those who might have come into contact with coronavirus carriers that they could be in danger of contracting the virus .
The CDC has its own team of contact tracers , but Redfield says the agency is working with state health departments to help them train their own teams , as well .
“ Ultimately , that number [ of contact tracers ] is going to be decided by the efforts that we have with the local health departments , ” Redfield told The Hill . “ But that ’ s ongoing now , and it needs to be in place , operationally ready by October of this year . ”
Redfield stressed that even as coronavirus infections wane , health care officials should be on the offensive , prepared for a possible second wave either or or in addition to an upcoming flu season . He also implored state health departments to improve their guidelines for handling further coronavirus outbreaks , including isolated outbreaks in nursing homes and other residential care facilities .
The CDC was only briefly in the lead of the United States ’ coronavirus pandemic response ; the issue quickly gave way to a full-government response that spanned agencies and involved its own team of experts . Now that the White House is more focused on the economic implications of the virus , much of the day-to-day pandemic management is falling back on the CDC ’ s shoulders .
On Thursday , the CDC released several documents , including updated guidelines for schools , child care centers , restaurants , bars , and subways on how to return to “ normal ” after coronavirus-related lockdowns are lifted . Last week , the agency released a guide on how businesses could disinfect public spaces efficiently and effectively .
███ , headed by bestselling author and popular podcast host Ben Shapiro , is a leading provider of conservative news , cutting through the mainstream media ’ s rhetoric to provide readers the most important , relevant , and engaging stories of the day . Get inside access to ███ by becoming a member .