It 's difficult to keep your distance in a grocery store or pharmacy , so now the CDC says we should wear a homemade mask in public to slow the spread of the coronavirus — particularly in areas with high community transmission .
Officials do n't want healthy people using medical masks because of fears they would buy them all ( kind of like toilet paper ) and not leave them for health care workers .
The masks do n't need to be professional-grade to help fight against COVID-19 . According to recent studies , the virus can spread between people in proximity by coughing , sneezing or even speaking .
It is important to note that covering your face with a piece of cloth wo n't protect you . But , it could help you from spreading the virus if you 're like some people who lack symptoms and do n't know they have it .
Sewing your own mask is easy , says Jeannette Childers , who ’ s 77 and lives in Mesa , Arizona . She ’ s among scores of volunteers across the country sewing masks . So far , she ’ s made 65 .
1 . Cut material and interfacing to 12 x 9 inches
2 . Iron interfacing to material ( adhesive side to back of material )
3 . Once ironed , fold fabric in half with interfacing on the outside
4 . Cut two pieces of elastic — each 7-inches long
5 . Pin and sew 1/4-inch from edge leaving a 2-inch gap in the center
6 . Put elastic band on each corner , inside the material and pin to keep in place , making sure the elastic is not twisted . Pinning in center as well
7 . Using the pattern , mark locations of pleat lines and add pins on both sides
8 . Fold 3 pleats . Sew around the entire perimeter of the mask , this holds the pleats in place , and closes the 2-inch gap
All you have to do is remove the pins , test out your new mask and head out to do your grocery shopping or wherever might make social distancing difficult .
While you ’ re at it , make extra to donate . The cloth face coverings recommended are not surgical masks or N-95 respirators , which are critical supplies that must continue to be reserved for health care workers .
Angelica Jaramillo Harding , a nurse in Mesa , Arizona , picks up donated masks from a Joann fabric and Craft store every Friday to distribute at hospitals , medical centers and clinics . Last week , she gave away 350 of them .
Since March 23 , Joann stores nationwide have been providing supplies to make masks for free if you donate the finished products . Since then , they ’ ve donated more than 16 million . “ We ’ re definitely touched by the community , ” Harding said . “ It helps us not to feel alone in this . ”