There are a number of concurrent crises playing out in the United States at the moment , as the country grapples with a runaway pandemic , a teetering economy , and absent national leadership , all of which are made worse by an American-made crisis that predates the current moment : the American health care crisis . In a country where health coverage has long been treated as a luxury , linked to certain kinds of white-collar employment , the coronavirus has made health coverage an amenity fewer can afford . That ’ s according to the early findings of a study released this week conducted by the nonpartisan consumer advocacy group Families USA , which found that during the early stages of the pandemic a staggering 5.4 million laid-off Americans lost their health insurance in a matter of weeks . That ’ s a historic drop-off and nearly 40 percent higher than during the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009 . And it ’ s not over—the pandemic is getting worse , not better , and the economy might not be far behind .
What makes the current lack of coverage of millions of Americans at the exact moment they need it most particularly galling is that there was a short-term alternative just sitting around—Obamacare . When the virus sent people to their homes in March , taking millions of jobs with it , the Trump administration refused to reopen the federal exchanges—which are only open to new sign-ups during a small six-week window at the end of each year—to allow Americans to buy coverage to protect themselves during the coming pandemic . At that point , the Affordable Care Act was already seriously hobbled from a decade of Republican efforts to chip away at the law in the courts and in statehouses across the country until it served fewer and fewer people . Even still , it was better than the alternative , which doesn ’ t exist . In fact , the Trump administration and dozens of Republican state attorneys general are back before the Supreme Court again , a full decade on , to try to eliminate the Affordable Care Act once and for all . What ’ s their alternative ? There isn ’ t one and there never has been .
The result is what you ’ re seeing play out across the country at the moment : Emergency rooms are swelling , the country ’ s health infrastructure is once again creaking , and more and more Americans don ’ t have health insurance to protect them against ruin , physical or financial . It should not surprise you that the portions of the country that have the highest rates of uninsured , according to the Families USA study , are states that refused federal help in expanding Medicaid as part of Obamacare . “ In the 37 states that expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act , 23 percent of laid off workers became uninsured , ” the study found . “ The percentage was nearly double that—43 percent—in the 13 states that did not expand Medicaid , which include Texas , Florida and North Carolina . ”
Subscribe to the Slatest newsletter A daily email update of the stories you need to read right now . We encountered an issue signing you up . Please try again . Please enable javascript to use form . Email address : Send me updates about ███ special offers . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms Sign Up Thanks for signing up ! You can manage your newsletter subscriptions at any time .
There are now eight states in the country where more than 20 percent of the population below the age of 65 does not have health insurance : Texas ( 29 percent ) , Florida ( 25 percent ) , Oklahoma ( 24 percent ) , Georgia ( 23 percent ) , Mississippi ( 22 percent ) , Nevada ( 21percent ) , North Carolina ( 20 percent ) , and South Carolina ( 20 percent ) . You read that right : In the state of Texas , three in 10 residents eating in restaurants and drinking in bars after the great reopening do not have health insurance . Those states may also look familiar to you as some of the hottest of hot spots in the U.S. right now .