Large majorities of Americans back coronavirus restrictions , slower return to normal : POLL Anxiety over the coronavirus is still steep , the ███/Ipsos survey shows .
Overwhelming majorities of Americans favor restrictions related to containing the coronavirus and fear moving too quickly to reopen the economy – concerns that break through party lines amid a national unease about the pandemic , according to a new ███/Ipsos poll released Friday .
Just over eight in 10 Americans are concerned about contracting the virus , a number that has held steady in polling the last few weeks .
How concerned are you that you or someone you know will be infected with the coronavirus ? ███/Ipsos Poll
In this week ’ s poll , 72 % believe moving too quickly to loosen the stay-at-home orders is a greater threat to the country than moving too slowly , and 86 % think social distancing and stay-at-home orders are responsible policies . And if restrictions were lifted tomorrow , some 80 % say they are unlikely to go out to public places that are likely to draw crowds .
Tune into ABC at 1 p.m . ET and ███ Live at 4 p.m . ET every weekday for special coverage of the novel coronavirus with the full ███ team , including the latest news , context and analysis .
In the new poll , conducted by Ipsos in partnership with ███ using Ipsos ’ Knowledge Panel , anxiety over the coronavirus is still steep – as concern over getting the deadly disease hovers around the low eighties for the second week in a row . Only slightly more than one-quarter of Americans believe moving too slowly to ease restrictions poses a greater danger to the country , with more jobs being lost , than moving too quickly .
A meager 14 % of Americans think stay-at-home orders constrict personal liberty , and only one in five said if restrictions were lifted the next day , they would likely go out in public .
If restrictions on public activity were lifted tomorrow , how likely would you be to go out to public places such as restaurants , movie theaters , churches , and sporting events ? ███/Ipsos Poll
Even majorities of those identifying with President Donald Trump 's own party favorably view the current status quo and are more resistant to sudden changes . About three-quarters of Republicans are concerned about becoming infected , 53 % support a slower return to normal , and 72 % said they were unlikely to return to public places if restrictions were relaxed immediately .
More surprising , perhaps , is the 82 % of Republicans who align with the view that social distancing and stay-at-home orders are responsible , life-saving actions , while only 17 % believe the restrictive measures are a government overreaction that infringes on an individual 's freedom .
Which of the following statements comes closest to your point of view even if not exactly right ? ███/Ipsos Poll
That number comes against the backdrop of scattered demonstrations across the country , organized by protesters angry by the rigid stay-at-home orders in place as a response to the coronavirus , which has forced millions to claim unemployment benefits and ground most economic activity to a halt .
A potentially record-setting demonstration is on the horizon , as thousands are expected to protest outside Wisconsin 's state capital in Madison on Friday .
Even as Trump alternates between openly encouraging the protests and breaking with one of his allies , Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp , over a sudden timeframe for reopening businesses in his state , the country believes the drastic efforts to contain and control the spread of COVID-19 are appropriate .
Partisan colors still show with Democrats being more likely to be worried about the outbreak ( 87 % ) , back the stringent limitations on daily life , such as social distancing and the emergency orders issued by the nation 's governors ( 98 % ) , and believe that moving too quickly is a threat to the country 's progress ( 92 % ) . And 92 % of Democrats also said they are unlikely to go out in public under immediate loosened restrictions .
The new survey also finds that independents largely trace the views of the country , with a near 80 % -20 % margin across the board on each question .
Among independents , 80 % are concerned about contracting the virus , compared to 20 % who are not ; 72 % see more risk for the country in moving too quickly than too slowly ( 28 % ) ; 80 % support social distancing and the stay-at-home orders , compared to 20 % who believe they are a government overreach ; and 76 % say they would be unlikely to leave home , compared to 24 % who said they would be likely , if those emergency measures were instantly lifted .
This ███/Ipsos poll was conducted by Ipsos Public Affairs ‘ KnowledgePanel® April 22-23 , 2020 , in English and Spanish , among a random national sample of 506 adults . Results have a margin of sampling error of 5.6 points , including the design effect . See the poll ’ s topline results and details on the methodology here .
How it started and how to protect yourself : Coronavirus explained
Tracking the spread in the U.S. and worldwide : Coronavirus map