President Trump Confirms 1st U.S. Coronavirus Death ; U.S. Heightens Travel Warnings
A person in Washington state has died of the new coronavirus , President Trump confirmed Saturday . The fatality marks the first reported death from the virus in the United States .
The patient who died was a man in his 50s with underlying medical conditions , according to Washington state health officials .
Also at the press conference , Vice President Pence , who has been put in charge of the country 's coronavirus response , announced that the U.S. would elevate an advisory to Americans to not travel to highly affected parts of Italy and South Korea . Pence also announced an expansion to the already existing travel restrictions on Iran , which also has a high number of cases .
Since the start of the month , the State Department has advised U.S. citizens not to travel to China , where the outbreak started . Most of the U.S. cases involved people who had traveled to China or abroad .
Additionally , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has confirmed the first possible outbreak in a nursing facility , also in Washington state . This is unrelated to the patient who died .
So far , two people at the facility — one health worker and one resident — have tested positive . More than 50 workers and residents are showing symptoms of respiratory infection . Some are being hospitalized , and all are currently being tested . None of the new presumptive cases were related to travel , which health officials say could be an indication of the virus spreading within the community . In this localized area , officials say the risk to the public is increasing , although nationwide , the risk remains low .
At a separate press conference in King County , Wash. , Jeffrey Duchin , the health officer for public health in Seattle and King County , said the confirmed cases are likely just `` the tip of the iceberg . ''
Gov . Jay Inslee declared a state of emergency on Saturday , saying it `` is a time to take common-sense , proactive measures to ensure the health and safety of those who live in Washington state . ''
Robert Redfield , the director of the CDC , indicated at the press conference at the White House that the person who died did not have any link to foreign travel . The death comes soon after U.S. health officials began warning the public that the coronavirus now appears to be spreading within the country from person to person , independent of travel to affected areas around the world . The CDC acknowledged three other such cases , known as community spread , in the U.S. late Friday night .
Speaking at Saturday afternoon 's press conference , Dr. Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the National Institutes of Health , told the public to brace themselves for more cases in the country . Redfield also said to expect more cases , describing them as likely to occur in `` clusters '' in the days ahead .
`` You should not be surprised by that , '' Fauci said . `` That is something that is anticipated when you get community spread . ''
The new cases bring the total number of confirmed cases within the United States to more than 60 ; 44 of those cases originated aboard the Diamond Princess Cruise Ship and three other cases involve people who were brought back from Wuhan , China , where the first cases were diagnosed . Excluding those who were aboard the cruise ship or brought back from China , Trump said 22 patients within the U.S. have the coronavirus , four of whom are `` very ill. '' Another 15 are either fully recovered or are `` well on their way , '' according to the president .
`` So healthy people , if you 're healthy , you will probably go through a process and you 'll be fine , '' Trump said . `` There 's no reason to panic at all . ''
Trump said the person who died in Washington state was a woman in her 50s ; Washington state health officials later said the person was a man in his 50s .
The novel coronavirus continues to spread around the globe , including a massive surge in South Korea , where more than 800 new cases were confirmed between Friday and Saturday and more than 3,000 people are now confirmed to have the virus . The South Korean government has urged its citizens to stay indoors .
Though the vast majority of the more than 85,000 confirmed cases have occurred in China , the resulting disease , COVID-19 , is now in at least 57 countries and on every continent excluding Antarctica , according to the World Health Organization .
The confirmation of these new cases in the U.S. may actually be somewhat delayed , in part because there was an initial backlog in testing for the virus within the U.S. A problem with the test kits that the CDC distributed across the country required most testing to happen at the CDC headquarters in Atlanta . Federal health officials now say they have resolved the issue and are now working to distribute new test kits across the country .
Additionally , the University of California , Davis Medical Center in Sacramento , where one of the cases not linked to foreign travel is being treated , says that patient did n't meet the CDC 's threshold to approve a coronavirus test at first and so diagnosis was delayed for days . The CDC defended that delay , saying CDC guidelines were broad for travelers but not for people within the U.S .
Meanwhile , 124 health care workers who were likely exposed to the virus at that same UC Davis medical center were sent home and told by the hospital to quarantine themselves . The workers , who have complied with the order and are being paid , view the hospital 's actions as a system failure , according to a report by KQED .
In total , more than 2,800 people worldwide have died from the virus so far , mostly in China , where the death rate is estimated to be around 2 percent , much lower than the death rates for previous coronavirus outbreaks like severe acute respiratory syndrome or Middle East respiratory syndrome , which had death rates of 10 % and 34 % respectively . The death rate of this new coronavirus could also be lower than it appears if mild cases are not being reported .
Despite what could be the start of community spread , people in the U.S. do not need to change their day-to-day habits , according to Redfield .
`` The country as a whole ... still remains at low risk , '' Fauci said . `` But when we say that , we want to underscore that this is an evolving situation . ''
Health officials maintain that among the best ways to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus are the same as those to prevent the seasonal flu : Wash your hands frequently for at least 20 seconds , avoid touching your face and stay home when feeling sick .