SAN FRANCISCO/WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Hollstadt Consulting CEO Molly Jungbauer has had to let go 30 of the 150 employees at her St. Paul , Minnesota firm to weather the drop in revenue from travel industry clients because of the coronavirus .
She ’ s worried about her daughter , who lives in New York and has the disease . But she also worries that shutting the economy with open-ended stay-at-home orders could have an “ irreversible ” impact .
So she was relieved to hear Minnesota Governor Tim Walz ’ s plan last week : clamp down on commerce and social activity now but then reopen the state for business by May 4 . “ It is nice to know that we have somewhat of an end date , ” she said .
Coronavirus shut-downs could lop 25 % or more from U.S. output , some economists forecast , throwing tens of millions of Americans out of work . The U.S. government and the Fed are mounting what could be a $ 6 trillion economic rescue .
And elected U.S. politicians entrusted with public welfare are making calculations centered around the question : How many possibly preventable deaths are acceptable , as weighed against millions of jobs lost and trillions of dollars of economic output foregone ?
Declaring the cure can ’ t be worse than the disease , President Donald Trump has said that by April 12 , he wanted churches all over the country to be “ packed ” with Easter celebrants . On Sunday , Trump backed away from that goal by extending social distancing guidelines to April 30 .
More testing is critical , Trump advisor Stephen Moore told ███ .
“ Once you have testing you can open up the economy , ” he said . South Korea has tested a much bigger portion of its citizens than the United States has , allowing it to reduce infections and without stopping its economy . The U.S. has ramped up its capacity in recent weeks , though some states are making bigger inroads than others .
Also key , Moore said , is understanding if new cases are rising as fast in the Midwest as on the coasts , and if more people can , like the hundreds of thousands of workers at FedEx still on the job , practice social distancing and still work .
“ You kind of have to look at the businesses that are running , ” Moore said .
U.S. state and local officials are doing their own calculus .
“ We will not put a dollar figure on human lives , ” New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said . Almost half of the 130,000 U.S. cases to date have appeared in New York , where some hospitals are overwhelmed with critically-ill patients .
Other governors in states with fewer cases are forging ahead with plans to try to limit both deaths and economic damage .
On Wednesday , Walz - who is self-quarantining after possible exposure - told Minnesotans that models project an eventual 2.4 million infections statewide .
If allowed to spread unchecked now , he said , as many as 74,000 Minnesotans could die because too few hospital beds and ventilators means patients won ’ t get the medical care they need .
Economically , he said , the state ca n't afford to stay shut for a year or more until a vaccine is developed , an approach an influential Imperial College study here recommends .
So Walz is imposing a strict “ stay-at-home ” order for two weeks and a more relaxed version for a few weeks after that , to give hospitals the time to prepare . Epidemiologists refer to this as “ flattening the curve . ”
“ I don ’ t believe it ’ s prudent to try to shelter in place until a vaccine is there , ” Walz said . “ I ’ m asking you to buckle it up for a few more weeks here . ”
Even that will be painful : state officials estimate 28 % of Minnesotans will be temporarily jobless for the next two weeks , with about 40 % of those without any form of paid leave .
Once businesses and schools reopen , Walz hopes to use testing and targeted quarantines to keep new cases in check .
But he acknowledged there will be more deaths . “ It ’ s agonizing and I find it nearly unacceptable , ” he said . “ My job is to reduce it down . ”
Coronavirus is about ten times deadlier than the flu , killing one of every hundred that get it , according to Anthony Fauci , the top U.S. infectious disease expert . Given Walz ’ s estimate of 2.4 million Minnesota residents infected , that means 24,000 dead .
So far there have been 503 cases and nine deaths in the state .
For a growing chorus of economists , the notion of weighing deaths against the economy is fundamentally flawed .
“ One can do those types of quite gruesome calculations ” said MIT economist Emil Verner . But evidence suggests “ that in some sense , that ’ s a false tradeoff , ” he said .
Verner last week co-authored a paper about the response to the 1918 flu epidemic and found that cities that restricted public gatherings sooner and longer had fewer deaths - and ultimately emerged from the pandemic with stronger economic growth .
“ Saving lives and saving the economy are not in conflict right now , ” former Fed Chair Janet Yellen and more than 30 other current and former policymakers and economists wrote in a joint statement published earlier this week .
Paul Winfree , director of economic policy studies at the conservative Heritage Foundation , agrees that easing restrictions too early could be damaging . But , he said , allowing the downturn to deepen into a depression would ultimately negatively impact health .
“ The White House is starting to weigh the long and short term health consequences of coronavirus and mitigation ... ( and ) they are hearing from the business community that there needs to be some level of certainty , ” he said .
The question remains if the American consumer , who is responsible for about two-thirds of U.S. GDP , will be confident enough to go to crowded malls and cozy restaurants if the death toll is still rising .
UCLA professor Andy Atkeson says that though lifting lockdowns may seem like an economic shot in the arm , doing so could let infections shoot right back up again .
“ Americans would lock themselves down , afraid to go out to shop and work given the illness and death around them , ” Atkeson wrote .