Some outlandish rumors about COVID-19 , the disease caused by the new virus SARS-CoV-2 , still persist , and continue to percolate on the internet : To some , it ’ s a dastardly bioweapon designed to wreak economic armageddon on the West ; a left-wing conspiracy to damage the reelection prospects of President Trump ; a virus that leaked from a Wuhan laboratory .
Such paranoid speculation is at the very least unhelpful , health professionals say , and only serves to politicize a global public-health emergency and distract from potentially life-saving measures to contain and/or slow the spread of coronavirus . After reportedly jumping from animals to humans at a food market in Wuhan , China in early December or before .
“ Conspiracy theories politicize a public-health emergency and distract from potentially life-saving measures . ”
As the world struggles to come to terms with the prospect of COVID-19 changing the way we socialize and work , people are left wondering whether the financial markets have had a massive overreaction to yet another virus that will eventually fizzle out , or whether it ’ s time to buckle down and heed warnings of the disease ’ s seriousness issued by governments and health authorities .
Here , ███ breaks down the facts and fiction of the global pandemic :
Airborne transmission is “ plausible , ” according to a study published in the print edition in the peer-reviewed The New England Journal of Medicine this week from scientists at Princeton University , UCLA and the National Institutes of Health . The researchers concluded that the virus could remain airborne for “ up to 3 hours post aerosolization . ”
The scientists found that SARS-CoV-2 , the virus that causes the new disease COVID-19 , was detectable in the air for up to three hours , up to four hours on copper , up to 24 hours on cardboard , and up to two to three days on plastic and stainless steel . For those reasons , officials recommend washing hands , cleaning surfaces and “ social distancing ” in public spaces .
It ’ s recommended that you remain at least six feet apart from other people , especially indoors , experts say . “ Studies have looked at how far spit and little droplets fly , and that ’ s the magic number , ” said Luis Ostrosky , vice chairman of internal medicine at McGovern Medical School in Houston .
Dispatches from the front lines of a pandemic : ‘ They ’ ve likened it to a war where the number of casualties just keep on coming ’ : Italians find solidarity , resilience and music during the coronavirus lockdown
Will you be OK if you are young and healthy ?
“ The COVID-19 virus is capable of causing infection and severe disease in all people of all ages , ” said Dr. Maria Van Kerkhove , head of WHO ’ s emerging diseases and zoonosis unit . “ The data that we ’ ve seen from a number of countries is that the majority of children that are infected are experiencing mild disease , ” she said , adding that there has been a handful of childhood fatalities .
While there ’ s no question that the elderly and those with underlying conditions have been affected much more than other age group , younger people are not immune : 20 % of deaths in Korea were people under the age of 60 , and 15 % of people in intensive care units in Italy were under 50 years of age , said Dr. Michael Ryan , WHO ’ s top emergencies expert .
In New York state , where 50 % of the U.S. cases are located , Gov . Andrew Cuomo , a Democrat , said last week that roughly half of hospitalized coronavirus patients were between 18 and 49 . Among the latest fatalities : A 36-year-old public school principal from New York City — where there were more than 38,000 cases of coronavirus as of Tuesday morning .
“ It ’ s not certain how long the virus that causes Coronavirus survives on surfaces , but it seems to behave like other coronaviruses , ” the World Health Organization said . “ Studies suggest that coronaviruses — including preliminary information on the COVID-19 virus — may persist on surfaces for a few hours or up to several days . ”
Higher temperatures , based on earlier coronaviruses , are likely to degrade it . But experts caution that — as spring arrives in the Northern Hemisphere , which usually marks the end of the traditional flu season — this novel coronavirus may not necessarily go away in warmer weather . It is from a different family of viruses than the flu , and it is highly contagious .
Its life span will also vary , depending on the type of surface , temperature and/or humidity . Bathrooms are a welcoming environment for coronaviruses . “ Previous coronaviruses can remain viable in cold , moist surfaces up to nine days , ” Ostrosky said . So if you are sharing a home with someone who has coronavirus , he strongly advises against sharing the same bathroom .
President Trump speaks in an address to the nation from the Oval Office at the White House on Wednesday . He announced a suspension in travel from Europe to the U.S. Associated Press
In-flight oxygen is probably of higher quality than the air in your home . “ If you have an infected person in the front of the plane , and you ’ re in the back of the plane , your risk is close to zero simply because the area of exposure is thought to be roughly six feet from the infected person , ” according to Charles Chiu , professor of laboratory medicine at University of California , San Francisco .
“ Ventilation rates provide a total change of air 20 to 30 times per hour , ” the WHO says . “ Most modern aircraft have recirculation systems , which recycle up to 50 % of cabin air . The recirculated air is usually passed through HEPA ( high-efficiency particulate air ) filters , of the type used in hospital operating theatres and intensive care units , which trap dust particles , bacteria , fungi and viruses . ”
President Trump last week said he was “ marshaling the full power of the federal government ” by suspending travel for non-U.S. citizens from Europe to the U.S. for 30 days , later extending it to the U.K. and Ireland , a measure aimed at stopping sick people spreading COVID-19 . “ We made a lifesaving move with early action on China . Now we must take the same action with Europe , ” he said .
Dispatches from the front lines of a pandemic : ‘ The lack of an all-island response has also rattled communities on both sides of the Irish border. ’ Pubs close due to coronavirus , government issues new strict rules for funerals
“ Men do tend to be more affected than women and their symptoms are often more severe , ” Ostrosky said . “ Estrogen has a protective effect . When scientists block estrogen production in animals , they become more susceptible to coronaviruses and they get worse symptoms. ” He added , “ But please don ’ t take estrogen injections or pills . If you are a man , they will not help you . ”
Italy had 119,827 confirmed cases , as of Saturday , and has had the worst nationwide outbreak after the U.S. ( 278,568 ases ) . In Italy , the average age of those who have died from COVID-19 in Italy is 80.3 years old , and only 25.8 % are women , according to Silvio Brusaferro , legal representative at the Istituto Superiore di Sanità . Italy also has the oldest population in Europe .
Is there a gender difference when it comes to influenza ? “ No , with the flu it ’ s pretty even , ” Ostrosky said . The two illnesses have similar symptoms , including a sore throat and coughing . Coronavirus is a type of virus common in humans and animals , and causes mild-to-moderate respiratory illnesses . But in very severe cases it can travel through your body and damage other organs .
‘ Most face masks do not effectively filter small particles from the air and don ’ t prevent leakage around the edge of the mask when the user inhales , ’ the CDC says . ███ photo illustration/iStockphoto
Face masks help prevent patients from spreading the virus , but they are not as effective as protecting the healthy , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says . On Friday , it recommended the use of cloth face masks , saying they were useful for preventing the wearer from passing on the virus if he/she was asymptomatic . It reversed that stance , citing “ new evidence . ”
Some previous studies have concluded that face masks have helped reduce contagion by reducing droplets being sprayed into the air during flu season ; another Japanese-based study says this works when paired with vaccination , not an option in this case . it may be that they work in a small amount of cases and/or just wearing them helps to promote healthy behaviors .
Also see : ‘ You can never make things perfectly safe with zero risk. ’ How can you choose between saving the U.S. economy and saving lives ?
This study says N95 medical-grade masks do help filter viruses that are larger than 0.1 micrometers ( One micrometer , um , is one millionth of a meter . ) The coronavirus is 0.125 um . “ These products can help block large droplets expelled by the wearer , but also have been shown to have efficacy at filtering smaller particles and are designed to fit tightly to the face , ” it said .
Face masks are needed for health-care professionals . N95 masks are tighter-fitting than surgical masks and protect against small particles and large droplets , according to the CDC . Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said that there are only 30 million N95 masks in the national stockpile , and “ as many as 300 million masks are needed in the U.S. for health-care workers . ”
Recommended : How much exercise is OK during the coronavirus pandemic ? and in Paris , the French scramble to make sense of a chaotic situation — with paperwork
No . Seniors have a higher risk of getting severely sick and/or dying from COVID-19 . Italy has the oldest populations in Europe , and that ’ s one reason some observers say it ’ s had such a high fatality rate . Health professionals say people should remain at least six feet apart from other people because that ’ s roughly as far as the virus can travel in a cough , sneeze or when someone is talking .
Whether you ’ re on a plane or a train , you are at risk of contracting coronavirus , especially if you are seated near an infected person and/or you touch a contaminated surface and then your face without properly washing your hands . However , WHO says there ’ s no difference between sitting in a restaurant , office or movie theater : If you ’ re near an infected person , you ’ re at risk .
While you can ’ t do much about being seated next to an infected passenger on a plane at 30,000 feet , you can exercise responsible “ social distancing , ” Ostrosky said . “ The more people who are in that enclosed space with you , the higher the risk you have of being exposed to someone who is sick , ” he added . “ If we had to rank them , there is an increased risk in larger groups . ”
“ The average person should not worry about their clothing , ” Sarah Fortune , a professor and chair of the department of immunology and infectious diseases at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health , told ███ in an email . “ If you are a health-care provider and potentially subject to a high density of virus , the answer is different . But for most of us , it is all about our hands and face . ”
“ Coronaviruses in general last a lot longer on a solid , nonporous surface compared to porous fabrics , ” Juan Dumois , a pediatric infectious-diseases physician at Johns Hopkins All Children ’ s Hospital in St. Petersburg , Fla. , said . He suggested they would survive better on “ artificial fibers ” such as polyester than on cotton .
Not technically . Last month , WHO has declared COVID-19 a global pandemic . An outbreak is deemed to have become a pandemic when it has spread among humans on several continents , while an epidemic is a disease that infects regions or a community over a large geographical area . “ We ’ re deeply concerned , ” WHO head Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters last month .
But wasn ’ t coronavirus already a pandemic , given that it had reached approximately 130 countries by that time ? Not quite . There ’ s subjectivity involved in designating an epidemic a pandemic , and epidemiologists finally agreed that the efforts to contain the virus had failed . In other words , it ’ s now a matter of containing the spread and slowing it down to give scientists time to work on a vaccine .
Coronavirus had killed at least 7,163 people in the U.S. as of Saturday , 1,867 of which were in New York City , according to Johns Hopkins University . New York State has 102,870 confirmed cases , roughly 37 % of the U.S. total ; the U.S. accounts for 24 % of the global total . Worldwide , there were 1,140,327 confirmed cases of the virus and 60,887 reported deaths ; 233,930 have recovered .