Kim Kaseta waits for her patty melt while sitting at the counter at the Waffle House in Brookhaven , Georgia , on Monday .
White House coronavirus task force member Dr. Anthony Fauci urged caution Thursday as states begin to reopen from coronavirus shutdowns , warning against “ tempting a rebound ” in infections by returning too soon .
Fauci , appearing on NBC ’ s “ Today ” show , suggested that governors only begin to reopen their economies if they see a 14-day decline in new cases .
“ The only thing I can do is from 40,000 feet , just continue to urge the ones who don ’ t have that capability to really go very slowly , ” Fauci said . “ And those that do , go ahead and go by the guidelines . The guidelines very , very explicit and clear . ”
Governors are given “ a lot of leeway ” with the guidelines , but it ’ s necessary to adhere to their core principles moving forward , Fauci said .
“ You can ’ t just leap over things and get into a situation where you ’ re really tempting a rebound , ” he told host Savannah Guthrie . “ That ’ s the thing I get concerned about . I hope they don ’ t do that . ”
But Fauci insisted he wasn ’ t “ nervous ” about the expiring federal social distancing guidelines and as many as two dozens states with plans to restart their economies as soon as Friday .
“ I wouldn ’ t say it makes me nervous , but it makes me again committed to the things that I have been speaking about now for a considerable period of time , ever since we got into the mitigation phase , the 30-day guidelines of gradually opening up as we get into now opening up America , ” Fauci said . “ Remember , that ’ s a phased process . ”
Fauci stressed the importance of 14 days of “ continual diminution ” in numbers of new COVID-19 cases prior to any reopening , but warned of “ blips ” that may occur .
“ When you pull back , there will be cases , ” Fauci said . “ And what we need to do is make sure they have in place the capability of identifying , isolating and contact-tracing individuals . If they do that , I feel cautiously optimistic . ”