What happens if Covid-19 symptoms don ’ t go away ? Doctors are trying to figure it out .
Share All sharing options for : What happens if Covid-19 symptoms don ’ t go away ? Doctors are trying to figure it out .
In late March , when Covid-19 was first surging , Jake Suett , a doctor of anesthesiology and intensive care medicine with the National Health Service in Norfolk , England , had seen plenty of patients with the disease — and intubated a few of them .
Then one day , he started to feel unwell , tired , with a sore throat . He pushed through it , continuing to work for five days until he developed a dry cough and fever . “ Eventually , I got to the point where I was gasping for air literally doing nothing , lying on my bed . ”
At the hospital , his chest X-rays and oxygen levels were normal — except he was gasping for air . After he was sent home , he continued to experience trouble breathing and developed severe cardiac-type chest pain .
Because of a shortage of Covid-19 tests , Suett wasn ’ t immediately tested ; when he was able to get a test , 24 days after he got sick , it came back negative . PCR tests , which are most commonly used , can only detect acute infections , and because of testing shortages , not everyone has been able to get a test when they need one .
It ’ s now been 14 weeks since Suett ’ s presumed infection and he still has symptoms , including trouble concentrating , known as brain fog . ( One recent study in Spain found that a majority of 841 hospitalized Covid-19 patients had neurological symptoms , including headaches and seizures . ) “ I don ’ t know what my future holds anymore , ” Suett says .
Some doctors have dismissed some of his ongoing symptoms . One doctor suggested his intense breathing difficulties might be related to anxiety . “ I found that really surprising , ” Suett says . “ As a doctor , I wanted to tell people , ‘ Maybe we ’ re missing something here. ’ ” He ’ s concerned not just for himself , but that many Covid-19 survivors with long-term symptoms aren ’ t being acknowledged or treated .
Related My coronavirus survivor group is my most important medical support right now
Suett says that even if the proportion of people who don ’ t eventually fully recover is small , there ’ s still a significant population who will need long-term care — and they ’ re having trouble getting it . “ It ’ s a huge , unreported problem , and it ’ s crazy no one is shouting this from rooftops . ”
In the US , a number of specialized centers are popping up at hospitals to help treat — and study — ongoing Covid-19 symptoms . The most successful draw on existing post-ICU protocols and a wide range of experts , from pulmonologists to psychiatrists . Yet even as care improves , patients are also running into familiar challenges in finding treatment : accessing and being able to pay for it .
Scientists are still learning about the many ways the virus that causes Covid-19 impacts the body — both during initial infection and as symptoms persist .
One of the researchers studying them is Michael Peluso , a clinical fellow in infectious diseases at the University of California San Francisco , who is currently enrolling Covid-19 patients in San Francisco in a two-year study to study the disease ’ s long-term effects . The goal is to better understand what symptoms people are developing , how long they last , and eventually , the mechanisms that cause them . This could help scientists answer questions like how antibodies and immune cells called T-cells respond to the virus , and how different individuals might have different immune responses , leading to longer or shorter recovery times .
At the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic , “ the assumption was that people would get better , and then it was over , ” Peluso says . “ But we know from lots of other viral infections that there is almost always a subset of people who experience longer-term consequences. ” He explains these can be due to damage to the body during the initial illness , the result of lingering viral infection , or because of complex immunological responses that occur after the initial disease .
“ People sick enough to be hospitalized are likely to experience prolonged recovery , but with Covid-19 , we ’ re seeing tremendous variability , ” he says . It ’ s not necessarily just the sickest patients who experience long-term symptoms , but often people who weren ’ t even initially hospitalized .
“ We know from lots of other viral infections that there is almost always a subset of people who experience longer-term consequences ”
That ’ s why long-term studies of large numbers of Covid-19 patients are so important , Peluso says . Once researchers can find what might be causing long-term symptoms , they can start targeting treatments to help people feel better . “ I hope that a few months from now , we ’ ll have a sense if there is a biological target for managing some of these long-term symptoms . ”
Lekshmi Santhosh , a physician lead and founder of the new post-Covid OPTIMAL Clinic at UCSF , says many of her patients are reporting the same kinds of problems . “ The majority of patients have either persistent shortness of breath and/or fatigue for weeks to months , ” she says .
Additionally , Timothy Henrich , a virologist and viral immunologist at UCSF who is also a principal investigator in the study , says that getting better at managing the initial illness may also help . “ More effective acute treatments may also help reduce severity and duration of post-infectious symptoms . ”
In the meantime , doctors can already help patients by treating some of their lingering symptoms . But the first step , Peluso explains , is not dismissing them . “ It is important that patients know — and that doctors send the message — that they can help manage these symptoms , even if they are incompletely understood , ” he says . “ It sounds like many people may not be being told that . ”
Even though we have a lot to learn about the specific damage Covid-19 can cause , doctors already know quite a bit about recovery from other viruses : namely , how complex and challenging a task long-term recovery from any serious infection can be for many patients .
Generally , it ’ s common for patients who have been hospitalized , intubated , or ventilated — as is common with severe Covid-19 — to have a long recovery . Being bed-bound can cause muscle weakness , known as deconditioning , which can result in prolonged shortness of breath . After a severe illness , many people also experience anxiety , depression , and PTSD .
A stay in the ICU not uncommonly leads to delirium , a serious mental disorder sometimes resulting in confused thinking , hallucinations , and reduced awareness of surroundings . But Covid-19 has created a “ delirium factory , ” says Santhosh at UCSF . This is because the illness has meant long hospital stays , interactions only with staff in full PPE , and the absence of family or other visitors .
Theodore Iwashyna , an ICU physician-scientist at the University of Michigan and VA Ann Arbor , is involved with the CAIRO Network , a group of 40 post-intensive care clinics on four continents . In general , after patients are discharged from ICUs , he says , “ about half of people have some substantial new disability , and half will never get back to work . Maybe a third of people will have some degree of cognitive impairment . And a third have emotional problems. ” And it ’ s common for them to have difficulty getting care for their ongoing symptoms after being discharged .
In working with Covid-19 patients , says Santhosh , she tells patients , “ We believe you ... and we are going to work on the mind and body together . ”
Yet it ’ s currently impossible to predict who will have long-lasting symptoms from Covid-19 . “ People who are older and frailer with more comorbidities are more likely to have longer physical recovery . However , I ’ ve seen a lot of young people be really , really sick , ” Santhosh says . “ They will have a long tail of recovery too . ”
At the new OPTIMAL Clinic at UCSF , doctors are seeing patients who were hospitalized for Covid-19 at the UCSF health system , as well as taking referrals of other patients with persistent pulmonary symptoms . For ongoing cough and chest tightness , the clinic is providing inhalers , as well as pulmonary rehabilitation , including gradual aerobic exercise with oxygen monitoring . They ’ re also connecting patients with mental health resources .
“ Normalizing those symptoms , as well as plugging people into mental health care , is really critical , ” says Santhosh , who is also the physician lead and founder of the clinic . “ I want people to know this is real . It ’ s not ‘ in their heads . ’ ”
Neeta Thakur , a pulmonary specialist at Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center who has been providing care for Covid-19 patients in the ICU , just opened a similar outpatient clinic for post-Covid care . Thakur has also arranged a multidisciplinary approach , including occupational and physical therapy , as well as expedited referrals to neurology colleagues for rehabilitation for the muscles and nerves that can often be compressed when patients are prone for long periods in the ICU . But she ’ s most concerned by the cognitive impairments she ’ s seeing , especially as she ’ s dealing with a lot of younger patients .
These California centers join new post-Covid-19 clinics in major cities across the country , including Mount Sinai in New York and National Jewish Health Hospital in Denver . As more and more hospitals begin to focus on post-Covid care , Iwashyna suggests patients try to seek treatment where they were hospitalized , if possible , because of the difficulty in transferring sufficient medical records .
Santosh recommends that patients with persistent symptoms call their closest hospital , or nearest academic medical center ’ s pulmonary division , and ask if they can participate in any clinical trials . Many of the new clinics are enrolling patients in studies to try to better understand the long-term consequences of the disease . Fortunately , treatment associated with research is often free , and sometimes also offers financial incentives to participants .
But otherwise , one of the biggest challenges in post-Covid-19 treatment is — like so much of American health care — being able to pay for it .
Outside of clinical trials , cost can be a barrier to treatment . It can be tricky to get insurance to cover long-term care , Iwashyna notes . After being discharged from an ICU , he says , “ Recovery depends on [ patients ’ ] social support , and how broke they are afterward. ” Many struggle to cover the costs of treatment . “ Our patient population is all underinsured , ” says Thakur , noting that her hospital works with patients to try to help cover costs .
Related 4 aftershocks of the coronavirus pandemic that will be felt for years
Lasting health impacts can also affect a person ’ s ability to go back to work . In Iwashyna ’ s experience , many patients quickly run through their guaranteed 12 weeks of leave under the Family Medical and Leave Act , which isn ’ t required to be paid . Eve Leckie , a 39-year-old ICU nurse in New Hampshire , came down with Covid-19 on March 15 . Since then , Leckie has experienced symptom relapses and still can ’ t even get a drink of water without help .
“ I ’ m typing this to you from my bed , because I ’ m too short of breath today to get out , ” they say . “ This could disable me for the rest of my life , and I have no idea how much that would cost , or at what point I will lose my insurance , since it ’ s dependent on my employment , and I ’ m incapable of working. ” Leckie was the sole wage earner for their five children , and was facing eviction when their partner “ essentially rescued us , ” allowing them to move in .
These long-term burdens are not being felt equally . At Thakur ’ s hospital in San Francisco , “ The population [ admitted ] here is younger and Latinx , a disparity which reflects who gets exposed , ” she says . She worries that during the pandemic , “ social and structural determinants of health will just widen disparities across the board. ” People of color have been disproportionately affected by the virus , in part because they are less likely to be able to work from home .
Black people are also more likely to be hospitalized if they get Covid-19 , both because of higher rates of preexisting conditions — which are the result of structural inequality — and because of lack of access to health care .
“ If you are more likely to be exposed because of your job , and likely to seek care later because of fear of cost , or needing to work , you ’ re more likely to have severe disease , ” Thakur says . “ As a result , you ’ re more likely to have long-term consequences . Depending on what that looks like , your ability to work and economic opportunities will be hindered . It ’ s a very striking example of how social determinants of health can really impact someone over their lifetime . ”
If policies don ’ t support people with persistent symptoms in getting the care they need , ongoing Covid-19 challenges will deepen what ’ s already a clear crisis of inequality .
Iwashyna explains that a lot of extended treatment for Covid-19 patients is “ going to be about interactions with health care systems that are not well-designed . The correctable problems often involve helping people navigate a horribly fragmented health care system .
“ We can fix that , but we ’ re not going to fix that tomorrow . These patients need help now . ”
Lois Parshley is a freelance investigative journalist and the 2019-2020 Snedden Chair of Journalism at the University of Alaska Fairbanks . Follow her Covid-19 reporting on Twitter @ loisparshley .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .