This Feb. 24 , 2020 photo provided by Greg and Rose Yerex shows them in a hospital in Nagoya , Japan . Former passengers of the cruise ship Diamond Princess , they both tested positive for the coronavirus . Rose has since tested negative for the virus but decided to stay with Greg until he is cleared to leave . The couple said they 're happy to have each other , but that living in isolation has been difficult . `` I just want to go home and be normal , '' Greg said . ( Greg Yerex via AP )
This Feb. 24 , 2020 photo provided by Greg and Rose Yerex shows them in a hospital in Nagoya , Japan . Former passengers of the cruise ship Diamond Princess , they both tested positive for the coronavirus . Rose has since tested negative for the virus but decided to stay with Greg until he is cleared to leave . The couple said they 're happy to have each other , but that living in isolation has been difficult . `` I just want to go home and be normal , '' Greg said . ( Greg Yerex via AP )
SEATTLE ( AP ) — Amid all the fears , quarantines and stockpiling of food , it has been easy to ignore the fact that more than 60,000 people have recovered from the coronavirus spreading around the globe .
The disease can cause varying degrees of illness and is especially troublesome for older adults and people with existing health problems , who are at risk of severe effects , including pneumonia . But for most of those affected , coronavirus creates only mild or moderate symptoms , such as fever and cough , with the vast majority recovering from the virus .
According to the World Health Organization , people with mild illness recover in about two weeks , while those with more severe ailments may take three to six weeks to rebound . In mainland China , where the virus first exploded , more than 80,000 people have been diagnosed , but more than 60,000 already have recovered .
Because the difference in impact can be so great , global health authorities have the difficult task of alerting the public to the virus ’ dangers without creating panic .
Already , the widespread consequences of the virus have been staggering , sending shock waves through the world ’ s financial markets . Global oil prices sustained their worst percentage losses since the the Gulf War in 1991 , and new restrictions were imposed in Italy and in Israel as the Holy Week approached .
But even some of the most vulnerable patients can fight their way through the disease .
Charlie Campbell ’ s father , 89-year-old Eugene Campbell , has been diagnosed with the coronavirus and is hospitalized in Edmonds , Washington . Charlie Campbell said his father ’ s doctor is cautiously optimistic , adding , “ Under normal circumstances , he would discharge my dad , but these aren ’ t normal circumstances . ”
Eugene Campbell came to the hospital from Life Care Center , a nursing home in Kirkland that has been linked to a large share of the state ’ s coronavirus deaths .
“ We went and saw him yesterday and he looked pretty good , ” Campbell said , noting that his father is breathing normally and his vital signs and heart rate are good . “ He may be the oldest person to recover from coronavirus . ”
In China , Tan Shiyun , a postgraduate student at a university in Wuhan , had traveled to her family home in Yichang over 180 miles away when she began to experience minor symptoms from the virus .
She went to the hospital , where she was given common cold medicine and sent home . It was only after her symptoms persisted and she visited the hospital a second time for an outpatient CT scan and received a call asking her to come back did she understand her symptoms came from something other than the common flu .
After many days and a number of tests , doctors eventually told her that the infection had spread to both of her lungs .
“ After that , I felt a heavy head while walking , unable to breathe , and nauseous , ” Tan said in a video blog post . But after over two weeks in the hospital , a CT scan showed her infection was disappearing and she was discharged .
For some who ’ ve been quarantined , anxiety and dread that they will become stigmatized by friends , neighbors and co-workers have equaled their concerns about their physical health . A few patients with the virus who were interviewed by The ███ — all of them passengers on the Diamond Princess cruise ship that ended up quarantined off Japan — described symptoms that were no stronger than a regular cold or flu .
For some who ’ ve been quarantined , anxiety and dread that they will become stigmatized by friends , neighbors and co-workers have made them reluctant to acknowledge even the most modest health impact . A few patients with the virus who were interviewed by The ███ — all of them passengers on the Diamond Princess cruise ship that ended up quarantined off Japan — described symptoms that were no stronger than a regular cold or flu .
“ It ’ s been a 2 on a scale of 10 , ” said Carl Goldman , hospitalized in Omaha , Nebraska , since Feb. 17 , after developing a 103-degree fever on a chartered flight from Japan to the U.S .
Goldman is staying hydrated with Gatorade . He said he continued coughing more than two weeks after he first got sick , but would probably only have missed one day of work if he had been diagnosed with the cold or flu . He stays active by pacing in his room , trying to match his pre-sickness routine of 10,000 daily steps on the pedometer .
“ I totally get this is where I need to be and I need to be cleared of this before I ’ m released , ” he said .
American Greg Yerex , who was diagnosed along with his wife , Rose Yerex , on the Diamond Princess , said he had no symptoms and felt as healthy as he did on any other normal day .
“ If I was home , I would be out doing everything I normally do , ” he said in an interview conducted via Facebook calls when the couple were still hospitalized in Nagoya , Japan . Rose Yerex tested negative when she got to the hospital .
For Greg Yerex , it was the couple ’ s mental health that faced the biggest threat as they they spent days in quarantine , isolated from friends and family and deprived of any direct human contact .
“ It ’ s like being a prisoner , ” he said . “ You pace , you worry , you fret , you imagine all sorts of things . You have no control . ”
Greg Yerex said that he and his wife , who have since been released from the hospital , plan to go to counseling to work through the mental stress they experienced .
“ I don ’ t get to speak with anyone , ” she said in a Facebook call while still hospitalized in Nagoya . “ I have a little window in my room , but can not leave . The only contact I have is through Facebook messenger . I would never wish this on anyone . ”
Frasure said one of the things she found most frustrating was waiting for her test results to come back . Patients who have been diagnosed with the virus must have two consecutive negative tests before they can be released .
Frasure is now out of the hospital , but is worried about being stigmatized by her home community .
“ Are they going to be afraid ? ” she wondered . ” Are they going to criticize me for being home , thinking I brought virus back with me ? ”
This story corrects that the Gulf War was in 1991 , not 1999 .
The ███ Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ’ s Department of Science Education . The AP is solely responsible for all content .