The novel coronavirus has infected nearly 100,000 people worldwide — spreading to around 90 countries and even slipping past the walls of the Vatican .
The tiny city-state within Rome confirmed its first case Friday , but wouldn ’ t say who was infected .
The Vatican has insisted that Pope Francis — who canceled audiences last week over a “ slight indisposition ” — has only a cold . He has tested negative for the coronavirus .
Vatican officials said they are working with Italian authorities to prevent the spread of COVID-19 .
Italy as a whole remained the European epicenter of the illness , particularly in its northern regions . A total of 148 fatalities have been reported there .
Meanwhile , in Iran , 3,500 cases and at least 107 deaths have been reported — including senior politician Hossein Sheikholeslam , a diplomat and the country ’ s former ambassador to Syria , Business Insider reported .
Eight percent of the country ’ s parliament has tested positive for the deadly infection , CNN reported earlier this week .
In the UK , a woman in her 70s with underlying health conditions became the first person in the country to die of COVID-19 , the BBC reported .
The woman , who had been “ in and out of hospital for non-coronavirus reasons , ” was admitted and tested positive for the infection Wednesday .
The total number of people infected in the country surged to 116 Friday — rising by more than 30 in 24 hours — but the prime minister ’ s official spokesman said it was “ highly likely the virus is going to spread in a significant way , ” according to the report .
The Netherlands and Cameroon each reported their first cases on Friday .
South Korea , the second-hardest-hit country , saw 505 additional cases reported Friday , a notable decline from a high of 851 Tuesday .
While the country has touted its “ remarkable diagnostic and treatment abilities , ” vice health minister Kim Gang-lip said , “ It ’ s not easy to make predictions about how the situation … would play out . ”
China , where the virus originated in December , reported 143 new cases Friday , the same as a day earlier — but a marked decline from earlier in the outbreak .
Only a month ago , China reported several thousand new cases a day , outnumbering infections in other countries about 120 to 1 .