LONDON/BRUSSELS ( ███ ) - Fears of a second wave of COVID-19 infections shut six major food markets in Beijing on Friday , while India , which opened up this week , recorded a record daily increase and half a dozen U.S. states said their hospital beds were filling up fast .
Health officials worldwide have expressed concerns in recent days that some countries grappling with the devastating economic impact of lockdowns may lift restrictions too swiftly , and that the coronavirus could spread during mass anti-racism protests .
“ We must be ready to roll back relaxation of measures if needed , ” the European Union ’ s health commissioner Stella Kyriakides said after urging its 27 members to plough ahead with testing the population as they reopen schools and businesses .
In China , where the new coronavirus originated , two new cases of COVID-19 , the disease it causes , were recorded in the capital . Authorities closed part or all of six big wholesale food markets which the two men had recently visited but it was not known how they had become infected .
India opened most public transport , offices and malls this week after nearly 70 days even though health officials said it was weeks away from flattening the rising infection curve .
The official death toll , at 8,498 , is relatively small , but the health ministry said registered cases rose by 10,956 on Friday , a record , with many in Delhi , Mumbai and Chennai .
Syed Ahmed Bukhari , the head of Delhi ’ s Jama Masjid , one of India ’ s biggest mosques , ordered a halt to congregations until the end of the month .
“ What is the point of visiting mosques at a time when the virus is spreading so fast ? ” he said .
In Turkey , the top medical association said the easing of restrictions on June 1 had come too soon , although the daily death toll as fallen in recent weeks to about 20 .
“ There is talk of when the second wave will hit , but we have not yet been able to overcome the first wave , ” Cavit Isik Yavuz , part of the coronavirus research team at the Turkish Medics Association said .
While new infections are slowing in most of Europe , health experts see a moderate to high risk that post-lockdown rises may warrant new restrictions .
Related Coverage Factbox : Global surge in coronavirus cases raise fears about second wave
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) predicted a moderate acceleration across Europe in coming weeks , which could place healthcare systems under stress if not checked rapidly . Government control measures could check and reverse upward trends within two to three weeks , it said .
Andrea Ammon , director of the ECDC , stressed the importance of maintaining physical distancing , hand hygiene and what she called “ respiratory etiquette ” .
Officials have expressed concern the virus could spread among the tens of thousands who have crowded together in Europe ’ s big cities to demonstrate against racism after the death in U.S. police custody of George Floyd .
“ Mass events could be a major route of transmission , ” said Martin Seychell , a health official at the EU Commission .
World Health Organization ( WHO ) Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said late on Thursday that the threat of a resurgence remained very real .
“ We must also remember that , although the situation is improving here in Europe , globally it ’ s getting worse ... We will continue to need global solidarity to defeat this pandemic fully , ” he said .
Of 5,347 new deaths recorded worldwide , 3,681 were in the Americas , the WHO said on Thursday .
In about half a dozen U.S. states including Texas and Arizona , the number of coronavirus patients filling hospital beds is rising , fanning concerns that the reopening of the U.S. economy may unleash a second wave of infections . Alabama , Florida , North Carolina , South Carolina , Oregon and Nebraska all had a record number of new cases on Thursday .
“ I want the reopening to be successful , ” Harris County Judge Lina Hidalgo , the top executive for the county that encompasses Houston , Texas , told reporters . “ But I ’ m growing increasingly concerned that we may be approaching the precipice of a disaster . ”
More hospitalisations inevitably mean more deaths ahead , said Spencer Fox , research associate at the University of Texas at Austin .
“ We are starting to see very worrying signs about the course the pandemic is taking in cities and states in the U.S. and around the world , ” he said . “ When you start seeing those signs , you need to act fairly quickly . ”
Wall Street ’ s main indexes opened sharply higher on Friday , a day after the biggest one-day dive in about three months on fears of a resurgence in infections . Global stocks .MIWD00000PUS were up 1.3 % after four days of consecutive losses .
The United States has now recorded more than 113,000 coronavirus deaths , by far the most in the world . That figure could be over 200,000 by September , Ashish Jha , the head of Harvard ’ s Global Health Institute , told CNN .