Anita Shaffer went for a drive around her neighborhood on Sunday and came home with a $ 200 fine for violating Pennsylvania 's stay-at-home order that 's meant to contain the spread of COVID-19 .
Shaffer told PennLive that she went for a leisurely drive simply to get out of the house , but ended up getting pulled over by two state police officers as she was returning home . The cops said her taillight was out , but the ticket they ended up issuing to Shaffer says she violated the state 's Disease Control and Prevention Act of 1955 and `` failed to abide by the order of the governor and secretary of health issued to control the spread of a communicable disease . ''
`` He asked me if I was aware of the stay-at-home act , '' Shaffer told PennLive 's Jan Murphy . `` I am aware of it but I did n't know it pertained to just driving . ''
Indeed , why should it ? The key to stopping the spread of the coronavirus , we 've been told by public health officials , is social distancing—that is , staying away from interpersonal contact as much as possible . A single person sitting inside their own car is no less isolated than someone sitting alone inside their house would be . In fact , if Shaffer 's story is true , the only interpersonal contact she had while driving on Sunday was with the officers who pulled her over !
`` Troopers have been encouraged to use contacts with the public as opportunities to reinforce the necessity to abide by stay-at-home orders , '' is how Ryan Tarkowski , a spokesman for the state police , explained the encounter . But maybe at a time when `` contacts with the public '' are considered a public health risk , the cops could find a better strategy .
Unfortunately , Shaffer 's story is not a singular one . A paddleboarder in California was arrested last week for violating the state 's stay-at-home order . Apparently being surrounded by open water is insufficient social distancing . In New York City , where the COVID-19 outbreak is most severe right now , police have been arresting people for violating social distancing orders—technically , the arrests were for `` obstructing governmental administration , unlawful assembly , and disorderly conduct , '' The Intercept reports—and packing them together in crowded jails .
There has been much discussion about whether the treatment for the coronavirus outbreak is worse than the disease itself . Any serious accounting of the pandemic must take into account the immense economic damage and widespread unemployment caused by stay-at-home orders and mandatory shutdowns .
A corollary to that discussion is the question of how aggressively shutdown orders should be policed . Yes , they are necessary to stop the spread of the disease and can not be ignored , but you risk tipping beyond protecting the public and actually increasing the risk of spreading disease with aggressive enforcement . What if one of the officers who gave Shaffer a ticket was an asymptomatic carrier ? Nearly 2,000 cops in New York City have tested positive for COVID-19—which suggests that you might be more likely to contract the disease while getting written up for leaving your house to go for a run or drive than if you 'd simply been allowed to go for a run or drive .
And that says nothing of the civil liberties violation that occurred when Shaffer was pulled over for doing absolutely nothing that threatened public health . If anything , driving for recreation should be encouraged right now . It 's a way for people to get out of the house and have a bit of fun—especially with roads being so empty and gas prices falling to near record lows—while maintaining social distance .
As local and state governments try to find the right balance between enforcing mandatory quarantines and respecting civil liberties , they should pursue policies that are driven by science , that are proportionate to the risks involved , and that do not last any longer than necessary , says Elizabeth Goitein , director for liberty and national security at the Brennan Center for Justice , a legal policy think tank . She worries that ramped up scrutiny of every detail of everyday life could become a new normal that tilts away from freedom .
`` Could we start to see—once people get socialized to this idea that governments have this power—could we see governments a little more willing to use that power ? '' she asks . `` I think we 're going to have to be extremely careful , extremely vigilant that we do n't allow this time in our history to break down the barriers to powers the government should not have . ''
Police should not have the power to stop and question everyone who leaves their home in apparent contravention of a stay-at-home order . Even in a time when those orders are in place , the default assumption can not become that movement is illegal unless approved by the state .
Yes , the police may have a role to play in preventing large public gatherings and other actual violations of social distancing guidelines , but not every apparent violation of a quarantine order is a risk to other people . For that matter , not all violations of quarantine orders can be enforced , as there simply are n't enough cops to do so . And if enforcement is going to be arbitrary , then it would be no surprise to see some communities and individuals targeted for reasons that have nothing to do with public health . ( And for heaven 's sake , do n't call the cops on your neighbors ! )
Shaffer tells PennLive that she plans to appeal the ticket and fine . When this is all over , a court should have no trouble clearing her name .
( UPDATE : York County District Attorney Dave Sunday has announced his intention to withdraw the citation against Shaffer . `` Based on the facts in this one specific case , the fact that she was on her way home , that she was by herself in her car , that she was completely cooperative . I think that prosecution from my office of this may not be in the public interest , '' Sunday told WSBA Morning News with Gary Sutton . )