The Senate ’ s return is a test case for the House
CORONAVIRUS CONUNDRUM -- If Congress returns too soon and lawmakers contract coronavirus , leaders could face backlash for not keeping members safe . But if Congress doesn ’ t get back to business , leaders could take heat for sitting on the sidelines in the middle of a crisis . Those are the competing pressures that the Senate and House are under as they make decisions about when — and how — to reopen .
So far , the chambers are taking divergent approaches . But the House will surely be keeping a close eye on operations in the Senate , which is returning today despite D.C. ’ s stay-at-home order . The Office of Attending Physician is recommending that senators conduct self-health audits and wear face masks , though it is not required ; press conferences are being moved to larger rooms ; social distancing will be enforced at stakeouts ; and only one print pool reporter will be allowed at most committee hearings . More on the guidelines from WSJ ’ s Lindsay Wise and Natalie Andrews : https : //on.wsj.com/2SvQIhu .
Across the Capitol , the House is delaying its return by at least another week . But some lawmakers and senior aides think the House may need to push its return even further : The Capitol physician informed members of the House Administration Committee Friday that coronavirus cases may not peak in the D.C. region until mid- or even late May . And leaders have so far struggled to reach a bipartisan agreement on how to safely function amid the pandemic .
House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) laid out his own list of ideas this morning on how to reopen , such as bringing back a few committees first and allowing them to work on bills before calling back the rest of the House for a floor vote . His pitch comes as lawmakers in both parties have grown increasingly frustrated that they ’ ve been asked to vote on massive coronavirus bills that were hashed out by leadership in back-room deals . More on all this from Sarah , your Huddle host and Heather : https : //politi.co/2ypfmcF .
THE HOUSE AND SENATE , however , agree on at least one thing . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and Speaker Nancy Pelosi joined forces to issue a rare joint statement denying a White House offer to provide rapid testing in the Capitol , because they don ’ t want Congress to get special treatment . Trump sounded off on the decision , which might be a politically savvy move but could also be a public health gamble . “ No reason to turn it down , except politics , ” Trump tweeted . “ Crazy Nancy will use it as an excuse not to show up to work ! ” More from Marianne : https : //politi.co/3c2mnyt .
Related reads : “ Back in session : Senate risks a return but House stays away , ” via The AP ’ s Lisa Mascaro : https : //bit.ly/2WnTzdo ; and “ Is the Future of Congress on Zoom ? ” by Ben Jacobs for New York Magazine : https : //nym.ag/3c8217m .
WILL PROGRESSIVES PLAY HARDBALL ? -- For all the talk of a rising left , progressives have so far struggled to wield influence in the House during negotiations on the coronavirus relief bills . Part of the reason is that the bills have been drawn up by congressional leaders in a near-empty Capitol — and top-down approach that has become more necessary during the pandemic . And Republicans , who control both the White House and the Senate , have rejected progressives ' most ambitious proposals .
But only one Democrat , liberal Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York , has actually voted against any of the four rescue packages on the floor . “ There ’ s an enormous amount of pressure , I think , that progressive leadership is under , that ’ s saying , ‘ Well , are you really going to vote against crumbs for hospitals ? ’ ” Ocasio Cortez said in an interview just before the vote last month . “ I think a lot of that leadership is going to have to depend on outside agitation . ”
The next coronavirus relief package represents progressives ’ most critical — and perhaps last — chance to make a mark , and they are determined to have a louder voice in the talks . But it ’ s unclear if they will be able to win major concessions . While the co-chairs of the Congressional Progressive Caucus frequently work behind the scenes with Speaker Nancy Pelosi to shape major bills , some in the caucus complain they are disappointed with the final product — which usually skews toward the caucus ’ moderate wing , the “ majority makers ” who delivered Democrats the House . Sarah and Heather with the smart story : https : //politi.co/2zWP0zb .
Related reads : “ For A.O.C. , ‘ Existential Crises ’ as Her District Becomes the Coronavirus Epicenter , ” by NYT ’ s Mark Leibovich : https : //nyti.ms/2KWUPyH ; and “ Obstacles mount for deal on next coronavirus bill , ” from The Hill ’ s Jordain Carney : https : //bit.ly/2KZKnGW .
HAPPY MONDAY ! Welcome to Huddle , the play-by-play guide to all things Capitol Hill , on this May 4 . A Florida man was arrested for trying to quarantine on a private Disney island — where would be your dream spot to self-isolate ?
FRIDAY ’ S MOST CLICKED : Burgess and Marianne ’ s story on how the Senate lacks the capacity to test all senators for coronavirus was the winner .
President Donald Trump speaks during a Fox News virtual town hall from the Lincoln Memorial , Sunday , May 3 , 2020 , in Washington . ( AP Photo/Evan Vucci ) | Evan Vucci/AP Photo
FAUCI FIGHT -- A battle is heating up over whether Dr. Anthony Fauci will be able to testify on Capitol Hill . WaPo with the scoop : “ The White House is blocking Anthony S. Fauci from testifying before a House subcommittee investigating the coronavirus outbreak and response , arguing that it would be ‘ counterproductive ’ for him to appear next week while in the midst of participating in the government ’ s response to the pandemic . The White House issued a statement about Fauci ’ s testimony shortly after The Washington Post published a story Friday afternoon quoting a spokesman for the House Appropriations Committee , who said the White House was refusing to allow Fauci to appear at a subcommittee hearing next week .
`` Fauci is expected to appear at a Senate hearing related to testing the following week , according to a senior administration official , who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal planning . ‘ It ’ s not muzzling , it ’ s not blocking , it ’ s simply trying to ensure we ’ re able to balance the need for oversight , the legitimate need for oversight , with their responsibilities to handle covid-19 work at their respective agencies and departments , ’ said the official , who noted that health risks entailed in moving around in public places were also a factor. ” The story from Erica Werner and Mike DeBonis : https : //wapo.st/2SzeIjF .
WHO IS DOUG JONES ? -- Is the Senate Democrats ’ campaign arm preparing to cut Sen. Doug Jones ( D-Alabama ) loose ? Burgess and James Arkin explore : “ There 's a glaring omission as Democrats lay down millions of dollars to try and win control of the Senate : Democratic Alabama Sen. Doug Jones . The two leading Senate Democratic campaign groups reserved nearly $ 100 million for the fall in half a dozen states with Republican incumbents . But so far they have put down nothing to protect their most vulnerable incumbent and aren ’ t yet formally committing to spend big dollars for him .
“ Jones said the cavalry will come eventually . ‘ I don ’ t think they have to do that right now . I don ’ t even have an opponent yet . I don ’ t think that they ’ re going to leave us out at all , ’ Jones said in an interview . … Jones faces perhaps the most difficult Senate reelection fight in the country , and it ’ s reflected by Democrats ’ caution at going all in . The party has dumped money into tough races in red states in recent years only to see their candidates and incumbents get blown out from Louisiana to Arkansas to Tennessee , but has also won tough races in Montana and West Virginia. ” The dispatch : https : //politi.co/3dfg0bC .
A DIFFERENT KIND OF SOCIAL DISTANCING -- Moderate and vulnerable Republicans are notably keeping their distance from Trump during the pandemic . The New York Times with the story : “ Every evening from his kitchen table in southwestern Michigan , Representative Fred Upton , a moderate Republican running for his 18th term in office , posts a coronavirus dispatch for his constituents , highlighting his own efforts to respond to the crisis and the news from Washington , often with cameos from Democrats . Absent from his Facebook updates are any mentions of President Trump , whose response to the pandemic has raised questions that threaten to drag down Republicans ’ electoral prospects this fall , or of the president ’ s provocative news briefings , which have become a forum for partisan attacks on Democrats and dubious claims about the virus .
“ It is a tricky task for lawmakers like Mr. Upton in centrist districts throughout the country , who understand that their re-election prospects — and any hope their party might have of taking back the House of Representatives — could rise or fall based on how they address the pandemic . Already considered a politically endangered species before the novel coronavirus began ravaging the United States , these moderates are now working to counter the risk that their electoral fates could become tied to Mr. Trump ’ s response at a time when the independent voters whose support they need are increasingly unhappy with his performance. ” More from Catie Edmondson and Rebecca R. Ruiz : https : //nyti.ms/2z9zvTW .
Zack Roday , who was communications director for House Energy and Commerce Committee Republicans , has started as a senior strategist for GuidePost Strategies .
Rina Patel is now associate director of allied groups for women , youth and LGBTQ+ outreach at the Democratic National Convention Committee . She previously was legislative aide for the Congressional Equality Caucus .
The Senate meets at 3 p.m. At 5:30 p.m. , the Senate is expected to vote on confirmation of the nomination of Robert J. Feitel to be inspector general of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission .
House Democratic Caucus Chair Hakeem Jeffries ( D-N.Y. ) holds a conference call briefing with the co-chairs of the caucus Task Force on Aging and Families to discuss seniors and COVID-19 at 2 p.m .
FRIDAY ’ S WINNER : Maggie Herman was the first person to guess that Sen. John Barrasso was once a rodeo doctor .
TODAY ’ S QUESTION : From Maggie : Which President fought Congress to keep a pair of tiger cubs , gifted by the Sultan of Oman , at the White House ? The first person to correctly guess gets a mention in the next edition of Huddle . Send your best guess to [ email protected ] .