People across the US have come forward to call the anti-malaria drug a 'miracle ' coronavirus treatment as New York state officials announce they will start trials with the medication on Tuesday .
On Monday , New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo said the state will doctors will start trialing hydroxychloroquine this week after the number of coronavirus cases in New York City alone rose to 12,000 , an increase of more than 3,000 overnight .
The drug has not yet been proven as effective in battling the virus , but President Donald Trump drummed up excitement over it when he called it a 'game changer ' last week .
Dr Anthony Fauci , the White House coronavirus expert , said more work was needed before it could be heralded as a solution .
But people like Rio Giardinieri , Margaret Novins and Lost star Daniel Dae Kim are praising the drug for saving their lives .
Here are some of the infected patients who have credited the medication for the improvement in their condition .
People across the US , like Rio Giardinieri ( left in the hospital and right , with his wife before falling ill ) have come forward to call the anti-malaria drug a 'miracle ' coronavirus treatment as New York state officials announce they will start trials with the medication on Tuesday
Giardinieri , who is the vice-president of a company that manufactures cooking equipment for high-end restaurants in Los Angeles , said his doctors administered the drug as a last hope for his recovery .
The 52-year-old believes he contracted the virus during a conference in New York and immediately fell ill with a fever for five days , back pain , headaches , a cough and fatigue .
' I was at the point where I was barely able to speak , and breathing was very challenging , ' he told Fox 6 .
He went to Joe DiMaggio Hospital in South Florida , where doctors diagnosed him with pneumonia and coronavirus .
Giardinieri explained that he was placed on oxygen but he was still unable to breath .
After a week , doctors told him there was nothing else they could do and on Friday evening he said goodbye to his wife and three children .
' I really thought my end was there . I had been through nine days of solid pain and for me , the end was there , so I made some calls to say , in my own way , goodbye to my friends and family , ' he told the news site .
Giardinieri said a friend then told him about the anti-malaria drug . He immediately asked a doctor to administer the medication .
He then explained what came next , including the moment when he felt like his heart was beating out of his chest .
'They had to come in , and get me calmed down , and take care of me , ' Giardinieri said .
But then the next morning he says he 'woke up like nothing ever happened ' and feeling much better .
The doctors said they do n't believe Giardinieri 's episode was a reaction to the anti-malaria drug but instead was likely the virus progressing in his body .
Meanwhile , in New Jersey , where there are more than 2,800 confirmed coronavirus cases and 27 deaths , Novins had a very similar experience .
She told Forbes that she began feeling ill on March 8 and by March 15 she 'could n't breathe ' .
Meanwhile , in New Jersey , Margaret Novins ( left , in the hospital and right , before being hospitalized ) had a very similar experience . She said she began feeling better just a day after her doctor gave her an anti-malaria drug
Novins said she was initially diagnosed with pneumonia before getting more test results back on March 19 that showed she was positive for coronavirus .
The 53-year-old said her doctors categorized her as 'critical ' and she was given the hydroxychloroquine drug . When she woke up on Saturday her fever was gone , which is 'fantastic ' , she said .
Novins told the news site that her doctor 'insisted the pharmacy get it to me the minute we got the positive ' .
In North Carolina , Jeff Hensley , 57 , was hospitalized over the weekend with labored breathing after he tested positive for COVID-19
The Harnett County man started feeling sick on March 4 while working in Hawaii .
In North Carolina , Jeff Hensley ( left and right , with his wife before hospitalization ) , 57 , was hospitalized over the weekend with labored breathing after he tested positive for COVID-19 , according to his wife . She says he 's now being treated with an anti-malaria drug
According to The News & Observer , Hensley had asked to be tested for the virus three times after returning to North Carolina on March 7 .
His wife told the news site that her husband was finally admitted and 'is on oxygen ' .
She said doctors are currently treating him with the anti-malaria drug .
Though the drug is not FDA approved his wife says she 's glad he 's being treated with it .
Taking to Instagram on Saturday evening the 51-year-old said he felt 'back to normal ' and had not needed hospital treatment .
Kim , who will remain in self-isolation until Monday , claimed to 'have no symptoms ' other than congestion and believes that the antimalarial drug Hydroxychloroquine was the 'secret weapon ' to his recovery .
' I am happy to report that my progress has continued and I practically feel back to normal . I am lucky enough to be in the 80 per cent of diagnosed cases that have not required hospitalization , ' revealed the Hawaii-based actor in the nearly seven-minute video .
Daniel Dae Kim took to Instagram on Saturday evening to give followers an update on his COVID-19 diagnosis , after coming forward with his diagnosis on Thursday
Kim 's personal physician prescribed him a 'drug cocktail ' that consisted of the antiviral medicine TamiFlu , the antibiotic Azithromycin , a Glycopyrrolate inhaler , and the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine .
Though all of the medicines worked in conjunction to aid in Kim 's healing process , the actor stated that hydroxychloroquine was the 'secret weapon . '
According to Kim , the drug 'has been used with great success in Korea in their fight against the coronavirus ' .
There are currently no approved treatments or preventive vaccines for COVID-19 .
Researchers are studying existing treatments and working on experimental ones , but most current patients receive only supportive care such as breathing assistance .
Potential treatments like malaria drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are in short supply as demand has surged with the rapid spread of the outbreak .
Some states have already taken steps to limit prescriptions of the drugs to those who need them most .
A French study , carried out on 20 patients earlier this month , is highly preliminary and was non-randomized .
However , it did find that six patients who received a combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin had their viral load reduced faster than those on either hydroxychloroquine alone or neither of the drugs .
On Monday , New York Gov Andrew Cuomo said the state will doctors will start trialing hydroxychloroquine this week after the number of coronavirus cases in New York City alone rose to 12,000 , an increase of more than 3,000 overnight
The drug has not yet been proven as effective in battling the virus , but President Donald Trump ( pictured on Sunday ) drummed up excitement over it when he called it a 'game changer ' last week
There are more than 41,000 confirmed coronavirus cases in the US with 576 deaths
Hydroxychloroquine is a high-power drug used to treat malaria , which is a parasitic infection , as well as some non-infectious inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis .
Azithromycin is a fairly common antibiotic that is used to treat a number of bacterial infections , such a strep throat .
Neither drug has been previously indicated to treat a viral infection such as coronavirus , although there were anecdotal reports of hydroxychloroquine being used successfully to treat SARS , a close relative of coronavirus .
Last week , the University of Minnesota put out a call for 1,500 people to sign up to a clinical trial to determine if hydroxychloroquine , a malaria medication , is effective in treating coronavirus .
The trial is being led by Dr David Boulware . He has asked for 1,500 people who have been recently exposed to a confirmed case of COVID-19 to come forward to take part .
Last week , the University of Minnesota put out a call for 1,500 people to sign up to a clinical trial to determine if hydroxychloroquine , a malaria medication , is effective in treating coronavirus
The trial is being led by Dr David Boulware . He has asked for 1,500 people who have been recently exposed to a confirmed case of COVID-19 to come forward to take part . Researchers are seen in a lab at the University of Minnesota on Thursday
Ideally , they want to treat healthcare workers to hopefully provide a prevention from them catching the virus .
The test would involve drugs being sent overnight to 1,500 people who want to participate .
Half would receive the malaria medication and half would receive a vitamin .
On Friday , Boulware said the president had become 'very excited ' about the trial but that more needs to be done before it can be rolled out .
However if it works , it could stop people from becoming infected within three days of being exposed .
The drug costs just $ 12 and has already been approved by the FDA for treating malaria and arthritis .
They want to sign up people with high risk exposure to see if they can stop them from catching it .
But there have already been reports of people in the US and in Nigeria either dying or overdosing from the drug . According experts Banner Health , a man died and his wife is in critical condition after taking chloroquine
'Health workers who have been exposed , or household contacts ... high risk exposures and seeing if we can treat people in the first three days after their exposure to prevent them going on to develop the disease , ' he said .
But there have already been reports of people in the US and in Nigeria either dying or overdosing from the drug .
In Phoenix , Arizona , Banner Health experts are emphasizing that chloroquine , a malaria medication , should not be ingested to treat or prevent this virus .
'Given the uncertainty around COVID-19 , we understand that people are trying to find new ways to prevent or treat this virus , but self-medicating is not the way to do so , ' said Dr Daniel Brooks , Banner Poison and Drug Information Center medical director .
It was also reported on Monday that three people in Nigeria have been taken to local hospitals with chloroquine poisoning after taking the drug ( file image )
'The last thing that we want right now is to inundate our emergency departments with patients who believe they found a vague and risky solution that could potentially jeopardize their health . '
According to Banner Health experts , a man has already died and his wife is under critical care after the couple , both in their 60s , ingested chloroquine phosphate , an additive commonly used at aquariums to clean fish tanks .
Within thirty minutes of ingestion , the couple experienced immediate effects requiring admittance to a nearby Banner Health hospital .
It was also reported on Monday that three people in Nigeria have been taken to local hospitals with chloroquine poisoning after taking the drug .
Health officials in Nigeria warned against using the anti-malaria medication to alleviate coronavirus symptoms after seeing a spike in its use , following its endorsement by Trump .
There has reportedly been as much as a 400 per cent rise in price of the drug since the president 's comments during a press conference on Saturday .
According to officials in the Nigerian capital of Lagos three people were hospitalized in the city after taking the drug and accidentally overdosing .