In a win for religious freedom advocates , a federal judge ruled that New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo ( D ) and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio ( D ) are wrong to limit religious gatherings amid the coronavirus pandemic while at the same time supporting mass protests of racial injustice .
U.S. District Judge Gary L. Sharpe issued a preliminary injunction Friday prohibiting Cuomo , his attorney general , and de Blasio from ordering or enforcing any arbitrary limits on church gatherings .
In his decision , Sharp noted that `` it is not the judiciary 's role to second guess the likes of Governor Cuomo or Mayor de Blasio when it comes to decisions they make in such troubling times , that is , until those decisions result in the curtailment of fundamental rights without compelling justification . ''
The order effectively states that the New York officials can not impose any limitation on outdoor gatherings and can not impose limitations on indoor gatherings out-of-step with phases two and three of the New York 's reopening plan .
Under the plan , `` essential '' businesses are granted 100 % occupancy and `` nonessential '' businesses are granted 50 % occupancy , but religious gatherings are confined to 25 % occupancy .
`` We are pleased that Judge Sharpe was able to see through the sham of Governor Cuomo 's 'Social Distancing Protocol ' which went right out the window as soon as he and Mayor de Blasio saw a mass protest movement they favored taking to the streets by the thousands , '' Thomas More Society Special Counsel Christopher Ferrara said in a news release .
The Thomas More Society , a conservative not-for-profit national law firm , represented the group of Catholic priests and Jewish congregants who brought the complaint .
`` Suddenly , the limit on 'mass gatherings ' was no longer necessary to 'save lives , ' '' Ferrara added . `` Yet they were continuing to ban high school graduations and other outdoor gatherings exceeding a mere 25 people . This decision is an important step toward inhibiting the suddenly emerging trend of exercising absolute monarchy on pretext of public health . What this kind of regime really meant in practice is freedom for me , but not for thee . ''
Limitations on mass gatherings due to COVID-19 seemingly went out the window as mass protests erupted across America following the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis over Memorial Day weekend .
In New York , thousands of protesters flocked to the streets day after day without any pushback from Cuomo and de Blasio .
Instead , the aforementioned officials spoke openly in support of New York residents ' freedom to protest while still enforcing limitations on other forms of public assembly .
Sharpe , in his ruling , pointed out the hypocrisy , arguing the double standard amounted to `` preferential treatment '' for the protesters .
`` Governor Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio could have just as easily discouraged protests , short of condemning their message , in the name of public health and exercised discretion to suspend enforcement for public safety reasons instead of encouraging what they knew was a flagrant disregard of the outdoor limits and social distancing rules , '' Sharpe wrote . `` They could have also been silent . But by acting as they did , Governor Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio sent a clear message that mass protests are deserving of preferential treatment . ''