Medical experts have improved their treatment options caring for COVID-19 patients since the pandemic began . Early in the course of the disease , hospitals were overwhelmed with critically ill patients suffering with unfamiliar symptoms . Doctors were often unsure about how to care for them .
`` It was very scary , just to give you the subjective feeling , of caring for patients and talking with patients and their families and a lot of the time saying , 'We do n't know a lot about this disease . We do n't know how you 're going to do , ' '' said Dr. Armond Esmaili , a hospitalist at the University of California San Francisco Medical Center , according to Axios .
Since then , physicians have learned new ways to reduce pain and suffering in COVID-19 patients and also how to reduce the number of deaths . In many cases , they 've found that already established techniques are effective in treating the virus and are less invasive .
For example , doctors are now using high-powered oxygen instead of ventilators to help many patients breathe on their own .
According to Reuters , a New York study showed that 88 % of 320 ventilated COVID-19 patients died .
Tried-and-true medications such as the steroid dexamethasone has reduced deaths by one-third among patients on ventilators and by one-fifth for those on oxygen .
Esmaili told Axios that giving patients the anti-viral drug remdesivir helps shorten their hospital stay . Remdesivir was granted an Emergency Use Authorization to treat severely ill patients by the Food and Drug Administration . Studies have shown that patients who are given the drug recover four days faster than those given a placebo .
Doctors have also learned to prescribe all COVID-19 patients medications to reduce the risk of blood clots , says Esmaili . Besides giving old drugs new purpose in the fight against the coronavirus , physicians have resorted to physical maneuvers to ease symptoms .
Flipping patients on their stomachs , for example , is a simple way to improve breathing in fluid-filled lungs . The maneuver called `` proning '' takes pressure off the lungs themselves . It 's an old procedure that 's gaining popularity for patients with respiratory distress from COVID-19 , according to Business Insider .