WASHINGTON – A reporter 's question about hydroxychloroquine led to a testy moment at Sunday 's White House briefing .
Anthony Fauci was asked his thoughts on the effectiveness of the anti-malaria drug in treating coronavirus patients , and President Donald Trump interrupted before the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases could answer .
“ He ’ s answered that question 15 times , ” said Trump , who had spent much of the news conference touting the drug 's potential .
Earlier in the day , Fauci did answer a question about hydroxychloroquine when he was on CBS 's `` Face the Nation . ''
“ The data are really , just , at best , suggestive , ” he said . “ There have been cases that show there may be an effect and there are others to show there 's no effect . So , I think in terms of science , I do n't think we could definitively say it works . ”
Coronavirus live updates : US deaths near 10K ahead of 'hardest and saddest week '
Fauci and White House trade adviser Peter Navarro got in a heated argument Saturday over hydroxychloroquine , according to Axios and the New York Times .
According to the reports , Navarro brought in studies from trials overseas that show the drug , which is often used to treat malaria , was working to combat coronavirus .
Fauci maintained that there is still only anecdotal information and that more rigorous studies need to be done to see the true effect of the drug , according to the reports . Despite the two arguing about the drug as a treatment , the White House coronavirus task force has agreed to surge the supply of hydroxychloroquine to hot zones .
Fauci also conceded in an interview with Science magazine in mid-March that he and Trump `` disagree on some things '' but that the president listens and `` goes his own way . '' Fauci at times has been absent from some of the briefings . When he 's not present , that sometimes fuels speculation about his relationship with Trump .
Both Fauci and Trump have dismissed speculation that he does not attend some of the briefings because they are on bad terms .
In addition , Fauci now has security detail after receiving threats , according to media reports . The expert has drawn criticism from some of Trump 's staunchest allies online who accuse him of contradicting the president .
Where 's Fauci ? Doctor 's absence is noticed at White House coronavirus briefing
According to the CDC , “ There are no US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) -approved drugs specifically for the treatment of patients with COVID-19 . ”
The FDA ’ s website also has an answer for people who ask if they should take chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine to prevent or treat coronavirus .
“ No , ” an answer on the FDA ’ s FAQ about coronavirus says . “ Hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine are available in the United States by prescription only for the prevention or treatment of malaria and certain inflammatory conditions such as lupus . The FDA is working closely with other government agencies and academic centers to determine whether chloroquine can be used to prevent COVID-19 or treat patients with mild-to-moderate COVID-19 . ''
Want to talk more about politics ? : Join our Facebook group : ‘ Across the Aisle , Across the Nation . ’