At a time when the federal government is largely leaving states to chart their own course , Massachusetts can be a model , says Robert Bollinger at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine . “ If strategies are shown to be effective in certain states , other states are going to adopt that . ”
So that ’ s what Massachusetts is doing – recruiting hundreds of people to help sleuth the pathways that the coronavirus is taking through communities . Without such contact tracing – as well as better testing – states can ’ t reopen , health experts say .
Google and Apple are trying to do it with technology – tracking everyone a person diagnosed with COVID-19 might have come into contact with . But Dr. Brown wants an army of virus detectives . “ The personal touch still is what we believe to be the most effective way , ” she says .
Catherine Brown is not waiting for Google and Apple to solve her problem . As a Massachusetts health official , Dr. Brown is tasked with helping to create the conditions that could help ease the state ’ s coronavirus lockdowns . And she knows contact tracing will be an essential tool .
As American states mull the easing of COVID-19 social restrictions , many are turning to a trusted tool for controlling infectious diseases : contact tracing .
Known as “ disease detectives , ” contact tracers are people who work to halt the spread of a virus . They reach out to individuals who are confirmed cases and then trace others the person came into contact with , from family members to subway riders . It ’ s a hands-on containment strategy that requires speed , manpower , and public trust .
South Korea , Singapore , Taiwan , and New Zealand are held up as examples of effective contact tracing . But their use of digital surveillance may prove hard to adopt here . Efforts to apply smartphone technology are underway – most notably a joint project by Google and Apple – but states nationwide are also scrambling to stand up armies of human COVID-19 tracers .
Massachusetts has been among the more aggressive states , and it is not starting from scratch . Even before COVID-19 , it had a relatively robust contact tracing program . Now , with health experts saying scaled-up contact tracing must be a cornerstone of the United States pandemic response , Massachusetts offers a window into how that response is taking shape .
“ This needs to be in place before the lockdown ends , ” says George Rutherford , an epidemiologist at the University of California San Francisco . “ Our mitigation strategy now is to keep everyone in their houses . That mitigation has to be replaced with something else . ”
Health experts worry that a piecemeal U.S. approach – some states doubling down on virus detection and others holding back – will mar a national restart . Most U.S. states are still dogged by a lack of rapid and accessible COVID-19 testing , which tracers rely on to find and map clusters .
Massachusetts has begun building a surge force of tracers with a $ 44 million initiative . In recent weeks , more than 300 people have been trained for a virtual call center to track residents who may be infected . The operation is run by Partners In Health , a global health nonprofit based in Boston , which plans to hire up to 1,000 people for paid and volunteer positions .
Illinois Gov . J.B. Pritzker said Wednesday that he was in talks with Partners In Health to stand up a similar force .
Before COVID-19 , Massachusetts ’ tracing program involved around 400 state epidemiologists and local public health nurses , who tracked cases of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS . But when coronavirus cases started to surge in February , “ we knew it was going to outstrip our ability to manage it , ” says Catherine Brown , state epidemiologist in the Bureau of Infectious Disease and Laboratory Sciences .
Tracing has continued in Massachusetts , prioritizing health care workers and residents at care homes , jails , and prisons . Other states hit hard early on , like Washington , set similar priorities . As the pandemic intensified , Dr. Brown joined the all-out effort to trace potential spreaders .
She recalls making a call to a woman diagnosed with the coronavirus . The woman lived with two people at high risk of a severe form of COVID-19 , so Dr. Brown talked her through the risks and how to isolate herself from others .
“ In that small household we didn ’ t stop an outbreak , but we protected vulnerable individuals . Every single case has a human side , ” she says .
Today , Massachusetts has the third largest number of confirmed cases . Still , Dr. Brown says the early work of tracers – at least 21,345 people were contacted in February and March – likely helped slow the rate of infections so that hospital admissions haven ’ t overwhelmed capacity .
John Hanna/AP Kansas Department of Health and Environment Secretary Lee Norman discusses the state 's coronavirus pandemic at a news conference at the Statehouse in Topeka , Kansas , April 15 , 2020 . The department is enlisting 400 volunteers to help with contact tracing – a critical step toward safely easing stay-at-home restrictions .
Many states spend far less on public health . Alabama previously had fewer than 10 contact tracers for its nearly 5 million residents , and now has around 50 working on COVID-19 , the state ’ s health director told the Washington Post .
“ There ’ s a massive gulf between where we are and where we need to be in many parts of the country , ” says Joshua Michaud , associate director for global health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation .
Nationally , the number of full-time disease investigators is 2,200 , according to the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials ( ASTHO ) . That comes after a decade of double-digit cuts in public health spending following the 2008-09 global recession .
A recent report by the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security , together with ASTHO , called for the hiring of an additional 100,000 contact tracers to contain COVID-19 epidemics , at a cost of $ 3.6 billion in emergency federal funding . Others have called for higher numbers .
“ What we ’ re doing right now is simply buying time , ” says Robert Bollinger , a professor in the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine . “ We don ’ t as a country have a strong enough public health system to do contact tracing in the community . ”
Behind these estimates is a stubborn reality : Chasing down leads in a pandemic , as detectives do after an unsolved crime , is labor-intensive and expensive . Each confirmed case yields several new contacts to trace , contact , and isolate , which averages 4 hours of work per tracer . And time is against them , since symptoms can show up days after infection .
“ It has to be a rapidfire process . We know that hours and days make the difference with coronavirus , ” says Mr. Michaud .
One silver lining is that millions of Americans suddenly have time on their hands . States and cities are tapping medical students , school nurses , and librarians to support COVID-19 contact tracing . In San Francisco , which had 10 tracers before the pandemic , volunteers are lining up to help , says Dr. Rutherford , who is helping the city add 150 more .
Massachusetts and six other Northeastern states are working together to ease social restrictions and reopen businesses ; California , Oregon , and Washington are doing the same . Testing and contract tracing are likely to inform when and how these reopenings happen .
“ I think it ’ s going to be critical for every state that wants to get open and back to something like a new normal to put some kind of mechanism like this in place , ” Massachusetts Gov . Charlie Baker told CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation ” Sunday , referring to contact tracing .
Other U.S. states like Texas are already starting to ease controls . This piecemeal approach could raise tensions if future outbreaks in states with robust coronavirus surveillance are traced to states that aren ’ t doing the same . Experts point out that South Korea and Taiwan mobilized national health systems to trace and contain their pandemics – a key element of their success . That level of federal involvement has been absent in the U.S .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
But states that invest in COVID-19 testing and tracing could lead others . “ If strategies are shown to be effective in certain states , other states are going to adopt that , ” says Dr. Bollinger . “ They want to get past this phase and start opening up their schools and businesses . ”