The coronavirus “ has raised awareness that what ’ s going on inside matters , and it affects us , ” says Michele Deitch , a professor who specializes in corrections administration . “ When we are through this nightmare situation , we may well be willing to make adjustments to our policies that recognize the need to continue some of those new practices . ”
The novel coronavirus that has so far infected 400,000 people around the world and brought the global economy to a near standstill is reshaping society in dramatic ways , including how Americans think about care for prisoners .
LA County Public Defender Ricardo García is continuing to talk with the sheriff ’ s office about more ways to safely reduce the inmate population and the risk of contagion .
The number of inmates in the jails has decreased by more than 1,000 , and arrests have dropped from an average of 300 a day to 60 .
In Los Angeles County , home to the country ’ s largest local jail system , Sheriff Alex Villanueva is working to reduce crowding to protect people from COVID-19 . He ’ s released inmates early , freeing those with fewer than 30 days left to serve . Deputies are arresting fewer people , with offenders who would see their bail set at $ 50,000 or less given citations .
For an incarcerated person , visits from family and friends are “ like life support , ” says Jeremiah Bourgeois .
Those visits , he continues , “ help you maintain your humanity ” – and he would know , having spent 27 years in prison in Washington state .
But when the coronavirus outbreak was declared a pandemic March 11 , those visits were one of the first things to stop . As tough as it is on incarcerated people and their families , it will protect public health , experts say . Mr. Bourgeois admits that , at first , he didn ’ t see it that way .
“ I thought it was more a matter of not wanting the virus to come out of the prisons , ” rather than protecting those inside , he says . “ I ’ m so used to people not caring about what happens to prisoners . ”
The pandemic that has infected more than 400,000 people around the world and brought the global economy to a near standstill is reshaping society in dramatic ways . How Americans think and care about prisoners is one of them .
There are 2.3 million people behind bars – many of them older and infirm , many without access to good medical care – and they have lived out of sight and out of mind for most Americans . But with the coronavirus crisis , conditions behind bars are now a public health priority .
Already , states are taking steps to release certain inmates from jails to lower their risk of exposure .
New Jersey is releasing 1,000 prisoners from jails this week , by order of the state Supreme Court chief justice , following similar moves in California . The intake and transfer of inmates and juveniles into California 's correctional facilities has also been temporarily halted , with them staying in county custody for the next 30 days instead . New York City is releasing 300 nonviolent inmates from Rikers Island , after 38 prisoners and employees tested positive at the jail . Iowa , meanwhile , is expediting the release of about 700 people who have already been cleared for parole or work release .
On Monday , 14 senators sent a bipartisan letter to the Trump administration , asking it to quickly transfer to home confinement eligible , nonviolent federal inmates who are deemed at high risk for COVID-19 .
And as more police and sheriff departments lower arrest rates and explore lowering inmate populations , more fundamental questions are emerging : Is this how things should have been all along ? Are measures being implemented for the coronavirus era able to endure beyond the outbreak ? And could any of this transformation be permanent ?
The coronavirus “ has raised awareness that what ’ s going on inside matters , and it affects us , ” says Michele Deitch , a professor at the University of Texas at Austin who specializes in corrections administration .
“ It ’ s not another world ; it ’ s actually part of our public health system , ” she adds . “ When we are through this nightmare situation , we may well be willing to make adjustments to our policies that recognize the need to continue some of those new practices . ”
The decentralized nature of the United States justice system means responses to COVID-19 have varied , as different jurisdictions seek to protect the health of their incarcerated population and the broader community while still fulfilling constitutional duties like the right to a speedy trial .
Local , state , and federal courts across the country have closed , from Bexar County , Texas , where justices of the peace have suspended eviction hearings , to the U.S. Supreme Court , which has suspended oral arguments .
As of March 20 , some 15 states and the U.S. Bureau of Prisons had suspended all visitation , while 37 states were still allowing legal visits , according to a tracker maintained by The Marshall Project . Corrections administrators and law enforcement , meanwhile , have been taking a three-pronged approach : lowering admissions , speeding up releases , and improving overall hygiene and health screening of inmates and staff .
Local jail systems , which saw 10.6 million admissions in 2017 , are a critical front line in the country ’ s COVID-19 response .
“ They ’ re going to be the first place this starts , ” says Professor Deitch . They “ need to be turning off the spigot of who ’ s coming into the system . ”
In Los Angeles County , home to the country ’ s largest local jail system , that ’ s what they ’ re trying to do .
LA County Sheriff Alex Villanueva is working the problem from both ends . He ’ s released inmates early , freeing those with fewer than 30 days left to serve . Deputies are arresting fewer people – though still arresting violent suspects . Offenders who would see their bail set at $ 50,000 or less are being given citations , an increase from $ 25,000 .
The number of inmates in the jails has decreased by more than 1,000 , and arrests have dropped from an average of 300 a day to 60 .
LA County Public Defender Ricardo García is continuing to talk with the sheriff ’ s office about more ways to safely reduce the inmate population and the risk of contagion . And on March 24 the Superior Court of Los Angeles ordered the release of an undisclosed number pre-trial inmates from the county jail .
A significant number of people are being held pretrial , not yet convicted of a crime – approximately 40 % of the inmate population in 2016 . His greatest concern is an acute outbreak in the jails .
“ We have huge swaths of people in jail who would do fine in the community if steps were taken to help them , ” he says .
Sheriff departments in Nashville , Tennessee ; and Cleveland are taking similar actions . More than 200 inmates were released from Cuyahoga County jail in Cleveland earlier this month .
In Texas last week , the Fort Worth Police Department stopped making Class C misdemeanor arrests , while in Houston , the Harris County Sheriff ’ s Office is seeking compassionate release for some inmates in the county jail , where 540 people were 56 or older as of March 23 .
The number of people age 55 or older in state and federal prisons increased by 280 % between 1999 and 2006 . For decades sanitation and health care in prisons have been a low priority , according to Homer Venters , former chief medical officer for New York City Correctional Health Services .
Health care behind bars “ is poor and inadequate because it has been designed to be that way , ” said Dr. Venters on a March 13 conference call organized by The Justice Collaborative .
“ We hear a lot about hand-washing as the most important [ outbreak avoidance ] tool . Most of the jails and prisons I ’ ve been to around the country don ’ t have enough sinks , ” he added . “ And if there are enough sinks , there isn ’ t enough soap . ”
And many prisons , jails , and immigration detention centers are full , if not overcrowded – an environment that , according to Dr. Venters , makes managing and preventing an outbreak “ almost impossible . ”
Some departments have been providing inmates with soap free of charge and waiving fees for inmate health care , but they should be doing more , says Professor Deitch . Prisons should be expanding compassionate release , providing free phone and video calls , ramping up medical checks , and instituting de-escalation measures so public health restrictions within prisons don ’ t boil over into violence .
“ Anything we can do to get anyone out of there who doesn ’ t absolutely need to be there is smart from a humanitarian perspective , but also to reduce the spread of the virus in the community , ” she adds . “ What happens in jails and prisons doesn ’ t stay in jails and prisons , and when we ’ re talking about communicable diseases like this , that ’ s especially true . ”
Texas announced on March 24 the first positive case of the coronavirus in a state prison inmate . There were about 9,600 people age 60 or older in Texas prisons in fiscal year 2018 , with just over half of inmates behind bars for violent offenses .
“ There are a lot of people in prison who don ’ t need to be there , ” says Jennifer Erschabek , executive director of the Texas Inmate Families Association . “ But you can ’ t just kick them out the door and say , ‘ See you later . ’ ”
Still , for inmates and their families , the thought of a COVID-19 outbreak behind bars is never far from their minds – and restrictions on visitation , logical as they may be , have not helped .
For Jeff Gifford and his wife , visits to their son in the Darrington Unit near Houston have been what they live for . Since they lost visitation on March 13 , their reactions have varied .
“ My first thought was , ‘ [ Darn ] it , it ’ s horrible. ’ My second thought was , ‘ Thank God , ’ ” says Mr. Gifford , a real estate agent in Austin .
“ It ’ s a struggle , ” he adds . “ We ’ re just really happy the disease hasn ’ t spread inside yet . ”
“ You just don ’ t know how seriously [ prison staff members ] are taking the edicts set out by management , ” he continues . “ But you hope for the best ; that ’ s all you can do . That ’ s what we ’ re doing every day . ”
Something else Mr. Gifford , and many others , are hoping for is that , once the coronavirus pandemic has passed , people living and working in prisons and jails aren ’ t shunted back to society ’ s margins , and that new policies of compassion don ’ t disappear with the virus .
“ We all need to be treating each other with more compassion and kindness right now , [ including ] in custodial settings , ” says Professor Deitch .
“ If jurisdictions do what I think they need to do – that ’ s reducing the number of people held in their custody , ” she adds , “ I think we ’ re going to learn it ’ s possible to do that quickly and safely without putting public safety at risk . ”