Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , has become the first senator to test positive for the coronavirus . His staff says he is asymptomatic .
In a statement released on Sunday , Paul 's deputy chief of staff , Sergio Gor , wrote :
`` Senator Rand Paul has tested positive for COVID-19 . He is feeling fine and is in quarantine . He is asymptomatic and was tested out of an abundance of caution due to his extensive travel and events . He was not aware of any direct contact with any infected person . He expects to be back in the Senate after his quarantine period ends and will continue to work for the people of Kentucky at this difficult time . Ten days ago , our D.C. office began operating remotely , hence virtually no staff has had contact with Senator Paul . ''
Paul , a physician , was one of eight Republican senators who voted against a coronavirus relief package last week , after the Senate opposed his efforts to offset spending on the legislation .
Paul 's staff explained his decision to get tested in a statement later on Sunday .
`` Similar to the President and the Vice President , Senator Rand Paul decided to get tested after attending an event where two individuals subsequently tested positive for COVID-19 , even though he was n't aware of any direct contact with either one of them , '' the statement read . `` Additionally , due to a prior lung injury , and subsequent surgery on his lung , Senator Paul is in a higher risk category as it relates to pulmonary issues . ''
His positive test comes amid continuing shortages of tests nationwide . As NPR 's Vanessa Romo reported on Saturday :
State and local government leaders have been putting pressure on the Trump administration and the coronavirus task force led by Vice President Mike Pence to address widespread testing shortages . In response , the administration has turned to the private sector to help develop tests , vaccines and therapeutic medicines to help stem the pandemic .
As of 5:30 p.m . ET Sunday , at least two Republican senators had announced they are self-quarantining after contact with Paul — Utah 's Mitt Romney and Mike Lee . Sens . Cory Gardner , R-Colo. , and Rick Scott , R-Fla. , were already in self-quarantine due to contact with others who tested positive for the virus . That leaves 48 Republicans in the Senate available to vote , which could affect legislation , as any measure would need either unanimous consent or 60 votes to pass a necessary procedural vote . As a reminder , Congress does not currently allow remote voting .