WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - President Donald Trump faced one of the gravest threats of his political career as the coronavirus pandemic spread , leaving fellow Republicans to worry that the White House ’ s response and the hit to the economy would harm his re-election prospects .
U.S. stock market indexes that Trump has touted throughout his term as evidence of his success plunged into bear market territory on Thursday - a day after he tried to calm Americans ’ fears with an Oval Office address that promised economic stimulus and a 30-day travel ban for Europeans .
Some Republicans worried that the measures were too little , too late for an administration that for several weeks minimized the risk of the COVID-19 respiratory disease caused by the virus that has killed at least 39 Americans .
“ The president ’ s early downplaying and politicizing of the virus hurt his credibility and will make people question the administration ’ s readiness from now until the day this passes , ” said Mike DuHaime , a Republican strategist who ran Chris Christie ’ s gubernatorial campaigns in New Jersey .
“ The president ’ s greatest strength has been the economy . If the stock markets continue to tank , and real people begin to hurt financially , it will hurt the president politically . ”
Trump emerged triumphant last month after his Senate acquittal in a Democratic-led impeachment drive , ready to ride high on a strong economy as a crowded field of Democratic candidates bickered over who was best to take him on in November ’ s general election .
The narrative quickly changed . Moderate Democrats in the past two weeks have consolidated their support behind former Vice President Joe Biden over liberal Senator Bernie Sanders . They are betting that Biden can draw support from across the party , as well as from suburban moderates and disaffected Republicans .
Biden seized the chance to offer a contrast to voters with his own coronavirus speech on Thursday . He lambasted the administration ’ s handling of the crisis while seeking to portray himself as a steady , experienced hand in the face of a public health emergency .
“ I ’ d rather be Joe Biden than Trump right now , ” said a Republican official close to the White House . “ A month ago , Trump is looking at Bernie Sanders and a strong economy and rising favorability after impeachment . Coronavirus can not have a positive impact . ”
Trump ’ s re-election campaign defended the president ’ s actions and in a statement accused Biden of trying to “ capitalize politically and stoke citizens ’ fears . ”
The growing threat from the coronavirus forced Trump on Thursday to reverse course and suspend his large campaign rallies .
“ The safety , security and health of the American People is President Trump ’ s top priority right now , ” the Trump campaign said in a text .
Noting that Trump had called the disease a “ foreign virus , ” Biden warned against “ xenophobia ” and said the coronavirus “ does not discriminate based on national origin , race , gender or ZIP code . ”
Biden laid out his own plan for dealing with the outbreak , including emergency paid sick leave for workers and widely available free testing for the virus , saying the number of tests should number in the “ millions , not the thousands. ” The Trump administration has been criticized for failing to produce enough tests to meet demand .
“ This virus laid bare the severe shortcomings of the current administration , ” the former vice president said in his 20-minute address from his home state of Delaware . “ Public fears are being compounded by pervasive lack of trust in this president fueled by an adversarial relationship with the truth . ”
Sanders , who has vowed to remain in the race despite lengthening odds , also bashed Trump ’ s handling of the crisis . He called for stronger action by government agencies to halt the spread of the virus and for measures such as paid sick leave and unemployment compensation for those affected .
“ During a crisis we must make sure that we care for the communities most vulnerable to health and economic pain , ” Sanders told reporters in his hometown of Burlington , Vermont .
A Trump supporter and fundraiser said the coronavirus outbreak had been politicized , like every issue in the United States .
“ The battle lines are drawn , ” said Jim Worthington , a health club executive in Bucks County , Pennsylvania . “ If you like Trump , you think he ’ s done all the things right , like cutting off travel to China . If you ’ re a Democrat , you think the opposite .
“ I think he ’ s been ahead of the issue , and the media has really overhyped it , ” Worthington said , adding that he thought the virus should be taken seriously .
The crisis has reshaped the contours of the presidential campaign . Democratic officials announced on Thursday that Sunday ’ s televised debate between Biden and Sanders would be moved to Washington from Arizona .
Officials had already decided not to allow an audience into the debate hall , citing contagion concerns .
Biden , Sanders and Trump have all canceled campaign events in recent days after warnings from public health officials about holding large-scale gatherings . Arizona , Florida , Illinois and Ohio hold Democratic nominating contests on Tuesday .
Biden ’ s campaign on Wednesday converted planned rallies in Florida and Illinois into “ virtual ” events and on Thursday said all staffers would begin to work from home beginning Saturday . Sanders ’ staffers will also work from home , reaching out to voters online instead of holding large events or door-to-door canvasses , his campaign said Thursday .
Late Thursday , Trump ’ s campaign said its events would also all be conducted in a virtual setting , including moving training sessions online .
One Republican strategist said Trump ’ s handling of the coronavirus was hurting him now but that it was too soon to gauge its impact on his long-term political prospects . ███/Ipsos polling from March 9-10 showed 55 % of Americans disapproved of Trump , while 40 % approved , largely unchanged from the past year .
“ A few weeks ago , the president ’ s supporters were very dismissive of the virus . Today , they are being very silent , ” the Republican political operative said . “ It ’ s a supply chain issue , and he ’ s the supply chain president . When he says we have test kits on the ground and we don ’ t , that ’ s a real problem . ”