On Tuesday , Arizona Democrats will cast their ballots in the Presidential Preference Election .
In Maricopa County , there have been some last-minute changes to polling locations because of growing concerns about the new coronavirus .
As of March 15 , there were 13 confirmed or presumed positive COVID-19 cases in Arizona and health professionals were recommending `` social distancing , '' or avoiding crowds and unnecessary gatherings .
As Gov . Doug Ducey and President Donald Trump announced states of emergency last week , election officials in Arizona 's largest county grappled with how to best serve voters while still heeding public health advice .
Ultimately , they decided to close 80 Maricopa County polling places , and make the remaining 151 voting locations `` vote centers '' — where voters can vote at any location , not just the one in their neighborhood .
If you 're planning to vote in Tuesday 's election , here 's everything you need to know :
You must be a registered Democrat to vote in the Presidential Preference Election .
The state Republican and Libertarian parties decided months ago not to have presidential primary elections and voters not registered with a party are not allowed to participate in presidential preference elections in Arizona .
You can check your voter registration and eligibility here . It 's too late to change your party affiliation to vote in this election .
The polls will be open from 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. Tuesday , as usual . As long as you are in line by 7 p.m. , you will be able to vote .
The Maricopa County Board of Supervisors announced Friday that it will cut about 80 polling locations on election day due to polling locations and poll workers canceling , and a lack of needed cleaning supplies to stock all locations .
The remaining 151 locations will be converted to vote centers , meaning a voter can vote at any location — not just the one nearest to them .
`` Folks should come on election day if they want to vote , '' Supervisor Bill Gates said . `` It 's going to be safe and there will be many places to do that . ''
You can find the full list of polling locations on the Maricopa County Elections Department website or call 602-506-1511 .
If you received your ballot by mail and have not mailed it back , it is now too late to return it by mail .
Instead , you should drop off your completed ballot — sealed inside the green , signed envelope — at any of the remaining 151 voting locations .
You will not have to wait in line . There should be a box near the entrance of the voting location where you can drop your ballot .
Voters need to bring a form of identification to the polls . The following photo IDs are accepted :
If you do not have one of these forms of ID , you will need two other forms of ID . These can include a bank statement , utility bill in your name , Arizona vehicle registration , property tax statement in your name , among other options .
The Maricopa County Elections Department is extending the hours for Democratic voters to drop off mail ballots for the presidential preference election .
Voters can drop off ballots Monday at the department , 510 S. Third Street in Phoenix , around the clock .
Goodyear City Hall , 190 N. Litchfield Road in Goodyear ( 8 a.m. - 5 p.m. ) .
Faith Lutheran Church , 801 E. Camelback Road in Phoenix ( 8:30 a.m. - 5 p.m. ) .
Maricopa County Elections Department – Mesa , 222 E. Javelina Ave. in Mesa ( 8 a.m. - 9 p.m. ) .
Mesa Community College at Red Mountain – Mesa , 7110 E. McKellips Road ( 8:30 a.m. - 9 p.m. ) .
Queen Creek Unified School District Office , 20217 E. Chandler Heights Road in Queen Creek ( 8:30 a.m. - 9 p.m. ) .
South Mountain Community Center , 212 E. Alta Vista Road in Phoenix ( 9:30 a.m. - 4 p.m. ) .
Surprise City Hall , 16000 N. Civic Center Plaza in Surprise ( 8:30 a.m. - 9 p.m. ) .
Tolleson Council Chambers , 9555 W. Van Buren St. in Tolleson ( 8:30 a.m. - 9 p.m. ) .
All of those locations , except Goodyear City Hall , will also allow in-person emergency voting until 5 p.m. Monday for voters who did not get a ballot by mail and can not vote on Election Day . Voters must be registered as Democrats .
Some states , such as Louisiana , delayed elections planned for Tuesday . Ohio 's governor said Monday he would support extending voting in his state .
But Arizona is sticking to its plans for voting on Tuesday , albeit with changes in some polling locations .
Maricopa County Elections Department announced Friday it would slash 80 polling places , leaving 151 vote centers where voters can cast a ballot regardless of precinct . All locations are listed at maricopa.vote .
Phoenix has announced that it would close libraries . But the county said libraries designated as polling places would still be open for voters .
Precincts 64/66 are moving from Mountainbrook Village Community Center to Gold Canyon Methodist Church , 6640 S Kings Ranch Road , Gold Canyon 85118 . Precinct 27 is moving from Anthem Community Center to the Coolidge Women 's Club at 240 W. Pinkley Ave. in Coolidge .
Pima County officials said they are moving one polling place for precincts in Sahuarita .
Yuma County is moving a polling place from the county health department to the Yuma Civic Center .