But “ there ’ s a real risk here , ” says Steven Schier , an emeritus political science professor at Carleton College in Northfield , Minn. “ Public opinion is clearly not with these protests to open up now . So he has to worry that he ’ s associating himself with an unpopular movement that could produce some bad results . ”
It is an apparent political effort to “ have his cake and eat it too. ” In a fundamental way , Mr. Trump is also tapping into the nation ’ s deep roots in individualism and personal responsibility , as well as a growing distrust on the right in experts and elites .
That has produced seemingly contradictory messages : On the one hand , Mr. Trump has been urging governors to follow science-based federal guidelines for a phased “ opening of America. ” At the same time , he ’ s been egging on protesters at state capitols who are rebelling against those same guidelines that are keeping most Americans sheltering-in-place .
With six months until Election Day , President Trump is hoping voters will see him as having done all he can to save the nation from economic meltdown – while also protecting public health in a pandemic that has so far claimed 55,000 American lives .
In a past life – that is , before COVID-19 – President Donald Trump was banking on a strong economy to usher him into a second term .
That calculation has largely evaporated , but not entirely . With six months until Election Day , President Trump is now asking voters to make a multi-step mental leap : Remember the once-robust economy , and then see him as having done all he can to save the nation from economic meltdown , while also trying to protect public health in a pandemic that has so far claimed 55,000 American lives .
The bifurcated approach has produced seemingly contradictory messages : On the one hand , Mr. Trump has been urging governors to follow science-based federal guidelines for a phased “ opening of America. ” At the same time , he ’ s been egging on protesters at state capitols who are rebelling against those very same guidelines that are keeping most Americans sheltering-in-place .
It is a risky gambit – an apparent political effort to “ have his cake and eat it too , ” as he whips up his core supporters with calls to “ liberate ” their states , while trying not to alienate the more mainstream voters he will need in November . The latest poll numbers in key battleground states show Mr. Trump losing to former Vice President Joe Biden .
In a fundamental way , Mr. Trump is also tapping into the nation ’ s deep roots in individualism and personal responsibility , as well as the right 's growing distrust of experts and elites .
“ He ’ s been very good at building a base , which is very loyal to him , and continuing to remind the base he ’ s on their side , ” says historian Michael Kazin , an expert on populism at Georgetown University . “ As the economy gets worse , more and more people will say that while the virus might be dangerous , it ’ s also dangerous to have businesses close up for good . ”
The political challenges are several fold . Social distancing means no campaign rallies for the foreseeable future . Online campaign events – attracting audiences in the hundreds , not thousands – aren ’ t the same . That forces him to rely all the more on Twitter and friendly news outlets to reach his supporters .
Even Mr. Trump ’ s daily coronavirus briefings , which have attracted high viewership and given him a platform to spar with media , have gone south . Since his controversial appearance last Thursday , when he sparked an uproar by seeming to float the idea of ingesting disinfectants to treat COVID-19 , he has dialed way back . On Friday he took no questions , and over the weekend did not hold any briefings at all . Monday ’ s scheduled briefing was initially canceled , then reinstated .
Alex Brandon/AP President Donald Trump watches as Dr. Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , speaks about the coronavirus in the press briefing room of the White House in Washington April 22 , 2020 .
The anti-lockdown rallies themselves also represent a mixed bag for Mr. Trump . On one level , they reflect the spirit of rebellion that gave rise to his presidency , and before that the tea party movement . But they also attract fringe elements . Some have featured Confederate battle flags and signs with swastikas .
Some protesters bring firearms , though they have been urged not to . In Virginia , pre-coronavirus protests centered on gun rights have morphed into anti-quarantine protests . At a “ drive-by ” rally at the state capitol in Richmond last week , the messages contained heartfelt pleas by people eager to return to work and worried their rights are being trampled .
“ I am not a COVID-19 denier , ” says Steve Walker , a self-employed mechanic from Chesterfield , Virginia , speaking by phone after the rally . “ But I believe that the government ’ s response to this is overreaching . ”
He worries that if the closures aren ’ t dialed back soon , the food supply could be at risk . But when asked about the Gadsden “ Don ’ t Tread on Me ” flag his son waved out the window of their green Dodge Durango during the protest , Mr. Walker reveals a deeper sense of grievance .
The flag , common at lockdown protests and a tea party symbol , “ is a warning to the government : We don ’ t work for you , you work for us , ” Mr. Walker says . “ And if you continue on a course toward tyranny , there will be repercussions . You have a good chance of seeing armed revolt in this state . ”
Much has been made of the support some anti-quarantine protests have received from national groups and people with White House connections , such as Stephen Moore , who serves on the administration ’ s advisory board for reopening the economy .
But , supporters note , no one is paying protesters or forcing them to show up . The anti-quarantine efforts are a natural outgrowth of the libertarian “ less government , more freedom ” ethos of groups like FreedomWorks , which has 5 million Facebook followers .
“ A lot of the people who were involved in the tea party movement have remained active in FreedomWorks , ” says Adam Brandon , the group ’ s president . “ We ’ re in touch . ”
In the last three years , he says , the group has trained 25,000 activists by sponsoring “ fly-ins ” to Washington and holding regional events .
Still , Mr. Trump ’ s all-caps tweets on April 17 calling to “ LIBERATE ” Michigan , Minnesota , and Virginia were startling . The day before , the president had released a three-phase plan to “ reopen America , ” guidance aimed at helping states shift responsibly toward opening their economies without inviting a surge of new COVID-19 cases .
In fact , 8 in 10 Americans support the shelter-in-place orders in effect in most states , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation , and many governors have seen a spike in their job approval ratings amid the pandemic .
Some governors worried the president was calling for an armed insurrection . When Democratic Minnesota Gov . Tim Walz saw the tweet , he reached out to Mr. Trump . The two eventually had a “ very nice call , ” according to a Trump tweet .
“ The tweeting Trump isn ’ t necessarily the phoning Trump , ” says Steven Schier , an emeritus political science professor at Carleton College in Northfield , Minnesota .
But “ there ’ s a real risk here , ” Professor Schier says . “ Public opinion is clearly not with these protests to open up now . So he has to worry that he ’ s associating himself with an unpopular movement that could produce some bad results . ”
The three states that Mr. Trump tweeted “ liberate ” messages at have Democratic governors . Mr. Trump is hoping to win Minnesota in November , after barely losing there in 2016 . Virginia voted Democratic by more than 5 percentage points . But Michigan is a true battleground , voting for Mr. Trump in 2016 by just a fraction of a percent – and he is fighting hard to keep it in 2020 .
It ’ s worth noting that the United States appears to be the only country with any significant anti-quarantine protests . Part of it is a reflection of American political culture , in which freedom of speech and freedom of assembly are enshrined in the Constitution .
“ There is a lot of social media frustration over the lockdown in several European countries , including the Netherlands and U.K. , but I have not seen many open demonstrations , ” writes Cas Mudde , a professor in the school of public and international affairs at the University of Georgia , in an email . “ Of course , what makes the U.S. so remarkable , is that the president is by and large opposing his own policies . ”
Seth Herald/Reuters Protesters against the state 's extended stay-at-home order to help slow the spread of the coronavirus demonstrate at the Capitol building in Columbus , Ohio , April 20 , 2020 .
Professor Mudde also notes that Mr. Trump is raising expectations about a return to normalcy with his public support for the protests , but could soon be confronted with a second outbreak in states that soften their lockdowns – including Georgia , where he lives . If that prompts a renewed tightening of lockdown measures , he adds , it could turn the protesters against the president .
One protester , Tom Zawistowski of Akron , Ohio , is a longtime tea party activist , and has opposed the restrictive actions of his state ’ s Republican governor , Mike DeWine . The governor has won praise for shutting down Ohio early , but to activists like Mr. Zawistowski , it ’ s an abuse of power .
He points to a high infection rate in some Ohio prisons but few deaths , and believes both Governor DeWine and Mr. Trump are overreacting to the virus – and doing deep harm to the economy in the process .
“ I ’ m going to keep asking questions , ” Mr. Zawistowski said Friday , as he prepared for a protest in Columbus , Ohio , the next day . He indicated he would not wear a mask .
Mr. Brandon of FreedomWorks rejects the “ no mask ” approach to the protests .
“ I know the press is gravitating toward people not wearing masks , ” he says . “ But that ’ s not the majority of people [ at the protests ] . That ’ s totally out of our control . We ’ re advocating that anyone who shows up , first and foremost , needs to keep themselves safe in the world of COVID . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Staff writer Story Hinckley contributed to this report from Richmond , Virginia .