The government may issue some Americans facing financial struggles due to the coronavirus pandemic another stimulus check , Fox Business reports .
As lawmakers consider passing another coronavirus relief package , stimulus checks will be a topic up for discussion .
House Democrats already included a second round of checks to Americans in legislation they passed in May . The HEROES Act includes a direct payment of up to $ 1,200 for some Americans .
Senate GOP members blasted the House ’ s proposal , but some Republicans have recently signaled support for a second cash infusion .
President Donald Trump and other White House officials have also expressed support for another cash payment to Americans .
What remains unclear is how much money Americans may receive and who is eligible for the payment .
Trump told Fox Business he would be OK with issuing a stimulus check that was more than what Democrats proposed .
“ I support actually larger numbers than the Democrats , but it ’ s got to be done properly , ” Trump told Fox Business ' Blake Burman . “ I want the money getting to people to be larger so they can spend it . I want the money to get there quickly and in a noncomplicated fashion . ”
Senate Republicans will return to Washington , D.C. , from a two-week break on July 20 to discuss the next relief bill .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell proposed that the direct payments go to people who earned $ 40,000 or less a year .
“ I think the people who have been hit the hardest are people who make about $ 40,000 a year or less , ” he said on Monday .
Congress will have two weeks to hash out a deal before the House begins its recess by Aug. 3 .
McConnell said he wants to finish legislation on the package before August .
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said Thursday that if lawmakers sign off on another payment , the federal government would be able to get the money out `` very , very quickly . ''
`` We do support another round of economic impact payments , '' Mnuchin told CNBC . `` In most cases , those are not checks , it 's direct deposits and we can get that into hard-working Americans ' bank accounts very , very quickly . ''
If Trump signs any new legislation by the beginning of August , Americans could see the money in their accounts by the end of the month , according to Fox Business .