( ███ ) - Democratic presidential candidates Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders said on Monday they were consulting with public health experts about coronavirus risks in planning their next campaign moves , as election officials in upcoming primary states urged people to consider voting early .
Neither Sanders , a senator from Vermont , nor Biden , the former vice president , has called off a major rally because of the outbreak that has sickened more than 110,000 people and killed almost 4,000 globally , although public health officials have urged people at risk for contracting the disease to avoid large gatherings .
There have been 605 confirmed cases in the United States , with 22 deaths .
The winner of the Democratic nomination will take on Republican President Donald Trump in the Nov. 3 general election . Trump has said he would not stop holding campaign rallies .
“ Every organization in America is taking a hard look at what the coronavirus means for their operations , and yes , that ’ s true of our campaign , as well , ” Sanders told a coronavirus roundtable in Michigan , one of six states that vote on Tuesday in the next round of the state-by-state nominating competition .
“ We do not hold a rally without first conferring with local public health officials . ”
Biden told NBC on Monday he would consider calling off rallies if health authorities warned they were too risky
“ I ’ m looking to the CDC for advice on that , ” Biden said , referring to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . “ We ’ re going to follow the recommendations of the experts ... and if they conclude that there shouldn ’ t be big indoor rallies , then we ’ ll stop big indoor rallies . ”
At a rally in Detroit on Monday , Biden ’ s campaign provided hand sanitizer to attendees and press .
A “ Women for Trump ” bus tour set to be led by the president ’ s daughter-in-law , Lara Trump , was canceled on Monday , because of scheduling issues , his campaign said . The New York Times reported that sources close to the campaign said the cancellation was spurred by concerns over the coronavirus .
Several of the states holding nominating contests in coming days have adopted measures aimed at protecting voters from contracting or spreading the virus .
Florida ’ s government urged voters to consider voting early for its March 17 Democratic presidential nominating contest , and Arizona braced for the possibility of poll workers staying home that day .
In Michigan , which votes on Tuesday , officials told poll workers to step up plans to sanitize voting booths and other equipment . Washington state - the hardest-hit state in the country - caught a break because its Tuesday contest is vote-by-mail .
Fears of the spread of the virus have led officials to cancel events and conferences across the country , including a planned Saturday event by Democrats in Washington state .
Arizona officials are bracing for the possibility that poll workers will not show up on March 17 because of illness or fear . They are combing through a statewide volunteer database to identify potential replacements if needed , according to the Arizona Department of State .
In Cook County , Illinois , which includes Chicago , officials are seeking the power to extend voting hours on March 17 , reassign early voting locations and even change voting days , said Frank Herrera , a spokesman for the county clerk ’ s office .
Florida , the nation ’ s third most-populous state and home to a large population of elderly people , has 19 confirmed cases of the virus and has declared a state of emergency .
State voters who have symptoms can designate someone to pick up their absentee ballots up until Election Day , Laurel Lee , Florida ’ s secretary of state , wrote on Twitter on Monday .
Florida authorities have emailed local election officials recommendations from the CDC on how to prepare polling places amid the spread of the virus . The recommendations include advising poll workers to stay home if they feel ill and steady cleaning of voting locations throughout the day .
In Orlando , Florida , a forum for the presidential candidates that had been scheduled for Thursday was canceled because of coronavirus concerns , said Carolyn Bobb , a spokeswoman for the AFL-CIO .