President Donald Trump in Norfolk , Virginia , on Saturday . Kevin Lamarque/Reuters
President Donald Trump says it ’ s unfair to criticize his response to the coronavirus pandemic . No one could have seen this crisis coming , he argues , and no president could have acted more quickly . But that ’ s not how Trump talks about other leaders . He condemns governors , mayors , and previous presidents for failing , in his view , to prepare for the disaster or respond adequately to it . “ Everything I took over was a mess , ” he fumed at a press conference on Friday . “ It was a broken country in so many ways . ”
In particular , Trump says Gov . Andrew Cuomo should have anticipated that New York state would need thousands of extra ventilators . And he accuses former President Barack Obama of moving too slowly against swine flu in 2009 . Both complaints are hypocritical . Trump had far clearer warnings than Cuomo did , and he has moved far more slowly than Obama did . By the standards Trump applies to others , his coronavirus response is a failure .
On Tuesday , in a Fox News interview , Trump excoriated Cuomo . “ New York Gov . Cuomo rejected buying [ a ] recommended 16,000 ventilators in 2015 for the pandemic , ” said the president , reading from a right-wing blog post . Trump embellished the story , claiming that Cuomo had a chance to buy the ventilators “ at a very low price , and he turned it down. ” “ He should have ordered the ventilators , ” said the president .
Trump had the story wrong . In November 2015 , a New York state task force reported that although the state had enough ventilators to manage a moderate flu outbreak , they wouldn ’ t be sufficient in the event of “ a severe public health emergency on the scale of the 1918 influenza pandemic. ” The report calculated that in “ a severe influenza pandemic , there is likely to be a projected shortfall of ventilators ( -15,783 ) during peak week demand . ”
The report addressed a scenario that hadn ’ t been seen in nearly a century . It didn ’ t envision the present crisis , and its projection of the ventilator shortage was well below estimates issued by New York this week . Nor did the report recommend buying more ventilators . On the contrary , it concluded that if the state were hit by a severe pandemic , “ purchasing additional ventilators beyond a threshold will not save additional lives , because there will not be a sufficient number of trained staff to operate them. ” The report added that buying so many ventilators , in preparation for a hypothetical catastrophe , would squeeze “ funding for current and ongoing health care expenses . ”
Trump has also lied about Obama . On March 4 , he claimed that Obama ’ s administration “ didn ’ t do anything about ” the 2009 swine flu outbreak . On March 12 , Trump said “ nothing was done for such a long period of time , as people were dying all over the place. ” On March 13 , Trump said Obama ’ s team “ started thinking about testing when it was far too late. ” And on Thursday , Trump told Sean Hannity , “ They acted very , very late . They were incredibly late . ”
None of that is true . The 2009 outbreak started in Mexico . The Mexican government reported it to the Pan American Health Organization on April 12 of that year . Two days later , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention examined a specimen in the United States , and by April 15 , the CDC had determined it was swine flu . On April 22 , the CDC activated its Emergency Operations Center . On April 26 , the Department of Health and Human Services declared a public health emergency and began to send antiviral drugs and personal protective equipment to affected states . On April 30 , the Obama administration asked Congress for $ 1.5 billion to fight the virus . By April 28 , the CDC had developed a test to detect the virus , and on May 1 , the test kits were shipped out .
Once the pandemic arrived , Trump responded far more slowly than Obama did .
If Obama deserves criticism for taking 19 days to ship out tests , and if Cuomo is at fault for not buying extra ventilators four years ago , then Trump ’ s negligence in preparing for and responding to this crisis deserves far more condemnation . In the past three years , the president has ignored multiple direct warnings—briefings , reports , simulations , intelligence assessments—that a pandemic was likely and that the government didn ’ t have enough masks , ventilators , or antiviral drugs to deal with it . His administration was told exactly what to do : second-guess case detection rates , prepare rapid production of tests , and line up extra funding and personal protective equipment . He did none of it . He stiffed a budget request for preparedness funds , and he disbanded the National Security Council unit in charge of pandemics .
Once the pandemic arrived , Trump responded far more slowly than Obama did . Trump ’ s administration learned of the outbreak in China around New Year ’ s Day , but he brushed off briefings about it , figuring it hadn ’ t spread in the United States . ( The CDC offered to send its own experts to China , but China refused , and Trump—overriding advice and U.S. intelligence—backed off . ) On Jan. 21 , the CDC reported the first known American infection . But in an interview on CNBC , Trump scoffed , “ It ’ s one person coming in from China . We have it under control . It ’ s going to be just fine . ”
Data released by the World Health Organization showed the coronavirus was killing victims at a far higher rate than swine flu did . ( That remains true , even though calculated mortality rates from the coronavirus have declined . ) But the Trump administration didn ’ t declare a public health emergency until Jan. 31 . The president had to be pushed to ban travelers from China , and he did nothing domestically . In late January , the administration rebuffed an HHS request for money to buy masks and other emergency supplies . Throughout February , as U.S. intelligence agencies monitored the spread of the virus in Europe and Asia , Trump insisted the United States was safe . When a CDC official raised concerns in public , Trump rebuked her for scaring the stock market .
The CDC didn ’ t begin shipping out test kits to detect the coronavirus until Feb. 5 , more than a month after learning of the outbreak . The tests didn ’ t work properly , so the CDC had to make new ones . Not until Feb. 28 did the CDC announce that states could “ now start testing. ” Trump didn ’ t request funds to deal with the virus until Feb. 24 , and he asked for only a quarter of the money HHS said it needed . The administration didn ’ t begin sending personal protective equipment to states until the end of February , and it dragged its feet on providing ventilators until the end of March .
By every measure—preparation , organization , funding , testing , ventilators , masks , public communication—Trump ’ s performance has been abysmal . He ’ s weeks and weeks behind Obama . And his disregard for multiple direct warnings about a pandemic is , by the standard of foresight he applies to Cuomo , inexcusable . So when Trump claims that “ nobody could have ever seen something like this coming ” and that no previous administration could have delivered supplies as quickly as he has , he ’ s lying . Judge him as he has judged others .