The unprecedented lockdown of American society was executed with one primary goal in mind : preventing our hospitals and medical professionals from being overwhelmed by the new coronavirus .
Two months later , it remains doubtful whether it was truly necessary to force businesses to close their doors or to order citizens to stay in their homes for weeks on end .
Many of the models used to justify these measures have proved to be flat out wrong . Experts who put forward the worst doomsday projections have been wildly off the mark — most notably , the British epidemiologist and leading lockdown proponent Neil Ferguson , who claimed 2.2 million Americans would die unless the strictest measures were put in place .
Ferguson has since downplayed his model but remained a loud supporter of the restrictions until being busted violating his beloved shelter-in-place order to visit his mistress . Even the most prominent and often cited model from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation ( IHME ) has been repeatedly and dramatically revised .
Whether it was justified or not , the objective has been accomplished . Throughout most of America , our hospital systems are no longer in danger of being flooded by coronavirus patients . My home state of Georgia now has the lowest number of patients hospitalized and the lowest number of ventilators in use since April 8 . Even in hard-hit New York City , which has 185,000 COVID-19 cases alone , 26 % of hospital beds and 21 % of intensive care units are open . Our hospital systems have the capacity necessary to deal with the coronavirus .
OUR VIEW : Fauci testimony again shows president ca n't shelf COVID-19 reality as he does scientists
We can safely reopen the country and allow folks to return to work while continuing to practice smart health guidelines . Every day that we delay makes it more difficult to restore the economic prosperity we enjoyed just three months ago .
Over 33 million hardworking Americans have filed for unemployment since mid-March . Americans and their employers are facing a tremendous difficulty . We can not afford to wait . The sooner we begin taking steps on the road to recovery , the more prosperous the path will be for us all .
If you ca n't see this reader poll , please refresh your page .