The coronavirus crisis has given Democrats a chance to advance key parts of their liberal agenda , with coronavirus sanctuaries for illegal immigrants and government-covered testing and health care for those who suspect they are infected .
President Trump , meanwhile , has trotted out a reliable Republican proposal : tax cuts to boost a virus-struck economy .
With the coronavirus dominating the nation ’ s front pages and newscasts , both sides are playing by the maxim of former Obama Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel : Never let a good crisis go to waste .
Mr. Trump ’ s plan is for a payroll tax cut through the end of the year , along with targeted relief to the travel industry and other areas of the economy that are suffering business losses .
The list of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , is more extensive .
She has floated a mandate of paid sick leave for employees who miss work because of COVID-19 and an expansion of food stamps and unemployment insurance for those who hit on hard times . Democrats have pursued these ideas well before the virus crisis .
Mrs. Pelosi said the government should pay for testing of anyone at risk and guarantee payment of costs for those who need treatment .
Mr. Trump on Tuesday called Mrs. Pelosi ’ s plans “ chopped up . ”
“ A lot of them are things that [ they ] wanted to get for other things , ” he said . “ We ’ re looking at solving this problem . ”
Democrats were just as dismissive of Mr. Trump ’ s proposed tax cut . Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat , compared a tax cut to “ dropping money out of an airplane and hoping a few dollars land on the people who are affected . ”
“ We will focus on health care and the tests , and people who are affected . And economic relief should go to the people who are affected as well . Not an across-the-board thing , ” Mr. Schumer said .
Mr. Trump assigned Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin to negotiate with Mrs. Pelosi to find common ground on legislation .
But a number of Democrats say Mr. Trump should take steps on his own in areas like immigration enforcement , where they say an order from on high declaring hospitals to be coronavirus sanctuaries , where illegal immigrants can feel safe going for testing or treatment , could prove critical .
“ DHS must clarify that undocumented individuals or their relatives will not be referred to immigration authorities if they seek treatment related to potential COVID-19 illness , ” the chairs of Congress ’ s Hispanic , black . and Asian and Pacific Islander caucuses wrote in a joint letter late last week .
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement says there ’ s no need for a new order . Hospitals and other medical facilities are already on the “ sensitive locations ” list , where immigration arrests are not allowed save for “ extraordinary circumstances . ”
“ Claims to the contrary are false and create unnecessary fear within communities , ” ICE said . “ Individuals should continue to seek care for medical conditions . ”
Democrats and immigrant-rights activists have also called on the administration to suspend its new Public Charge policy that allows the government to consider a migrant ’ s use of welfare programs in deciding whether to issue a green card granting legal permanent residence . Use of certain welfare programs would “ weigh heavily ” against approval , Homeland Security officials say .
Immigration-rights advocates say people will refuse to go to the hospital for fear of tainting their future prospects .
Mark Krikorian , executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies , said there ’ s “ a strong practical case for making sure illegal aliens understand that testing and treatment for Wuhan Flu will happen regardless of immigration status , and that it won ’ t be counted against public charge for those applying for green cards . ”
“ But the anti-borders folks want to use it as a pretext for erasing the borders , ” he said .
Mr. Krikorian said they learned the lesson of Mr. Emanuel , who in late 2008 , as he was helping set up the Obama White House , said : “ You never want a serious crisis to go to waste . And what I mean by that is an opportunity to do things that you think you could not do before . ”
Mr. Krikorian said in this case “ the things the anti-borders crowd could not do before is suspend , roll back , and ultimately delegitimize immigration law . ”
While Democrats ’ immigration demands are unlikely to be heeded , some of their other ideas did appear to have traction .
Vice President Mike Pence , who is leading the administration ’ s coronavirus task force , announced Tuesday that COVID-19 testing and treatment will be available cost-free — though it was done through the free market , with the nation ’ s insurers agreeing to cover costs without any copay to customers .
White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow said the government already has executive authority to expand sick leave for workers — though he didn ’ t detail what that would look like .
On Mr. Trump ’ s payroll tax cut , he said the president would prefer it to last through the end of the year — though they aren ’ t pondering spending cuts to balance the hit to the budget .
“ Over time , we ’ ll make [ lost revenue ] up with much better economic growth , ” said Mr. Kudlow , who declined to estimate a price tag for the emergency package , saying the details are still being worked out .
Even before the virus crisis , Mr. Trump had suggested he was looking for another tax cut — and COVID-19 has given him a push .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , Kentucky Republican , said his chief goal is to make sure the final package that emerges on Capitol Hill is bipartisan . That , he said , is the job of Mr. Mnuchin and Mrs. Pelosi .
“ We ’ re hoping that he and the speaker can pull this together so that we end up not playing partisan games at a time which seems to me to cry out for bipartisan , bicameral agreement , ” he said .
He pointed to last week ’ s speedy passage of an emergency spending bill to boost federal assistance amid the crisis as evidence Congress can work when it needs to .
Mr. Schumer said for that to happen , Mr. Trump will have to stay out of the way . He pointed out that in last week ’ s spending negotiations Mr. Trump had suggested a price tag of $ 1.2 billion . Mr. Schumer and fellow Democrats suggested $ 8.5 billion .