The coronavirus that 's packing people in hospitals as they grapple with sometimes life-threatening complications is leading to another problem for some survivors : mental health issues .
What 's happening : Many hospitals require adult patients to enter without family . Their stress , loneliness and fear , sometimes magnified by invasive treatment procedures , place them at a high risk for disorders such as PTSD , some medical experts say .
Loneliness can affect all of us during a pandemic , as many people stay physically distant from each other and more than 36 million Americans live by themselves .
`` Loneliness is about an experience and not a feeling , because loneliness is a combination of thinking , of feeling , and of behaving , '' says Ami Rokach , clinical psychologist and psychology teacher at York University in Toronto .
It can have an impact on psychological and physical health and is thought by some to be `` as bad for you as smoking , as [ being ] overweight and as [ having ] diabetes , '' Rokach says .
However , there are some indications that people 's resilience plus increased use of communications technology may be helping lessen the broader impact of the pandemic on loneliness , according to Martina Luchetti , assistant professor at Florida State University College of Medicine .
While further research is needed , Luchetti says a recent American Psychological Association study co-authored by her found that distancing measures `` did not increase loneliness '' as expected in the general public .
But the situation is different for COVID-19 patients . With the exception of giving birth , many hospitals do n't allow adults to bring a support person due to fears of infection and a limited supply of personal protective equipment .
Not only is it stressful to be diagnosed with a new disease with minimal treatment options , but the virus itself can affect the brain , including psychiatric and neurological complications .
Being alone through the prolonged treatment process can be `` heart-wrenching '' to watch , although nurses and doctors try to comfort them , says Martha A.Q . Curley , professor of pediatric nursing at the University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing .
`` You have people who 've lived 50 , 60 , 70 years together and they ca n't be with them when they 're ill , they ca n't transition through the illness with them , and they ca n't be there when they die . [ It ] is just excruciatingly painful , '' Curley says .
Some COVID-19 survivors may experience PTSD , which can last for years without treatment .
Most people feel anxiety with the uncertainty of COVID-19 , but some experience PTSD due to trauma and a `` threat to life or threat to physical integrity , '' says Anthony King , professor of psychiatry and psychology at the University of Michigan .
`` Clearly , the coronavirus disease is a threat to life , '' and the chance someone may experience PTSD may be exacerbated by patient isolation while fighting the disease , King says while cautioning further research is needed into anecdotal evidence .
Long-term studies of past serious outbreaks found PTSD is much higher in patients than in the general population .
In one study , one-fourth of 90 SARS patients had PTSD 30 months after the outbreak and 15.6 % had a depressive disorder .
The big picture : Research has shown many ICU survivors experience trauma , particularly with procedures like intubation .
And Curley points out reports of post-intensive care syndrome are growing after patients with COVID-19 are discharged , which can be further complicated by the fact that family members do n't know what the patient went through .
Four doctors argue in a New England Journal of Medicine perspective piece that new guidelines should enable more regular telecommunication between isolated patients and their families .
Curley , who is also a pediatric nurse at Children ’ s Hospital of Philadelphia , goes one step further and suggests steps can be taken to safely allow a family member into the ICU with a COVID-19 patient . Family facilitators can help with the careful screening , preparation and support needed to undertake this goal , she says .
`` We need to think of ways to make this happen . It will be different within each system , it will be different with each patient , but we ought to not just create a rule that families are not allowed , '' Curley adds .
The bottom line : Isolated and faced with uncertainty and fear , some COVID-19 patients are at risk for trauma that experts say should be screened for and addressed at all stages of health care .