Democratic presidential candidates Bernie Sanders and Joe Biden have both canceled their planned election-night rallies Tuesday in Ohio amid coronavirus fears .
The Sanders campaign announced the cancellation of their rally first , which was slated to take place in Cleveland , Ohio .
“ Out of concern for public health and safety , we are canceling tonight ’ s rally in Cleveland , ” the Sanders campaign spokesman , Mike Casca , said in a statement Tuesday afternoon . “ We are heeding the public warnings from Ohio state officials , who have communicated concern about holding large , indoor events during the coronavirus outbreak . ”
“ Sen . Sanders would like to express his regret to the thousands of Ohioans who had planned to attend the event tonight , ” Casca continued , adding that “ all future Bernie 2020 events will be evaluated on a case by case basis . ”
Minutes later , the former vice president 's campaign followed suit , with deputy campaign manager Kate Bedingfield announcing the cancellation `` out of an abundance of caution . ''
`` In accordance with guidance from public officials and out of an abundance of caution , our rally in Cleveland , Ohio tonight is cancelled , '' Bedingfield said in a statement Tuesday . `` We will continue to consult with public health officials and public health guidance and make announcements about future events in the coming days . ''
She added : `` Vice President Biden thanks all of his supporters who wanted to be with us in Cleveland this evening . ''
The Biden campaign said the candidate will instead speak at National Constitution Center in Philly on Tuesday night .
The announcements came the same day that multiple states are holding presidential primaries , with Michigan carrying the largest delegate prize .
Sanders and Biden had both decided to hold their rallies in Ohio Tuesday night , in an effort to look ahead to the key swing state , which holds its primary next week on March 17 .
Earlier in the day , Sanders said that the coronavirus threat was being taken “ very seriously , ” while taking a swipe at President Trump .
MARCH 10 PRIMARIES : HERE ARE THE STATES VOTING , AND THE DELEGATES AT STAKE
“ We take this issue , unlike the president , very , very seriously , ” Sanders said . “ What we are doing , wherever we go , whenever we do rallies , we consult with public health officials . ”
He added : “ Because the last thing in the world we will ever wan na do is put anybody in danger . ”
Sanders ' announcement comes amid the outbreak of coronavirus , also known as COVID-19 , which has rocked the political world .
Over the weekend , it was revealed that an attendee of the Conservative Political Action Conference , CPAC , held from Feb. 26 to Feb. 29 outside of Washington , D.C. had tested positive with the virus .
The top levels of government on the GOP side – Trump , Vice President Pence , cabinet officials , top-ranking lawmakers – attended CPAC . Staffers quickly worked to figure out who may have come in contact with the still-unnamed person . These discussions so far have led to several lawmakers going into self-quarantine as a precaution , amid assurances from organizers that nobody else has yet gotten sick from this individual .
The chain of events has fed speculation about whether Trump himself was at risk , as both the president and Pence attended and spoke at the conference . The White House said there is no indication that Trump or Pence was in close proximity to the stricken attendee .
Meanwhile , it ’ s unclear for how long the candidates will go without holding indoor campaign events . Biden , Sanders and Trump are all in the 70s , which puts them in the age bracket that doctors say could leave them more vulnerable to coronavirus .
But steps have been taken in recent days to still hold events : During a Biden campaign event in Michigan on Monday night , volunteers gave attendees hand sanitizer as they entered the venue .