( ███ ) - The arrival of warmer weather in the Northern Hemisphere raises the question of whether summer could slow the spread of the coronavirus outbreak . Here is what science says .
While warmer weather typically ends the annual flu season in temperate zones , climate alone has not stopped the COVID-19 pandemic from sweeping any part of the globe . In fact , outbreaks in hot and sunny Brazil and Egypt are growing .
Still , recent data about how sunlight , humidity and outdoor breezes affect the virus gives some reason for optimism that summer could slow the spread .
The virus has not been around long enough to be certain .
Respiratory infections like flu and the common cold follow seasonal patterns in temperate regions . Environmental conditions including cold weather , low indoor humidity , and spending more time indoors can all hasten the spread of an epidemic .
Real-world evidence about the effect of weather on the new virus is mixed . One study of 221 Chinese cities found that temperature , humidity and daylight did not affect speed of spread .
Two other studies did find an effect , including a look at new infections in 47 countries that linked higher temperatures to slower transmission in places like the Philippines , Australia and Brazil .
“ The Northern hemisphere may see a decline in new COVID-19 cases during summer and a resurgence during winter , ” concluded the authors of another study of 117 countries , which found that each 1-degree of latitude increase in distance from the Equator was associated with a 2.6 % increase in cases .
The head of the World Health Organization ’ s emergencies programme , Mike Ryan , cautioned : “ We can not rely on an expectation that the season or the temperature will be the answer to ( the disease ’ s spread ) . ”
WHY DO RESPIRATORY DISEASES SPREAD DIFFERENTLY IN SUMMER AND WINTER ?
“ The reason why cold weather is presumed to cause spreading of coughs , colds and flu is that cold air causes irritation in the nasal passages and airways , which makes us more susceptible to viral infection , ” said Simon Clarke , an expert in cellular microbiology at Britain ’ s University of Reading .
Winter weather tends to inspire people to spend more time indoors , although air conditioning may also bring people back inside in the summer .
In the lab , when temperatures and humidity rise , coronavirus particles on surfaces more quickly lose their ability to infect people - and they are inactivated especially fast when exposed to sunlight , U.S. government researchers found .
It is still a good idea for people to wash hands frequently , practice social distancing and wear a mask in summer , experts say . While virus particles coughed or exhaled by an infected person will disperse faster outdoors , one study found a gentle breeze could carry saliva droplets up to 6 m ( 19.69 feet ) .
Vitamin D : Researchers are investigating whether levels of immunity-regulating vitamin D in people ’ s blood affect how vulnerable they are to infection with the new coronavirus or how sick they become . The majority of vitamin D in the body comes from skin exposure to sunlight .
Pollen : A study in the Netherlands of all “ flu-like ” illness , including COVID-19 , in recent years concludes that pollen concentrations are a better predictor than sunlight of respiratory disease trends . Clouds of pollen act as air filters , snagging virus particles , and pollen activates immune responses , even in people without overt allergies .
The study found that flu-like illness started to drop when pollen in the air reached 610 grains per cubic metre , a typical level from early spring to October in most middle latitudes .