The second fact is that this disease is deadlier than the flu , to which the honestly ill-informed and the wantonly irresponsible insist on comparing it . Early guesstimates , made before data were widely available , suggested that the fatality rate for the coronavirus might wind up being about 1 percent . If that guess proves true , the coronavirus is 10 times as deadly as the flu .
But there is reason to fear that the fatality rate could be much higher . According to the World Health Organization , the current case fatality rate—a common measure of what portion of confirmed patients die from a particular disease—stands at 3.4 percent . This figure could be an overstatement , because mild cases of the disease are less likely to be diagnosed . Or it could be an understatement , because many patients have already been diagnosed with the virus but have not yet recovered ( and may still die ) .
Juliette Kayyem : The U.S. isn ’ t prepared for what ’ s about to happen
When the coronavirus first spread to South Korea , many observers pointed to the comparatively low death rates in the country to justify undue optimism . In countries with highly developed medical systems , they claimed , a smaller portion of patients would die . But while more than half of all diagnosed patients in China have now been cured , most South Korean patients are still in the throes of the disease . Of the 7,478 confirmed cases , only 118 have recovered ; the low death rate may yet rise .
Meanwhile , the news from Italy , another country with a highly developed medical system , has so far been shockingly bad . In the affluent region of Lombardy , for example , there have been 7,375 confirmed cases of the virus as of Sunday . Of these patients , 622 had recovered , 366 had died , and the majority were still sick . Even under the highly implausible assumption that all of the still-sick make a full recovery , this would suggest a case fatality rate of 5 percent—significantly higher , not lower , than in China .
The third fact is that so far only one measure has been effective against the coronavirus : extreme social distancing .
Before China canceled all public gatherings , asked most citizens to self-quarantine , and sealed off the most heavily affected region , the virus was spreading in exponential fashion . Once the government imposed social distancing , the number of new cases leveled off ; now , at least according to official statistics , every day brings more news of existing patients who are healed than of patients who are newly infected .
A few other countries have taken energetic steps to increase social distancing before the epidemic reached devastating proportions . In Singapore , for example , the government quickly canceled public events and installed medical stations to measure the body temperature of passersby while private companies handed out free hand sanitizer . As a result , the number of cases has grown much more slowly than in nearby countries .