John Welch , a nurse anesthetist with the nonprofit Partners in Health , was working at a clinic on the rural central plateau of Haiti when , in August of 2014 , he got a call asking if he could fly to Liberia . The charity had just agreed to help in the fight against Ebola , which had cropped up in Guinea that winter and was now spreading rapidly across West Africa . Welch , who specializes in pediatric surgeries , would go on to play a vital role in the American response to the coronavirus , but in 2014 he knew little about viral outbreaks and virtually nothing about Ebola . Within a week , however , he had flown to Atlanta , for a two-day crash course on the features of the disease , and then travelled to the Liberian capital of Monrovia .
It had been about three weeks since the World Health Organization had declared the outbreak a global emergency , and the press carried reports of bodies decaying on Monrovia ’ s streets . By the time Welch arrived , there were about a half-dozen Ebola-treatment units in or near the capital , most of them run by aid organizations . Those organizations , though , were just beginning to understand how complicated the epidemic would be , and how long it would take to control it .
A few months after arriving in Liberia , Welch was transferred to Port Loko , Sierra Leone , where P.I.H . had agreed to help manage a small hospital . Not long after he arrived , Welch , covered in protective gear , sat at the bedside of a young woman who was dying from complications of labor . Her doctors and nurses could not prove that she was not carrying Ebola , and no surgeon or midwife could be found who was willing to perform a C-section .
Port Loko was the hot zone . “ Nothing was happening in that hospital besides Ebola , ” Welch said . “ The first month , all we did was try to clear some cases out of the hospital so that we could reëstablish essential services. ” Tests were scarce , so patients were divided into positive cases , negative cases , suspected cases , and presumed cases , those who had not tested positive but were obviously symptomatic . Suspected cases were divided again , into “ wet ” patients , who had diarrhea and vomiting or were hemorrhaging blood from their orifices , and “ dry ” ones , who were not . Patients who had recovered were released from the hospital , but that meant persuading their families that they were no longer contagious . Often , when people developed fevers and went to the hospital , their possessions were set on fire or doused with chlorine , so the Port Loko hospital started sending patients home with cooking utensils , a cell phone and SIM card , and a little bit of cash .
By the end of 2014 , the virus had been beaten back in the cities , although , at any time , there were a few hundred active cases , about half of them nestled in areas so remote that they could not even be reached by motorcycle . The outbreak ’ s last Ebola death was reported in April , 2016 . “ If you ask me how we beat Ebola in West Africa , there ’ s a three-second answer : contact tracing , ” Welch said . He was referring to a simple public-health technique , developed during syphilis outbreaks in the nineteen-thirties , in which the infected are interviewed about the people they ’ ve come in contact with ; those contacts are then asked to isolate themselves , in order to prevent the contagion from spreading further . At the time of the Ebola outbreak , Liberia ’ s public hospitals employed a total of fifty physicians—the country had few of the capabilities of a modern , Western-style health-care system . It relied instead on an army of amateur community-health workers , who could take on the work of contact tracing . Tolbert Nyenswah , who was Liberia ’ s deputy health minister at the time , told me , “ Because we could not spare doctors or nurses , we hired social workers and schoolteachers as contact tracers—people who were respected in the community. ” Welch recalled long meetings with village and tribal leaders , to identify trusted and influential people to hire as tracers . As soon as patients with Ebola symptoms arrived at Port Loko Hospital , they were interviewed about everyone they ’ d been in contact with since they first developed a fever . A contact tracer then went to the patient ’ s neighborhood to tell those contacts that they needed to isolate at home for twenty-one days . Every day for three weeks , the tracers would return , to insure that those people were still isolating , to check on their health , and to see if there was anything they needed .
Liberia , a nation of five million people , eventually employed as many as ten thousand tracers . Welch recalled that , after he had been in the region for eight months , “ if you told me there would be an outbreak in a particular region , I could tell you which village . If you told me the village , I could tell you which house. ” He told me this story one evening at the beginning of May , speaking by phone from his apartment in Boston ’ s South End , where he was helping direct a similar program , the Massachusetts COVID-19 Community Tracing Collaborative . The which house stage in Massachusetts , Welch said , felt far away . He told me , “ I think we are at a similar point with COVID-19 to where we were with Ebola when I first arrived in Monrovia . ”
The Community Tracing Collaborative , or C.T.C. , which was publicly announced at the beginning of April , was one of the first and largest contact-tracing programs to be launched in response to COVID-19 , and it has provided an early model for similar programs developed by cities and states across the country . But the C.T.C . was even more notable because it had been developed by Partners in Health , an organization whose fame far exceeds its hundred-and-forty-million-dollar budget . The nonprofit ’ s founders , who established the organization in the late nineteen-eighties , are among the most famous figures in public health : they include Paul Farmer , who is renowned for his humanitarian work in Haiti and is the author and subject of best-selling books ; Ophelia Dahl , who ran the organization for over a decade ; and Jim Yong Kim , who , from 2012 to 2019 , was the president of the World Bank . P.I.H. ’ s mission has long been to build durable medical systems in the poorest parts of the poorest countries on earth , by training local community-health workers and allowing them to mold programs to local needs . Much of P.I.H. ’ s work has been in the least developed countries . And so the decision to have the group design and administer the COVID-19 response in a city filled with world-class hospitals also suggested that , in a crisis , the American health-care system needed tools and resources that it didn ’ t already have .
Massachusetts ’ s first confirmed COVID-19 cases appeared in February—a cluster connected to a corporate meeting held by the pharmaceutical company Biogen , at the Boston Marriott Long Wharf . On March 3rd , the state ’ s first case of community transmission emerged , in the Berkshires , and a week later the governor , Charlie Baker , declared a state of emergency . At the time , the state had only ninety-two confirmed cases , three-quarters of which could be traced to the Biogen conference , but that low figure was due to a shortage of tests : it was clear that the virus had spread much farther . During the first week of April , the total number of deaths in the nation more than doubled , from forty-seven hundred to more than twelve thousand . The number of cases—and hospitalizations , and deaths—was rising fast enough that Boston ’ s biggest hospitals were drawing up protocols that would help them decide who would be allocated a ventilator if the intensive-care units were overwhelmed .