But other adjustments are more difficult . Democratically elected leaders championing “ small government ” face new demands for the opposite – underscored , for example , by high ratings for many U.S. state governors . Authoritarian regimes , favoring central control , face a different challenge . In China , there has been extraordinary public criticism of early failings . In Russia and Egypt , the full impact of having to answer to the changing public mood is only starting . Leaders ’ worries may be evident in recent moves to rein in or punish independent reporting of the scale of the outbreak .
Unfamiliar demands on leaders are felt with particular urgency because of who ’ s making them : nurses and emergency workers , ship captains or passengers , men and women wanting assurances their needs will be met amid shortages and soaring unemployment . That ’ s forcing a rethink in many places . Tight-pursed fiscal prudence in Britain and Germany , for example , has given way to huge aid and stimulus packages .
At a time when trust in established institutions had been eroding , there seems to be a renewed sense that there are some things only governments can do . And , in crises like the coronavirus pandemic , that they must do .
It ’ s the most basic of political questions , but COVID-19 is now moving it from the philosophy classroom into nearly every corner of every country on Earth : What is government for ?
And the answer where it most matters – among citizens , among the governed – seems to be changing dramatically , at least in places feeling the worst effects of the virus . There , the immediate task of government has become acutely clear : Protect us and our loved ones , and give us the information , policies , tools , and care for that to happen .
That ’ s also part of a more fundamental change , at a time when trust in all established institutions had been eroding . Suddenly , there seems to be a renewed sense that government actually matters – that there are some things only governments can do . And , in crisis , things that governments must do .
There ’ s another , related change : Despite the reach of the internet in amplifying conspiracy theories and competing versions of events , we ’ re seeing a rekindled respect , and a need , for expertise and trustworthy research . For facts .
Whether , of course , such changes will prove enduring , once the worst of the crisis has finally passed , will take many months to answer . But the unfamiliar demands on governments and leaders are immediate .
They ’ re being felt with particular urgency because they ’ re not coming only from lobbyists or think tanks . They ’ re from nurses and emergency workers , imploring those in charge to get them protective gear . From captains or passengers on ships where the virus has struck , pleading for a place to dock . From men and women , old and young , wanting assurances they ’ ll have the food , supplies , and care they need , often suddenly finding themselves without the week-to-week funds to afford them .
Even in some developed countries – where most of the cases , or at least those publicly acknowledged , are so far occurring – that ’ s forcing a rethink . For Britain ’ s ruling Conservatives , and Chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s coalition government in Germany , tight-pursed fiscal prudence has long been a political article of faith . Yet within days of the first , stark economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis , both countries announced huge aid and stimulus packages , with the promise of more to come .
Markus Schreiber/Reuters German Chancellor Angela Merkel talks about measures taken by the government to stop further spread of COVID-19 during a briefing at the chancellery in Berlin , April 6 , 2020 .
Similar fiscal responses are now in place or on the way in nearly all countries where citizens are feeling the impact of shutdowns of economic activity .
But however costly , in political terms , that ’ s often proving the easiest adjustment for the people in power .
Elected leaders championing “ small government , ” for instance , are facing a crisis that is prompting demands for the opposite . U.S. President Donald Trump , in recent days , has been visibly struggling to square that circle . On the one hand , he has repeatedly portrayed the crisis as ultimately the responsibility of state and local leaders . But sky-high poll ratings for many state governors on the front line , in New York or Michigan , Washington or Ohio , have left no doubt of the grassroots hunger for assertive , effective , honest , and straightforward government action .
The president ’ s overall take on who is responsible is showing little sign of changing . Yet he did announce on Friday a federal government arrangement that he said would guarantee that no American , even the millions of uninsured , will have to pay if hospitalized with COVID-19 .
As not just a small-government leader , but a populist who has been sometimes almost flamboyantly dismissive of science , President Trump has also made another adjustment : deferring , on at least some major calls , to the scientific experts in his coronavirus task force .
Authoritarian regimes are faced with a different challenge . They do believe in strong central government , with pretty much everything ultimately subject to central control . But the impact of COVID-19 – an adversary they can not defeat by force , much less by decree – is being felt no less by their citizens than those in democratic countries . The human response , the instinctive list of things they want from their rulers , has been much the same : Protect us ; give us the information and tools and care we need .
Even in China – which , after initially hiding the outbreak , took draconian measures to bring it under control – there has been extraordinary public criticism of the early failings on the country ’ s tightly controlled social media .
In other authoritarian countries like Russia and Egypt , and even in India , a democracy , but one led by strongman populist Narendra Modi , the full impact of having to answer to the changing public mood is only now beginning to hit .
All three of those countries seem likely to struggle with an inexorably widening number of cases – India and Egypt , in particular , both with huge populations , many areas of economic deprivation , and a patchy healthcare system . All three have recently imposed restraints on movement and economic activity .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
But in a measure of their nervousness about what may be coming , and whether they ’ ll be able to meet ordinary citizens ’ needs and expectations , all of these nation ’ s rulers have something else in common . In recent days , they have moved to rein in or even punish independent reporting or comment on the scale of the outbreak .