The United Nations Security Council is watching the greatest global health crisis in a century unfold from the sidelines , quarreling over the wisdom of working online , batting down proposals to help organize the response to the pandemic , and largely ignoring the U.N. secretary-general ’ s appeal for a global cease-fire .
The paralysis comes at a time when the United States is pressing the 15-nation council to adopt a resolution that would largely blame China for unleashing the pathogen on the world . The initiative—which appears to be part of a broader U.S. strategy to deflect responsibility for its own sluggish response to the spread of the virus—is certain to be blocked by China , which wields veto power .
The council ’ s inaction marks a stark contrast from the Security Council ’ s previous response to international threats , from al Qaeda ’ s 9/11 attack on the United States to the 2014 Ebola epidemic in West Africa . During that health crisis , the Obama administration rallied the council behind a plan to flood the region with medical workers and to shift the mandate of a U.N. peacekeeping mission in the region—working with the support of the U.S. military—to help contain the spread of disease , which killed over 10,000 people .
In an effort to fill the current political vacuum , U.N. Secretary-General António Guterres on Monday issued a call for a sweeping global cease-fire to allow war-wracked countries and insurgent forces to turn their attention to battling the virus . His peace envoys in Yemen and Syria have taken up the call for a cease-fire .
[ Mapping the Coronavirus Outbreak : Get daily updates on the pandemic and learn how it ’ s affecting countries around the world . ]
“ The fury of the virus illustrates the folly of war , ” he said . “ That is why today , I am calling for an immediate global cease-fire in all corners of the world . It is time to put armed conflict on lockdown and focus together on the true fight of our lives . ”
Some council diplomats have weighed in on the issue . But the council has yet to lend its concerted voice to the appeal .
Kelly Knight Craft , the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations , said in a teleconference on Thursday that Libya must find “ a political path to stability , as continued conflict threatens to fuel the spread of COVID-19 . ”
“ This is not the time for violence , but rather for all actors to immediately suspend military operations , reject toxic foreign interference , and improve the ability of health authorities to combat this global pandemic , ” she said in her prepared remarks .
The Russian foreign ministry issued a statement calling for a humanitarian pause in some regional armed conflicts , as well as an end to economic sanctions . But it insisted that such a pause would not apply any constraints on its military operations in places such as Syria , where it says it is fighting terrorism .
“ We are highly concerned over the situation on territories controlled by terrorist groups , who could not care less about people ’ s wellbeing , ” according to the Russian statement . “ We are confident that counter-terrorist measures must be carried on . ”
On Friday , the president of the U.N. General Assembly Tijjani Muhammad Bande , organized a televised press conference with the U.N. Secretary-General , the Security Council president , and the president of the U.N. Economic and Social Council to draw attention to the crisis .
During the press conference , China ’ s U.N. ambassador defended the council ’ s response to the crisis , saying “ we are calling for cessation of hostilities , we are calling for ceasefire , and we are calling for unhindered access for humanitarian access . ”
Meanwhile , six governments , Ghana , Indonesia , Liechtenstein , Norway , Switzerland , and Singapore , proposed the 193-member General Assembly step in and adopt a resolution underscoring the “ central role ” of the U.N. in addressing the crises . By late Friday , the co-sponsors had secured signatures of support for the measure from 147 nations .
“ In this moment of great uncertainty and global anxiety , it is important for the voice of the U.N. General Assembly to be heard loud and clear , ” according to a letter from the co-sponsors of the resolution . “ We believe that the United Nations system has a central role to play in mobilising and coordinating the global response to this pandemic . ”
The U.N. Security Council—which held its last meeting on U.N. premises on March 12—has been riven by a range of procedural and political disputes .
Read More U.S. and China Turn Coronavirus Into a Geopolitical Football Beijing is using the outbreak to boost its reputation for global cooperation while Washington plays the blame-Beijing game . Exclusive | Colum Lynch , Robbie Gramer U.N . Diplomacy In The Age of Contagion Some delegations are repatriating vulnerable staff from New York amid a surge in coronavirus infections . Report | Colum Lynch U.N. Calls for Rolling Back Sanctions to Battle Pandemic Secretary-General Guterres says it ’ s time for “ solidarity not exclusion. ” Report | Colum Lynch
In the days following the suspension of meetings , China , which holds the presidency of the Security Council this month , and the U.N. secretariat have labored to construct a secure teleconferencing system to conduct meetings remotely .
The United States , meanwhile , proposed the council officially acknowledge the need to continue its work online .
“ In the event of a serious public emergency , including a public health emergency , that renders a physical meeting of the Security Council impractical , the Security Council may hold meetings using video conferencing as a last resort to ensure the participation of all members and to function continuously , ” reads a U.S. proposal presented to the council . “ Security Council meetings held through virtual means are deemed to be meetings pursuant to the United Nations Charter and the Security Council ’ s Provisional Rules of Procedure . ”
But Russia blocked the U.S. proposal , arguing that all formal sessions of the Security Council must take place inside the U.N. Security Council chamber .
“ We shouldn ’ t be afraid to gather from time to time in [ the ] UNSC Chamber , ” Russia ’ s Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia wrote in a March 16 letter to the Chinese ambassador . “ In the current circumstances it is important to show the rest of the world that [ the ] U.N. and its Security Council are functioning . ”
Nebenzia said Moscow was prepared to explore , on a case-by-case basis , the possibility of letting some delegations participate in council discussion by teleconference , but only if Russia and other members were permitted to meet inside the U.N. Security Council chamber . So far , Russia has agreed to discuss U.N. activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Libya on Tuesday and Thursday with the council by teleconference . But it has insisted that the meetings carry no official weight . On Thursday , the council managed to issue a press statement condemning a terrorist attack at the Dharamshala Sikh temple in Kabul , which killed 25 people .
Russia has denied it is holding up deliberations , saying it has allowed televised video conference meetings to take place . The “ Security Council remains active , ” Russia ’ s U.N. mission wrote Thursday on Twitter . “ Discussions of # DRC via VTC on Tuesday initiated by [ Russia ] clearly demonstrated that . Today # Libya was discussed int his format . # Syria is pending on 30 March . ”
The council , however , has so far been unable to convince Russia to renew the mandates for U.N. operations in Somalia and Sudan , or to grant an extension to a panel of experts monitoring sanctions against North Korea .
But Russia was not alone in gumming up the council ’ s works .
Listen Now : Do n't Touch Your Face A new podcast from ███ covering all aspects of the coronavirus pandemic Learn More
Last week , Estonia , one of the council ’ s 10 temporary members , sought support for a Security Council statement that voiced concern that the pandemic “ may constitute a threat to international peace and security ” and called for greater international cooperation in confronting the pathogen .
But that initiative was blocked by South Africa and China , which argued that the pandemic did not constitute a threat to peace and security and should be addressed in institutions like the World Health Organization .
France , meanwhile , has since opened discrete discussions involving the council ’ s four other key powers , Britain , China , Russia , and the United States , on a resolution that would address the pandemic . The French initiative infuriated some of Paris ’ s European colleagues , which claim they were not consulted . In any event , the French draft appeared unlikely to be adopted . The United States proposed an amendment to the text that would refer to the coronavirus as the “ Wuhan virus , ” a move in line with Trump administration efforts to blame China for the initial spread of the virus . The U.S. initiative—which was first reported by NBC—is certain to be blocked by China .
The initiative comes after foreign ministers of the G-7 industrial powers , meeting via videoconference , failed to adopt a statement on the pandemic after U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo insisted that it refer to the pathogen as the “ Wuhan virus . ”
The council ’ s inaction contrasts with its previous approach to global health crises in Africa over the past two decades .
In January 2000 , U.S. Vice President Al Gore presided over a U.N. Security Council meeting to discuss the threat posed by HIV to regional security in Africa . The then-U.S. ambassador to the United Nations , Richard Holbrooke , who spearheaded the effort , subsequently insisted the U.N. supply its peacekeepers with condoms to halt the spread of HIV . Shortly after , the National Security Council declared HIV , the virus that causes AIDS , a national security threat .
In September 2014 , Samantha Power , then-U.S. ambassador to the United Nations , presided over the first emergency session of the Security Council to address the Ebola epidemic in West Africa . During the meeting , the council adopted a resolution declaring Ebola a “ threat to international peace and security ” and urged the world to send more health care workers and supplies to the hardest-hit countries : Liberia , Sierra Leone , and Guinea .
“ This would be a good moment for an initiative from the Security Council to get out in front of this , rather than appearing irrelevant in the face of a global crisis , ” said Karin Landgren , the executive director of the Security Council Report , a nonprofit . “ The big picture is that countries have largely turned inward and there isn ’ t an immediate thought to how they could best come together to address this . ”
“ It is high time that the Security Council address this threat to international peace and security , ” Mona Ali Khalil , a former U.N. lawyer , wrote on the news site PassBlue . “ The Security Council has a responsibility to coordinate a prompt and effective global response . ”
If the council is unwilling , she added , the U.N. chief should “ invoke his authority ” under the U.N. Charter to bring the matter before the council .
Rob Berschinski , who was involved in negotiations over the Ebola resolution for the United States , told ███ it defies logic to contend that the current pandemic is not a threat to international peace and security .
“ It ’ s likely that various conflicts and crisis scenarios are going to be directly impacted by this , ” said Berschinski , who outlined a series of steps the council could take to coordinate the international response in a piece published by Just Security .
“ It ’ s reasonable to say , ‘ We ’ re going to take care of America first , ’ ” Berschinski told ███ . “ But at the same time it would be a massive mistake not to be setting up structures that are undoubtedly going to be necessary to fight this disease internationally , for months , and perhaps years . ”
As for assigning responsibility for the virus ’ s spread , that can wait until later , he said .
“ I think China deserves a considerable amount of blame for the way its government covered up in the initial stages of the pandemic , ” Berschinski said . “ But at this point we need to make the global health security that threatens hundreds of thousands of lives , if not more , a priority over this seemingly petty argument over who is more to blame . ”