More US states are beginning to lift lockdown orders even as US leaders say social distancing guidelines will be necessary throughout the summer .
But governors warn that life will not quickly return to normal , and that restrictions will remain in some places to keep the virus from resurging .
On Friday , the US saw its largest single-day spike in cases .
But the infection rate has dropped significantly in several hotspots , including New York , the US epicentre .
As of Tuesday , the US has over 994,000 recorded coronavirus cases , according to Johns Hopkins University , and more than 56,700 deaths .
Public health experts warn that lifting restrictions too soon could cause a second wave of infections . The decision to end mandatory orders comes as over 26m Americans seek unemployment protection , and the jobless rate climbs to around 16 % of the population .
Even as state governors allow orders to expire , some city mayors have issued their own separate plans to end local lockdowns rules .
At one point , over 90 % of the US population was under mandatory lockdown orders , but some states began lifting orders over the weekend allowing some Americans to return to hair salons and tattoo parlours .
Georgia , Oklahoma , Alaska and South Carolina have already allowed some businesses to reopen . They and other states have issued plans that call for more rules to be relaxed in the coming week .
Colorado 's Democratic Governor Jared Polis has said kerb-side retail pickup can begin on Monday , with hair salons , barbershop and tattoo parlours allowed to reopen on Friday .
Tennessee will allow restaurants to reopen on Monday , the same day that Mississippi 's mandatory lockdown order expires .
Montana 's governor has allowed churches to reopen starting on Sunday , with social distancing measures still required . Restaurants and schools will be allowed to reopen on 7 May .
Eight states led by Republican governors - Arkansas , Iowa , Nebraska , North Dakota , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Utah and Wyoming - never issued mandatory orders to stay at home .
Michigan 's Democratic governor , who has angered protesters with her lockdown orders , told ABC News that it is too early to lift mandatory orders in the state .
`` We 've got to be nimble and we have to follow the science and be really smart about how we reengage , '' said Gov Gretchen Whitmer .
Despite a state-wide order to stay-at-home in California , thousands of people have flocked to beaches amid a heat wave .
But officials in both Ventura and Orange Counties , where beaches are open , said most people were adhering to social distancing guidelines , including staying 6ft ( 2m ) apart .
Many beaches are still closed , leading the sheriff of LA County to warn beach-goers that `` enforcement is in full effect '' .
Texas ' governor said he will not renew the states stay-at-home order when it expires on 30 April because it already `` has done its job '' .
Republican Greg Abbott said on Monday that retail business as well as restaurants , cinemas and malls can reopen - but at only 25 % capacity - starting on Friday .
Barbershops , hair salons , pubs and gyms can not reopen until later in May , the governor said .
Ohio Republican Governor Mike DeWine , who has been praised for his virus response , said that non-essential surgery that does not require an overnight hospital stay can resume on 1 May .
On 4 May , offices can reopen and on 12 May retail business can resume .
`` These are first steps , '' Mr DeWine said . `` We 've got to get moving . ''
On Sunday , White House coronavirus taskforce co-ordinator Dr Deborah Birx said social distancing will remain the norm `` through the summer to really ensure that we protect one another as we move through these phases '' .
Her comments come after Vice-President Mike Pence said the virus would be largely `` behind us '' by the 25 May Memorial Day holiday , which signals the unofficial start of summertime in the US .
Dr Birx told Fox News this weekend that new cases and deaths `` will be dramatically decreased by the end of May '' .
On Monday , New York Governor Andrew Cuomo suggested some parts of his state could begin to reopen after the current stay-at-home order expires on 15 May .
The governor said that transmission rates , as well as death rates , would dictate how and when the state reopens .
He urged local officials to follow national health guidelines for reopening and work together regionally , saying : `` You have to be smart about it - we all have to be smart about it . ''
Mr Cuomo also noted he would extend restrictions in many parts of the state . There are still 1,000 new Covid-19 cases confirmed each day in New York .
The death rate has dropped in New York , with 337 deaths on Sunday , compared to 367 deaths on Saturday and 437 on Friday . It represents the lowest increase since 30 March .