House Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiGOP signals Trump 's payroll-tax cut in Republican coronavirus bill — for now Trump threatens to double down on Portland in other major cities White House , Senate GOP clash over testing funds MORE ( D-Calif. ) and Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Chuck SchumerHow a progressive populist appears to have toppled Engel MJ Hegar wins Democratic battle to challenge John Cornyn Dunford withdraws from consideration to chair coronavirus oversight panel MORE ( D-N.Y. ) are set to meet on Tuesday afternoon with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin Steven Terner MnuchinGOP signals Trump 's payroll-tax cut in Republican coronavirus bill — for now White House , Senate GOP clash over testing funds GOP eyes more than billion for schools in coronavirus package MORE and White House chief of staff Mark Meadows Mark Randall MeadowsGOP signals Trump 's payroll-tax cut in Republican coronavirus bill — for now White House , Senate GOP clash over testing funds GOP eyes more than billion for schools in coronavirus package MORE .
The meeting , which two sources confirmed to ███ , will be the first time administration officials and Democratic leadership have sat down for face-to-face discussions about a fifth coronavirus relief package .
It comes as Congress and the White House are under intense pressure to provide more relief with coronavirus cases climbing across the country and unemployment stuck in the double digits .
`` Well , our message to them is let 's get going , '' Schumer told CNN 's `` New Day '' during an interview on Tuesday morning .
Schumer then pointed to differences between the White House and congressional Republicans as a reason for the stalled talks .
`` The Republicans do n't even seem to have their own act together . It 's hard to negotiate when the president says one thing , Senate Republicans say another , '' he said .
`` We hope they 're going to be unified and present something to us ... in detail , '' Schumer added .
Lawmakers and the administration have weeks to get a deal before Congress is scheduled to leave town until early September .
Administration officials have said they want a deal by the end of the month , to line up with the soon-to-expire federal increase in unemployment benefits . The Senate is scheduled to leave town on Aug. 7 , giving negotiators more flexibility .
There are several divisions not just among Republicans and Democrats but GOP senators and the White House over key policy proposals lawmakers are debating including in the next coronavirus bill .
The House previously passed a $ 3 trillion relief bill largely along party lines . McConnell and the White House are eyeing a $ 1 trillion measure , though senators have acknowledged that could creep upward .
Tuesday is poised to be a crucial day in the negotiations . Mnuchin and Meadows will meet on Tuesday morning with a key group of Senate Republican negotiators : Senate Health , Education , Labor and Pension Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander Andrew ( Lamar ) Lamar AlexanderWhite House , Senate GOP clash over testing funds GOP eyes more than billion for schools in coronavirus package ███ 's Coronavirus Report : Former HHS Secretary Sebelius gives Trump administration a D in handling pandemic ; Oxford , AstraZeneca report positive dual immunity results from early vaccine trial MORE , Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Richard Shelby Richard Craig ShelbyGOP eyes more than billion for schools in coronavirus package This week : Debate over Confederate statues , fifth coronavirus bill heats up House panel wraps up lightning-fast appropriations for 2021 MORE and Sen. Roy Blunt Roy Dean BluntWhite House , Senate GOP clash over testing funds GOP eyes more than billion for schools in coronavirus package Making vulnerable children a priority in the pandemic response MORE ( R-Mo . ) , a member of leadership and chairman of a subcommittee that oversees health and education funding .
Republican senators and the White House are divided both on whether to provide new money for testing and what restrictions to place on money for schools .
`` Well , just a better understanding of how we can ... most effectively use federal dollars to help 135,000 public and private schools , and 6,000 colleges , open safely this fall , as much as possible in-person . That 's what I would hope to do , '' Alexander told reporters on Monday night .