Ready to fight back ? Sign up for Take Action Now and get three actions in your inbox every week . You will receive occasional promotional offers for programs that support ███ ’ s journalism . You can read our Privacy Policy here . Sign up for Take Action Now and get three actions in your inbox every week .
Thank you for signing up . For more from ███ , check out our latest issue
Support Progressive Journalism ███ is reader supported : Chip in $ 10 or more to help us continue to write about the issues that matter . ███ is reader supported : Chip in $ 10 or more to help us continue to write about the issues that matter .
Fight Back ! Sign up for Take Action Now and we ’ ll send you three meaningful actions you can take each week . You will receive occasional promotional offers for programs that support ███ ’ s journalism . You can read our Privacy Policy here . Sign up for Take Action Now and we ’ ll send you three meaningful actions you can take each week .
Thank you for signing up . For more from ███ , check out our latest issue
Travel With ███ Be the first to hear about Nation Travels destinations , and explore the world with kindred spirits . Be the first to hear about Nation Travels destinations , and explore the world with kindred spirits .
The state of Texas , which has implemented some of the most aggressive “ reopening ” strategies so far , experienced its largest single-day jump in reported coronavirus cases over the weekend . The state of Georgia , which was one of the first states to reopen , is such a mess that the state government was caught trying to mislead people about the direction cases are trending . The thing that experts predicted would happen as states reopen appears to be happening : People are getting sick . Ad Policy
That ’ s a terrifying problem , now that , as of yesterday , all 50 states have begun to lift their lockdowns . The pandemic isn ’ t “ over , ” but the country ’ s patience has apparently run out . People are willing to risk their lives to get their hair cut , and state governments have decided to let them . When reached for comment , Covid-19 took the form of Al Pacino and said : “ Vanity , definitely my favorite sin . ”
It ’ s tempting to conclude that the newly infected deserve their fate . There ’ s a video going around of people gathering on a beach in Galveston , Tex. , for “ Go Topless Jeep Weekend ” ( the lack of punctuation is important , I believe ) and I ’ m hard-pressed to find anybody in the video who should be allowed back into the gene pool . Watching these dispatches , there ’ s a hope that only the people who seem to be trying to get sick will get sick , that it ’ s their choice to be irrational , and , if that ’ s the case , that we should all be quiet while Darwin ’ s theory does its work .
Unfortunately , that ’ s not how our society works . That ’ s not how communicable diseases work . That ’ s not how any of this works . Cell phone data shows that the small groups of largely white confederates who have attended anti-lockdown protests spread themselves across hundreds of miles , even into neighboring states , within 48 hours of attending one of their Covid parties . And , of course , the people most likely to congregate in large groups without wearing a mask are also the people most likely to show up at your local grocery store or Costco without wearing a mask , sneeze on your potential purchases , and then amble off in search of more “ freedom ” while leaving sickness and death in their wake .
Quite simply : It ’ s the people who are most vocal about wanting the country to reopen who are making it too dangerous to reopen the country . It ’ s the people who are least concerned about their own health who are putting everybody else ’ s health at risk .
The only rational response to these people who refuse to abide by social distancing guidelines is for people who want to protect themselves to shelter in place even longer . At this point , even if the government provided widespread testing ( which it still has not ) and these people knew they had Covid , I wouldn ’ t trust them to stay inside . Society is only as strong as its weakest link , and right now our weakest links are showing themselves to be literal mouth breathers who can ’ t be bothered to cover their faces .
The problem is that the rational response is not available to everybody equally . For the most part , the people who want the stores and bars and beaches open are not the people who have to work at the stores and bars and beaches . The people who refuse to serve the greater good by wearing a mask demand service . Every time a business is badgered into opening , there ’ s a whole host of people who are pressed into service : not just the employees of that business but also the many folks who make up our whole societal support apparatus—police , sanitation workers , transit workers , parking valets . Scores of humans have to risk their health just so a Trump voter can drink unobstructed by a face mask until they puke into a trashcan . Current Issue View our current issue
If these people were serious about restoring economic activity for the workers in need of a paycheck , rather than just for their own personal enjoyment , then they ’ d be begging to wear a mask so that those workers could return to their jobs as safely as possible . They ’ d be begging to stay six feet apart to show that Americans can be trusted to look out for each other . If everybody could just be smart and follow the rules , we might be at a point where limited social engagement and economic activity could be possible without causing a dramatic spike in disease . People could take their tops off if they would just keep their masks on . We could go to the beach and even spend money if people would just use the giant ocean to maintain social distance . If we were smart and careful , we might not have to spend the summer completely alone and afraid .
We can ’ t have these nice things because we have too many selfish people spoiling it for everybody else . We can ’ t manage the crisis , because too many people have decided to be unmanageable . We are slowly beginning to understand how to protect ourselves from the virus . But we have no clue how to protect ourselves from the virulent people who insist on spreading the virus because they ’ ve determined they can live with other people dying . A person walking around without a mask isn ’ t telegraphing that they don ’ t care about their own life ; they ’ re shouting that they don ’ t care about yours . They ’ re willing to be the one who kills you , because they don ’ t value anybody ’ s life but their own .
The most aggressive reopeners know exactly whose lives they aren ’ t interested in protecting : black and brown people , old people , and working people . The Washington Post grabbed some quotes from giddy “ reopeners ” gathered in crowds without protective equipment outside a Georgia mall . The quotes are breathtaking examples of people saying the quiet part aloud :
“ I think you have to live life , ” said Jeff Lampel , taking a sip of beer . “ When you start seeing where the cases are coming from and the demographics—I ’ m not worried , ” agreed his friend Scott Friedel . “ I know what people are going to say— ‘ Those selfish idiots are killing our old people ! ’ ” said Lampel . “ How do you give up a day like this—really , how ? ” Friedel said , enjoying the last rays of sun as the music kept playing and the crowds kept coming .
Jeff Lampel is right about one thing : He and his friend are selfish idiots .
The calculus by these two guys is instructive . The costs and risks of reopening are not borne by the people clamoring for it , and they know it . Nikole Hannah Jones ( the Pulitzer Prize–winning reporter behind The 1619 Project ) has said that the push to reopening is “ linked to the belief that Covid is disproportionately killing black and brown folks. ” It ’ s objectively insane to risk lives so Tweedledee and Tweedledum can get together and drool on each other on a sunny day . The only thing that allows them to be so unbothered and so unwilling to take minimum precautions is their belief about who is really getting sick .
I can ’ t fix these people . I can ’ t educate them . I can ’ t teach them to care about somebody other than themselves . In some deep , vengeful part of my brain , I might hope that they get sick—sick enough to realize the error of their ways—but that wouldn ’ t solve anything . Covid can not fill the gaping hole where their empathy is supposed to be ; it will just add to their endless reserves of self-pity . More on Covid-19 How Stanford Lost Its Soul Jeet Heer Trump ’ s Crackpot Claims Are a Distraction—and We ’ re Taking the Bait Joan Walsh
All I can do is protect myself from them . And that involves staying inside for as long as I possibly can . That stinks for me . And it stinks for the businesses that need my consumerism . There is economic activity that I would like to engage in . I would like to take my kids to the ice cream truck ( or , at the very least , I ’ d like to sue the ice cream truck for making me Daddy Bad Guy when I tell my kids we can not answer its siren song ) . But I can ’ t . I can ’ t risk some maskless MAGA bro standing right behind us in line and launching into a spittle-hurling “ it ’ s a hoax ” rant when I politely ask him to take two steps back from my family .
It ’ s a privilege to be able to stay inside . Outside , working people have no refuge from customers who don ’ t care if they live or die .
But working people will not go down without a fight . The antidote to the Topless Jeep people is this hero Costco employee who barred a disease vector who refused to wear a mask from continuing to shop . We can only hope businesses that take seriously the health and safety of their employees and customers will be rewarded , while people who only care about themselves will be ostracized to their Chick-Fil-A and NASCAR infields .
Right now , my house is the only place where I feel safe from the idiots . As we reopen , I ’ ll only be going to the places that promise to keep me safe from them .