“ Time will tell if this will turn into a tea party-type movement , ” Hice said of the growing social unrest . “ Part of me is hopeful this will begin a movement of Americans taking a stand for constitutional liberties that have been eroding for quite some time , but rapidly eroding through this pandemic . ”
Yet for all the heated protests taking place — and as several states begin to wind down restrictions — the desire to immediately end the lockdowns remains a minority opinion . According to new polling , most Americans do not feel comfortable with their states reopening salons , gyms , movie theaters and other businesses .
That might explain why some Republicans have taken a more measured approach to the debate , acknowledging it ’ s difficult to strike a balance between public health concerns and the need to get the economy humming again . And even if the economy is technically reopened , it ’ s not clear there will be many customers if fear of the virus is widespread .
`` No matter what decision you make , there 's going to be people second-guessing it , ” said Sen. John Cornyn ( R-Texas . ) , who is up for reelection this fall . “ You need to do it gradually and you need to be careful . … We all know how to manage risks in our own life — that 's if we have good information and know how to do that . But right now , people are being inundated . ”
President Donald Trump — who has also encouraged protesters with tweets to `` liberate '' Democratic-run states — recently tapped a bipartisan congressional task force to explore ways to get the nation back to work . It 's a sign the White House wants some bipartisan buy-in for reopening the economy , one of the most consequential decisions that will be made during the pandemic .
Coronavirus casualties are still climbing , with over 80,000 Americans dead from the virus thus far . Republicans who have been clamoring to reopen the country have faced accusations from Democrats that they care more about the economy than people ’ s lives .
Many GOP lawmakers , however , counter that continuing the lockdown carries its own set of health risks , pointing to the increase in suicides and routine health exams getting pushed to the back burner .
“ We need to get back to our way of life , because there are serious mental health issues , ” said House GOP Whip Steve Scalise ( R-La. ) . “ You ’ re seeing suicides on the rise . ”
Others have given more blunt assessments . Rep. Trey Hollingsworth ( R-Ind . ) told a local radio station last month that the health risks are the `` lesser of two evils ” compared with the economic damage from the virus .
Republicans have also begun to decry the stay-at-home orders as a violation of constitutional rights — a call to arms that plays directly to the right ’ s fears about government overreach .
“ Power has gone to their heads , and they believe government is the answer to everything , ” said GOP Rep. Debbie Lesko of Arizona , who accused Democratic Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot of going “ ballistic ” with her threats to jail people who violate social distancing orders .
Meanwhile , Hice and Biggs wrote a letter to Trump over Easter weekend voicing concern that virus-related restrictions on public gatherings are infringing on Americans ’ religious freedoms . They 've complained that in some places , you can buy alcohol and a lottery ticket but ca n't attend your place of worship .
“ Just because we have a pandemic does not mean our constitutional rights evaporate or disappear , ” Hice said . “ I believe there ’ s a tremendous abuse of civil liberties in certain cases across the country , and I ’ m hopeful some of these people will be held accountable . ”