The issue of whether government in America can quarantine persons against their will , ostensibly for their own health and that of others with whom they may come in contact , requires a dual analysis — one of the powers of the federal government and the other of the powers of the states .
For constitutional analysis purposes , since local and regional governments derive their powers from the states in which they are located , the analysis of state powers pertains to them as well .
We begin our analysis with the observation of the truism that freedom is the default position . The language of the Declaration of Independence , as well as various amendments in the Bill of Rights , unambiguously reflects the views that those who wrote , ratified and amended the Constitution recognized that our rights — to think , speak , publish , worship , defend ourselves , travel , own property , be left alone — are natural to our humanity .
These rights preexisted the government . Their source is our humanity . Government does not grant these rights . Rather , its primary purpose — as stated in the Declaration of Independence , its sole purpose — is to protect these rights .
Though the courts have interpreted the Constitution to possess lamentable exceptions , the framers and ratifiers arguably accepted the non-aggression principle — articulated in the modern era by the late Professor Murray Rothbard — which declares that all aggression against persons and property even by government is immoral .
In the case of the federal government , it is one of limited , delegated powers . Of course , 230 years of legislation and litigation have blown its powers outside the confines of the Constitution and , invariably , in the direction of expanding federal power at the expense of personal liberty and the states .
The states formed the federal government and not the other way around .
Yet today , the feds stay in power by bribing the states with cash grants , the rich with bailouts , the middle class with tax breaks and the poor with transfer payments .
Notwithstanding all this , the courts continue to recognize the concept of personal liberty in a free society .
All this is background to the issue lurking beneath the headlines this week . Can the government quarantine people without proof of contagion and imminent assault ? The short answer is no .
We know that , under the Fifth Amendment , if any government — state or federal — wants to impair the life , liberty or property of any person , it must follow due process .
The substantive component asks if the impairment of liberty is proper to the government that seeks the impairment , and the procedural component asks if the impairment has come about fairly .
Now , back to what the feds can do and what the states can do in a public health crisis . There are no emergency provisions or triggers in the Constitution ; yet , Congress gave itself the power to regulate public health and safety under various pretexts .
The pretexts exist because the nanny state urge of members of Congress to regulate is confronted by the reservation in the Tenth Amendment of health and safety to the states . Those pretexts are regulating commerce and all that affects commerce , and paying the states to do Congress ' will .
Stated differently , the Supreme Court has ruled that both the federal government and the states can confine a person who has not committed a crime , or one who has but has served one 's full sentence , in order to protect society from the person 's intentional or uncontrollable harmful tendencies .
It is contrary to the plain meaning of the Constitution for Congress to give itself powers that were not delegated to it by the Constitution , but the courts have permitted this . Yet , even in the case of a lunatic who has committed a crime and served his full sentence but remains dangerous , the courts have recognized constitutional safeguards to protect his natural rights .
Now , back to our question of whether the government — state or federal — can confine persons against their will in order to protect public health . The short answer is yes , but the Constitution requires procedural due process .
Thus , a government-ordered quarantine of all persons in a city block or a postal zip code or a telephone area code would be an egregious violation of due process , both substantive and procedural . Substantively , no government in America has the lawful power to curtail natural rights by decree .
Procedurally , notwithstanding the fear of disease contagion , the states and feds may only quarantine those who are actively contagious and will infect others imminently . And it must present evidence of both at a trial at which it bears the burden of proof .
While the non-aggression principle permits offensive aggression in self-defense when an attack is imminent and certain , that is a high standard for the government to meet , as it should be . Freedom — even the freedom of a madman or a dangerously sick and contagious person — is the default position . Infringing upon it without procedural due process is always constitutionally impermissible .
The Constitution was not written for the government to right every wrong .
We know that government itself causes most wrongs — the theft of property by taxation , the impairment of economic liberty by regulation , the slaughter of innocents by war , the infringement of expressive liberties by majority vote . Yet , the Constitution still mandates an exacting due process for all whom the government would restrain .
That means a trial before any quarantine , no matter the public danger , and a fair trial , not one animated by mass hysteria or government-generated fear .
Judge Andrew P. Napolitano was the youngest life-tenured Superior Court judge in the history of New Jersey . He is Fox News ’ senior judicial analyst . Napolitano has been published in The New York Times , The Wall Street Journal , and numerous other publications . He is the author of the best-seller , `` Lies the Government Told You : Myth , Power , and Deception in American History . '' For more of Judge Napolitano 's reports , Go Here Now .