Millions of Americans remain subjected to unprecedented restrictions on their personal lives , their daily lives , their family 's lives .
The coronavirus lockdowns continue in many places . You may not know that because it gets no publicity , but it 's true . And if you 're living under it , you definitely know .
TRUMP BLASTS ‘ RADICAL LEFT ’ DEMS IN SEATTLE , SAYS ‘ DOMESTIC TERRORISTS ’ TAKE HOLD OF CITY
As a result of this , tens of millions of people are now unemployed . A huge number of them have no prospects of working again . Many thousands of small businesses are closed and will never reopen . More Americans have become dependent on drugs and alcohol , seeing their marriages dissolve , and become clinically depressed .
Some of them delayed their weddings . Others were banned by the government from burying their loved ones in funerals . Some Americans will die of cancer because they could n't get cancer screenings , some unknown number have taken their own lives in despair . Others have flooded the streets to riot because bottled up rage and frustration take many forms .
The cost of shutting down the United States and denying our citizens desperately needed contact with one another is hard to calculate . But the cost has been staggering .
The people responsible for doing all of this , say they have no regrets about it . We faced a global calamity , they say . COVID-19 was the worst pandemic since the Spanish flu . That flu killed 50 million people .
We had no choice . We did the right thing . That 's what they 're telling us . Is it true ?
The answer to that question matters , not just because the truth always matters , but because the credibility of our leaders is at stake here . This is the biggest decision they have made in our lifetimes . They were able to make it . They rule because we let them . Their power comes from us .
As a matter of public health , we can say conclusively the lockdowns were not necessary .
So the question , now and always is , are they worthy of that power ? That 's not a conversation they want to have . And right now , they do n't have to have that conversation because all of us are distracted and mesmerized by the woke revolution underway outside .
They just created a separate country in Seattle . Huh ? We 'll bring you the latest on that . But we do think it 's worth four minutes taking a pause to assess whether or not they were in fact lying to us about the coronavirus and our response to it .
And the short answer is this : Yes , they were definitely lying .
As a matter of public health , we can say conclusively the lockdowns were not necessary . In fact , we can prove that . And here 's the most powerful evidence : States that never locked down at all -- states where people were allowed to live like Americans and not cower indoors alone -- in the end turned out no worse than states that had mandatory quarantines . The state you probably live in .
The states that locked down at first but were quick to reopen have not seen explosions of coronavirus cases . All of this is the opposite of what they said would happen with great confidence .
The media predicted mass death at places like Lake of the Ozarks and Ocean City , Md . -- places where the middle class dares to vacation . But those deaths never happened . In the end , the Wuhan coronavirus turned out to be a dangerous disease , but a manageable disease , like so many others . Far more dangerous were the lockdowns themselves .
For example , in New York , Pennsylvania , New Jersey , and Massachusetts , panicked and incompetent governors forced nursing homes to accept infected coronavirus patients , and as a result , many thousands died , and they died needlessly .
This is all a remarkable story , but it 's going almost entirely uncovered . The media would rather tell you why you need to hate your neighbor for the color of his skin . The media definitely do n't want to revisit what they were saying just a few weeks ago , when they were acting as press agents for power-drunk Democratic politicians .
We were all played . Corrupt politicians scared us into giving up control over the most basic questions in our lives . At the same time , they gave more power to their obedient followers , like Antifa , while keeping the rest of us trapped at home and censored online .
Back then , news anchors were ordering you to stop asking questions and obey .
Chris Cuomo , CNN anchor : All right , so while most Americans are staying inside -- or should be , right , if they 're not out protesting like fools -- they 're not happy about being told to stay home . Staying home saves lives .
And the rest of us should be staying at home for our mothers and the people that we love , and to keep us farther apart , will ultimately bring us closer together in this cause .
Oh , if you love your mother , you will do what I say . It turns out cable news anchors do n't make very subtle propagandists .
And then Memorial Day arrived in May , and some states started to reopen . Millions of grateful Americans headed outdoors for the first time in months , and the media attacked them for doing that . They called them killers .
Swimming with your kids , they told us , was tantamount to mass murder .
Claire McCaskill , MSNBC political analyst : Frankly , a lot of the people in those crowds -- they thought they were , you know , standing up for what the president believes in and that is not to care about the public safety part of this .
Robyn Curnow , CNN host : Look at this . I mean , this is kind of crazy , considering we 're in the middle of a global pandemic .
I mean , as one person quipped , you know , that 's curving the curve . That 's not flattening it .
Don Lemon , CNN anchor : Massive crowd of people crammed together , as if it were just an ordinary holiday weekend despite the risks of a virus that has killed more than 98,000 people .
Boy that montage was the opposite of a MENSA meeting . Has that much dumbness been captured on tape ever ?
The last clip you saw was from May 25th . That was just over two weeks ago . `` Ninety eight thousand people are dead . How dare you leave your house ? You do n't work in the media . You 're not essential . ''
But it did n't take long for that message to change completely . In fact , it took precisely five days .
Here 's the same brain dead news anchor you just saw less than a week later . He is no longer angry , you 'll notice , about Americans going outside . As long as they are rioting and burning and not doing something sinful , like swimming with their children , he is delighted by it .
Lemon : And let 's not forget , if anyone is judging this -- I 'm not judging this , I 'm just wondering what is going on . Because we were supposed to figure out this experiment a long time ago . Our country was started because -- this is how : the Boston Tea Party . Rioting .
So do n't -- do not get it twisted and think that , oh , this is something that has never happened before . And then this is so terrible , and where are we in these savages and all of that . This is how this country was started .
Yes , do n't judge . This is how this country was started -- by looting CVS and setting fire to Wendy 's . Of course , you took American History . You knew that .
Andrew Cuomo 's brother must have been in the same history class because he had the same reaction .
Chris Cuomo : America 's major cities are filled with people demanding this country be more fair , more just .
And please , show me where it says that protests are supposed to be polite and peaceful . Because I can show you that outraged citizens are the ones who have made America what she is and led to any major milestones .
Wow . So , one minute they were mass murderers for going outside . Now , they 're Sam Adams . They 're patriots . They 're American heroes .
If all of this seems like a pretty abrupt pivot , fret not . Rioting is not a health risk as long as it helps the Democratic Party 's prospects in the November election . Rioting will not spread the coronavirus .
Sounds implausible , but we can be certain of that , because last week , hundreds of self-described public health officials signed a letter saying so . They announced that the Black Lives Matter riots are a vital contribution to public health . In effect , they 're an essential medical procedure .
But that does n't mean you get to go outside . You do n't . Thanks to coronavirus , you do not have the right to resume your life , and if you complain about that , it 's `` white nationalism . '' That was their professional conclusion .
Does a single American believe any of that ? No , of course not . It is too stupid even for CNN to repeat , so they mostly ignored it . That 's an ominous sign if you think about it . It means these people are done trying to convince you , even to fool you .
They 're not making arguments , they 're issuing decrees . They think they can . They no longer believe they need your consent to make big decisions to run the country . Once the authority stops trying to change your mind , even by deceit , it means they 've decided to use force -- and they have .
During the lockdowns , people whose loved ones died were not allowed to have funerals for them . Think about that . It 's hard to think of anything crueler , but it happened to a lot of people . They claimed it was necessary . It was not necessary . And we know that because now that a man has died whose death is politically useful to the Democratic Party , the authorities have given him three funerals and not a word about a health risk .
Or consider King County , Wash -- that 's where Seattle is . Restaurants in King County are operating at just 25 percent capacity . That 's the law now . Nonessential businesses are allowed just 15 percent capacity . The effect of that is economic disaster . Most small businesses run on very small margins . They ca n't survive for long , and in fact , many have failed .
What should they do ? They should join Antifa , obviously , because in King County , Wash. , Antifa can do whatever Antifa wants to do . They have taken over an entire six-block section of downtown Seattle , and that 's fine with health authorities . There is no social distancing required . They 're essential .
Are you getting the picture ? Is it adding up to a message ? Yes , the message is we were played . We were all played . Corrupt politicians scared us into giving up control over the most basic questions in our lives . At the same time , they gave more power to their obedient followers , like Antifa , while keeping the rest of us trapped at home and censored online .
In other words , they used a public health emergency to subvert democracy and install themselves as monarchs . How were they able to do this ? The sad truth is , they did it because we let them do it . We believed them , therefore , we obeyed them .
If there 's anything good to come out of this disaster , it 's that none of us will ever make that mistake again .
Adapted from Tucker Carlson 's monologue from `` Tucker Carlson Tonight '' on June 10 , 2020 .