“ So if there are no hand-washing facilities in Syria a year from now , how can you get rid of this virus ? It ’ s a perfect example of ideals and interests intertwined . ”
The question matters beyond the Middle East . Successfully fighting the virus means investing in one another ’ s health , leaving no places for it to hide . The recognition of that has already led to unusual offers of help . Some Persian Gulf nations are reaching out to Iran , a sworn enemy , to help contain the illness there . The need , Mr. Egeland says , is for that spirit to expand .
The head of the Norwegian Refugee Council is particularly concerned about Syria and its refugees . Recent shelling in the rebel stronghold of Idlib has sent one million more residents fleeing . They join Syrian refugees in camps that often house 10 people in a small tent . “ How can you do constant hand-washing , if your water ration is three liters per day , and that ’ s supposed to go to drinking and cooking ? ” he asks .
As the world ’ s attention focuses on how technologically advanced societies are dealing with the coronavirus , Jan Egeland has a different question . What about the rest of the world ?
Syrians now entering their 10th year of war could be forgiven for believing they have already faced the modern equivalent of the biblical Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse .
But the millions of refugees and internally displaced Syrians are bracing for yet another trial : the coronavirus .
Even technologically advanced nations like China , Italy , and the United States are struggling to stop the spread of COVID-19 . But the rudimentary camps full of Syrian victims of conflict – many of them having endured a cold winter in tents , lack of basic hygiene , and malnourishment – may be uniquely vulnerable to the global pandemic .
Experts say there is still a window to act to take life-saving health and hygiene measures . And one key is for Western donors to recognize that preventing an uncontrolled regional outbreak improves their own long-term risk calculations at home .
That will be a challenge , as countries around the world remain engulfed by their own domestic needs .
And even before the coronavirus , humanitarian efforts in the Middle East were beset by years of conflict ; donor fatigue ; neglect as populations filled sprawling camps or moved , newly homeless , toward safer borders ; and weak governments besieged by popular protests in Iraq , Lebanon , and Syria .
The trajectory of the virus suggests that it will hit areas with high concentrations of refugees – such as Syria , Afghanistan , Yemen , and Venezuela , says Jan Egeland , head of the Norwegian Refugee Council ( NRC ) . “ Then my open question to any decision-maker ... trying to curb the spread of the virus : How can you do social distancing , if you live in a refugee camp with 10 people per small tent ? ”
“ How can you do constant hand-washing , if your water ration is three liters per day , and that ’ s supposed to go to drinking and cooking ? And how , ” he continues , “ are you supposed to care for the infected and quarantine the vulnerable , when there is no health care ? ”
Grim conditions in opposition-controlled Idlib , Syria , highlight the depths of the challenges ahead . Recent bombardment of this last , shrinking rebel enclave has forced one million people from their homes . Syrian government forces backed by Russia and Iran have captured nearly half of the enclave since renewing an offensive last December with relentless bombing .
That forced into even tighter quarters the 3 million people in Idlib – among them Islamist militants , including former Al Qaeda affiliates , trucked there as part of cease-fire deals brokered when other rebel-held regions were defeated .
The latest United Nations situation report for northwest Syria , published Monday , notes : “ Inadequate land for the formation of new camps and sites leave many new IDPs [ internally displaced people ] in overcrowded conditions without formalized camp support . ”
It adds that , “ access to food has become an increasing concern. ” Indeed , some 1.5 million people in Idlib depend on food aid , and in January alone , 1,227 trucks crossed the border with supplies from Turkey , the largest number in seven years .
Felipe Dana/AP A boy walks out of a heavily damaged building where he is currently living , in Idlib , Syria , March 12 , 2020 . Idlib is the last urban area still under opposition control in Syria , located in a shrinking rebel enclave in the northwestern province of the same name . Syria ’ s civil war , which entered its 10th year March 15 , 2020 , has shrunk in geographical scope – focusing on this corner of the country – but the misery wreaked by the conflict has not diminished .
A tenuous cease-fire brokered March 5 by Turkey and Russia , both of which have troops deployed in and around the province , still holds . But the U.N. notes that even before the December offensive began , the population of Idlib was “ already extremely vulnerable . ”
The World Health Organization says Syria ’ s health system – especially after years in which government and allied forces targeted health infrastructure behind rebel lines – is “ on its knees. ” Beyond Syria ’ s borders , neighbors Turkey , Lebanon , and Jordan have absorbed millions of refugees .
“ In Syria you have this perfect storm . When we needed the health system the most , it was bombed . When people were supposed to be able to quarantine and distance themselves , they had to flee their houses to temporary , crowded camps , ” says Mr. Egeland .
“ So as bad as it is in Italy and China and increasingly in the rest of Europe , I can not see why it would not be 10 times worse when you have none of the mitigating measures that we have , ” he says .
But the solution that can ease the impact is still within reach , if donors can see the need for a holistic approach .
“ What can we do ? Water and sanitation . It ’ s not rocket science . It ’ s a logistical challenge , ” says Mr. Egeland , whose 14,000 field workers with NRC aim to double to 4 million the number of people across multiple war zones they reach with water and sanitation .
That means more latrines , and 10 times more running water points for washing , and decongesting camps by tripling or quadrupling the space devoted to displaced people . It means expanding health care , public hygiene campaigns , and building quarantine facilities – all actions the NRC says may keep the virus at bay in the Middle East , and so make it less likely to persist there as a threat to the rest of the world .
“ You have 6 million refugees from Syria , 6 million internally displaced in Syria – including a million recently in Idlib – another 1.5 million displaced in Iraq , all of them living in oppressively unsustainable conditions that , by all indications , ” are consistent with transmission of the virus , says Julien Barnes-Dacey , head of the Middle East and North Africa program at the European Council on Foreign Relations in Brussels .
Another key factor is the governments of Syria , Lebanon , and Iraq , all “ hollowed out ” over recent years by multiple layers of crises and short on leadership and resources , says Mr. Barnes-Dacey .
But that very concern may be causing some shift in regional thinking , with Exhibit A being unexpected support for Iran – epicenter of the virus in the Middle East – by the United Arab Emirates and some other Persian Gulf states , despite long-simmering tensions with Iran .
The Islamic Republic is host to 9 out of 10 of the 21,000-plus confirmed cases of COVID-19 across the Middle East , and a number of its leadership elite are among more than 1,800 citizens who have died . Suffocating U.S. sanctions have complicated both medical exports to Iran and the cash transfers to pay for them .
The UAE nevertheless expressed its support for Iran and “ highlighted the importance of collective work and efforts to survive this global challenge. ” It made two shipments of medical supplies to Iran , including two planeloads carrying thousands of pairs of gloves , masks , and other equipment , on March 16 .
“ They recognize obviously that what happens in Iran doesn ’ t stay in Iran , and it can easily overflow across the Gulf , ” says Mr. Barnes-Dacey .
Such moves are “ first and foremost about self-preservation , and [ Persian Gulf states ’ ] desire to ensure that the situation in Iran is containable , ” he says .
“ But it points to a model of possible regional collaboration that could be a constructive way of reinforcing efforts to contain and manage the situation , ” says Mr. Barnes-Dacey . “ If Arab Gulf states are prepared to do something with Iran , it suggests that fault lines and conflict lines will likely be deprioritized in the case of a threat that challenges everyone equally . ”
On a wider scale , that is the case the NRC ’ s Mr. Egeland is making to donor countries like the U.S. and members of the European Union , about the need to look now at easing the effect of the virus among the most vulnerable refugees and displaced in Syria and beyond .
“ Why make strongholds for the virus , anywhere in the world , when we live in a global world with global pandemics ? ” he says . “ If it gets a stronghold in camps with half a million people ... it means it can always come back .
“ If hand-washing is a mitigating factor in New York City , it ’ s also important for New York City that there are hand-washing facilities in Syria , because it started with patient zero in Wuhan , and now we are sitting in quarantine in Oslo , ” says Mr. Egeland , who is under mandatory quarantine there after a visit to South America .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ So if there are no hand-washing facilities in Syria a year from now , how can you get rid of this virus ? It ’ s a perfect example of ideals and interests intertwined . ”