No bar exam ? No problem ! Every day Donald Trump is president , we wake up in a brand new issue spotter . Today ’ s scenario comes courtesy of a Trump supporter in Texas who got so excited by the president ’ s constant hyping of the supposed miracle drug hydroxychloroquine that he thought he ’ d conduct his own experiment to prove its efficacy .
There is currently no proof that the anti-malarial medication , which is commonly used to treat lupus , improves outcomes for coronavirus patients . Indeed , a hospital in France just halted a test of the drug , finding that the treatment protocol that pairs it with the antibiotic azithromycin cumulatively poses an unacceptable risk of heart damage . But Dr. Robin Armstrong , a GOP activist who sits on the advisory board of Black Voices for Trump , is convinced that the president ’ s prodigious gut instinct is correct , that hydroxychloroquine will save us from this deadly virus .
And because Dr. Armstrong is the medical director at The Resort , a nursing home in Texas City , he has access to a whole pool of subjects to “ prove ” it . So when 83 people at the facility , including residents and employees , tested positive for COVID-19 , he selected 27 of them to start a regimen of hydroxychloroquine sulfate tablets recently donated to the state of Texas by New Jersey-based Amneal Pharmaceuticals . The Galveston County Daily News reports that , “ Armstrong said Trump ’ s championing of the drug is giving doctors more access to try it on coronavirus patients . ”
Dr. Armstrong didn ’ t tell the patients ’ families that they were receiving the drug , although he assured the paper that he was in the process of giving them a heads up on Monday . But Texas Governor Greg Abbott appears to have beaten him to the punch , announcing at a press conference that day in Austin that the drug was being given to the nursing home residents experimentally , to “ determine whether or not it will be a successful treatment for those patients . ”
“ We look forward to updating you as the week progresses about how this drug is aiding — or not — these patients , ” he said .
According to The Houston Chronicle , the Texas Pharmacy Board limited prescriptions and instructed its members to fill off-label prescriptions only when accompanied by a “ written diagnosis from the prescriber consistent with the evidence for its use. ” And Dr. Patrice Harris , president of the American Medical Association , “ said she personally would not prescribe the drug for a coronavirus patient , saying the risks of severe side-effects are “ great and too significant to downplay ” without large studies showing the drug is safe and effective . ”
Okay , torts students , START YOUR ENGINES . Please limit your answers to one blue book , in the interests of time .
Elizabeth Dye lives in Baltimore where she writes about law and politics .
30 COVID-19 patients in Texas City nursing home treated with unproven malaria drug [ Houston Chronicle ]
Texas City nursing home residents with coronavirus being treated with unproven hydroxychloroquine drug [ Texas Tribune ]