Washington Governor Jay Inslee on Friday accused Donald Trump of `` fomenting domestic rebellion and spreading lies '' after the United States president urged supporters to `` LIBERATE '' three states led by Democratic governors .
`` The president 's statements this morning encourage illegal and dangerous acts . He is putting millions of people in danger of contracting COVID-19 , '' Inslee said in a series of tweets on Friday afternoon .
`` His unhinged rantings and calls for people to 'liberate ' states could also lead to violence . We 've seen it before , '' Inslee added . `` The president is fomenting domestic rebellion and spreading lies - even while his own administration says the virus is real , it is deadly and we have a long way to go before restrictions can be lifted . ''
Inslee 's tweets came after Trump apparently encouraged the growing protests against the stay-at-home restrictions aimed at stopping the coronavirus .
The president is fomenting domestic rebellion and spreading lies - even while his own administration says the virus is real , it is deadly and we have a long way to go before restrictions can be lifted . 2/7 — Governor Jay Inslee ( @ GovInslee ) April 17 , 2020
`` LIBERATE MINNESOTA ! '' `` LIBERATE MICHIGAN ! '' `` LIBERATE VIRGINIA , '' Trump said in a tweet-storm in which he also lashed out at New York Governor Andrew Cuomo for criticising the federal response . Cuomo `` should spend more time 'doing ' and less time 'complaining , ' '' the president said .
LIBERATE VIRGINIA , and save your great 2nd Amendment . It is under siege ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) April 17 , 2020
The president 's tweets marked a different tone from the day before , when Trump said it was up to state governors to decide when and how to reopen their economies . The Trump administration on Thursday unveiled a phased approach to the reopening of the economy , saying governors would be calling their `` own shots '' while the federal government stood `` alongside '' them .
On Friday , responding to pleas from governors for help from the federal government in ramping up testing for the virus , Trump put the burden back on them : `` The States have to step up their TESTING ! ''
Trump defended his tweets later on Friday , saying he was `` very comfortable '' with the posts . He accused the three states of doing `` too much '' and said he was not worried about those protesting against stay-at-home orders , despite the fact demonstrators have defied the administration 's social distancing guidelines .
Trump has repeatedly expressed his desire to see businesses reopen quickly and claimed earlier this week that he possesses `` total authority '' over the matter , even though the lockdowns and other social-distancing measures have been imposed by state and local leaders , not Washington , DC .
Some states did take some of the nation 's first , small steps towards loosening restrictions .
In Florida , Republican Governor Ron DeSantis gave the green light for municipalities to reopen beaches and parks if they could do so safely . In Texas , Republican Governor Greg Abbott said stores could begin selling items curbside , non-essential surgery could resume , and state parks could reopen .
A man speaks with a library worker after receiving an unemployment form , as the outbreak of COVID-19 continues , in Hialeah , Florida [ File : Marco Bello/Reuters ]
But governors of both parties Friday suggested they would be cautious in returning to normal , with some of them warning that they can not do it without help from Washington to expand testing .
`` The federal government can not wipe its hands of this and say , 'Oh , the states are responsible for testing , ' '' New York Governor Cuomo said . `` We can not do it without federal help . ''
West Virginia Governor Jim Justice , a Republican ally of Trump , said he would listen to medical experts in deciding how to move forward .
`` I am not going to do something that I feel in my heart is the wrong thing that 's going to endanger our people , '' he said .
Democratic Virginia Governor Ralph Northam said he and his staff are focused , not on the president 's tweets , but on fighting a `` biological war '' .
`` I do not have time to involve myself in Twitter wars , '' said Northam , who is a medical doctor . `` I will continue to make sure that I do everything that I can to keep Virginians safe and to save lives . ''
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo speaking during a news conference in New York City [ Mike Segar/Reuters ]
The clash between Trump and Cuomo was personal , with the president complaining the governor has not expressed his thanks for the help received from the federal government . Cuomo countered by saying : `` I do n't know what I 'm supposed to do , send a bouquet of flowers ? 'Thank you to the federal government for participating in a federal emergency . ' ''
Even in largely rural states with small populations , such as Wyoming , Maine and South Dakota , governors said they were not anxious to quickly resume business as usual .
`` Until we 've got the testing up to speed - which has got to be part of the federal government stepping in and helping - we 're just not going to be there , '' said Wyoming Governor Mark Gordon , a Republican .
The University of Washington , whose computer models have frequently been cited by health officials at White House briefings , predicted Friday that Vermont , West Virginia , Montana and Hawaii could open as early as May 4 if they restrict large gatherings , test widely and quarantine the contacts of people who test positive .
Iowa , North and South Dakota , Nebraska , Utah , Arkansas and Oklahoma , however , are among states that would need to wait until mid-June or early July . About half the states should wait until at least early June to reopen , and all should gauge the capacity of their public health systems to handle outbreaks , university researchers said .
Worldwide , the outbreak has infected more than 2.2 million people and killed more than 153,000 , according to a Johns Hopkins University tally based on figures supplied by government health authorities around the globe , though it has become increasingly clear that the true numbers are much higher .
The official death toll in the US surpassed 36,000 , with more than 692,000 confirmed infections .
Protesters carry rifles near the steps of the Michigan State Capitol building in Lansing , Michigan [ Paul Sancya/AP Photo ]
The shutdowns have inflicted heavy damage on economies around the world . In the US , the crisis has cost at least 22 million Americans their jobs , pushing the unemployment rate towards levels not seen since the Great Depression in the early 1930s .
Many Americans , especially in rural areas and other parts of the country that have not seen major outbreaks , have urged governors to reopen their economies . Defying social distancing guidelines , protesters have taken to the streets in Ohio , Texas , North Carolina , Kentucky , Virginia and Michigan , where more than 3,000 turned out on Wednesday in what looked like one of the president 's rallies , with `` MAGA '' hats and Trump flags .
Protests continued Friday , including one outside the home of Governor Tim Walz of Minnesota and another in Idaho , where the governor is a Republican .
Public health experts have warned that an easing of the shutdowns must be accompanied by wider testing and tracing of infected people to keep the virus from coming back with a vengeance .