The left urges caution in reopening and worries that doing so prematurely will result in unnecessary deaths .
“ White House guidelines recommend that state officials wait for a ‘ downward trajectory ’ over 14 days in either the number of new cases or the share of all tests for the virus that come back positive before they lift business restrictions . Georgia fails the first test . The number of new cases that its health department has announced each day has trended up over the past two weeks . ”
“ Surveys show that a vast majority of Americans support strict shelter-in-place policies that are intended to limit the spread of the disease… an economy depends on consumers just as much as producers . Businesses need customers . It ’ s not clear they plan to participate . If a nail salon or tattoo parlor is open but no customers show up , those businesses will suffer . If restaurants are open but no one shows up to eat , those restaurants will suffer . When movies , concerts or sporting events open up , people aren ’ t going to show up , no matter how much performers and sports teams would like them to…
“ A recent survey asked noted economists across the country whether they thought the government should invest more than it currently is toward measures like accelerating testing and providing financial incentives for the production of a successful vaccine . All of them agreed that it should . The survey also asked them whether abandoning severe lockdowns at a time when the likelihood of a resurgence in infections remains high would lead to more economic damage than staying in lockdowns to prevent a resurgence . None of them disagreed . Economists and public health experts aren ’ t on different sides here . The way to save the economy is to do everything public health experts are asking for . ”
“ Our true choice is not a matter of debating May 1 versus June 1 versus Sept. 1 . It 's entirely a matter of how fast we put in place a public health system that is ready to do its vital job . Opening the economy without a functioning public health system is a death sentence that could send the current 50,000 death toll to hundreds of thousands instead… my advice to the mayors and governors is this : Scale up your health systems so that they start tracking every day where your citizens are most likely becoming infected…
“ By tracking cases and interviewing ( safely , by phone ) each newly infected individual , you can get these individuals into early isolation and determine where the infections in the community are generally occurring , for example , whether among family members , congregant settings like nursing homes , shelters , prisons , or shops , restaurants and workplaces in particular parts of town . By tracing the contacts of infected individuals , you can far more quickly identify new cases and help those to isolate . ”
Some note that “ Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Mississippi , South Carolina , and Tennessee formed a regional pact with Georgia to end coronavirus restrictions… All six states also rejected Medicaid expansion , even as 36 other states adopted the plan to help more poor people get health coverage…
“ The Trump administration has said it will reimburse hospitals for treating uninsured patients suffering from coronavirus , provided those hospitals do n't bill patients . But they have n't detailed exactly how much money would be allotted for the program . It would n't preclude hospitals from deciding to charge people rather than seek reimbursement at the Medicare rate . And it does n't appear to cover all doctors , including those working at hospitals , and or cover people who get sick from the disease but whose tests come back negative , or people who are ill , seek treatment and end up having something else… ‍ “ That means if workers do get sick as a result of being forced to return to work , many won ’ t have health insurance and could face financial ruin if they go get treatment . ”