The NCAA has just ruled that mandatory football practices can begin in July , anticipating a full season of college football . This is nuts . The pandemic isn ’ t going away ; it ’ s surging in more than 29 states , with seven reporting new records for cases in a day . States that opened early without adequate safeguards — Texas , Florida , Arizona — now face a spread of the pandemic that may soon exhaust the supply of hospital beds . Deaths are now over 125,000 . Increasing numbers of young people are contracting the disease , presumably because of the lack of social distancing , the scorn for masks that has accompanied the reopening in many states — and , of course , in the White House itself .
The experience of Texas and Florida and Arizona in reopening suggests that it may not even be safe to reopen college campuses with thousands of students gathering together in dorms , classes , parties and bars , much less begin practices on a football field .
Columnists In-depth political coverage , sports analysis , entertainment reviews and cultural commentary .
In the so-called “ voluntary workouts ” that some schools began in June , dozens of players have already tested positive . UNLV suspending on-campus workouts when four athletes tested positive for the virus . Texas Tech reports 23 players have tested positive ; Clemson reports 37 football players and 47 cases in all among athletes . And now the NCAA says it ’ s time to open mandatory workouts .
Football is a physical contact sport . The coronavirus is transmittable through respiratory droplets . If an infected athlete wipes his nose or mouth between plays , or takes out his mouth guard , he has the virus on his hands that will be in repeated contact with other players . Does anyone doubt that the virus will spread like wildfire once mandatory camps and contact drills begin ?
To discount this reality , we hear a lot of gibberish . The athletes will be tested regularly , we ’ re told , and isolated , traced and quarantined if they have the disease . How regularly ? Well , daily would be optimal — that is what wealthy professional teams are talking about doing — but few if any universities can afford that . So some will test weekly ; some only if an athlete exhibits symptoms , even though young people are often asymptomatic . No wonder Ohio State University is forcing players and their parents to sign an “ acknowledgment of risk waiver . ”
The university is prepared to risk the lives of the players , but not open itself up to liability .
Don ’ t worry , we ’ re told , “ college athletes in general are a young , healthy population in relation to the general public . They are usually well-equipped to fight off the infection physically unscathed. ” Usually . But we ’ re learning that even those who survive the virus are often scarred with weak lungs , or bad hearts .
The watchword , we ’ re told , is “ flexibility. ” Second- and third-string players have to be ready to step in at any time . “ This scenario , ” one doctor wrote , would be analogous to spraining an ankle or pulling a hamstring during warmups and suddenly needing to sit out the next one to three games . ”
No , a sprained ankle does not put a life at risk . A pulled hamstring is painful , but not as lasting as a damaged lung or weakened heart . Sprained ankles and pulled hamstrings aren ’ t contagious . We ’ re not talking about “ flexibility , ” we ’ re talking about irresponsibility .
Many of the football players in Division One schools come from low-income families . Many depend on their scholarship to pay for their schooling . Now they are asked to risk their lives for their sport .
I believe that this college football season should be postponed . It can ’ t be played in a “ bubble , ” as Dr. Anthony Fauci suggests . And we ’ ve already got vivid proof of how vulnerable the players are to the virus .
But if the NCAA and the universities are intent on playing despite the risk — driven no doubt by the billions of dollars at risk if the season is called off — they should at the very minimum give the players and their parents a real choice . Every player should be given the choice of whether to play or not , with their scholarship sustained no matter what decision they make . Every player and their families should be guaranteed free health care if they contract the virus . No player should be extorted to put his or her life at risk in order to get the education that they have earned .
In this time of Black Lives Matter protests , the lives of these young athletes — black , white , brown and yellow , male and female , must matter . If the NCAA isn ’ t responsible enough to suspend the season , it should at the very least require that every athlete be given a choice on whether to take the risk , without losing the scholarship that has been promised to them .