The Senate majority leader oversaw a huge handout to big business and drew bipartisan ire for suggesting struggling states should go bankrupt
It was , New York ’ s governor , Andrew Cuomo observed , “ one of the really dumb ideas of all time ” . Larry Hogan , his counterpart in Maryland , called it “ complete nonsense ” . Congressman Pete King of New York said it was the work of the “ Marie Antoinette of the Senate ” .
Trump adviser : coronavirus relief aid threat to ‘ sanctuary cities ’ could happen Read more
It would be an understatement to say Mitch McConnell ’ s suggestion that state and local governments should declare bankruptcy rather than seek more federal funding went down like a lead balloon . It was a rare instance of the Senate majority leader overplaying his hand .
It also showed that Donald Trump is not the only figure embodying liberal nightmares in the time of coronavirus . When historians contemplate a death toll in the tens of thousands and an economy fallen off a cliff , they will pay close attention to the president ’ s most important ally .
“ I think Mitch McConnell is the guy to be watching and focusing on in terms of what ’ s going on , ” said Larry Jacobs , director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota . “ His messaging around the coronavirus has been tone deaf .
“ It ’ s not just the fact that McConnell was remarkably brutal in pairing Americans into red and blue states at a time of national crisis – that is pretty shameless – but I think it was also politically inept because he ’ s got his colleagues in tough races in blue states . ”
McConnell ’ s role in the pandemic drama has been criticised . On 12 March , just before Trump declared a national emergency , the senator flew back to Kentucky for a celebration for Justin Walker , a young rightwing judge nominated to America ’ s second highest court . The ill-timed absence was noted . “ # WheresMitch ? ” trended on Twitter .
Play Video 4:30 'Just dumb ' : Cuomo slams Mitch McConnell over 'reckless ' state bankruptcy proposal – video
With the economy in a tailspin , Senate Republicans came up with emergency funding . But it was skewed in favour of corporate executives and shareholders . Democrats refused it . A New York Times editorial was headlined : “ The Coronavirus Bailout Stalled . And It ’ s Mitch McConnell ’ s Fault . ”
Democrats forced concessions in a record $ 2.2tn bill that increased support to workers and reduced handouts to business , though these still amounted to what critics called a $ 500bn “ corporate slush fund ” .
Trump was earning global opprobrium for his bungling of the pandemic , but it was apparently too late for McConnell to untether himself from the president , even if he so desired . Instead , he blamed Democrats for impeaching Trump .
“ [ The coronavirus ] came up while we were tied down in the impeachment trial , ” McConnell told the conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt . “ And I think it diverted the attention of the government because everything every day was all about impeachment . ”
Opponents saw that as a feeble attempt to excuse the inexcusable .
Moe Vela , a former senior adviser to Joe Biden , said : “ Almost any good Mitch McConnell did by cooperating and collaborating on the legislative side is undone by his enabling of the president at a time when he could have been a real leader and called out the president on his lack of responsiveness and leadership .
“ It ’ s disappointing because he had the chance to redeem himself from all the negative and enabling and divisiveness of the past several years as the majority leader and he didn ’ t take it .
Vela , a board director of TransparentBusiness , added : “ Mitch McConnell and Donald Trump are battling for who is the greatest hypocrite in our nation – it ’ s like they ’ re competing for the hypocrisy trophy . It ’ s not about unity , it ’ s not about bringing the American people together at a time of crisis . For McConnell and Trump , it ’ s all about politics and power . ”
Last week McConnell retreated from his much-derided position on “ blue state bailouts ” and bankruptcy , indicating he would consider funds in the next relief bill for state and local governments struggling to pay police and firefighters .
“ There ’ s no question all governors , regardless of party , would like to have more money , I ’ m open to discussing that , ” he said on Fox News Radio .
But he sailed into fresh controversy by insisting that senators , unlike their counterparts in the House , return to work on Monday . Washington DC remains a virus hotspot . At least one senator , eight Capitol police officers and 11 workers have tested positive . Democrat Chris Van Hollen of Maryland warned that “ without effective safeguards in place , Mitch McConnell is endangering the lives of the staff ” .
Chuck Schumer , the minority leader , condemned McConnell for priorities that include confirming Walker and demanded oversight hearings into the White House ’ s “ dreadful response to this public health crisis ” .
Schumer said : “ The American people are demanding answers and solutions – Senator McConnell ought to focus the Senate ’ s work on the crises caused by Covid-19 , not rightwing judges or fulfilling his ‘ pre-existing partisan wishlist ’ of protecting big business from any harm done to the American people . ”
Another confrontation is looming , over the next stimulus package . McConnell is insisting on protections for businesses from coronavirus-related lawsuits as states reopen . Democrats warn workers ’ health could be jeopardised .
Public Citizen , a corporate and government watchdog , tweeted : “ McConnell is now refusing to pass ANY stimulus bill that doesn ’ t include TOTAL LEGAL IMMUNITY for corporations that get people sick [ with ] the coronavirus . It ’ s abhorrent . It ’ s also totally impractical . How can we reopen the economy if companies have no incentive to keep us safe ? ”
'Are you a spoiler ? ' : why critics fear Amash 's Libertarian bid may ensure a Trump win Read more
Trump and McConnell appear bound together . Should the president lose in November , he could bring down Senate Republicans – perhaps even McConnell in Kentucky . Challenger Amy McGrath , a fighter pilot , outraised McConnell in the first three months of this year .
Defeat would be an ignominious end to a divisive career . Kurt Bardella , a former senior adviser for the House oversight committee , said : “ History will not look back on Mitch McConnell kindly . He has been the most effective enabler of Donald Trump .
“ Everything Trump has inflicted on the American people has been done with the blessing of McConnell . Through this entire coronavirus pandemic , McConnell has displayed he is a soulless person who is willing to let people suffer so he can continue to wield power . ”