New York Governor Andrew Cuomo speaks to the media as U.S. Army personnel look at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan , which will be partially converted into a hospital for patients affected by the coronavirus outbreak , March 23 , 2020 . ( Mike Segar/Reuters )
Previously marginalized state and local governments have taken the lead in fighting the present pandemic .
Alexis de Tocqueville ’ s America was supposed to be long gone . Seeing political centralization as the great woe of the French state — which had been periodically wracked by violent instability since 1789 , and would be again in 1848 — the young French aristocrat found a possible cure in the highly decentralized system of Jackson-era American government . Political life , he wrote , was overwhelmingly concentrated at the local level , where town meetings still decided most matters of significance . Counties were administrative divisions that mostly existed on paper , state governors were kept on an extremely tight leash , and the federal government was still in its infancy , its powers strictly confined to a few undeniably national concerns .
Until several weeks ago , it was hard not to think that contemporary America had turned Tocqueville ’ s analysis completely on its head . Following the Civil War , the vast expansion of federal power that was deemed necessary to guarantee the rights of freed slaves against the states that had enslaved them , and to enforce Reconstruction while it lasted , famously ( though more gradually than some have implied ) accompanied a grammatical change in the way we describe the United States , from plural to singular : “ The United States are ” became “ the United States is. ” Early 20th century Progressives led the growth of a federal bureaucracy , which expanded with the New Deal and the Second World War until , by the end of the 1940s , it was common to speak of a federal “ administrative state , ” attached to the executive , ruling the country , unaccountable to voters .
All of this led inevitably to the moment just before the current crisis hit , in which national politics , blaring on TV screens and dominating social-media feeds , seemed to crowd out state and local politics . The newspapers that had reminded Americans of the importance of these closer , smaller realms declined and disappeared . Ticket-splitting , which could be considered an indicator of the strength of the Tocquevillian tradition , hit a new low in 2018 .
Intermittently , Beltway writers issued calls for others to abandon the swamps of Washington and rejuvenate local institutions and state politics , which served mainly to illustrate the desperation of the situation . All the major political issues — drug legalization , gay marriage , abortion — were either removed from state purview by Supreme Court fiat or seemed destined sooner or later to receive such a treatment . It appeared increasingly clear that the federal constitution was a pretty relic of the Tocquevillian era , prized mainly by nostalgists , serving a legitimating role in an order that no longer had any space for it , like the Roman Senate under the Empire .
Then a pandemic struck . The initial federal response was faltering , with test kits malfunctioning and the president downplaying the risk . So states — and , in many cases , local governments — came to the fore . California ’ s Bay Area issued the first “ shelter in place ” order , followed quickly by a similar order for the rest of the state . Governor Gavin Newsom has proclaimed California a “ nation-state. ” New York , which was next in line for lockdown , has seen its governor , Andrew Cuomo , emerge as a leading protagonist in the struggle to combat the virus . Cuomo ’ s bullying style , a nuisance in tranquil times , now soothes the frayed nerves of New Yorkers , in the latest demonstration of Machiavelli ’ s tenet that men ’ s characters fit some times better than others . Crucial , life-and-death matters were suddenly in the hands not of the federal government but of state and local authorities .
The public-health crisis caused by the novel coronavirus has proven that you can ’ t fudge federalism . It isn ’ t enough to set up formal federal bodies and give them constitutional powers ; sub-national units must have traditions of independence and popular sanction to actually use the powers they ’ ve been given . The viral pandemic has given the lie to systems in countries around the world that are federal on paper but unitary in fact .
Spain ’ s autonomous communities were supposed to have very extensive powers , including over decisions relating to public health — until , on March 14 , Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez ’ s government declared a state of emergency and announced that the central government in Madrid would be assuming control .
In Italy , decrees isolating first a handful of northern towns , then the region , and finally the entire country came at every stage from the central government . Regional presidents such as Lombardy ’ s Attilio Fontana , unable to put in place firmer measures themselves , were reduced to begging the central government to do so .
In the United Kingdom , devolved governments in Scotland , Wales , and Northern Ireland —governments that some thought were moving toward an ad hoc form of federalism until the pandemic — have had no opportunity to exert influence on the response to the virus . They have been forced , as have local councils across England , simply to implement the decisions made in No . 10 : first , a laissez-faire policy intended to build “ herd immunity , ” then , following predictions of mass death resulting from the strategy , an escalating about-face ending in nationwide lockdown on March 23 .
In Germany , it ’ s true , the states ( Länder ) took the lead , with Bavaria locking down two days before the rest of the country — but reports circulated that Angela Merkel was nervous at the prospect of divergent policies across the country . She quickly directed the federal government to retake control of the fight against the virus by banning gatherings of more than two people .
Only in Brazil , where president Jair Bolsonaro has refused to institute a nationwide lockdown , taking to national television to proclaim the coronavirus a “ tiny little flu ” and attack the World Health Organization for its “ destruction of jobs , ” have federal units had a real chance to step up . State governors in Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo have led the response , introducing lockdown measures within their jurisdictions , and making themselves targets of the president in the process .
Of course , it can ’ t be said that the present resurgence of federalism in Brazil and the United States has happened under the best of circumstances . And it ’ s too soon to determine how a decentralized administration helped , or didn ’ t help , the response to the virus . But for now , it ’ s enough to take stock of how robust and relevant previously marginalized political institutions suddenly seem . They are a piece of the old constitution still with us , having showed signs of life at a moment when , across the world , many of their counterparts did not .