“ The 360 ” shows you diverse perspectives on the day ’ s top stories and debates .
Around the world , governments and health experts are scrambling to limit the spread of the coronavirus . Urgent public awareness campaigns are being used to inform the public of the severity of COVID-19 , the disease caused by the virus . Social distancing measures — some voluntary , some imposed — have been put in place in countries around the globe .
These drastic steps are necessary to avoid potentially millions of deaths globally over the next few months . The ultimate concern is the health and well-being of those who are vulnerable to the virus . But pursuing these measures could bring about a less obvious , but still significant , threat to the mental health of people who may themselves never become infected .
The mental health impacts of the outbreak will vary among individuals , but experts say the most pervasive issues are anxiety and loneliness .
It ’ s easy to understand why anxiety would spike during a crisis . Wall-to-wall news coverage and changing messages from political leaders can cause stress and uncertainty in average people . For the estimated 40 million Americans with underlying anxiety disorders , these triggers can bring about overwhelming feelings of fear and lack of control . That can lead people to make unhealthy decisions as they struggle to differentiate between the very real dangers of the virus and the imagined risks brought on by their anxiety .
Another major driver of mental health risks is the isolation brought on by social distancing . Humans have an evolutionary desire to be part of a group . When we ’ re deprived of social contact , it can have dramatic effects on both mental and physical health . Loneliness was already a pervasive problem before the outbreak . Weeks of extended isolation enacted to control the spread of the virus could have significant and lasting health impacts . Loneliness has been shown to have a health impact equivalent to smoking 15 cigarettes a day .
The effects on mental health could endure long after the virus has been contained . People impacted by the SARS epidemic in the early 2000s reported mental health issues for up to four years after the epidemic ended .
Mental health experts say there are ways to combat the psychological toll of the coronavirus pandemic . The most common advice includes avoiding sensationalist news coverage , interacting with people over the phone or internet , getting outdoors while avoiding close contact and making digital appointments with mental health professionals .
For some , the mental health risk outweighs the risk to physical health
“ There is real risk , but for the vast majority of us , the risk is not commensurate with the degree of obsession and panic coverage of the virus has bred , both in people who are panic-prone and those who are not. ” — EJ Dickson , Rolling Stone
Isolation will exacerbate an epidemic of loneliness that already exists
“ Across the country , people are being asked to work from home , universities are switching to virtual classes and large gatherings are being canceled . These are key strategies to prevent transmission , but they can come at a social and mental-health cost : furthering our sense of isolation from one another , and making us forget that we ’ re in this together. ” — Abdullah Shihipar , New York Times
“ The uncertainty that exists right now is hard for people to manage . We prefer predictability and like to be able to anticipate what is going to happen as it increases a sense of safety . When that is not present , people try to find it ; then when the information is unclear or contradictory , this can sometimes create even more ambiguity resulting in increased stress and fear. ” — Therapist Holly Sawyer to Philadelphia Inquirer
Humans need social interaction just as they need food or water
“ If we think about loneliness as this adaptive response kind of like hunger and thirst , it ’ s this unpleasant state that motivates us to seek out social connections just like hunger motivates us to seek out food. ” — Psychologist Julianne Holt-Lunstad to Business Insider