Yet the strategy born out of those three-plus years of work has since been swamped by a three-month coronavirus crisis that ’ s plunged the nation into full-scale health and economic emergencies — and forced the administration to overhaul its approach toward the health system .
“ We continue to have the same principles at stake : We ’ re not opposed to spending money , we ’ re opposed to wasting it , ” said a senior administration official , who argued the White House is doing what ’ s necessary to meet the moment . “ I wouldn ’ t want to pretend that it ’ s free money . It ’ s not . But the frame of reference is what ’ s going on out there . ”
Over the last few weeks , the Trump administration has greenlighted legislation that sends $ 100 billion in aid to frontline providers — including hospitals that administration officials have fought with for months over plans to tighten pay rates and require more financial transparency .
It separately authorized billions more in loans to cash-strapped hospitals and doctors through the Medicare program . And after years spent trying to curb federal spending on Medicaid through divisive policies encouraging states to impose work requirements and cap their funding , the administration is now surging money to the program to bolster safety-net care .
The new Medicaid spending is estimated to total $ 50 billion over the next couple years — a figure that could soon be dwarfed by Congress ’ next round of injections into a health care system still scrambling to catch up with the fast-spreading virus . The program for low-income Americans is also likely to balloon on its own amid record unemployment , with one projection estimating as many as 23 million people could join the Medicaid rolls over the next several months .
While Trump ’ s allies acknowledge the vast spending increase , they also maintain that the administration has used the coronavirus crisis as an opening to push through some long-sought deregulatory actions . Those include a sweeping expansion of Medicare coverage for telehealth services — backed by policy experts in both parties — that makes it easier for people to get care virtually or over the phone , and a broad loosening of regulations that previously prevented physicians from practicing across state lines or restricted the types of care nurses and physician assistants could provide .
“ We ’ ve expanded it dramatically , ” the senior administration official said of the broader telehealth coverage , predicting it would ultimately prove difficult to rescind . “ It ’ s one of those things that once we get the hell out of the way , the marketplace will take off . ”
Trump notably has also yet to abandon one mainstay of his health agenda : Ardent opposition to Obamacare , which he ’ s still seeking to eliminate through a lawsuit filed by several GOP-led states .
“ What we want to do is terminate it , ” Trump said in March .
The White House subsequently opted against reopening Obamacare ’ s insurance marketplaces as jobless numbers grew and the virus spread . Yet that has only forced the administration to create a brand-new program to cover the cost of treating uninsured coronavirus patients .
It ’ s a concept that both Republicans and Democrats alike note is essentially a narrow single-payer system , with the federal government directly paying hospitals for care .
“ One could look at the plan as kind of a skinny Medicare for all who have Covid-19 , ” Levitt said , adding that it ’ s “ certainly ironic given the criticism of 'Medicare for All ' from President Trump and other administration officials . ”
The senior administration official disputed that characterization , calling it needed compensation for hospitals on the condition they wo n't stick patients with “ surprise ” medical bills — and noted that there are already concerns the federal funding will be insufficient .
“ They ’ re already complaining it ’ s not enough , so there ’ s no way to run the whole system on single payer , ” the official said . “ If anything , it ’ s going to show that single payer doesn ’ t really work , but I ’ m happy that people who are uninsured are going to be able to go get the care they need . ”
Still , the run of free spending has dismayed some conservatives , who say the rush to expand government by the administration and congressional Republicans has been jarring – even if necessary in some cases in response to a fast-developing crisis .
The Trump era had already undermined efforts to arrest federal spending , with the deficit on track to surpass $ 1 trillion even before the outbreak . But the coronavirus fight opened up additional hefty funding streams that will be hard to cut off , especially as the threat of the disease lingers for months .
“ When this crisis is over , that funding needs to be pulled back , ” said Jason Pye , the vice president of legislative affairs for the conservative advocacy group FreedomWorks . “ We ’ re putting ourselves in a very awkward position . ”
Perhaps more significantly , the period could elevate the parts of the health care industry that Trump ’ s populist rhetoric has targeted for years . Ambitious efforts to shed light on hospitals ’ opaque prices have been overshadowed by their crucial role as first responders . And a centerpiece pledge to crack down on the pharmaceutical industry over soaring drug costs remains unfulfilled , as the administration relies on it to develop the treatments that could lead the way out of the nation ’ s weeks-long halt .
“ These are the new heroes , ” Miller said . “ In the near term , we ’ ll lionize them . ”
███ Pulse Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Sign Up Loading By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply .
The Trump administration is drawing a different lesson from the last several weeks , the senior administration official said , emphasizing the distinction between encouraging companies working to help improve the nation ’ s health system and cracking down on those trying to take advantage of it .
“ I ’ m much more comfortable with where we are on drug pricing '' than a Democratic Party that 's sought to rein in the entire industry , the official said , calling Trump 's stance a combination of `` pro innovation and trying to take out bad incentives . ''
To critics of the administration , though , the scramble to bulk up federal programs in response to the pandemic is just the latest example of a health agenda defined less by concrete policy goals than the president ’ s ever-changing political instincts .
Trump is still trying to wipe out Obamacare even as he relies on its sweeping architecture of health benefits and programs , said Linda Blumberg , a fellow in the Health Policy Center at the nonpartisan Urban Institute . He ’ s refused to reopen private insurance enrollment , in favor of having the government directly fund care . And as Trump speeds toward November , he ’ s increasingly caught between the health care vision he ’ d planned to run on — and the one that ’ s needed now .
“ He really is acting out of two different objectives that are working against each other , ” Blumberg said , referring to the policy goal of reining in health care spending and the political necessity of expanding it . “ You can ’ t square it . ”