This week , the New York Times featured the story of how the coronavirus savaged the Federal Correctional Complex in Oakdale , Louisiana . On March 28 , Patrick Jones , 49 , serving a 27-year sentence for possession of crack cocaine with the intent to distribute , became the first federal inmate to die of the virus .
Barely three weeks later , seven inmates had died , at least 100 inmates and staff members had been infected , with more than 20 hospitalized — and an entire community terrorized . The prisoners died , unreported , unknown , their bodies essentially owned by the federal government that imprisoned them .
According to corrections officers there , the warden was slow to act , saying that “ we live in the South and it ’ s warm here . We won ’ t have any problems , ” a haunting illustration of the dangers of loose rhetoric and tall tales from the president , amplified on social media .
Columnists In-depth political coverage , sports analysis , entertainment reviews and cultural commentary .
The horrors of the Andover , New Jersey nursing home — with at least 70 residents dead and dozens more testing positive — has dramatized the vulnerability of the elderly in nursing homes , where over 7,000 have died . Our grossly overpopulated prisons and jails are quickly becoming the next centers to be ravaged by the disease .
Cook County Jail , the largest in the country , is already one of the nation ’ s largest sources of infections , with more confirmed cases than the USS Theodore Roosevelt or the New Rochelle , New York cluster . Four inmates are dead and 215 have tested positive , as have 191 correctional officers and 34 other sheriff ’ s office employees . One employee just died .
We know the most about Cook County because Sheriff Tom Dart has been the most open . Many are suffering and dying of COVID-19 because sheriff ’ s offices around the country have not been very open and are not testing . The jail is overwhelmed . The sheriff and jail workers need more hands on deck . For every shift change , the virus is recycled in the community .
A state prison in Ohio is now the largest reported source of coronavirus infection in the United States . I called President Trump and urged him to make testing , tracing and social distancing a priority for those in jails , nursing homes and prisons . The workers , inmates and communities where the workers live all need help .
In Ohio , 2,300 prisoners in three prisons have tested positive . In prisons and jails across the country , inmates locked up for nonviolent crimes or while awaiting trial , and older , vulnerable inmates near the end of their term , among others , sit in terror , fearful that they face a death sentence .
Prisons and jails are virtual petri dishes for the virus . Social distancing is impossible . Soap and water are often not available .
Correctional officers have no choice but to mix with inmates . Many inmates are poor , often with health problems — asthma , diabetes , heart conditions , stress — that make them more vulnerable to the virus .
Prisons and jails have begun — although far too slowly — to react . Cook County Jail has reduced its population from 10,000 to 4,200 , partly because of bail reform , some from courts sentencing fewer nonviolent offenders to prison , some from early release . Soap and disinfectants have been made available . Those with symptoms are isolated from the general population . Visitors and volunteers are not allowed , often at great psychic cost to inmates .
Facilities are cleaned more frequently . In some prisons , inmates have been locked in their cells for 22 hours a day to limit human interactions .
But — as is true for the general population — testing is often not available . Too few are tested too seldom . That puts not only prisoners but corrections officers and their families , and the people they interact with at risk .
Not surprisingly , prison uprisings have begun , as terrorized inmates demand protection and more information . Corrections officers have joined in lawsuits to get adequate protective equipment , information , and testing . Too often , it is too little and too late .
There is no defense . Clearly , at the federal and state level , prison officials should speed the release of nonviolent offenders , of the elderly and the vulnerable . Universal testing is an imperative . Prisoners need more access to soap and water . And both prisoners and corrections officials need protective gear — from masks to gloves — and , most of all , information on how to protect themselves .
Donald Trump informed me that he had made his son-in-law , Jared Kushner , the point person on prison reform . The time for aggressive action is long past . Prisons should be made a priority for supplies , for tests , and for early release of as many inmates as possible , particularly the elderly and the vulnerable .
If the pandemic continues to spread through prisons , the toll in lives will soar .
As the pandemic exposes once more , it is a moral outrage that the U.S. locks up more people than any other country , including China . Prisoners are disproportionately poor and people of color , too often victims of institutionalized racism that still puts African American young men at greater risk of being stopped by police , charged , and jailed if convicted .
Even without the virus , that is a disgrace . Now the virus is turning incarceration into a potential death sentence .