At a time when some Americans are concerned about the safety of a COVID-19 vaccine , tens of thousands have already volunteered to help bring oneinto existence .
As of Monday , more than 138,600 people had signed up to take part in testing .
“ That ’ s why we ’ re optimistic that we ’ re going to be able to get the trials enrolled in an expeditious way . I think we can do what we need to do , ” said Dr. Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases .
The milestone was reached just a week after the National Institutes of Health launched a clinical trial network for vaccines and other prevention tools to fight the pandemic .
More are still needed , but the initial surge will go a long way toward filling the requirement for at least 30,000 volunteers each for the four companies that plan to launch Phase 3 clinical trials of their potential vaccines by early fall .
Together , the Moderna , Pfizer BioNTech , AstraZeneca and Inovio trials will require at least 120,000 volunteers .
“ I would say it ’ s very encouraging at this stage , ” said Barry Bloom , an immunologist and vaccine expert who is a professor of public health at the Harvard Chan School of Public Health .
'No one is safe until everyone is safe ' : Vaccine nationalism threatens global coronavirus effort
Regulation : FDA says a coronavirus vaccine would have to be at least 50 % effective to be approved
Vaccine countdown : We 're one-third of the way to a widely available coronavirus vaccine , experts say
Hundreds of clinical trials for drugs , medical devices and vaccines are going on across the United States at any one time , but most are relatively small . Putting together four large trials at the same time , with even more planned to come online later in the fall and winter , is a massive undertaking .
It doesn ’ t just require volunteers but also a robust complement of clinics , hospitals and medical centers around the nation with staff and physicians experienced in running clinical trials .
To make that happen , the NIH launched the COVID-19 Prevention Trials Network , merging four existing clinical trial networks . It launched on July 8 with a website where volunteers can sign up .
The network builds on decades worth of work creating clinical trial networks that goes back to the AIDS epidemic in the late 1980s , Fauci said .
“ It would take literally years to build up a network that I ’ ve build up over the last 30 years . So why do it ? We ’ re going to use what we have , ” he said .
People chosen to take part will be racially , ethnically and geographically diverse . In its guidance for companies testing possible vaccines , the Food and Drug Administration says it wants the vaccine candidates to be tested in populations most affected by COVID-19 , including ethnic and racial minorities , pregnant women , the elderly and people with underlying medical conditions that can worsen COVID-19 .
While the effort is coming together quickly , the process is following the same strict protocols required of all vaccine developers .
“ The guidelines for these trials are really clear . They will be scientifically rigorous and there are no shortcuts , ” Bloom said .
Phase 3 clinical trials come only after months of other tests that first begin in cells and then moves on to animals . Only if all goes well with animal tests does the process move to humans .
In Phase 1 trials , the goal is to determine any immediate adverse effects . This is done through tests in a small number of healthy people , generally fewer than 100 . For example , for the Phase 1 trial of the Moderna vaccine candidate , 45 people took part .
Phase 2 trials expand the safety testing and look at dosing – how high a dose can be given before there are adverse effects ? Typically several dose levels are tested . In addition , these trials look to see if the vaccine causes an immune response in the subject . They can end up including several hundred people and expand to include older subjects .
Phase 3 trials begin when it ’ s clear the vaccine doesn ’ t cause immediate adverse effects and appears to provoke an immune response . The goal is to see if the vaccine actually protects the subjects against getting COVID-19 or , if they do get it , causes the illness to be less severe .
`` Each vaccine needs to be tested on about 30,000 volunteers , '' Dr. Francis Collins , director of the NIH , said in June . `` We do n't believe that we have enough power in the analysis to be able to document the vaccine works unless you get to roughly that number . ''
Half the participants will get the vaccine candidate , the other half will get a placebo .
“ A lot of people drop out right there . They say , ‘ No , I don ’ t want it if I don ’ t get the vaccine , ’ ” said Dr. Robert Hiatt , a professor of epidemiology at the University of California-San Francisco , who has led multiple large clinical trials .
Part of the work of the clinical trial workers is overcoming such hesitation . People in the control group , the ones who don ’ t actually get the vaccine , are vital to understanding if the real vaccine works , Hiatt said .
Researchers take care that participants understand what they ’ re signing up for . First there is an initial intake interview , which might be done over the phone or online . Those who are chosen must go through a thorough consent process .
The informed consent agreement can run 50 to 100 pages , said Dr. Mohamud Daya , a professor of emergency medicine at the Oregon Health and Science University in Portland , Oregon , who runs a large clinical trial network studying drugs for emergency conditions such as brain injuries , strokes and heart attacks .
“ The average consent form takes anywhere between 30 to 60 minutes , to go through , ” Daya said . “ You need to spend time with people , give them time to have things explained and ask questions . ”
Participants might be asked not just for their medical histories but also the names , addresses and phone number of the volunteer ’ s friends , family and neighbors , as well as information about their social media accounts . The information collected about friends and family helps researchers find participants if they lose track of them , to ask if they still want to take part , Hiatt said .
The COVID-19 vaccine trials won ’ t last for months but years as researchers watch for long-term side effects , so staying in touch is crucial .
“ There are all sorts of people who drop out . They lose interest . They move , they get a new cell phone , ” Hiatt said .
While it ’ s unethical to pay volunteers large sums of money to take part in clinical trials , volunteers can expect to be compensated for their time and effort . What other trials will offer isn ’ t known , but the Moderna Phase 1 trial , which launched in March , offered participants $ 100 for each in-person visit they completed . Those who attended all 11 planned visits over a 14-month period could receive a total of $ 1,100 .
The real cost is the medical staff who recruit , interview and track all the participants . It typically costs several hundred dollars per participant in staff time alone . For a clinical trial with 30,000 people in it , that ’ s upwards of $ 6 million . Every person who drops out means another must be added .
Running a large clinical trial is complex and finding the right mix of volunteers is often challenging and can take months , but Hiatt thinks the COVID-19 trials will be different .
`` The altruistic aspect of this is appealing , ” he said . “ People want to be part of the cure . ”