Education officials across California are reviewing and updating emergency plans and preparing for the potential closure of schools if the new coronavirus spreads widely .
Federal officials this week said schools need to start thinking about what to do in the event of a local outbreak .
With the virus spreading to countries outside China , it appears to have breached containment efforts and will almost certainly spread in the United States at some point , officials said .
A Solano County resident tested positive for the virus , officials announced Wednesday , marking the first case in the country from an unknown source .
The Fairfield-Suisin Unified School District , which is in Solano County , notified parents that because of the new case , staff will be disinfecting surfaces on a daily basis , a recommendation made by county and state officials , to try to prevent the spread of the virus .
“ While this may be alarming and cause fear , we want to assure you that FSUSD is taking precautions to keep our school sites disinfected and clean , ” officials said in a statement . “ Our staff will wipe down commonly shared surfaces every day with disinfectants . ”
The state is also recommending students and staff to frequently wash their hands , cover their nose and mouth when sneezing and coughing , and stay home if they are sick . Officials can also consider canceling special events , like school dances , plays or other large gatherings ..
But with the virus likely to spread across communities , closing schools , holding classes in smaller groups or remote education via the internet are all possibilities , said Dr. Nancy Messonnier , director of the National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases .
“ I understand this whole situation may seem overwhelming and that disruption to everyday life may be severe , ” she said . “ But these are things that people need to start thinking about now . ”
According to the Center for Disease Control in a 2017 advisory regarding a flu pandemic , closing schools “ preemptively before flu becomes widespread in schools and communities can help slow the spread of disease in the community. ” In addition , officials might close certain schools if many staff and students are sick and regular school functions can not be maintained .
Parents also need to start considering what to do if schools are closed or classes are held remotely in their community , Messonnier added .
“ I had a conversation with my family over breakfast this morning and I told my children that while I didn ’ t think that they were at risk right now , we as a family need to be preparing for significant disruption of our lives , ” she said . “ You should think about what you would do for childcare if schools or day cares close . ”
While many children in China are attending school remotely , most schools in the Bay Area or across the country wouldn ’ t be able to conduct classes online given a lack of computer or internet access for many students .
Such widespread school closures are not unprecedented , with many Bay Area schools shutting down in 2018 because of air quality issues related to wildfires . Individual schools have also closed from time to time because of outbreaks of illness like the norovirus .
School districts must have emergency plans for earthquakes , fires , active shooters and other types of critical events , and in recent years , officials have added a pandemic flu plan for communicable diseases like the coronavirus .
The pandemic influenza plan in Tulare County , for example , includes county guidance to close a school if more than 30 % of students are ill .
State and county officials have been providing guidance to California school districts about how to deal with a potential outbreak .
“ Although there are still zero confirmed cases in San Francisco residents , the global picture is changing rapidly , and we are working with the city to ensure we are prepared in the event that our schools are impacted , ” said San Francisco schools spokeswoman Laura Dudnick . “ We are planning for how we would manage in the case of an exposure at a school . ”
Already , the state Department of Education has advised schools to bar travelers from mainland China from school grounds for 14 days .
In addition , they are encouraging school staff to promote preventive measures , like hand washing and cleaning frequently used surfaces . Those with fevers should stay home until the fever is gone for 24 hours , according to the guidelines .
More Information Parents : How to plan for an extended stay at home during a flu pandemic Ask your employer about how business will continue during a pandemic . Ask your employer if you can work from home during a flu pandemic . Plan for a possible reduction or loss of income , if you are unable to work or your place of employment is closed . Check with your employer or union about leave policies . Check with your school district for home learning activities . Have materials , such as books , on hand . Plan recreational activities that your children can do at home . Source : Chula Vista Elementary School District
“ The California Department of Education is monitoring the situation regarding the 2019 novel coronavirus and working closely with agency partners to determine best steps to be prepared , ” said Scott Roark , spokesman for the California Department of Education . “ Any decisions to close schools as a result of the coronavirus would be made by individual county health agencies and school districts . ”
In Contra Costa County , officials said they are in “ constant communication ” with county health officials . Three people who have tested positive for coronavirus are currently being monitored in Contra Costa hospitals ; they were all U.S. passengers evacuated from a cruise ship in Japan where the virus was spreading rapidly .
But there is no evidence that the virus is circulating in the county , said Terry Koehne , spokesman for the Contra Costa County Office of Education .
“ With that said , we also take seriously our responsibility to keep students and schools safe and protected , ” he said , “ and will work on a plan with health services ... on how to respond if any of our schools are at risk of becoming impacted . ”