President Donald Trump and former Vice President Joe Biden spoke Monday afternoon about the coronavirus crisis , Fox News reported .
“ A source familiar with the call said they spoke about the response to the COVID-19 pandemic , ” Fox reported . “ The call comes after Fox News first reported last week that Biden offered to have a phone call with Trump directly to discuss a strategy to combat the virus . ”
Trump called out Biden early Monday , writing on Twitter , “ ” [ W ] hat ever happened to that phone call he told the Fake News he wanted to make to me ? ”
“ Joe Biden wanted the date for the Democrat National Convention moved to a later time period . Now he wants a ‘ Virtual ’ Convention , one where he doesn ’ t have to show up . Gee , I wonder why ? Also , what ever happened to that phone call he told the Fake News he wanted to make to me ? ”
Joe Biden wanted the date for the Democrat National Convention moved to a later time period . Now he wants a “ Virtual ” Convention , one where he doesn ’ t have to show up . Gee , I wonder why ? Also , what ever happened to that phone call he told the Fake News he wanted to make to me ? — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) April 6 , 2020
Biden fired back in his own tweet on Monday , offering to keep a chat on the table .
“ Mr . President , I hope we can gather in Milwaukee , but that is going to depend on you stepping up and doing what needs to be done to handle this pandemic , ” Biden tweeted , before plugging his campaign page outlining his own response .
“ We had a wonderful warm conversation , ” Trump said at his daily White House briefing on Monday . “ He gave me his point of view , and I fully understand that , ” Trump said , adding the call lasted about 15 minutes .
“ VP Biden & President Trump had a good call . VP Biden shared several suggestions for actions the Admin . can take now to address the ongoing coronavirus pandemic and expressed his appreciation for the spirit of the American people in meeting the challenges facing the nation , ” Kate Bedingfield , Biden ’ s deputy campaign manager , wrote on Twitter .
Mr. President , I hope we can gather in Milwaukee , but that is going to depend on you stepping up and doing what needs to be done to handle this pandemic . I have laid out how you can do that : https : //t.co/YLHCGEKnUB . Happy to discuss anytime . https : //t.co/ePQuQKkeZV — Joe Biden ( @ JoeBiden ) April 6 , 2020
“ Earlier Monday , a source familiar told Fox News that despite the president expressing interest in having a phone call with the Democratic frontrunner , the Biden campaign did not hear from the White House , ” Fox wrote .
The source told Fox News that the Biden campaign reached out to the White House Monday to set up the call , which took place Monday afternoon . Last week , when asked whether he would be receptive to a call with the likely Democratic presidential nominee , Trump said : “ Oh sure , absolutely . I ’ d love to speak with him . ”
Trump said last week : “ I always found him to be a nice guy . I don ’ t know him very well , frankly , but I think he ’ s probably a nice guy . If he ’ d like to call , I ’ d absolutely take his call . ”
Biden ’ s offer to chat with Trump came after White House adviser Kellyanne Conway called on the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee to stop criticizing the Trump administration ’ s efforts to handle the coronavirus and instead “ call the White House today and offer some support . ”
Biden last week finally backed restrictions on travel from China — two months after Trump put them into place to stem the spread of the coronavirus , which originated in Wuhan , China .
Bedingfield said on CNN on Friday that the former vice president “ supports travel bans that are guided by medical experts , advocated by public health officials , and backed by a full strategy . ”
“ Science supported this ban , therefore he did , too , ” Bedingfield said .
On Jan. 30 , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) declared a global health emergency of international concern . The same day , the U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) for the first time confirmed person-to-person spread of the Wuhan virus and applauded WHO ’ s decision . And also that same day , Trump created the White House Coronavirus Task Force to coordinate U.S. efforts regarding the new disease .
The next day , on Jan. 31 , the president declared coronavirus a U.S. public health emergency and issued a travel ban between the United States and China . Campaigning in Iowa that day , Biden criticized Trump ’ s China travel ban , saying , “ This is no time for Donald Trump ’ s record of hysteria and xenophobia . ”
On Feb. 1 , Biden again criticized Trump for the move .
“ We are in the midst of a crisis with the coronavirus . We need to lead the way with science — not Donald Trump ’ s record of hysteria , xenophobia , and fear-mongering . He is the worst possible person to lead our country through a global health emergency , ” he wrote on Twitter .