A woman holds a small coronavirus vaccine bottle , April 10 , 2020 . ( Dado Ruvic/Reuters )
An early human trial of Oxford University ’ s experimental coronavirus vaccine has yielded a strong immune response in hundreds of people , according to newly released data .
The potential vaccine , which the U.K. university developed in partnership with drugmaker AstraZeneca , was administered in a trial that involved 1,077 people and caused an immune response in people aged 18 to 55 that lasted two months or slightly longer , according to data published Monday by the medical journal The Lancet . The vaccine , which is made from a combination of coronavirus genetic material and a virus that causes the common cold in chimpanzees , caused the body to produce antibodies against the coronavirus and caused a reaction in T-cells , a type of white blood cell that also helps stave off infection .
“ We are seeing good immune response in almost everybody , ” said Dr. Adrian Hill , director of the Jenner Institute at Oxford University , which focuses on developing vaccines . “ What this vaccine does particularly well is trigger both arms of the immune system . ”
Larger trials of the vaccine , called ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 , with about 10,000 participants are currently underway , and a trial looking to test 30,000 people in the U.S. is expected to begin within the next few weeks , Hill said . Even as testing of the vaccine ’ s effectiveness is underway , AstraZeneca said it is working to manufacture 2 billion doses , including 400 million for the U.S. and UK , with distribution to the public pending on the success of the clinical trials .
The vaccine caused no serious adverse events but did cause minor side effects including fever , chills , headache , and muscle pain .
At least 23 of about 100 experimental coronavirus vaccines have reached the human trial stage , including Oxford ’ s trial . Widespread availability of a vaccine for the coronavirus , which has infected more than 14 million people globally and killed more than 606,200 , is expected next year if trials are successful .