One morning a few weeks ago , Rebecca Haley realized that her job had changed . Haley is the medical director for blood collection at Bloodworks Northwest , a nonprofit that serves 90 hospitals in the Pacific Northwest . But , Haley decided , regular blood and platelet donations weren ’ t the focus anymore . Like thousands of blood centers across the country , Bloodworks needed to collect something new : plasma from Covid-19 survivors .
How Long Does the Coronavirus Live on Surfaces ? Plus : What it means to “ flatten the curve , ” and everything else you need to know about the coronavirus .
Once someone is infected with the virus that causes Covid-19 , their immune system begins to produce antibodies , specialized cell protectors that recognize the new coronavirus and fend it off . Once that person has recovered , their blood retains the antibodies . Transfusing those antibodies into a Covid-19 patient might be able to help them fend off their own infection , buying them time until their immune system starts producing its own antibodies . This treatment is known as convalescent plasma therapy , and it ’ s an old solution ; doctors used it to help treat measles patients before a vaccine was developed and it has been used on Ebola , SARS , and MERS patients , as well as during the 1918 pandemic flu .
Scientists don ’ t know yet if this strategy works against Covid-19 , but in early April the Food and Drug Administration approved two nationwide clinical trials that the agency would coordinate . As those trials get underway , blood centers around the country are mounting an unprecedented effort to collect the potentially life-saving substance—but they are also facing thorny logistical and ethical problems along the way .
“ Nearly every blood center in the country has mobilized to help collect convalescent plasma , ” says Kate Fry , CEO of America ’ s Blood Centers , a national network of 600 such centers . She says tens of thousands of people have reached out wanting to donate . “ Thousands of units have already been shipped . We ’ re hoping for tens of thousands in the coming months , ” she adds .
One of the upsides to trying convalescent plasma as a therapy is that it ’ s readily available from all those donors , and can be given to a patient as soon as 36 hours after being collected . But there are still many practical unknowns when it comes to using it for Covid-19 . Should it be used only to help very sick patients , or should it be administered earlier in the course of the infection , before patients need to be put on a ventilator ? How much do people need ?
Researchers are running clinical trials to answer those questions , but the consensus right now is that , at the very least , convalescent plasma doesn ’ t seem to do much harm . With no proven treatments available for Covid-19 , the FDA loosened restrictions on who can use the experimental therapy , allowing hospitals to join clinical trials or to use it in “ compassionate use ” cases , which are allowed for critically ill people when no other treatment options exist .
At Bloodworks Northwest , Haley says it was an easy decision to start collecting convalescent plasma . “ The risk is low enough , the possibility of gain is high enough , ” she says . Her center collected its first convalescent plasma donation on April 10 . Since then , 700 people have put themselves on the donor list .
But that was the simple part . In the social distancing era , centers have had to retool their blood collection protocols to protect workers . At American Red Cross donation centers , that means checking donors ’ temperatures before they enter the building , giving workers and donors masks , and keeping everyone six feet apart . It also means screening donors over the phone before they show up , says Erin Goodhue , the group ’ s executive medical director .
Blood centers already have the equipment they need to do the collection , but lots of internal processes have to be modified so that the staff can collect the plasma safely and make sure it gets sent to the right places . They need to have the right labels and billing codes , which help keep track of samples , even if the hospitals aren ’ t being charged . They need to update their computer systems to recognize convalescent plasma as a new product , and they have to make sure they can keep that convalescent plasma separated from regular plasma donations .