The Hollywood left keeps pinning coronavirus victims on conservatives and Donald Trump . HBO host John Oliver claimed Trump ’ s pandemic plan was for “ him to live while letting a lot of us die. ” Actress Holly Marie Combs actually blamed her grandfather ’ s death on the President .
ABC ’ s The View co-host Whoopi Goldberg compared Trump to Nazi death camp doctor Josef Mengele and Robert DeNiro bashed Republicans ’ for their “ deal with the devil ” by letting “ lunatic ” Trump get away with letting people die .
The following are the most sickening attacks by celebrities on Trump and conservatives from the Hollywood left over the last few weeks :
13 . Trump ’ s Plan = “ Letting A Lot Of Us Die ”
“ Our wartime President has decided that the only way to win this war is to draft every one of us , hide our battle plans , and hope that we ’ re all brave enough not to notice that we ’ ve already surrendered . Or to put it much more succinctly ... his plan to steer us through this pandemic is for him to live while letting a lot of us die . ”
— Host John Oliver on HBO ’ s Last Week Tonight With John Oliver , May 10 .
“ I can not picture that man [ Donald Trump ] gracefully conceding and walking away , and I keep asking Democrats , you ’ re probably the one with the most law enforcement experience I ’ ve ever asked this — what do you do if he says ‘ It was rigged , blah , blah , blah , it ’ s not safe for me to leave ’ , whatever bullshit he ’ s going to come up with , and refuses to leave . I want to know what the plan is . ”
— Host Bill Maher to former Obama Attorney General Eric Holder on HBO ’ s Real Time , May 1 .
11 . Not Excited About Joe , But He ’ s Our Only Hope to Save Democracy
“ We ’ ve seen all of the ideas for candidates . It ’ s been boiled down to Biden . There ’ s no time to fight about it . There ’ s no time to protest about it . We must come together and get behind Joe Biden and make sure that he ’ s elected so that our democracy can survive . ”
— Actor Billy Porter on ABC ’ s The View , May 1 .
“ HAPPY MOTHERS DAY ! ! ! I hope you ’ re a better Mother than you are First Lady , you ’ re useless as a First Lady , literally @ FLOTUS # MILFS ”
“ The last time you were on , you were talking about your book The View From Flyover Country and it was a lot about , sort of — you had studied autocratic regimes , and how they , you know , have this way of sneaking up on people….You couldn ’ t have imagined , sort of predict that if things don ’ t change , this is the sort of thing we were going to end up with , right ? ... You talk a lot , not just in the book but also on your podcast , about the elections in November . How much confidence do you think the American people can have in a fair election right now ? ”
— Host Seth Meyers to liberal author Sarah Kendzior on NBC ’ s Late Night with Seth Meyers , May 6 .
“ I don ’ t hate Donald . I hate you for voting for him , for not having intelligence . I do think it would be extremely patriotic of Donald to say ‘ I ’ m in over my head and I don ’ t want to be president anymore . ’ ”
— Host Howard Stern on his SiriusXM show , May 12 .
“ My grandfather died today . He voted for you . He believed you when you said this virus was no worse than the flu . He believed every lie you muttered and sputtered . He died today from Covid-19 one day after his 66th wedding anniversary . You ’ re a disgrace to the human race . ”
— April 27 tweet by Charmed actress Holly Marie Combs .
6 . What ’ s With Republicans ’ “ Deal With the Devil ” Pact with Trump ?
“ What ’ s scarier about it all is the Republicans and his enablers around him are not doing anything . They ’ re around a crazy person , and they don ’ t do anything . They ’ re not standing up to him ... Nobody has the balls to stand up to this guy . And they all have a platform….What could be worth it for them to sacrifice their souls to make this deal with the devil to work with this guy ? It ’ s crazy . It ’ s crazy . ”
— Actor Robert DeNiro on CBS ’ s The Late Show with Stephen Colbert , May 6 .
“ Here in the U.S. , we have seen the cost of failed leadership . As the pandemic began its global march , President Donald Trump failed to act quickly and decisively , likely increasing its toll and worsening our pain and suffering . As he has done with climate change , Trump failed early on to embrace or even understand sound scientific consensus about what must be done to protect this nation and its people . ”
— Actor Robert Redford in an April 30 column for NBCNews.com .
Host Stephen Colbert : “ What do you make about the current horror story that we ’ re in and one of the central characters , which is our , our president ? ” ...
Author Stephen King : “ The thing about drinking bleach just kind of bowled me over . People have been telling me for years , you know , that I sort of foresaw Donald Trump . I wrote a book called The Dead Zone , and there was a character in there , a kind of TV comedian-type guy who appealed to the common people and told everybody that he was going to solve the pollution problem , and the problem of garbage . He was going to shoot it all into outer space ! And then he would hand out hot dogs and he ’ d say , ‘ You ’ re going to say ‘ hot dog ’ when you elect Greg Stillson president. ’ And really , shooting garbage into outer space compares pretty favorably to injecting bleach into the human body I think . ”
— CBS ’ s The Late Show with Stephen Colbert , May 5 .
“ We have a President who says , ‘ Drink bleach. ’ Geez , you waited 27 years — it couldn ’ t hold a few months . That ’ s what I would like to ask Ms. Reade . Why now ? I ’ m not saying , ‘ Why not 27 years ago ? ’ I understand it can take victims years to come forward . I ’ m saying , ‘ Why not before Super Tuesday ? Why not last fall when we still have a dozen other candidates to choose from ? Why wait until Biden is our only hope against Trump and then take him down ? ’ ”
— Host Bill Maher on HBO ’ s Real Time , May 8 .
“ I have to say the reason that the story is still in the news is if you have little kids , you have to constantly explain to them , ‘ No you can not drink bleach . You can not do this. ’ You know , the last person that really even suggested anyone use bleach was a man called Dr. Mengele , and he did bad things to people . So we don ’ t discuss bleach . ”
— Co-host Whoopi Goldberg on ABC ’ s The View , April 27 .
“ You ’ ve got a lunatic [ Donald Trump ] saying things that people are trying to dance around….It ’ s appalling . He wants to be re-elected , he doesn ’ t even care how many people die….He doesn ’ t care for those people [ Trump supporters ] . And the people who he pretends to care about are the people he has the most disdain for because he could care less about them . They might like to tell themselves or delude themselves , but he doesn ’ t care about them . ”
For more attacks on Trump and conservatives during the coronavirus crisis , see these previous articles :
TOP 10 : ‘ Delusional ’ Donald Trump and GOP ‘ Villains ’ Deadlier Than Vietnam War
TOP 12 : Celebs Sink Lower as They Attack Trump , His Family and Supporters
TOP 16 : Journalists Coldly Claim Trump and GOP Want Thousands to Die
TOP 10 : Celebrity Attacks on Trump ’ s Handling of the Pandemic
CORONA CRAZY : The 12 Most Insulting Attacks on Trump of the Week