TRUMP MASKS UP — One of the relatively clear findings of political science is that when members of a party are confronted with a new policy question , they will look to trusted ideological leaders for cues about what the “ right ” position is .
When the seriousness of the coronavirus pandemic was understood in March , it was mostly people on the left who decried the use of masks . Liberals argued that the science behind preventing the spread of the disease through mask-wearing was thin or , alternatively , that they should be reserved for health care workers so buying them was an act of selfishness . Mask wearers were shamed on social media by people on the left . But after the CDC promoted the use of masks , liberals , led by prominent Democratic politicians , quickly got on board .
On the right , a libertarian strain won the day and mask wearing became seen as an infringement on liberty . But one could just have easily predicted that conservatives were going to see a virus that emanated from China as a foreign threat and a national security issue that needed to be defeated with all of the U.S. government ’ s resources . This was how many people on the right saw the threat of the Ebola virus during the Obama administration .
What actually determined the consensus conservative position on masks for the first four months of the pandemic had nothing to do with ideology , and it had nothing to do with science , either . It had to do with personality — specifically the personality of President Donald Trump . He was anti-mask and , as the political science literature predicts , the conservative movement rallied around his position .
After months of anti-mask messaging , Trump finally reversed himself today .
“ I ’ m all for masks , ” he said , adding that he would wear one if he were in a crowded room and noting that he had a black one on recently . “ I sort of liked the way I looked . ”
Many prominent Republicans and conservatives — Vice President Mike Pence , former Vice President Dick Cheney , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , “ Fox and Friends ” host Steve Doocy , Trump whisperer Sean Hannity — have sent a similar message in recent days as coronavirus cases have spiked , especially in red states through the Sun Belt .
For the many conservative voters who look to their leaders for guidance , today just might be the start of a sustained public health campaign that could save lives .
Welcome to ███ Nightly : Coronavirus Special Edition . Renu will be interviewing Miami Mayor Francis Suarez next Wednesday for our virtual new event series . ███ Nightly : Daytime Edition . You can register to join us here . Renu adds : I promise not to ask him about any behind the scenes Jane the Virgin gossip . Reach out with tips : [ email protected ] or on Twitter at @ renurayasam . Nightly will be off July 3-6 . We will return Tuesday , July 7 .
A message from PhRMA : America ’ s biopharmaceutical companies are sharing manufacturing capabilities with each other so that once a treatment or vaccine is ready , they can get it to millions of people fast . And there ’ s no slowing down . America ’ s biopharmaceutical companies will continue working day and night until they beat coronavirus . More .
HOW WE BOTCHED REOPENING — States emerging from coronavirus “ stay-at-home ” orders this spring had a roadmap to safety at their fingertips . Much of it was never put in place . Or it was largely ignored . And the alarming surge in coronavirus cases now spreading across the country is less a surprise than a tragically predictable national “ I told you so ” moment , executive health care editor Joanne Kenen writes . “ Every state was allowed to go off and do their own activities , ” said Howard Koh , a senior public health official in the Obama administration who is now at Harvard . “ And a lot of states opened up when the trends were going the wrong way . ”
To open safely , states needed vastly expanded testing . They needed contact tracing to identify and isolate people who had been exposed . They needed clear , consistent public health messaging and a coordinated national response , so that Americans could understand that even as economic activity resumes , life does not return to normal . And states needed to pay attention to the epidemiological data — diagnoses , positivity rates , hospital admissions , ICU capacity — that would tell them if their caseload was going down and staying down before taking the next step in gradually reopening .
But the hierarchy of risk was put aside . Some states that initially avoided the worst effects of Covid-19 stampeded right through the gates . The current resurgence of Covid-19 cases — and most experts see this as a wave within a first wave , not the second wave that many fear will arrive in the fall — wasn ’ t inevitable . On an almost daily basis , health experts issued public warnings about the risk . By the time governors listened , cases were exploding .
SKY ROCKETS IN FLIGHT — Canadians are celebrating Canada Day today with a virtual fireworks show instead of the usual display at Ottawa ’ s Parliament Hill . In the U.S. , however , there ’ s little consensus about how to celebrate our upcoming Independence Day . State officials have partly blamed Memorial Day celebrations for recent case count spikes and hospitalizations . They worry that July 4 gatherings will exacerbate the current crisis .
Arkansas has triple the number of cases today compared with Memorial Day , making the same activities like gathering for barbecues far more dangerous , said Nate Smith , Arkansas Secretary of Health and president of the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials on a media call today .
Despite the risks of big gatherings , the Trump administration decided that this year ’ s July 4 celebration at the National Mall will be bigger than ever , with more than 10,000 fireworks launched from two different sites over the course of 35 minutes , according to details released today by the Interior Department . The release said that 300,000 cloth masks would be distributed to visitors . Republican South Dakota Gov . Kristi Noem said Tuesday that there would be no social distancing required at a July 3 fireworks show at Mount Rushmore with Trump . And today , Anthony Fauci discouraged Americans from attending the event .
As with so much of the pandemic response , individual cities — and in some cases states — are making their own judgments about whether to keep or can this year ’ s fireworks displays . Our reporters scattered around the country sent us these dispatches :
New York officials spread out the annual Macy ’ s July 4 fireworks show over six days this week with launches from unannounced locations and a broadcast of the smaller shows planned for Saturday .
Chicago has scrapped its main Navy Pier fireworks show , but there are still smaller celebrations in the ‘ burbs .
The annual Boston Pops Fireworks Spectacular was canceled in May , but the orchestra will hold a virtual broadcast on July 4 .
In California , Democratic Gov . Gavin Newsom urged 19 counties to cancel fireworks shows . Many cities , including San Francisco , already have called off the festivities , but one city in Sacramento County , Folsom , is holding a “ drive-in ” fireworks show on July 3 with cars parked further apart and no food sales , according to our California editor , Kevin Yamamura . A couple other cities in Orange County are planning similar events , according to the OC Register . One city is launching fireworks without having a viewing location , telling residents to watch from their homes .
In New Jersey , education reporter Carly Sitrin tells us that aerial consumer fireworks remain prohibited , but Democratic Gov . Phil Murphy signed an executive order on June 14 permitting organized fireworks displays at public and private beaches , boardwalks , lakes , and lakeshores subject to the restrictions on outdoor gatherings . Still , many municipalities have gone ahead and postponed or canceled their events including Ocean City , which normally has a Night in Venice party .
The biggest fireworks show in South Florida in Miami ’ s Bayfront Park is off , and the nearby town of Hialeah , Fla. , is holding a fireworks display but asking people to stream the festivities from home .
In Arizona , many towns are canceling their celebrations , but a few have converted to a drive in show .
Houston is holding a concert and fireworks display without a live audience .
And Washington D.C ’ s neighboring towns , including Alexandria , Va. , and Takoma Park , Md. , are also canceling their celebrations . A short drive up I-95 , Baltimore is too .
And not even cities and states can shut down the impromptu displays of patriotism cropping up around the country . Our Chicago area based Natasha Korecki sends us this handy guide from the Chicago Sun-Times for differentiating between fireworks and gunshots .
40 PERCENT — The spread of the coronavirus has increased racial tensions across the country , and Asian Americans and African Americans are facing the worst of it , according to findings from a new survey released today . In the study , conducted by the Pew Research Center , 40 percent of Black and Asian American adults said they have been treated differently or subjected to slurs or jokes as a result of the pandemic , campaign 2020 reporting fellow Maya King writes . A plurality of both groups also expressed anxiety about wearing a mask in public out of fears that they would be viewed as a threat or physically attacked .
Trump has repeatedly blamed China for the global spread of the virus , referring to it as the “ Chinese virus ” or “ kung flu ” during recent rallies and news conferences . “ It ’ s hard to attribute causality , but what we can say is that many Asian Americans feel they have been subject to slurs or jokes because of their race or ethnicity since the outbreak , ” said Neil Ruiz , associate director of global migration and demography at Pew , who co-authored the report .
Nightly asks you : How has the pandemic changed your July 4 holiday ? Send us your answer using our form , and we ’ ll include some of them in our Thursday edition .
JUNE JOBS PREVIEW — Economists are expecting to learn that the country added about 3 million jobs in June , when the Labor Department releases its monthly jobs report on Thursday . But that was before virus cases started surging across the South and West , and many states started shutting down recently opened businesses . Your host Slack chatted with reporter Megan Cassella about what economists expect in the report and whether fears of a second wave are warranted . This conversation has been edited .
Since Friday is a holiday , we 're getting the double-whammy of jobs reports tomorrow — one showing the number of Americans filing unemployment claims last week , and another estimating the overall unemployment rate for June .
We do n't know what they 'll show , but we can try to guess ( though that can be a dangerous game these days ) . The weekly claims are expected to remain elevated as they have been for months , likely showing another 1.5 million or so Americans — or perhaps more — filing an application for jobless benefits . The monthly numbers could be slightly more hopeful . But they also warn that these monthly numbers come from a survey conducted in mid-June — and that the economy has taken a turn for the worse since then , as the coronavirus surged .
For sure . There 's some anecdotal evidence out there of some folks getting laid off for a second time — anyone who works at a bar in California , for example . There ’ s some real-time private data showing that business activity plateaued and is now even dropping again in states where the virus is spreading rapidly .
On a broader level , economists and some lawmakers say we ’ ve always known that the coronavirus dictates the economic recovery , and jobs won ’ t come back until the virus is contained . We 're seeing those effects play out again now .
What about people who have officially kept their jobs — how do things look for them ?
Anecdotally , we do hear stories about employers cutting pay , usually as a way to try to avoid layoffs . Some high-profile executives have announced they ’ re cutting their own pay . The idea of course is that with money so tight , if everyone makes a little less , more people can keep their jobs . Some companies have also taken advantage of the heightened unemployment aid by furloughing workers now , knowing they can get the extra money .
The survey was conducted in mid-June . They ’ re likely to paint a picture way rosier than what ’ s happening on the ground now .
‘ REACHING OR NEAR CAPACITY ’ — The United States ' coronavirus testing capacity is at risk of being overwhelmed in some states by a surge in new infections and increased surveillance efforts in nursing homes and jails , Brett Giroir , the coronavirus testing czar said today . “ It is absolutely correct that some labs across the country are reaching or near capacity , ” Giroir said . Giroir emphasized that young adults , who account for the majority of new cases , must be vigilant about practicing social distancing and wearing a mask , health care reporter David Lim writes . The Department of Health and Human Services is developing plans to implement surge testing in moderate-sized communities of high concern in Texas , Florida and Louisiana , to try to bring the outbreaks in those areas under control .
Behind the anti-maskers — Last year , it was vaccines . Now , it ’ s masks . California reporter Mackenzie Mays looks at how the same activists are once again turning a public health issue into a culture war — and why that ’ s a big problem for state lawmakers and school teachers — in the latest edition of ███ Dispatch .
What is the difference between those democracies that have responded effectively to coronavirus and those that have not ?
“ The democracies led by populists — the U.S. , U.K. , Brazil — have done poorly , and the democracies led by institutionalists have done well : Merkel being a prime example of an institutionalist . Then there ’ s a separate cut , which is “ old democracy ” vs. “ young democracy. ” This doesn ’ t entirely work because it doesn ’ t take the developing world into account , but basically , if you look at Germany , New Zealand , Australia , Taiwan , those are all young democracies . Whereas the U.K. , the U.S. , France , those are older democracies . And I think there are two features there : one , just a certain kind of aged sclerosis comes with bureaucratic buildup over time , a lack of flexibility and nimbleness .
“ But another thing matters , too : The younger democracies , simply by virtue of having their birth connected to a later historical moment , have more fully embraced the concept of social rights and consequently went into this crisis understanding that the social compact includes things like health , and that the goal of a national response is , among other things , to protect the foundation for social rights . Whereas the U.K. , U.S. , we have systems that rely — in their fundamentals — on 18th-century conceptions of political and civil rights as the bedrock ; social rights are still a contested matter for us. ” — Danielle Allen , head of Harvard ’ s Safra Center for Ethics and co-author of the university ’ s “ Roadmap to Pandemic Resilience , ” as told to ███ Magazine ’ s Zack Stanton
‘ I ’ M TRYING TO DEMOLISH STUFF ’ — Matt Wuerker talks satire during the Trump administration , as well as Pixar ’ s Coco and Latino culture in humor with cartoonist Lalo Alcaraz in the latest edition of Punchlines .
340,000 hours The amount of time Texas judges have logged in Zoom hearings during the pandemic . The state Office of Court Administration bought 3,000 Zoom licenses for 3,220 judges . More than half are using Zoom to conduct business with about 525,000 participants .
Stuck at home to avoid coronavirus , Florida Rep. Donna Shalala decided to get a dog . Her old pooch died two years ago , and “ I thought Covid is a perfect opportunity to get a new dog because we ’ re stuck , ” she said .
She checked with Miami-based Paws 4 You Rescue to see what they had . The rescue had the perfect Yorkie , Shalala said , one who ’ s about four years old and recently wandered lost into Strada In The Grove restaurant in the heart of her Miami-based district .
“ They said I should give him an Italian name , ” Shalala said . So the former Health and Human Services secretary thought of an old friend who ’ s now the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases .
A message from PhRMA : America ’ s biopharmaceutical companies are sharing their knowledge and resources more than ever before to speed up the development of new medicines to fight COVID-19 . They ’ re working with doctors and hospitals on over 1,100 clinical trials . And there ’ s no slowing down . America ’ s biopharmaceutical companies will continue working day and night until they beat coronavirus . Because science is how we get back to normal . See how biopharmaceutical companies are working together to get people what they need during this pandemic .
Did someone forward this email to you ? Sign up here .