NEW YORK/WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Nearly 1 in 4 Americans were under orders to close up shop and stay at home on Saturday , as lawmakers in Washington neared a deal that could pump a record $ 1 trillion into the economy to limit the economic damage from the coronavirus .
New Jersey ’ s governor followed four other states - California , New York , Illinois and Connecticut - that have imposed unprecedented restrictions to slow the spread of infections , which have risen exponentially .
Governors in other states urged citizens to avoid large gatherings , even if restrictions were not in place .
“ It ’ s like we are all lost in a movie that we can ’ t relate to in any way , ” West Virginia Governor Jim Justice said , as he urged residents of his state to take the threat more seriously .
At least 23,941 cases of the novel coronavirus have been reported in the United States and 306 people have died from the COVID-19 disease as of Saturday evening , according to a ███ tally of state and local government websites .
In Washington , Republican and Democratic leaders appeared to be nearing a deal to pump more than $ 1 trillion into the economy , adding to the hundreds of billions of dollars in fiscal and monetary stimulus that has already been deployed to prop up the world ’ s largest economy .
“ I think we ’ re clearly going to get there , ” said Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell , who scheduled a vote for Monday .
Hard-hit airlines are pressing for $ 29 billion in cash , promising in return not to furlough employees before September . But lawmakers said they were inclined to offer loans instead .
Two members of the U.S. House of Representatives have tested positive , and U.S. Vice President Mike Pence and his wife tested negative after an unidentified aide was diagnosed with the virus . Pence staffers said the aide had mild symptoms and had not had close contact with Pence or President Donald Trump .
Related Coverage Factbox : Latest on the spread of the coronavirus around the world
Trump tested negative for the virus last week , according to his doctor .
Graphic : Tracking the spread of the global coronavirus - here
As hospitals braced for an influx of patients , Dr. Anthony Fauci , the U.S. government ’ s top infectious disease expert , urged Americans to postpone non-essential surgeries to keep beds available .
The Trump administration has struggled to line up tests to diagnose the disease , masks to slow its transmission , and medical equipment to treat those who have contracted it .
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a test that can deliver a result in 45 minutes , rather than days , according to Cepheid , its maker .
At the White House , officials said they were delivering more tests and equipment where they were needed , but declined to say whether they had met benchmarks they had laid out earlier in the week .
Graphic : The novel coronavirus in the United States - here
State and local officials say they are scrambling for supplies .
A view of Aegis Living at Marymoor , an assisted living facility linked to several cases of coronavirus , during the coronavirus disease ( COVID-19 ) outbreak in Redmond , Washington , U.S. March 21 , 2020 . ███/Lindsey Wasson
“ We ’ ve gotten no help from the federal government , or limited help , ” Illinois Governor J.B. Pritzker said at a news briefing .
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said the state had identified 6,000 ventilators to help sick patients keep breathing , but needed 30,000 more . He said the state is sending 1 million N95 respirator masks to New York City - short of the 3 million city officials are seeking .
“ We are literally scouring the globe for medical supplies , ” Cuomo said .
In New York City , where more than 6,000 cases have been diagnosed , about a dozen people waited for a test in the parking lot of the Brooklyn Hospital Center .
“ That ’ s insane , ” city council member Mark Levine said in a phone interview . “ If they ’ re well enough to stand in a line , they should be home resting , they don ’ t need a test , and they need to get out of the way . ”
Federal authorities briefly stopped flights arriving at New York City-area airports after a trainee at an air traffic control center tested positive .
Neighboring New Jersey became the latest state on Saturday to adopt a statewide directive requiring residents to remain indoors except for trips to grocery stores , pharmacies , gas stations and other “ essential businesses . ”
Stay-at-home orders now apply to 84 million people in states that account for a third of the nation ’ s economy . Other states encouraged residents to reduce activity but did not put restrictions in place . Missouri went in a different direction , allowing child-care providers to take on more children .
The state directives were for the most part issued without strict enforcement mechanisms to back them up .
Cuomo said New York would fine and close businesses that defy the order . Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot said police would “ admonish ” people to go home .
In Ridgefield , Connecticut , where six new cases were reported on Saturday , town official Rudy Marconi said he would dispatch the police to break up a teenagers ’ basketball game .
“ We have no other tools in our toolbox . We have to rely on the social distancing , ” he said .