The Pentagon just offered ventilators for the coronavirus response . It could do much more .
Share All sharing options for : The Pentagon just offered ventilators for the coronavirus response . It could do much more .
With civilian hospitals increasingly overwhelmed and the coronavirus outbreak in America deepening , a question is coming up of whether there ’ s a bigger role the US military to play in responding .
“ We ’ re starting the process . And it ’ s a process — we hope it ’ s not going to be necessary , but it could be necessary , ” he said during the White House briefing on Tuesday morning .
Hours later , Defense Secretary Mark Esper said the Pentagon would at least offer some support . He told reporters that his department would be willing to offer up to 2,000 ventilators and 5 million respirators if asked , as well as offer labs to test civilians for the disease .
But , Esper made sure to say , he believes calling up military to help in the coronavirus response should be a “ last resort . ”
That ’ s not all . The US military will also be sending the US Army Corps of Engineers to New York state to assess how to build more medical centers , and it will deploy the USNS Comfort — a large medical ship with room for 1,000 patients — off the coast of New York .
Experts tell me the Pentagon ’ s actions are a good start , but that defense officials could still do much , much more .
For over a century , America ’ s armed forces have dealt with medical crises across the globe . Many service members today have the expertise to assist with medical care ; build MASH hospitals ; provide shelter ; or transport food , medical equipment , and people to meet the needs of the public . That ’ s already happening in Georgia and Florida and New York , for example , where those states ’ National Guards were called to help combat Covid-19 , the disease caused by the coronavirus .
“ The Department of Defense provides the ability to scale up like no other part of the US government can , ” Andrew Weber , the Pentagon ’ s top biological defense official from 2011 to 2014 , told me . “ Whatever is needed to mount an appropriate response , the military can do it at scale . ”
It ’ s important to note that America ’ s troops wouldn ’ t be leading efforts to combat Covid-19 . They ’ d be supporting civilian leaders from the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) or the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) with extra people , expertise , and technology .
That ’ s likely why , during the Democratic presidential debate on Sunday night , former Vice President Joe Biden called for the military to be deployed across America . “ It ’ s a national emergency , and I would call out the military , ” he said . “ We ’ re at war with the virus . ”
But the military ’ s involvement isn ’ t a panacea , and it has strict limitations on what it can do . Laws prohibit most troops from performing law enforcement functions , for example , and its actions are curtailed to helping states with things like emergency medical treatment and evacuations .
What ’ s more , the military only has a few small hospitals in the United States that are set up to treat military medical problems like bodily trauma , top Pentagon officials told reporters on Monday . Those facilities aren ’ t particularly ready to deal with the coronavirus outbreak or provide what civilian hospitals might need .
In other words , the military can help , but it can ’ t solve the government ’ s response problems . It also doesn ’ t help that the Army alone , for instance , is short $ 1 billion to respond to the outbreak . “ We ’ re trying to be very careful about not overpromising , ” Air Force Brig . Gen. Paul Friedrichs , the Joint Staff surgeon , told reporters on Monday . However , experts and some at the Pentagon believe the military can come up with the money to help if it wanted to .
As of now , there ’ s no real indication Trump wants to deploy the military . Most jarring is that he doesn ’ t have a senior Pentagon official on his Coronavirus Task Force . ( It ’ s possible the military doesn ’ t want to be involved — more on that later . )
It ’ s therefore not as easy a call for Trump to make as some might think , but the dozen current and former defense officials and medical experts I spoke with say he should still use his authority to put the military to work now .
“ There ’ s just so much capacity in the Defense Department that ’ s completely untapped at the moment , and that ’ s a mistake , ” Kelly Magsamen , a former top Pentagon official in the Obama administration , told me .
The legality of using the US military in the coronavirus response
Before going into what the military could do to help with the coronavirus , it ’ s first important to know what it ’ s allowed to do at the president ’ s request .
The US military is barred from using its capabilities directly to enforce US domestic laws unless Congress specifically authorizes it to do so . This stipulation , known as “ posse comitatus , ” is why US troops can only support civilian agencies like FEMA but not take direct action themselves . Per FEMA ’ s own website , the military is prohibited from interdicting “ vehicles , conducting searches and seizures , making arrests or apprehensions , surveillance , investigation , or undercover work . ”
There ’ s no indication that long-standing statute is going to change anytime soon . However , this rule doesn ’ t apply to the National Guard and the Coast Guard — which means both services could perform law enforcement functions if asked by a state ’ s governor . That means they could conceivably block roads or keep people from visiting family and friends , though that would be a severe response and it ’ s unclear any governor wants to authorize that yet .
The president , or at least his lawyers , knows all this . On Friday , Trump issued two declarations to deal with the outbreak : one reliant on the Stafford Act , and one based on the National Emergencies Act .
As my colleague Ian Millhiser wrote , “ Title IV of the Stafford Act permits the president to declare that a particular crisis is a ‘ major disaster , ’ and such a declaration does provide the president with new powers that he may use to combat such a disaster. ” Additionally , the statute says “ all requests for a declaration by the President that a major disaster exists shall be made by the Governor of the affected State . ”
So , as Millhiser notes , Trump “ can not simply issue a declaration and seize broad new powers . ”
There ’ s still plenty the US government can do under this act , including coordinating relief efforts , helping state governments , and handing out food and medicine as needed . If the military can be helpful in any of those endeavors , HHS , another agency , or a state ’ s governor can ask the Pentagon for assistance with them .
As for the National Emergencies Act , it gives the president more sweeping authorities , Elizabeth Goiten , the co-director of the Liberty and National Security Program at the Brennan Center , wrote for the Atlantic on Monday . For Trump to use those authorities , though , he must “ specify which powers he intends to invoke , and he must issue updates if he adds new powers to the list , ” she explained .
It ’ s therefore possible that under this statute , Trump could order the military to do more than a state ’ s governor wants , but he ’ d have to notify everyone of those intentions .
What ’ s most likely to happen , though , is that the military will abide by its long-standing process and doctrine of “ Defense Support for Civilian Authorities , ” or DSCA .
For emergencies in the homeland like the coronavirus outbreak , the military sees its role as providing “ support to prepare , prevent , protect , respond , and recover from domestic incidents. ” Such support is “ provided in response to requests from civil authorities and upon approval from appropriate authorities . ”
US troops , then , won ’ t start deploying to parts of the country without HHS or other government agencies asking them to , and even then the military will act strictly in support of what that agency wants .
In essence , Trump couldn ’ t use the military as his own personal coronavirus response force and law enforcement agency . It ’ ll be subordinate to the government agencies that request its assistance . How a National Guard unit acts , though , is highly dependent on a state ’ s governor .
HHS has already asked the Pentagon for help with quarantining Americans coming back from Wuhan , China — where the outbreak started — as well as infected passengers aboard the Diamond Princess cruise liner . Military officials are also at the 11 feeder airports that passengers from abroad must go through for medical screenings before entering the US .
But so far , that ’ s it . “ We ’ ve not received any other [ requests ] at this time , ” Jonathan Hoffman , a top Pentagon spokesperson , told reporters on Monday .
Yet experts tell me that , if states and agencies would just request it , the Pentagon could be even more helpful .
There are four main ways the US military could assist in the country ’ s pandemic response : 1 ) provide care ; 2 ) assist with logistics ; 3 ) develop a vaccine or other treatment ; and 4 ) control crowds and provide other calming effects .
Even as Americans aim to “ flatten the curve ” to keep coronavirus cases in the country low , hospitals find that they ’ re struggling to keep up with the number of patients that need medical care . A dearth of hospital beds , ventilators , and rested physicians means a spike in people requiring hospitalization could greatly overwhelm the civilian health system .
Should those resources run low , the Defense Department “ could use authorities under the Defense Production Act to rapidly acquire a range of equipment such as N-95 respirators , gloves for medical personnel , and ventilators , ” James Miller , the top Pentagon policy official from 2012 to 2014 , told me .
The military also has thousands of physicians who could help treat patients . Dr. Angela Rasmussen , an infectious disease expert at Columbia University , told me the military could create new hospitals if needed — as New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo called on the Army Corps of Engineers to do — or repurpose current ones , for example by converting parts of hospitals into intensive care units .
But it should be noted that the military isn ’ t completely stocked up to help on all of this . As mentioned before , the Pentagon has fewer than 40 military hospitals , each of them small and geared toward healing troops in specific communities . “ Our fixed facilities are designed to the force that we have there — not 1,000-bed medical centers all over the United States , ” Friedrichs , the Joint Staff surgeon , told reporters on Monday .
By contrast , there are around 6,000 civilian hospitals in the country up and running today .
And while the military also has 424 medical clinics , including the USNS Comfort , they ’ re not built to quarantine patients that have the disease . Still , if there are many patients who require care at one time , the military would surely look to house them on their military bases as a kind of overflow facility .
The Department of Veterans Affairs ( VA ) could also lend its doctors and facilities for the response if the VA secretary authorizes their use . “ The VA system was explicitly designed with the idea of not only treating veterans but providing redundancy for the civilian system , ” said Sasha Baker , a top aide to former Defense Secretary Ash Carter .
And the VA says it ’ s ready to help if called upon . “ VA stands ready to surge capabilities into civilian health care systems in the event those systems encounter capacity issues , but at this time they are not encountering such issues , ” Christina Mandreucci , the VA ’ s press secretary , told me . “ Requests for such support would flow through the HHS , which is leading the federal government ’ s Covid-19 response efforts . ”
But should the National Disaster Medical System ( NDMS ) — a government program consisting of about 5,000 medical professionals — be called into action by a state or the federal government , the VA would play a huge role in making it work . “ The VA is the backbone for the NDMS , ” said Anthony Principi , the VA secretary from 2001 to 2005 .
When I asked a current Marine officer how the military could best help if called upon , the officer ’ s response was short and to the point : “ We are good at logistics . ”
“ We ’ ve got trucks , warehouses , and people , ” the officer continued , “ plus a few cargo planes and helicopters. ” In other words , the military is full of highly trained professionals with top-of-the-line equipment that could be incredibly useful for transporting civilian officials and materials around the country .
That last part is key as doctors may need additional medical tools quickly to treat patients , or those in affected areas might require food and water to survive . Indeed , if so many people are sick that even grocery stores close down , they ’ ll need all the sustenance they can get . Only the military , really , has the trucks , helicopters , and planes necessary to deliver everything in an efficient manner . They ’ d also prove useful should someone require a medical evacuation .
Armed forces could coordinate all this in command and control centers , Barry McCaffrey , a retired Army general , told me . That would help streamline all these efforts so the response isn ’ t so haphazard .
Experts also noted that the armed forces have communications equipment allowing better coordination among several parts of the government . For example , if there needs to be a teleconference meeting , the military has the technology to set up such a meeting for personnel stationed in remote places .
And troops can offer generators to provide electricity around the clock if needed . Generators are especially useful for field hospitals or if electrical workers in a particularly badly affected area have to stay home .
But , here again , there ’ s still a problem . The military is failing to come up with money for its own coronavirus response . Part of that comes from Trump administration efforts to cut the amount of military medical personnel the US can have by 18,000 , or 20 percent of the force .
3 ) Help develop a vaccine or effective treatment for the virus
The Army leads the US military ’ s medical research , primarily at Fort Detrick in Maryland . Gen. James McConville , the Army ’ s chief , told Breaking Defense earlier this month that there are already researchers working on finding a vaccine for the novel coronavirus . “ They ’ ve been dealing with Ebola , they ’ ve been dealing with Zika , they ’ ve been dealing with MERS , and now they ’ re dealing with coronavirus , ” McConville said .
Weber , now at the Council on Strategic Risks , told me that the only viable vaccine candidates and experimental drugs created during the 2014 Ebola crisis came from the Pentagon ( in partnership with the Canadian Ministry of Defense ) . Once it looked like that vaccine could work , the National Institutes of Health took it “ the last 10 yards , ” said Weber .
But that ’ s not all . Columbia ’ s Rasmussen told me that other Pentagon agencies , such as the Defense Threats Reduction Agency and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) , are working on tools that could potentially help fight the virus .
In DARPA ’ s case , it has a program called the Pandemic Prevention Platform that will “ temporarily protect someone from contracting the virus before a vaccine is ready , ” Amy Jenkins , the program ’ s director , told NPR in February .
Basically , it ’ s a treatment that protects someone from the virus for about six months . It serves as a temporary fix while waiting for a vaccine that can take several weeks to kick in , and it consists of antibodies from people who ’ ve had Covid-19 and recovered . “ This technology could be used in this current coronavirus , ” she said , “ but this is still a very early technology . ”
At the time of the interview , Jenkins noted that the technology might be available within 90 days .
The military ’ s manpower could be helpful in managing large crowds , experts say . They could direct traffic at drive-through testing centers , for example , or control the flow of entries at medical facilities .
This would mostly be a job for the National Guard , the Marine officer told me , as people tend to freak out if they see other services trying to keep people calm within the US .
And , as mentioned above , there are legal reasons why the National Guard would have to be the service doing the crowd control work and not the federal military .
So far there are about 670 National Guard members activated in 15 states .
The public ’ s trust in the military might help calm nerves that the US government has the situation under control . “ It would give the American public confidence , ” Weber told me .
Experts told me it ’ s therefore surprising that Esper and Army Gen. Mark Milley , the Joint Chiefs chair , haven ’ t been more visible so far in reassuring the nation that all will be well .
The risks of having the military involved in the coronavirus response
While everyone I spoke with said the military had some role to play , many noted that deploying the armed forces also comes with very real risks .
One Air Force officer I talked to worried about exposing troops to sick people , which could increase the number of cases in the ranks . Having a large number of mostly young service members around crowds could also cause the virus to spread , since younger people may be infected without showing any symptoms . “ That hurts our ability to respond without endangering the very people we intend to protect , ” the officer said .
Plus , the military is already reluctant to help with pandemic response .
During the 2014 Ebola crisis , former defense officials told me , top military officials didn ’ t want 4,000 US troops going to West Africa to help . The feeling among some US uniformed leaders was that America ’ s service members should be focused on fighting wars , not curing diseases . Under immense White House pressure , though , the military did deploy and by most accounts proved instrumental in quelling the crisis .
Today ’ s military brass seems to hold similar views , as the Defense Department is still mainly focused on the health of the force . From March 16 to May 11 , for example , troops aren ’ t allowed to travel domestically . It ’ s unclear that Pentagon leadership has turned its attention to a national response yet , experts tell me .
The Air Force officer has one theory as to why that may be : Surging military physicians to treat civilians means there ’ s a “ risk of no treatment for your defense force in an era where soldiers are still getting rocket attacked downrange and North Korea is firing missiles into the East Sea , ” the officer said . “ There ’ s still an argument for readiness ” — meaning the military ’ s ability to respond to any contingency — “ and our physicians and medical professionals help us maintain that posture . ”
Other experts also noted that the Trump administration wants the armed forces focused on “ great power competition ” — preparing for fighting major wars in the future with the likes of China and Russia . If troops start spending months on the coronavirus crisis , they might be less prepared to engage in those conflicts .
Despite those concerns , though , most I spoke with believe Trump will turn to the military sooner rather than later — though they wish he ’ d done so earlier .
“ He downplayed the virus , and appeared not to understand what was happening , let alone what was coming , ” Miller told me . “ The price will be paid in American lives . ”