The economic toll of the coronavirus pandemic is immense , with tens of millions unemployed and the US economy shrinking at a rate unseen in more than a decade . Global financial institutions like the International Monetary Fund are warning that Covid-19 could trigger a global economic slowdown comparable only to the Great Depression .
One of the groups likely to suffer the most is millennials , many of whom have yet to fully recover from the Great Recession .
“ One thing we know is that younger workers who were more fragile are already being more hard hit . Older folks will suffer greater wealth losses , but at least they had that wealth cushion , ” the Atlantic ’ s Annie Lowrey told ███ ’ s Sean Illing recently .
Millennials , often categorized as people born between 1980 and 1997 , are economically vulnerable in part because they are an incredibly diverse generation , with about 55 percent being people of color . This diversity suggests that their economic situation is more broadly affected by financial inequalities than older generations .
In general , recent polls reveal that millennials — of all backgrounds — are experiencing high anxiety around how the coronavirus will affect their economic realities . For instance , a poll from the Pew Research Center conducted from April 7 to 12 ( among 4,917 adults , with a 2.1 percentage point margin of error ) found American millennials to be the most pessimistic of any age group about the future of the economy .
When asked whether the economy would be better or worse in one year , Americans over age 65 were the most optimistic , with 69 percent saying things would improve . But millennials were more likely to believe that things would be the same ( and they are not good now , as ███ ’ s Emily Stewart has explained ) or even worse . The majority of those between ages 18 and 29 said things would be the same or worse — 57 percent — as did 48 percent of those between ages 30 and 49 .
Adding to millennials ’ economic anxiety seems to be concerns about basic needs , including covering the costs of food and shelter . In early April , 60 percent of millennial-registered voters told pollsters at Quinnipiac University that the pandemic has them concerned about being unable to afford food , rent or mortgage , or medical expenses .
Millennials have every reason to be concerned , about their present and their future . Here are 14 charts that show why :
More young people have been laid off — and many of those still with jobs have had to take pay cuts
To get a sense of what things are like now , and how millennials are affected by cuts to their work hours , it ’ s helpful to look at this chart , from the Pew Research Center :
This chart , based on data from a poll of 4,917 adults ( taken from April 7 to 12 , with a 2.1 percentage point margin of error ) shows those between ages 18 and 29 have been the most affected by layoffs , with 35 percent saying they or someone in their household has lost their job . That cohort has been most affected by pay cuts as well , with 45 percent reporting reduced wages in their household .
Older millennials , who are entering their peak earning years , make up the second most affected group — 30 percent said they or someone in their household have lost their job and 39 percent said wages in the household have been cut .
Overall , a PBS NewsHour/NPR/Marist College poll found , with a 3.8 percentage point margin of error , that 55 percent of Americans under the age of 45 had either had hours cut , been laid off , or been furloughed as of April 26 .
Millennials of color have been particularly affected by layoffs . The unemployment rate for people of color was higher than it was for white Americans before the pandemic hit the US , and from February to March , it rose more sharply . According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics , black Americans saw a 0.9 percentage point increase , Latinx Americans a 1.6 percentage point increase , Asian Americans a 1.6 percentage point increase , and white Americans , a 0.9 percentage point increase .
Essentially , those making the least — including black and Latinx millennials — were more likely to be laid off than those making more .
It isn ’ t by chance that millennials are the group most affected by layoffs , furloughs , and wage reductions — and it appears that the jobs many worked were especially vulnerable to the restrictions needed to counter the pandemic .
Every industry has been affected by layoffs , but looking at the data from March , it is clear that the leisure and hospitality industry ( which includes hotels and restaurants ) alone lost 459,000 jobs .
In March , the sectors with the greatest job losses were in leisure and hospitality ; health care and social services ; professional services ( like consulting , administrative , and IT roles ) ; and retail sectors . And all four of those rely heavily on millennial labor .
As the above chart shows , industries that fall under the leisure and hospitality sector are majority millennial — according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics , in 2019 , 58.5 percent of “ accommodation and food services ” workers were between the ages of 20 and 44 ( with another 15.9 percent being under age 20 ) . And 52.9 percent of those employed in the “ arts , entertainment , and recreation ” industries ( which include professional sports , museums , and concert venues ) were between 20 and 44 .
Some industries with older workers — like farming — are clearly suffering more now than in March . But as ███ ’ s Matt Yglesias has noted , even as stay-at-home measures are relaxed , the millennial-heavy industries will likely be slowest to return to their former levels of profitability . People still need houses and apartments — a sector dominated by older Americans — amid the pandemic . But it isn ’ t clear there will be much appetite for dining or attending large sporting events anytime soon , meaning millennials working in the most affected sectors may face financial difficulties in the immediate future .
Millennials were in bad shape before the pandemic due to student debt
Layoffs , furloughs , and wage cuts due to the pandemic have stressed many households — particularly considering that Americans , in general , were dealing with nearly $ 15 trillion in debt :
Where older and younger Americans differ is that older Americans are more likely to have debt due to assets like homes that could , theoretically , be liquidated if times get tough . Most younger Americans , however , have much of their debt tied up in an asset that has no immediate value : their college education . ( And older millennials have debt due to both . )
What neither of these charts tells us is the scale of millennials ’ student loan debt burden . Looking just at federal student loans — which make up 92 percent of all student loans — the Department of Education found that Americans 24 or younger had $ 116 billion in debt at the end of 2019 ; those 25 to 34 had $ 498 billion ; and those 35 to 49 had $ 581 billion . People above the age of 50 , on the other hand , owed about $ 323 billion in student loans .
On average , millennials owed somewhere between $ 5,000 and $ 60,000 in student debt , and studies have found that debt comes with a cost . University of Wisconsin researchers Fenaba R. Addo and Yiling Zhang noted just how burdensome that debt can be in an essay in the 2019 series “ The Emerging Millennial Wealth Gap ” from the New America think tank : “ It is not surprising that the median wealth of all Millennials with any debt at age 30 is lower than those with no debt who attended college ; however , their median wealth levels are also lower than young adults who never attended college . ”
Many millennials took on college debt with the assumption that borrowing heavily while young would lead to higher wages as one aged . But given the high — and growing — cost of college education , younger millennials found themselves needing to wait longer than older millennials to see those benefits . And now , the economic crisis brought on by the pandemic raises the question of whether those benefits will ever materialize . This is true for millennials broadly , but even more true for millennials of color .
Wage gaps and heavier student loan burdens could make the pandemic more difficult for millennials of color
As is the case with health outcomes , the pandemic has revealed longstanding economic disparities .
Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows that in the first quarter of 2020 , the median pay for a black male worker between the ages of 25 and 54 was $ 891 per week ; for a Latino man of the same age , it was $ 796 a week . Meanwhile , a white man of the same age averaged $ 1,128 per week . Women of all three racial groups made less than the average white man , with white women making $ 906 , black women making $ 767 , and Latina women making $ 701 .
People of color — particularly women of color — are more likely to hold jobs deemed essential , meaning they are more likely to be risking their lives than white men , all while being underpaid .
And for those millennials of color who are unemployed or furloughed , unemployment benefits ( not counting the temporary $ 600 per unemployment check provided by the CARES Act ) are calculated based on one ’ s former weekly earnings . This means these preexisting wage gaps will only exacerbate inequality at a particularly trying time , as Americans of color can expect to receive smaller unemployment benefits on average than white Americans .
This also means that millennials of color who attended college face a compound problem — first , they make less , making their degrees less valuable . Second , they , particularly black students , borrowed heavily to earn those degrees , and therefore have more to pay off . Data collected by New America ’ s Wesley Whistle found that in 2016 , 84 percent of black college-goers had taken out student loans , compared to 67 percent of white students .
And even before the coronavirus began affecting wages , these two factors caused black — and Latinx — college students to have more trouble than their white peers with staying current on their loan payments . In 2018 , the Federal Reserve found that 28 percent of black Americans ages 18 to 29 with student loans had fallen behind in their payments , as had 15 percent of Latinx college students in the same age range . By comparison , 7 percent of white 18- to 29-year-olds with debt were behind . And this was when the economy was doing “ well . ”
People of color are more affected in general — and that means more financial stress for millennials
Not all states have broken down their confirmed coronavirus case data by ethnicity , but a number of particularly hard-hit cities and states have , including Illinois , Michigan , and New York . And their numbers show black and Latinx Americans being disproportionately affected by Covid-19 — particularly those between the ages of 18 and 49 , as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows :
The latest CDC # COVIDView report with new hospitalization data on race/ethnicity by age is now available https : //t.co/zP4VYlo0Pb pic.twitter.com/HgstCJ7tO9 — CDC ( @ CDCgov ) April 24 , 2020
Some states have broken down this data further . Illinois , for instance , tracks confirmed cases based on age and ethnicity and found ( where race and ethnicity information is available ) that black and Latinx millennials are at particular risk for the disease .
Looking at available data , Latinx Illinoisans appear at particular risk compared to people of other ethnic backgrounds , with Latinx millennials ages 20 to 29 having more than 2,459 confirmed cases as of May 4 .
All of this adds to the economic stress millennials — particularly millennials of color — were already facing . Coronavirus testing is free , but any hospitalizations or emergency room visits related to coronavirus care are not . The average Covid-19-related hospital stay for an insured person is believed to be about $ 30,000 , according to the trade group America ’ s Health Insurance Plans . An analysis from FAIR Health , a nonprofit focused on the cost of care , found those without insurance — as about 16 percent of millennials are — can expect to pay between $ 42,486 and $ 74,310 .
And coronavirus costs don ’ t just fall on those who have the virus . They also disproportionately affect non-infected millennials of color who find themselves with unexpected hospital — and even funeral and interment — expenses for older family members . Death data is still incomplete , but what we have shows that black Americans make up one-third of all US coronavirus deaths , according to the Associated Press . Notably , the US is about 13 percent black ; the areas covered by the incomplete data are 14 percent black .
A 2019 Federal Reserve study found that 39 percent of Americans would not be able to weather a $ 400 emergency , and an SSRS/Bankrate poll conducted in January ( with a 3.39 percent margin of error ) found that 59 percent of Americans would be unable to cover a $ 1,000 emergency . Coronavirus-related health and end-of-life costs are far higher — they would be ruinous for many Americans in the best of times . That they would seem to disproportionately fall on those more likely to be furloughed or laid off , and to have heavier than average student loan burdens , makes them more onerous .
Millennials delayed home buying , which means they don ’ t have stable equity
With fewer resources , millennials have delayed buying homes — again , assets that for older Americans provide some measure of economic security amid sudden downturns like those created by the pandemic .
An analysis from Deutsche Bank shows that the median age of Americans buying homes increased sharply following the Great Recession . In 2009 , the median home-buying age was about 39 . In 2019 , when millennials were between the ages of 22 and 39 , the median age of homebuyers was 47 .
Homeownership has been particularly difficult for black millennials . A 2019 report by the National Association of Real Estate Brokers found that 16 percent of black millennials owned homes in 2017 , compared to 46 percent of white millennials , 34 percent of Asian American millennials , and 29 percent of Latinx millennials . The report ’ s authors found that even prior to the pandemic , fewer than 40 percent of black millennials were expected to own a home by the time they were 50 .
All this means that few millennials will exit the pandemic with an asset they can liquidate or leverage for loans , making their recovery all the more difficult — and making them all the more vulnerable to the next recession .
Millennials never really recovered from the Great Recession — and this time is looking worse
The Great Recession hit millennials really hard . They faced a sharp increase in unemployment , as this chart from the Bureau of Labor Statistics illustrates :
That chart only includes people born in 1980 and ’ 81 , but it is reflective of the trends among all millennials — by the time the recession eased in 2010 , the Pew Research Center ’ s Drew DeSilver notes , unemployment was at 15.5 percent for Americans ages 20 to 24 .
In the decade after , millennials struggled to recover . A 2018 study by the St. Louis Federal Reserve found that while older Americans recovered in the years following the recession , millennials continued to sustain economic losses , so much so that by 2016 , the median wealth of a household headed by a millennial was 34 percent lower than historical models suggested it should have been .
Part of this is due to a decline in millennial income — the St. Louis Fed found that the median income for millennials was 10 percent lower in 2016 than it was pre-recession in 2007 . Also contributing to a decline in net worth , the study ’ s authors note , is that millennials were in a poor position to capitalize on some of the opportunities that allowed older Americans to rebound more quickly , such as low stock and property prices .
They also entered a job market during a period of high unemployment and low demand for workers , and found their wages depressed ; a 2017 study by the advocacy group Young Invincibles found millennials to have median wages 20 percent lower than Americans of the boomer generation did at their age .
Research shows that income levels began to recover for some millennials by 2016 . The average millennial college graduate was making about 7 percent more than expected by then , according to the 2019 New America report . Millennials who didn ’ t go to college , however , made about 9 percent less than expected . And as one might expect from the wage gap discussed before , there was a disparity in the recovery by ethnicity , leading to a larger racial wealth gap than existed previously .
In the New America report , Reid Cramer notes , “ The racial wealth gap in 2016 is larger than it was in the early 2000s , when the average non-Hispanic White household had ‘ only ’ six to seven times the wealth of the average African American household . ”
The Federal Reserve studied the racial wealth gap in 2016 and found the median net worth of a white American family was $ 171,000 . The median net worth of black and Latinx families , however , was $ 17,600 and 20,700 , respectively . Or , to compare as Reid did , the average white family had about 10 times the wealth of the average black family , and about 8.5 times as much as the average Latinx family . Reid also notes that far more black and Latinx families have zero or negative net worths than white families — nearly 20 percent of black families , and 15 percent of Latinx families .
This wealth gap — and millennials ’ difficulties in building wealth in general — is likely to be exacerbated by the pandemic . As ███ ’ s Emily Stewart has written , the US is already in a recession , and one analysts expect to become worse . Morgan Stanley has said investors should expect US GDP to fall by 37.9 percent in the second quarter of the year . Whether the economy will improve after that is a matter of debate . But even if it does , lasting damage will have been done , with millennials , again , among the most affected .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .