Stanford Medicine says vacuum cleaner bags , antimicrobial pillowcases , and other materials are reasonably effective substitutes for medical masks . Various studies point to similar results for those homemade face coverings , particularly when combined with hand-washing hygiene .
Even if masks don ’ t completely protect each individual , they could considerably reduce the spread of the virus . Even if the coverings only reduced transmission to and from each wearer by half , that would reduce the chance of spread by 75 percent . So face coverings could reduce the exponential growth of new infections and avert disaster in America ’ s hot spots .
Because scientists can not rule out with complete confidence that this coronavirus can be spread easily in the air , even outdoors , we believe it ’ s most prudent to promote face covering in all public settings . And to state the obvious , mask wearing and face covering is not a substitute for shelter-in-place , hand-washing and other protective measures .
Those wearing a mask may be stigmatized , since they might be presumed to be sick , given current government guidance . A national policy on face coverings for all , even those who have had the disease , like our co-author Dr. Kass , could eliminate that stigma . Wearing masks is a way we can all protect each other .
People should be strictly warned that wearing a face covering doesn ’ t let you ignore social distancing rules . That would be counterproductive .
Wearing masks will not only reduce viral spread , it would also help us return to work , get back to school , and avoid what could be a devastating second wave of the coronavirus .
While ensuring that all health workers have full protective equipment , and as many essential workers as possible have medical masks , President Trump , federal health officials , governors and mayors should call on Americans in well-populated cities and towns to wear face coverings or masks in all public areas . ( Government officials should start by wearing masks themselves , particularly in media appearances , to reduce the stigma and encourage use . )