“ Generally , in open societies , I ’ m more confident in the ability for a virus to be contained , ” says Devi Sridhar , director of the global health governance program at Edinburgh University . “ Because it ’ s transparent , and that ’ s what you want to have : free information flowing and good governance . ”
At the same time , the relative transparency , openness , and respect for individual liberties prized by democracies can also be a major advantage , analysts say , in keeping the public informed about risks and prevention , reducing panic , and maintaining crucial trust in government actions .
In some ways , it ’ s a scene that mirrors others around the globe , from Wuhan to Milan , as authorities try to handle the rapidly growing epidemic . But the differences are also stark . While China imposed a draconian quarantine of Wuhan ’ s 11 million people to curb the spread of the virus , officials in Italy , South Korea , and the United States face more hurdles to rapid mobilization .
Hand sanitizer , paper towels , and soap are “ flying off the shelves , ” says Tom Pharo , a manager at a local grocery chain in Seattle .
With six reported deaths attributed to the new coronavirus , the United States is getting a firsthand look at life amid a global outbreak .
As Washington state grapples with coronavirus , Americans are getting their first up-close look at life amid an outbreak – and how the country might balance public health safety with personal liberties .
Six people in the state have died , the first coronavirus-linked deaths in the United States ; 18 more cases have been confirmed , and the governor has declared a state of emergency . After revelations that the virus may have been spreading undetected in greater Seattle for six weeks , limited quarantines are now in place , with two teams from the Centers for Disease Control assisting . The local government is renting RVs and modular housing units , and buying a motel to isolate people who can ’ t stay at home ; some schools are temporarily closing .
“ This is a complex and unprecedented challenge ” Dr. Jeff Duchin , health officer for Seattle and King County , said Monday at a press conference . The current confirmed cases are “ the tip of the iceberg , ” he said , and testing could expand to as many as thousands a day . But officials gave no indication of a broader quarantine , and instead said they expect eventually to stop tracking individual cases and handle the virus as they do influenza . “ We are still trying to contain , but we are pivoting to a community-based approach , ” he said .
Meanwhile , Seattle director of public health Dr. Patty Hayes urged residents to “ stop the run on masks ” needed by “ front-line workers. ” Still , many people are stocking up on key supplies and preparing to hunker down .
Hand sanitizer , paper towels , and soap are “ flying off the shelves , ” says Tom Pharo , a manager at a local grocery chain , rushing to wipe-down check-out counters on Sunday in a store that is short-staffed . “ Getting people to come in [ to work ] is tricky , too , ” he says , because of mounting virus worries .
In some ways , it ’ s a scene that mirrors others around the globe , from Wuhan to Milan , as authorities try to handle the rapidly growing epidemic . But the differences are also stark – shedding light on the unique questions democracies must wrestle with , compared to China and other authoritarian states , as they seek to protect both public health and individual freedoms .
“ Epidemics ... reveal what really matters to a population , what is at stake , and especially whom and what these societies value , ” says David Jones , a professor of global public health and the history of medicine at Harvard University .
Unlike China , where the COVID-19 virus originated , officials in Italy , South Korea , and the United States face more hurdles to rapid mobilization . Yet democracies ’ relative transparency , openness , and respect for individual liberties is also a major advantage , analysts say , in keeping the public informed about risks and prevention , reducing panic , and maintaining crucial trust in government actions . “ We are trying to engage in radical transparency with the American public , ” U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar told reporters last week .
“ A strength of the democratic system is we should be hearing about cases from health care facilities , ” says Amanda Glassman , senior fellow at the Center for Global Development . ” We don ’ t have any ban on talking about people who have disease or hospitals that are overwhelmed . ”
China ’ s authorities , in contrast , suppressed initial reports of the virus in December for weeks as the contagion went unchecked – silencing whistleblowers , including a Wuhan doctor who later died from the illness .
The cover up caused “ an almost unprecedented online rebellion ... [ with ] average Chinese people being very angry at the government , ” says Diana Fu , associate professor of political science at the University of Toronto , who researches civil society in China . The authoritarian government had broken “ the basic social contract ” to provide people with safety and security , she says .
Once China ’ s leaders moved to act , however , they orchestrated a rapid , efficient , and huge mobilization of resources in a “ people ’ s war ” against the virus . Beijing was credited with swiftly identifying and sharing the genetic sequence of the virus . Meanwhile , it imposed a draconian quarantine of Wuhan ’ s 11 million people that “ may have bought the world time , for which we should all be grateful , ” Professor Jones says .
“ There ’ s no question that China ’ s bold approach to the rapid spread of this new respiratory pathogen has changed the course of what was a rapidly escalating and continues to be a deadly epidemic , ” Bruce Aylward , a Canadian doctor who led a WHO delegation to China , said at a press conference last week .
Other governments ’ anti-virus campaigns seem at times disjointed and slow , in comparison to China ’ s top-down approach , with new hospitals constructed overnight and big cities quarantined . Moreover , a slow distribution of testing kits and overly narrow criteria for testing may have missed numerous cases that are only now being detected . On Sunday , the administration announced a “ radical expansion ” of testing .
“ We ’ re well behind the ball in figuring out what is going on , ” Ms. Glassman says .
“ We don ’ t have a top-down command and control system , ” she adds . “ Civil liberties and individual beliefs play a huge role in people ’ s health-care seeking and their willingness to be led by government or to do what government advises . ”
In South Korea , for example , officials have sued a religious group for obstructing the surveillance work of health authorities in the city of Daegu , contributing to a mushrooming of coronavirus cases from dozens to more than 4,300 in only two weeks . Meanwhile , South Korean President Moon Jae-in faces public outrage – including a petition for his impeachment signed by 1.4 million citizens – for his handling of the crisis . Mr . Moon is blamed in particular for only belatedly imposing an entry ban on foreigners arriving from China ’ s Hubei Province , while allowing other Chinese travelers to enter South Korea .
In Italy , where cases spiked to more than 1,800 as of Monday , towns throughout the northern industrial heartland have been quarantined as officials attempt containment . But the aggressive reaction by authorities has raised concerns over restrictions on freedom of movement and basic human rights .
Francisco Seco/AP A gondolier looks at his smartphone as he waits for clients in Venice , Italy , Feb. 28 , 2020 . Authorities in Italy decided to re-open schools and museums in some areas less hard-hit by the coronavirus outbreak in the country , which has the most cases outside of Asia .
Raffaele Maresca is an instructor at a free fall wind tunnel in Milan . His job is usually frenetic , with between 200 and 400 clients showing up for indoor skydiving simulation daily . But now all appointments have been postponed . “ There ’ s a lot of paranoia . It feels like it ’ s being blown out of proportion , ” he says , wondering if he ’ ll still be able to go to movies , or even the gym . “ I feel it affects my freedom , and I don ’ t like it . ”
Countries ’ responses must be vigorous , but not at the risk of violating human rights , says Steven Hoffman , director of the Global Strategy Lab at York University in Toronto , which advises countries on law and policy in the face of transnational health threats .
“ When it comes to pandemics , following human rights principles actually align with scientific principles , ” he says . “ If we are trapped in a city that ’ s being presented as a high risk to the rest of the world , it ’ s a natural human tendency to try to leave that city ... which then makes it even harder for public health to identify those folks who might get sick and isolate them . ”
As cases have increased in Europe , freedom of movement , one of the foundational pillars of the European Union , has become a central issue . Austria temporarily halted trains from Italy , while many far-right politicians have used the coronavirus to renew their calls , begun in the wake of terrorism threats by ISIS and migration across the Mediterranean , to end passport-free travel between Schengen countries .
But some experts caution against the effectiveness of such bans , and say they also fuel fear of people perceived as “ foreign , ” or “ other. ” Incidents of racism , from Canada to the U.S. and across Europe , have spiked toward Chinese populations , and the Asian diaspora more generally .
In Italy , the far-right has gained space to rail against open borders in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak , says Cecilia Emma Sottilotta , a professor of political science at the American University of Rome . “ It is clearly perfect for political leaders like [ Matteo ] Salvini [ of Italy ] or Marine Le Pen [ in France ] or the [ Alternative for Germany party ] who have been arguing about the control of borders and people , ” she says . “ They are literally jumping on this . ”
Rather than cut off connections , democratic communities must work with each other to overcome the virus , says Devi Sridhar , director of the global health governance program at Edinburgh University . “ Citizens have to feel the government has their best interest at heart . And if they do come forward and want to report , they will get the best medical care and not forcibly be put into conditions that are against their will . ”
Democracies ’ free-flow of information is also central to their response , a key lesson that Canada learned in 2003 . During the outbreak of SARS , it became one of the worst-hit countries outside of Asia , especially in Toronto , which was slapped with a WHO travel advisory . The country counted 438 suspected cases and 44 deaths .
The government drew up a commission that looked at weaknesses in the response , like a lack of preparedness and of information-sharing between local hospitals , provinces , the federal government , and the rest of the globe . Afterward , Canada created a public health agency that is now leading the coronavirus containment effort .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ Generally , in open societies , I ’ m more confident in the ability for a virus to be contained , ” says Professor Sridhar . “ Because it ’ s transparent , and that ’ s what you want to have , free information flowing and good governance . ”