Carlo Leonti , 51 , has been fighting COVID-19 for days . He is treated with an oxygen helmet that helps him breathe at Monza ’ s hospital ’ s pneumology department . Arianna Arcara
███ is making its coronavirus coverage free for all readers . Subscribe to support our journalism . Start your free trial .
The first thing Damiano Rizzi told me was the story of a woman who was about to die . It wasn ’ t Rizzi ’ s own story—it was a story that another doctor had shared during a staff meeting . That doctor had been standing beside her patient ’ s bed . Before the patient closed her eyes , she stretched out her hand and placed it on the plastic visor that shielded her doctor ’ s face , as if looking for a last , desperate human touch .
Rizzi is the president of the health care NGO Soleterre , which works on human rights issues around health care . He ’ s also a psychologist at the San Matteo hospital in Pavia , one of the first cities affected by the COVID-19 emergency in Italy . He uses that doctor ’ s story as a portrait of what is happening in the wards of thousands of hospitals around the world . “ This virus has created a very strong sense of loneliness , ” he says . “ Doctors covered from head to toe in synthetic suits are the only link to real life for intubated patients , or imprisoned ones in oxygen helmets , often unable to say a word. ” For this reason , he and his team are on the front line , alongside the health personnel in the COVID-19 and intensive care units of the San Matteo hospital , to try to bring psychological support to this hell . “ We have been on the war front , in the Balkans , in the Donbass in Ukraine , in the refugee camps in northern Uganda . When the coronavirus emergency broke out , I felt it was important to be here . ”
There are many associations of psychologists who offer telephone consultations to health professionals , but almost no one is in the ward by their side because of the risk of infection . Right now , in Lombardy , the Italian region most affected by COVID-19 , the mental well-being of the patient and the caregiver is being treated equally . This emergency has kept health care workers in a state of continuous trauma for over a month . “ They are confused . Many find themselves doing a job they have never done , far from their departments , ” Rizzi says . “ Some experience survivor ’ s guilt , a classic for those who live through tragedies. ” They say they feel helpless , they are seeing many more people dying than they are used to seeing , they still don ’ t have the medicine to cure the disease , and sometimes they don ’ t even have the right protection . They are afraid of getting sick or infecting their loved ones .
Every morning , the doctors who work in the COVID-19 areas of San Gerardo Hospital in Monza do a briefing on their plan for the day to share data and general information with the medical director , Mario Alparone . Arianna Arcara
Often , COVID-19 leads us to the metaphors of war and trenches . According to Rizzi , that is because we have no other words to explain this situation that has blown up our certainties . But he says that in some cases it is even worse than armed conflict . “ During a war there are the battles that require a maximum state of mental alert , but then there is time to relax , or times when someone else goes to the front line . Here , on the other hand , there is a constant stress : during the battle in the wards , but also at home , where they are afraid of bringing the virus into the family . ”
Many doctors and nurses have decided to move away from loved ones , such as Pierluigi Viale , the director of infectious diseases at Sant ’ Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic in Bologna : “ I have been living alone at my mother-in-law ’ s house for several weeks . She moved in with my wife and our 4-year-old son . I come back late from work . Sometimes I stop by under their balcony and blow a kiss from the car . My son yells , ‘ Daddy , be careful ! ’ And I go away with my heart in pieces . It is not easy to live this moment without them , without a hug . But it ’ s for our own good . ”
One of the dozens of doctors who work in Monza ’ s hospital in personal protective gear . Arianna Arcara Alone , without families by their side and without the comfort of a priest , the faithful rely on a prayer . Arianna Arcara
While in America and other countries , the virus still on the rise , the advance of the pandemic in Italy appears to be slightly slowing down . The cases of the total infected are more than 140,000 , and new infections are decreasing . Of these 140,000 cases , 10,000 are health care workers , twice as many as those in China . One figure is particularly worrisome : 100 doctors have died since the outbreak . One hundred doctors in just a month . They died from working on the front line ; they died because without the right protective devices it ’ s easier to get sick . And the problem is not solely Italian . In Spain , 14 percent of the infections are among health workers . In a major hospital in New York City , more than 200 workers have fallen sick . Two nurses have already died there .
Isabel Fernandez is a psychotherapist who specializes in emergencies . She is at the forefront of listening to health personnel . Knowing that a colleague from another department or from another hospital is infected , or seeing a colleague die , creates a great trauma in health workers , she says : “ It becomes an image that creeps into your head and reminds you that the next one could be you . COVID-19 has mixed the working dimension with the private one : As a doctor , you can easily become a patient . ”
Giulia is a nurse at Monza ’ s hospital . Today , she is helping Carlo with physical therapy as he continues to recover . Arianna Arcara
This virus fatigues and scratches the souls of everyone , but those on the front line experience this more than anyone . Two Italian nurses have died by suicide in the past few weeks . Fernandez says that not only could there be extensive cases of PTSD , but there will also likely be episodes of depression , anxiety , and irritability , as well as difficulty returning to life as before : “ We are trying to give immediate support to relieve and prevent—we want to be the place to decompress . But the big call for help will come only at the end of the emergency . Now doctors are very focused on doing and have little time to listen to their feelings , ” she says .
Rizzi and his team meet the health care staff during group meetings . Any individual sessions they are able to do tend to happen in the hallways of the hospitals , “ between one visit and another , ” whenever the doctors have time . “ This is why our [ physical ] presence is important . We try to be there when they need it , ” he says . Some doctors cry because they feel listened to and less lonely ; others cry because they could not save their last patient . “ But they all tell us that the most difficult thing is not being able to have human contact . People are intubated , or under large oxygen helmets . Those who do well have a mask , ” says Rizzi . Doctors have the feeling that they are only dealing with bodies . They lack the history of these patients . “ At our hospital , we try to reconstruct their history , we speak with the families , the local parish , even with the mayors . And we help doctors communicate with loved ones , even the most painful news , ” Rizzi tells me .
There is another aspect of COVID-19 that leaves doctors speechless—the speed with which everything changes , how quickly vital parameters plummet and the person dies . “ A patient you thought was getting better gets worse unexpectedly in five minutes , This creates a sense of helplessness , ” says Alberto Pesci , the head of pneumology of San Gerardo Hospital in Monza , which currently has about 500 COVID-19 patients . This speed creates the sensation of chasing the virus , with no hope in sight .
Monza ’ s hospital houses 500 patients with COVID-19 . Compared with other Lombardy cities , it boasts the highest number of recovered cases . The hospital has undergone a complete transformation to cope with the emergency , changing entire wards dedicated to intensive care . Arianna Arcara
“ There are times when it seems that I can not do enough . There are patients that , when I leave for the evening , are gone in the morning , ” says S. , a nurse from Monza . S. , who asked for anonymity , has just returned to work after being infected with COVID-19 herself : “ I was looking forward to going back to the wards , despite the fear of getting sick again. ” Hospital management sent an email to all staff saying that those who didn ’ t feel up to it could step down . “ But none of us did , ” S. says . “ There are times when we cry or feel bad , like when in one shift we lost five people , but then we get up and go on , one day at a time . ”
This is probably the sense of strength and love that Rizzi speaks of . He tells us that on one side there is the horror of death , “ but on the other we are experiencing a moment of great humanity. ” In the middle of all of it , he ’ s also witnessed something rare : “ I ’ ve never seen such immediate actuation , a symbiosis toward a single goal : saving lives . ”