ALBANY — The state ’ s top coronavirus test lab is so overwhelmed by the mandated coronavirus testing in nursing homes that they ’ ve told counties to stop sending them shipments , The Post has learned .
Officials at the embattled state Health Department ’ s Wadsworth Center in Albany notified multiple county health officers they have reached capacity and are struggling to process the surge in tests .
The logjam comes one week after DOH started quietly increasing testing for nursing home residents , and following Gov . Cuomo ’ s announcement Sunday of a new executive order mandating that state-licensed nursing homes test staff twice a week .
Facilities are required to submit a plan to the state by Friday , May 15 , and noncompliance will be met with license suspension , revocation or a $ 2,000 penalty per day .
Livingston County ’ s top health officer was denied shipments of up to 800 COVID-19 swabs on Wednesday , after officials told her the lab was experiencing a delay of “ several weeks . ”
“ We ’ re honestly really at a loss . It places a large burden and it ’ s almost an impossible task , ” county public health director Jennifer Rodriguez told The Post , adding she ’ s worried swabs will expire .
Wadsworth processes tests for free , which is ideal for the cash-strapped county that operates the Livingston County Center for Nursing & Rehabilitation and employs roughly 200 healthcare workers .
Rodriguez said she has lined up private lab contracts , but that will cost an estimated $ 100 per test .
Dutchess County was also scheduled to ship 950 tests to Albany , but was similarly told to find alternative plans .
“ Dutchess was advised our efforts to test residents at nursing homes couldn ’ t continue at Wadsworth . They tell us our work to support the homes , provide comfort to families and protect lives can ’ t be accommodated and we need to find a private lab . This is nothing short of inexcusable , ” County Executive Marc Molinaro told The Post .
Albany County was told the lab is so backlogged it ’ s “ prioritizing ” nursing home residents ’ tests , but has no room for tests from staffers .
The test issue was also flagged by officials from Westchester County in emails obtained by The Post , widely shared among their colleagues in other jurisdictions .
Dennis Delborgo , the county ’ s emergency management director , expressed confusion over the state-ordered “ nursing home initiative . ”
He wrote on May 9 that the state failed to provide a “ plan as to what to do next , what lab to use and how to process and handle the samples , whether or not the facilities were required to participate . ”
Delborgo said he was astonished when an official at the state Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Services told him he “ should find [ his ] own lab ” since the state DOH “ couldn ’ t handle the volume ” because Westchester is “ one of the wealthiest counties in NYS , ” the emails show .
“ While Wadsworth is primarily a research lab , it has been operating 24/7 to be able to test more than 6,000 nursing home residents , staff and everyday New Yorkers this week alone — in addition to New York State giving open access to the 31-state run testing sites to nursing home staff , ” DOH spokesman Gary Holmes told The Post .
He said the state is authorizing several “ commercial labs which have capacity to run tens of thousands of tests a day to support this important directive ” and will help counties and nursing homes conduct testing if needed .