The US has bought almost the entire global supply of remdesivir , the anti-viral drug that can speed the recovery of patients infected with the coronavirus .
Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar announced earlier this week an agreement to secure large quantities of the medication from Gilead Sciences until September , allowing US hospitals to buy it .
“ President Trump has struck an amazing deal to ensure Americans have access to the first authorized therapeutic for COVID-19 , ” Azar said in a statement .
“ To the extent possible , we want to ensure that any American patient who needs remdesivir can get it . The Trump Administration is doing everything in our power to learn more about life-saving therapeutics for COVID-19 and secure access to these options for the American people . ”
HHS said it secured more than 500,000 treatment courses of the drug .
“ This represents 100 percent of Gilead ’ s projected production for July ( 94,200 treatment courses ) , 90 percent of production in August ( 174,900 treatment courses ) , and 90 percent of production in September ( 232,800 treatment courses ) , in addition to an allocation for clinical trials , ” it said .
Remdesivir will cost $ 3,120 for the typical patient with private health insurance , the drugmaker said Monday , adding that it will cost hospitals about $ 520 per dose for privately insured patients .
The shorter , more common course of treatment would work out to $ 3,120 , while the longer duration would cost $ 5,720 , the Wall Street Journal reported .
The anti-viral drug is the only one approved by the European Medicines Agency to treat coronavirus patients , according to Euronews .
Another drug found to have an effect on coronavirus patients is the steroid dexamethasone , which reduces the number of deaths in the most severely ill patients by up to a third , the news outlet reported , citing British researchers .
“ They ’ ve got access to most of the drug supply [ of remdesivir ] , so there ’ s nothing for Europe , ” Dr. Andrew Hill , senior visiting research fellow at Liverpool University , told the UK ’ s Guardian .
“ This is the first major approved drug , and where is the mechanism for access ? Once again we ’ re at the back of the queue , ” he said .
Hill added the UK could still get its hands on remdesivir through what is known as a compulsory license , which overrides the intellectual property rights of the company .
That would allow the UK to purchase from generic companies in Bangladesh or India , where Gilead ’ s patent is not recognized , the Guardian reported .