Covid-19 is wreaking havoc across the world , and no country will be spared its consequences , whether directly through loss of life and health , or indirectly through its impact on the economy , health services , education and many other parts of society . The pandemic is disproportionately affecting populations living in poverty and vulnerable situations .
Thankfully , great efforts , investment and coordination — largely facilitated by the World Health Organization ( WHO ) — are being directed at putting an end to the pandemic .
Vaccines are the most powerful public health tool and are critical for saving lives . Thanks to vaccines , we have seen good progress in reducing child mortality in recent decades .
At this point in time , with almost 200 potential covid-19 vaccine candidates currently at different stages of development , there is hope that soon one or more will prove to be both safe and effective . What happens next is equally important . This can not be a race with one winner . When one or more vaccines are successful , it must be a win for all of us .
We can not allow access to vaccines to increase inequalities within or between countries — whether low- , middle- or high-income . A future covid-19 vaccine can be instrumental in our commitment to achieve one of the key elements in the United Nations ’ sustainable development goals : ensuring healthy lives and promoting well-being for all at all ages .
However , manufacturing enough vaccines and doses to cover the whole global population will take time . While global cooperation in terms of resources , expertise and experiences is paramount for developing a vaccine , manufacturing and distributing it while leaving no one behind will truly put global cooperation to the test . But if we are successful , we can beat the virus and pave the way for recovery from the pandemic .
Therefore , we must urgently ensure that vaccines will be distributed according to a set of transparent , equitable and scientifically sound principles . Where you live should not determine whether you live , and global solidarity is central to saving lives and protecting the economy . A managed flow of the vaccine —including for humanitarian settings and other vulnerable countries such as the least developed countries and small island developing states — is the wise and strategic course of action and will benefit countries across the world .
Implementing an organized global flow of vaccines requires a strong multilateral mechanism ensuring mutual trust , transparency and accountability . A fair and effective vaccine allocation mechanism , guided by WHO advice and based on needs rather than means , should focus on saving lives and protecting health systems .
There are already local , regional and global initiatives to secure vaccine availability , including the important Covid-19 Vaccine Global Access ( COVAX ) Facility ; we believe these initiatives should be coordinated and mutually reinforcing . We particularly recognize the WHO ’ s role as the leading global health agency , but also ongoing efforts by Gavi ( the Vaccine Alliance ) and the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations ( CEPI ) as part of the vaccines pillar of the Access to COVID-19 Tools ( ACT ) Accelerator . We also acknowledge the role of the International Vaccine Institute ( IVI ) in making vaccines available and accessible for vulnerable populations in developing countries and fully support the U.N. secretary general ’ s important leadership in ensuring a coordinated process .
A successfully managed vaccine distribution will also be a cornerstone of strengthening multilateralism for the future — as was the Security Council resolution on covid-19 drafted by France and Tunisia , demanding a global cease-fire in armed conflicts — and an important step toward coming back stronger together .
We call on global leaders to commit to contributing to an equitable distribution of the covid-19 vaccine , based on the spirit of a greater freedom for all .
Cyril Ramaphosa , president of South Africa ( also chairperson of the African Union )