'Tip Of The Iceberg ' : Economy Shrinks At 4.8 % Pace , But Worst Is Yet To Come
The coronavirus pandemic is likely to trigger the sharpest recession in the United States since the Great Depression . An early signal of that came Wednesday , when the Commerce Department said the economy shrank at a 4.8 % annual rate in the first three months of the year — the first quarterly contraction since 2014 and the largest since the Great Recession .
For the first 2 1/2 of those months , the economy was chugging along at a steady , if not spectacular pace . But the plug was suddenly pulled in mid-March — when bars , restaurants and retail shops were abruptly closed and tens of millions of Americans were ordered to stay home in an effort to slow the spread of the deadly disease .
`` The coronavirus outbreak is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the United States and around the world , '' the Federal Reserve said in a statement . `` The virus and the measures taken to protect public health are inducing sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses . ''
The first-quarter drop in GDP was the biggest since an 8.4 % dive in the fourth quarter of 2008 . It marked a reversal from the 2.1 % growth rate at the end of 2019 .
Consumer spending — which accounts for about 70 % of GDP — plummeted at a 7.6 % rate in the first quarter — the most since 1980 .
More than 26 million people suddenly out of work have filed unemployment claims in recent weeks .
Half of all Americans say they or someone in their household has either lost hours or a job because of the coronavirus , according to a new NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist poll .
`` Prior to the coronavirus shock , the economy was doing relatively well , '' said Gregory Daco , chief U.S. economist for Oxford Economics . `` The shock that we experienced in the second half of March actually has led to a sudden stop in spending on a lot of services and even spending on some goods . ''
Analysts say even though that shock affected only the last few weeks of the quarter , it was more than enough to erase the gains of the previous 2 1/2 months .
Daco said the first-quarter decline is `` only the tip of the iceberg . ''
The bulk of the pandemic 's economic impact will be felt in the current quarter — April through June . By the end of June , Daco estimates the economy will be 12 % smaller than it was at the beginning of the year .
`` To put that into perspective , that [ drop ] would be three times as large as what we experienced in the global financial crisis , '' Daco said . It would be comparable to what the economy experienced at the end of World War II , when factories abruptly stopped churning out tanks and warplanes but had not yet shifted to making civilian goods .
Other forecasters also expect to see a sharp reversal in economic growth .
`` Whenever you have the entire country changing behavior at one time in a way that reduces spending , it 's certainly enough to wipe out any of the gains that we saw earlier in the year , '' said Ben Herzon , an economist at IHS Markit .
He noted that since the coronavirus took hold , air travel and restaurant reservations have all but completely evaporated .
`` For now , we 're expecting the economy to more or less stabilize in the third quarter and then begin to recover in the fourth quarter , '' Herzon said . But he acknowledged there 's considerable uncertainty in that outlook .
`` That all depends on how quickly new infections can be driven down and how quickly consumers and businesses will feel confident enough to begin spending , '' he said .
Fed Chairman Jerome Powell echoed that caution , warning that consumer spending wo n't snap back immediately , even as parts of the economy reopen .
`` It will start to pick up as people start to return to their normal patterns of spending , but the chances are it will not go right back to where we were , '' he said .
Powell pledged that he and his colleagues would act `` forcefully , proactively and aggressively '' to cushion the financial fallout .
The central bank has cut interest rates to near zero and promised to leave them there for an extended period . The Fed has also unveiled a series of emergency lending measures to keep households and businesses afloat during the pandemic .
`` It is worth remembering that the measures we are taking to contain the virus represent an investment in our individual and collective health , '' Powell said . `` As a society , we should do everything we can to provide relief for those who are suffering for the public good . ''