The November election may seem far away , and it ’ s impossible to know whether we ’ ll be operating under any kind of distancing guidelines like we are now . But the recent debacle in Wisconsin shows why states and localities should be preparing for voting from home . While pundits may debate whether the country should make the change , in the majority of states , individual voters can already choose whether to request an absentee ballot . The only question is whether politicians will be ready—or whether , if COVID-19 is still raging or has a second spike in the fall , they will oversee an election so chaotic that many Americans will view its results as illegitimate .
Voting by mail is already a reality—in 2016 , nearly a quarter of the electorate voted absentee . In about two-thirds of states , voters either receive ballots automatically or may request an absentee ballot without offering a reason . But even states that allow such absentee voting have never seen a demand for mail-in ballots like Wisconsin had .
Wisconsin had more than 1.2 million requests for absentee ballots , five times the normal number The state was unable to mail the ballots out fast enough or handle the influx of secondary decisions needed—such as whether voters would still need a witness , even if they were living alone and under state at home orders . Meanwhile , poll workers dropped out in droves . This was predictable , given that across the nation , the majority of poll workers are over 60 . Milwaukee had so few poll workers that it was forced to cut 180 polling sites to 5 , and Green Bay had just 17 poll workers report for election day , leaving the state ’ s third largest city with only two polling locations and a line that stretched past midnight .
Voting by mail is going to happen in many states under current laws , so politicians need to begin preparing now to accommodate higher numbers of voters .
Five states—including Republican Utah , Democratic Hawaii , and purple Colorado—already hold all-mail elections , automatically mailing ballots to all registered voters , with just a few polling places open for voters who need extra help . Five more states allow voters to sign up for permanent absentee status , including big states like California and New Jersey , and rural states like Montana and Nevada . In these 10 states , enabling most voters to vote from home is a manageable change .
About 20 more states have no-excuse absentee voting and already hold some elections by mail ; for instance , Anchorage , Alaska ( where 40 percent of the state ’ s voters live ) , holds mail-in municipal elections . These states need to order enough ballots and make plans now with the post office to ensure speedy delivery . Ideally , they need to buy more machines to count the ballots quickly , and purchase signature-matching machines to ensure that all signatures match the ones on file . In some cases , they will need to alter legislation so that counting can begin before election day , so counts are not too slow . There ’ s no time to waste , but this can be accomplished in seven months .
Finally , in about 18 states , absentee voting is less common and more limited . New Hampshire just altered its policy to allow COVID-19 to count as a medical excuse , but has never held widespread absentee voting . In the others , if you are over 60 , have diabetes , high blood pressure , or other pre-existing conditions that put you at particular risk of death from COVID-19 , you are out of luck . A handful of states that require reasons for voting absentee allow any voter older than 65 to request one—but not in all . Places like Texas that allow municipalities determine election policy are likely to end up a patchwork of different rules . These states , including much of the South and New England , must begin preparing now . If they don ’ t , November is likely to be a debacle , leaving a country desperately in need of leadership with confused voters and contested outcomes .
States where absentee voting has been most restricted should not try to move entirely to a vote-by-mail system ; it ’ s too great a change too soon . Incremental change makes more sense . High-density municipalities where coronavirus could spread quickly could enable no-excuse absentee voting or even mail out ballots . Rural areas could offer more drive-through locations . All these states should offer , or broaden , early voting hours to enable voters to space themselves at the polls .
Despite voting absentee himself , in Florida , President Trump keeps tweeting about fraud , and many voters legitimately worry about the sanctity of their ballots .
The good news is that fraud has been remarkably low in states that vote by mail now . Oregon , which began voting by mail 20 years ago , has had 12 proven cases of fraud out of 100 million ballots . The Heritage Foundation has been collecting cases of fraud and has found less than 1,100 over the last 20 years—but that ’ s out of about 250 million mail-in votes over that time period . Utah had a particular problem—parents were mailing in ballots for their 18-year-olds who were overseas on mission .
The fact that these parents and the one-off cases in the Heritage database were caught is testament to the security of the system . In fact , states that have moved entirely to vote-by-mail have some of the lowest numbers of voter fraud . Ballots have bar codes so that each voter can receive only one ; signature matching software or trained professionals ensure that the signature on the ballot matches that on the vote . In states where the match is imperfect , the government must notify individual voters and allow them the opportunity for verification . Meanwhile , penalties for fraud include fines of up to $ 25,000 and years in prison .
Absentee ballots are subject to fraud—but it is actually lowest in states prepared with the technology for widespread vote by mail . It is in states where absentee ballots are rare and anomalous to the mass voting system where most fraud has taken place . In these states , voters who are usually trying to benefit a candidate collect multiple ballots for that individual , using pressure or filling out ballots themselves to ensure an outcome . In Texas , such “ ballot harvesting ” in nursing homes is explicitly banned , but it has occurred in New York , Georgia , and other states with significant restrictions on absentee voting . States that moved toward greater vote by mail systems and invested in the proper equipment to ensure voter verification would be able to better detect and prevent illegal ballot harvesting .
Another potential form of fraud that could be prevented by mail-in-voting is hacking . Many of the states like Texas and Kentucky that make voting absentee more difficult , also have electronic voting machines that leave no paper trail . A malicious hacker , or simply a software glitch , could alter many times the number of votes of a single ballot harvester—and with no paper trail , no one would be the wiser . Statistics might suggest something had gone awry , but there would be no way to reassure voters that their votes were counted correctly . Mail-in ballots would actually secure these states by reducing fraud , malicious hacking , and mistakes .
Witnesses and notaries are not necessary for modern mail-in balloting . Anyone who has used a notary probably noticed how unlikely it is that they would prevent fraud . Signature matching machines and ballot bar codes are far more effective , and far easier for people who are supposed to be sheltering in place rather than verifying each others ’ signatures .
For many , concerns about fraud hides a deeper fear that mail-in balloting will unduly help one party . But the data is mixed for mail-in voting generally , and it is particularly unclear for the 2020 election .
The states that have embraced broad absentee voting and vote by mail don ’ t break down along partisan lines . Red and blue states in the West have moved to these systems , those of both persuasions east of the Mississippi , less so .
The biggest demographic who vote by mail are the elderly , who tend to vote Republican . They are also the most likely to be scared away from the polls by COVID-19 . However , studies of vote by mail in Colorado and Utah found increased turnout from the young , the very old , and nonvoters , benefitting , on the whole , no party in particular .
Usually , increased turnout helps Democrats . But Trump is no normal candidate—he particularly appeals to people who usually don ’ t vote—a group that votes far more frequently with mail-in ballots . In February , the Knight Foundation surveyed thousands of people who could vote but usually don ’ t . They found that increased voting would help Democrats win the popular vote . But nonvoters in a number of battleground states prefer Trump—and increasing their vote in places like Virginia where voting absentee is highly restricted could be decisive in handing him the electoral college victory .
Our voting system was not decreed by the founders . Absentee ballots started during the Civil War so troops could vote while away from home . Until the 1890s , there was no secret ballot . Only in 1925 did paying someone for their vote become a criminal offense . A one-time alteration for an extraordinary epidemic is hardly earth-shattering . But it could , in the face of historically low trust in government and in our fellow Americans , help ensure our democracy .
Rachel Kleinfeld is a senior fellow in the Democracy , Conflict , and Governance program at the Carnegie Endowment and a member of the bipartisan National Task Force on Election Crisis .