The happiest place on Earth has yet to reopen in Anaheim due to the health risk surrounding the novel coronavirus ( COVID-19 ) . The theme park is still pending government approval to reopen .
“ We recognize that the COVID-19 situation is constantly evolving , which is why our reopening approach is deliberately fluid and phased , and there are many factors that are helping us determine the timing of when various aspects of our business will reopen in a responsible way , ” Disneyland said in a statement .
Disneyland planned to reopen on July 17 , but California has begun to reverse the reopening process in the state due to increasing cases of the virus .
In July , California rolled back reopenings of restaurants , wineries , movie theaters , museums , card rooms , and bars .
Plans to reopen the theme park raised concerns among some groups about the health and safety of everyone entering Disneyland .
“ Theme parks are ranked one of the most dangerous places on every public health authorities ranking , ” organizing director for labor union Unite Here Local 11 representing Disneyland employees , Austin Lynch , told Scriberr News .
Employees want to return to work , but it needs to be safe , Lynch said .
“ Otherwise , from what we ’ ve seen , all it means is that they open , lose the public ’ s trust and close back down again , and that doesn ’ t work with us , ” Lynch said .
There have been productive discussions between the union and Disney to accommodate similar concerns between one another .
“ In order to reopen our theme parks , we need to negotiate agreements with our unions to return employees to work , ” Disneyland stated on June 24 .
However , Lynch emphasized that Disneyland is missing a crucial piece which is to provide testing to ensure the health of the employees .
“ What they are going to need is to offer to test because we work with people from all over the world , ” housekeeper at the Disneyland Hotel , Ines Guzman told Scriberr News .
Disneyland has accommodated many of the union ’ s concerns , but testing has not been one of them .
“ They ’ re ( Disney ) claiming that health authorities say that the testing will not be an effective screening method that the better thing is just to focus on prevention and prevention measures , but we want both , ” Lynch said .
Disneyland has issued several health and safety measures that will be enforced once the park decides to reopen .
Guidelines include mandatory face covering for cast members and guests , reduction in theme park capacity , temperature check before entering Downtown Disney , cashless transactions , reduced cast member interactions , and enhanced cleaning within the park .
The Downtown Disney District reopened on July 9 , with health and safety protocols similar to the Disneyland health guidelines .
Downtown Disney opened dining restaurants and merchandise stores with some using a mobile waitlist to manage the number of guests entering the store .
The hotels in downtown have not been approved to reopen , but Guzman raises concerns about her health once it does open .
Guzman explains as a housekeeper ; she is required to clean many rooms and wants Disney to provide extra help with disinfecting the rooms .
“ Being in the housekeeping department , I feel like they should have more workers to help us with all the disinfecting , ” Guzman said .
Guzman wishes to return to work soon , but as long as Disney stays accountable and takes precautionary measures .
Lynch explained another upcoming issue the union has been discussing , which are the subcontractors with Disney not openly committing to safety measures .
“ Disney has subcontractors , Sodexo , that serves food in the employee cafeterias throughout the whole resort , and they have not committed even to the measures that Disney has , ” Lynch said .
SodexoMAGIC is a joint company with Sodexo Corporation and Magic Johnson .
“ So again , goes back to that problem that a net without a hole is no net at all , ” Lynch said .
The union continues to push Disney to commit in writing to all of the safety and health measures .
“ We want the company to commit in writing to all the safety measures that are necessary for reopening , testing is one , ” Lynch said .
“ There ’ s also other important ones like safe workload so that the commitment to clean , sanitize , and disinfect more often is real . ”
Disney World in Orlando , Florida , has recently reopened on July 11 , even with the state ’ s increasing number of coronavirus cases surpassing 350,000 .
There has been no confirmed date for Disneyland Anaheim or Disney Hotels to reopen .