President Donald Trump revealed a grim projection in the coronavirus pandemic on Tuesday : Even with the social distancing the US is doing now , 100,000 to 200,000 Americans will likely die as a result of the ongoing outbreak . “ When you see 100,000 people , that ’ s a minimum number , ” Trump said .
It ’ s a horrifying figure . That ’ s more people than ever died in a single year from HIV/AIDS , drug overdoses , gun violence , or car crashes in the US . It ’ s more than American casualties during the entire Vietnam War .
But it ’ s also a horrifying number , in part , because much of it was likely preventable . If the US — including the Trump administration — had better prepared for pandemics , the country likely could have avoided ever talking about 100,000 to 200,000 deaths .
The estimated death toll “ was not inevitable , ” Céline Gounder , an epidemiologist at New York University , told me . “ If we ’ d jumped into contract tracing and testing , social distancing , and health system preparedness as soon as we heard reports from China , we ’ d be in a very different situation now . ”
Under Trump , the US had years to prepare . With warnings from President Barack Obama ’ s administration and activists like Bill Gates , it was always clear that America was vulnerable to a pandemic . ( ███ did a whole episode about it for Netflix . ) For many , the 2014- ’ 16 Ebola outbreak exposed the threat ; Jeremy Konyndyk , who worked in the Obama administration during the Ebola outbreak , told me he “ came away from that experience just completely horrified at how unready we would be for something more dangerous than Ebola , ” which , thankfully , was relatively hard to transmit .
In the years leading to the coronavirus outbreak , though , Trump did not take the concerns seriously . His administration shut down the White House office , set up after the Ebola outbreak , that oversaw disease outbreaks and pandemics . It repeatedly proposed cuts to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) and other public health agencies ( although Congress largely rejected those cuts ) . The administration cut a public health position that was meant to help detect disease outbreaks in China , where the coronavirus outbreak began .
By the time it became clear that the world was facing a serious threat in January and February , Trump and his administration were again slow to act . Despite declaring a public health emergency , the administration failed to establish the infrastructure for nationwide testing — holding up private testing labs with bureaucratic and regulatory hurdles while sending out its own faulty test kits . The administration did nothing of substance to really scale up the production of personal protective equipment ( PPE ) for health care workers , allowing a shortage to take root . Trump still hasn ’ t leveraged the full might of the Defense Production Act to get medical supplies to hospitals and clinics that need them to fight the outbreak .
The failure on testing alone is massive — one that remains today . As Johns Hopkins University epidemiologist Jennifer Nuzzo told the New York Times , “ Had we had done more testing from the very beginning and caught cases earlier , we would be in a far different place . ”
The result is an outbreak that looks very different in the US than in the few countries , like South Korea and Taiwan , that have better contained Covid-19 , the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus .
This isn ’ t solely on Trump . Some of it comes down to chance — that the coronavirus is popping up now and is so deadly and contagious is obviously not under any president ’ s control . Konyndyk ’ s experience under Obama shows the previous administration wasn ’ t ready for a pandemic either . Experts and advocates argue that pandemic preparedness , along with public health more broadly , is notoriously underfunded not just in the US but around the world . Some local and state officials , such as in New York City and Florida , have also underreacted to the crisis , making it worse .
But Trump , perhaps more than any other president , had plenty of warning about what was to come . He squandered all the opportunities given to him to do better , leaving much of the aggressive action that has reduced the death toll — down from the millions the White House and experts say is possible without interventions — to local and state officials who simply don ’ t have the reach of the federal government .
So now 100,000 to 200,000 Americans are likely to die .
Every step of the way , the Trump administration failed to take the threat of a pandemic seriously .
The threat was long well-known , including to the federal government . Government simulations and exercises before the outbreak revealed that there were a lot of problems , from the lack of sufficient PPE to simple confusion between the cities , states , and many federal agencies about who ’ s in charge during a crisis .
Trump reacted to the risks by deprioritizing pandemic preparedness . In 2018 , then–National Security Adviser John Bolton fired Tom Bossert , a homeland security adviser who , the Washington Post reported , “ had called for a comprehensive biodefense strategy against pandemics and biological attacks. ” Then Bolton let go the head of pandemic response , Rear Adm. Timothy Ziemer , and his global health security team . The team , the Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense , was the main group within the White House for pandemic preparedness — and it was never replaced .
At the time , the Trump administration and Bolton said the cuts were needed to streamline the National Security Council . But what it did , experts have told me , is leave the US unready for a crisis of the magnitude it ’ s facing now .
“ The basic systems need to be in place for global , state , and local responses , ” Jen Kates , director of global health and HIV policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation , previously told me . “ When you don ’ t shore those up , you ’ re not starting from scratch , but you ’ re catching up every single time . ”
Even once it became clear that the coronavirus pandemic was a real threat , Trump downplayed the outbreak . He compared the novel coronavirus to the seasonal flu , when the coronavirus is in fact much deadlier and more contagious than the flu . He called concerns about the virus a “ hoax. ” He said on national television that , based on nothing more than a self-admitted “ hunch , ” the death rate of the disease was much lower than public health officials projected . Even after his administration invoked social distancing guidelines , Trump talked up the idea of doing away with them by Easter to allow for “ packed churches . ”
Ashish Jha , director of the Harvard Global Health Institute , described the administration ’ s early messaging as “ deeply disturbing , ” adding that it ’ s “ left the country far less prepared than it needs to be for what is a very substantial challenge ahead . ”
Trump ’ s tone has changed in recent weeks . He ultimately extended his task force ’ s social distancing guidelines through April . On Tuesday , he went after the claim — that , again , he repeatedly made before — that coronavirus is like flu : “ It ’ s not the flu . It ’ s vicious , ” he said .
But however Trump may feel now , his administration ’ s failure to take this threat seriously early on left the country in a much worse place .
A recent investigation by the New York Times exposed how the Trump administration failed to scale up testing . The CDC developed its own test for coronavirus — seemingly to make a more accurate test than what was available from other places — but the test turned out to be faulty , and the CDC took weeks to provide a fix . Meanwhile , the administration put up all sorts of regulatory hurdles that prevented private labs from rolling out their own tests .
The result : The US was only testing about 100 samples a day by mid-February , according to the Times .
The Times concluded , “ Across the government , [ experts ] said , three agencies responsible for detecting and combating threats like the coronavirus failed to prepare quickly enough . Even as scientists looked at China and sounded alarms , none of the agencies ’ directors conveyed the urgency required to spur a no-holds-barred defense . ”
This failure alone doomed the US to a much bigger outbreak , forcing Americans to rely far more on social distancing and suffer many more deaths . That ’ s because testing is crucial , especially in the early stages , to curtailing an outbreak : First , it lets public health officials identify sick people , isolate them , and trace their recent contacts to make sure those people aren ’ t sick and get them into quarantine as well . Second , testing lets officials detect which places are hardest hit and , therefore , require the most attention and help .
Yet , even today , testing remains a problem . Maryland Gov . Larry Hogan ( R ) said this week that Trump ’ s claim that testing is no longer a problem is “ just not true ” and states are still “ flying blind ” due to insufficient testing .
Testing is only one example among many . The country is also experiencing a shortage of PPE for health care workers and ventilators for treatment . Both problems were repeatedly raised in pandemic simulations , but the federal government failed to replenish its Strategic National Stockpile and failed to scale up domestic production and supply chains . Even now , Trump has refused to use the full powers of the Defense Production Act , which would allow the federal government to demand more domestic production of these goods ( although it ’ d likely take at least weeks for this production to scale up ) .
The lack of medical supplies is one reason experts worry the US won ’ t have the health care capacity to deal with a flood of Covid-19 patients , leading to sickness , suffering , and death due to insufficient treatment .
Again , a lot of this goes back to poor preparation in the years before the Covid-19 pandemic — and , indeed , the years before Trump was in office — but Trump and his administration failed to prepare even once the threat of the coronavirus became clear .
These outcomes weren ’ t inevitable . Other countries that were more aggressive earlier seemed to reduce their potential death tolls .
Just take a look at this chart comparing Covid-19 cases between different countries and places :
The US ’ s trajectory in this chart is exponential : The number of cases is clearly rising every single day . But while US cases seemed to explode about two weeks after the 100th case , a few places — like South Korea , Taiwan , and Hong Kong — managed to flatten their curves with early , aggressive action around the same time .
South Korea did this , as Max Fisher and Choe Sang-Hun reported at the New York Times , with a lot of testing . While the US was still doing at most 100 tests a day , South Korea was pumping them out in the thousands , if not tens of thousands , a day . This allowed officials in South Korea to detect where outbreaks were happening and contain them — particularly by getting people to isolate and quarantine , along with some restrictions on movement , travel , and socializing — before things got too out of control .
The US is obviously not South Korea . It ’ s much bigger , more sprawling , and more populous . But the South Korean experience shows that aggressive testing , as one example , could help contain coronavirus . The US , due largely to the Trump administration ’ s failures , just didn ’ t have the capabilities South Korea did here .
There ’ s plenty of other evidence that early , aggressive action can help contain epidemics . During the 1918 flu pandemic , some US cities took quick , decisive action while others didn ’ t . A 2007 study in PNAS exposed the different outcomes in St. Louis , which quickly imposed restrictions to force social distancing , and Philadelphia , which didn ’ t , in this telling chart :
The study concluded that “ cities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic had peak death rates ≈50 % lower than those that did not and had less-steep epidemic curves . Cities in which multiple interventions were implemented at an early phase of the epidemic also showed a trend toward lower cumulative excess mortality , but the difference was smaller ( ≈20 % ) and less statistically significant than that for peak death rates . ”
If Trump had acted sooner , the US could have had a better chance at replicating the results from St. Louis in 1918 or South Korea in 2020 . But that moment has passed — and Americans are now facing the deaths of potentially hundreds of thousands of their friends , family , and peers as a result .