House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyObstacles mount for deal on next coronavirus bill House committees move toward virtual hearings for COVID-19 era GOP divided over state aid during coronavirus pandemic MORE ( R-Calif. ) released a plan Monday to reopen the House amid the coronavirus pandemic .
The top House Republican , along with Rep. Tom Cole Thomas ( Tom ) Jeffrey ColeUnderfunded Native nations battle coronavirus outbreaks Coronavirus culture war over reopening economy hits Capitol Hill House leaders enact new safety precautions for votes MORE ( R-Okla. ) , the ranking member of the House Rules Committee , and Rep. Rodney Davis Rodney Lee DavisDemocrats face disadvantage in COVID-19 political battle Lobbying world House reverses , but Senate to return despite COVID threat MORE ( R-Ill. ) , the ranking member of the House Administration Committee , offered four strategies as part of the plan .
“ This pandemic has claimed too many lives and livelihoods already . We must not allow the institution we are tasked with safeguarding to be the next , ” the GOP members wrote .
The Republicans said that the House should modify its existing practices and structures to allow for the chamber to reconvene amid the pandemic .
The Republicans also said physical distancing protocols to reduce density in the House should be expanded . And they suggest assessing House office buildings and possibly creating temporary barriers , for example plexiglass dividers , to help physical distancing in areas where it is “ difficult to achieve . ”
Their plan calls for a phased return with committees . Committees should present an outline to the majority leader detailing projected business meetings from the month ahead as well as with estimated attendance levels , the Republicans said .
The information could be used to create a staggered business calendar , with rotating use of larger committee hearing rooms where necessary , they added . Precedence , the GOP lawmakers said , should be given to bipartisan COVID-19 response measures .
The Republicans also suggested that a more hesitant “ crawl , walk , run ” approach toward deploying the use of technology for committee business .
They said a proposal from Rules Committee Chairman Jim McGovern ( D-Mass . ) that would allow for a form of remote floor voting and virtual committee hearings is “ concerning for a variety of reasons . ”
“ Before we rush to discard over 200 years of precedent , we should require that rigorous testing standards be met , ample feedback be provided , and bipartisan rules of the road be agreed upon and made public to truly safeguard minority rights , ” they said .
The Republicans also said that active risk mitigation practices should be accelerated , including the possibility of temperature checks at office entry points .
A spokesperson for Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiObstacles mount for deal on next coronavirus bill House committees move toward virtual hearings for COVID-19 era A blueprint for our economic recovery MORE ’ s ( D-Calif. ) office was not immediately available for comment in response to the GOP plan . Pelosi last week said the House may return to session as soon as the week of May 11 .