Weeks before Gov . Gavin Newsom ’ s announcement Monday that California would dramatically reverse its reopening , a doctor 2,500 miles away saw a new COVID-19 crisis emerging there .
It began ahead of Memorial Day , as clusters erupted in the deserts of Imperial County , down along the Mexican border . Driven north with increasing commercial activity and seasonal travel , as the state reopened and summer began , the disease tore through nursing homes in Tulare , Modesto , and Fresno counties as May bled into June .
Los Angeles , meanwhile , had its own flare-up that never quite cooled down .
For a time , it seemed that the Bay Area and the northern precincts of the state would prove immune to the resurgence , perhaps thanks to heavy mask usage and cool temperatures that kept people from huddling into the air-conditioned indoors . But finally , the outbreaks on their edges—possibly fueled by relaxed attitudes around social gatherings—overwhelmed them too , and sent their curves spiking upward .
“ California is the epicenter , ” said Dr. David Rubin , who watched the data come in from his post as director of PolicyLab , a research facility at the Children ’ s Hospital of Philadelphia that feeds data into the White House Coronavirus Task Force . “ I would add them to the list with Texas , Arizona , and Florida . ”
But unlike those other states , California is famed for its progressive and technocratic policies , and in particular for its first-in-the-nation shutdown . Newsom ’ s order on Monday again ended indoor dining , closed bars , shuttered zoos and museums , and obligated most counties to revert to the earliest stages of the reopening process .
According to Rubin , many leaders in the state saw only the spare capacity in their emergency rooms and intensive care units , and overlooked a crucial underlying factor : the virus ’ s growing transmissibility rate . Often referred to by experts as its reproductive value , or R0 , it reflects how easily and how often an illness is spreading . This number oscillated up or down on a daily basis across counties in California . But the trend— “ the signal , ” as Rubin puts it—was unmistakable .
Prior to Newsom ’ s order , PolicyLab was predicting a fresh outbreak in San Francisco , according to models shared with The ███ . The graphs include projections of transmissibility rates , and models of case counts expected under various phases of reopening—three in all , along with a shelter-in-place scenario , and the latest real-life trajectory . Last week , Dr. Rubin and his colleagues passed their findings—along with information and modeling for counties nationwide—to the Task Force , which incorporates the data into its tailored recommendations to governors .
“ I think [ California ] pushed through their reopening even as they had evidence that their transmission rate was increasing , ” Rubin said , arguing that the sporadic outbreaks across the state illustrated the growing threat . “ People look for that visual cue that says , ‘ Hey , we better do something. ’ But it ’ s already too late . It 's like waiting for the stock market to crash before selling your stock . ”
In an interview with The ███ , Newsom ’ s Health & Human Services Secretary Dr. Mark Ghaly defended the administration ’ s handling of the outbreak . He highlighted California ’ s strong performance early on , and asserted his office had tracked the virus ’ s transmissibility rate—along with hospitalizations , and reports from industries and localities . Relying on county input , he argued , was necessary in a state as vast as California .
“ We saw a trajectory of spread that made California leaders comfortable with reopening , ” he said . “ I feel very strongly that California has a plan that includes the description the governor uses , the dimmer switch . We always knew we would go up and down with our interventions . ”
But while epidemiologists in the Golden State diverged from Rubin ’ s analysis , they shared a conviction that the state ’ s caseload had veered horribly off course—and that it will take tremendous efforts to rectify .
Researchers at the University of Southern California ’ s Keck School of Medicine have for months monitored and modeled COVID-19 spread in Los Angeles—a city that Mayor Eric Garcetti this week warned may need to shut down again entirely .
A month and a half ago , Garcetti was announcing the sprawling metropolis would enter stage three of its reopening , allowing restaurants , beauty parlors , and houses of worship to return to some level of normal function , and offices to resume business where telework was impossible . The result , as the team at USC observed , was an uptick in cases and transmission rates , which have only continued to rise .
In an interview , USC ’ s Dr. Abigail Horn pointed out that , although L.A. entered its initial lockdown at roughly the same time as New York City , the California city was at a far earlier stage of the pandemic . That , combined with lower density and other factors , likely accounted for the City of Angels suffering a far lower death toll than NYC in the outbreak ’ s early months .
She also pointed out even though the city managed to flatten its curve , it didn ’ t ever manage to actually drive it down .
“ The worrisome thing is we weren ’ t decreasing our cases yet . Infections as a whole were never decreasing . We did open in that context , ” Horn said , adding that the USC scientists noticed increasing mobility and contacts between L.A. residents . “ We predicted that cases would go up . That was inevitable . The question was , ‘ How much ? ’ ”
But even with that question hanging , Horn ’ s colleague Dr. David Conti defended the city and state ’ s decisions to move forward with reopening . The reason the reprise of the disease proved so severe , he argued , was not public policy but public behavior—including the failure to wear masks , practice proper hygiene , and obey social distancing guidelines .
“ From a public health perspective , I think it was fine to reopen . The problem is how people react , ” said Conti , who called for intensifying government messaging so as to achieve more uniform compliance . “ So long as there are cases out there , there is potential for a spike . The question is how people behave . ”
Four hundred miles away , at the University of California , San Francisco , Dr. George Rutherford saw a very different problem .
He admitted the recent upswing in cases in the Bay Area likely owed to celebrations before and during the Fourth of July weekend . Nonetheless , he argued the COVID-19 surge was less a consequence of personal choices , and more of the personal obligations imposed on essential workers—particularly those in the state ’ s Hispanic communities .
“ Everybody has in mind some guy in board shorts and a t-shirt hanging out in Huntington Beach . That 's not where the infection is , ” he said , citing a recent paper researchers at his school published on testing in San Francisco ’ s Mission District . “ This is an endemic disease in the Latino community in California . ”
This goes beyond the national trend of COVID-19 hitting communities of color far harder than their share of the population , and—according to Rutherford—has to do with California Latinos ’ overrepresentation among essential workers , and their often crowded living conditions .
Thus , he sees the failure to contain the disease as stemming from leaders ’ unwillingness or inability to implement a massive social services intervention that would allow infected essential workers to self-isolate outside their homes while simultaneously providing for their families .
Worsening the overall picture for the state and the region , Rutherford added , was the California Department of Corrections ’ decision to move 121 untested inmates from the Institute for Men at Chino into San Quentin State Prison . More than a thousand people at the latter facility have now contracted the virus .
But , overall , Rutherford faulted the Newsom administration ’ s policies less than local authorities who lobbied the state for waivers in order to prematurely expedite their reopening .
“ I think clearly some places moved too soon , and the governor set up this process to walk it back , ” he said .
For his part , Ghaly , the state Health and Human Services Secretary , noted that , for all the waivers the state granted , it never extended one to Imperial County , the site of some of the worst flare-ups . He added that the state prison network ’ s health system is in the hands of a court-appointed federal receiver , and insisted that the quality of care at San Quentin has steadily improved .
“ It ’ s all part of our ongoing , evolving response , ” said Ghaly . “ These are absolutely important parts that we continue to build on in California . We have done a lot already , but there ’ s more to do . ”
The independent epidemiologists The ███ consulted agreed that the trajectory of the outbreak would vary tremendously by region . And Rubin and Rutherford argued that , with Newsom ’ s order and continued observation of masking and social distancing norms , the Bay Area might be able to quickly reverse its latest surge . The situation in Southern California , however , appears more intractable .
All the doctors agreed that the state needs consistent and concerted outreach at every level of government , however much their visions of that intervention might differ .
As for what the unfortunate example of California could teach the nation , Rubin noted that transmission rates have ticked up again recently in some of the most battered regions of the United States : New York , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania . To avoid a complete relapse like the one on the West Coast , he recommended the states act quickly and brake their reopening process before fall .
“ I see the same patterns emerging , ” he warned . “ If you ’ re waiting for some obvious signal in two to three weeks , it ’ s already too late . ”