Ivanka Trump Ivana ( Ivanka ) Marie TrumpIvanka Trump urges protesters to socially distance , wear masks Ivanka Trump , Kushner traveled to New Jersey for Passover despite federal guidelines : report Trump says Jared and Ivanka wo n't be part of new economic coronavirus council MORE on Wednesday defended the rights of protesters to gather in defiance of stay-at-home measures imposed by some states to fight the coronavirus pandemic , but encouraged demonstrators to practice social distancing and wear masks .
`` Peaceful protest & freedom of assembly are beautiful American traditions that should always be protected , '' the president 's oldest daughter and senior adviser tweeted .
`` If you choose to exercise your 1st Amendment rights , please practice social distancing & wear a face covering , '' she added . `` We can protect our rights & our health at the same time . ''
Peaceful protest & freedom of assembly are beautiful American traditions that should always be protected .
If you choose to exercise your 1st Amendment rights , please practice social distancing & wear a face covering .
We can protect our rights & our health at the same time . — Ivanka Trump ( @ IvankaTrump ) April 22 , 2020
Trump weighed in as protests have taken place in recent days across the country in opposition to stay-at-home orders issued by many governors .
The size of the protests have varied from state to state . Thousands of people turned out in Lansing for last week ’ s protests in Michigan , but most gatherings have numbered in the hundreds . A planned demonstration in Maryland earlier this week only drew a few attendees .
Photos and video from the gatherings show people packed close together with many not wearing masks . The Trump administration has recommended wearing masks to help prevent asymptomatic spread of the virus .
President Trump Donald John TrumpGOP lawmaker calls McConnell remarks on state bankruptcy 'shameful and indefensible ' Newsom wants to train 10,000 contact tracers in California Biden leads in three crucial Rust Belt states : Poll MORE has repeatedly offered his approval of the protests , and some of those demonstrating have turned up wearing Trump apparel or waving Trump flags . The president has specifically targeted states with Democratic governors , sending a tweet last week that called to `` liberate '' Michigan , Minnesota and Virginia .
The president 's backing of the protesters threatens to undermine his own White House social distancing guidelines , which call for no gatherings of more than 10 people and for individuals to maintain six feet of distance .
Anthony Fauci Anthony FauciFauci : Best way to reopen economy is to avoid a rebound of virus Trump says coronavirus 'may not come back at all ' Overnight Defense : Trump threatens to 'shoot down and destroy ' Iranian ships | Top general says Kim likely still 'in full control ' of North Korea | 26 Navy ships have confirmed coronavirus cases MORE , the top infectious diseases expert on the White House coronavirus task force , warned Monday that the demonstrations could lead to a new rise in coronavirus infections , making it more difficult to lift the very restrictions the protesters are speaking out against .
`` So as painful as it is to go by the careful guidelines of gradually phasing into a reopening , it ’ s going to backfire . That ’ s the problem , '' he said .