Disinformation poses a unique threat to our stability and society in the age of COVID-19 .
As the coronavirus continues to scorch its way across the U.S. and nations throughout the world , the coronavirus pandemic is swiftly becoming one of the defining global missteps and challenges of the early 21st century .
As governments across the world continue to lock down cities and implement social distancing measures to slow the spread of the virus ; in hopes of buying medical personnel precious time in an effort to try and prevent hospitals from being overwhelmed , the world in many ways has come to a halt as the virus continues its spread .
However , in the midst of the pandemic as the coronavirus advances across the globe , another outbreak has been quietly festering . Not a virological one , but one that involves disinformation and misinformation regarding the coronavirus itself .
Help support Latino Media . Subscribe for only $ 1.00 your first month .
Since gaining a foothold outside of China , misinformation regarding the coronavirus has exploded online amid the outbreak . In the wake of stay-at-home orders , non-essential business closures , economic turmoil and a botched federal response , people have turned to the internet in search of clarity and reassurance on things such as preventive measures , self-diagnoses , and information regarding the nature of the virus .
Amidst a sea of confusion , the planet is caught in what is possibly the deadliest information crisis that the world has ever faced .
While the world has weathered outbreaks , epidemics and even global pandemics before in the past , never before has the world faced one in the midst of a technologically advanced landscape like the one that we have today .
If you ’ ve spent even a little bit of time on the internet , chances are you ’ ve probably come across numerous examples of disinformation regarding the coronavirus . In fact , it ’ s one of the few things that might spread just as fast as the virus itself .
Some examples include claims that eating garlic or taking sips of water can prevent infection . Others however are more nefarious , with outrageous claims that the virus is actually caused by 5G Wi-Fi , that it originated in a laboratory as a bioweapon or that social distancing measures are being used to condition the public for martial law .
Of course , none of this is true . Despite what you might have heard on social media downplaying the pandemic ’ s severity , the coronavirus is very real . It ’ s not a figment of the public ’ s imagination . It ’ s not just another strain of the flu or the common cold . It ’ s not an escaped bioweapon , it ’ s not a hoax , and it ’ s not a ruse to institute any sort of social conditioning .
Statewide public safety and social distancing measures aren ’ t part of some covert plot to curtail civil liberties . What we are facing is a brand-new , dangerous virus that the world has never seen before , one that we know relatively little about and has quickly spread throughout the world . Thousands of people have died , millions are now jobless , and in the absence of clear facts , data and strong leadership from the federal government , misinformation and disinformation has quickly filled the void .
Misinformation , disinformation , and even conspiracy theories , of course , are nothing new . However , in an increasingly interconnected world , disinformation is increasingly being given a global audience with just a few clicks on a keyboard .
In the wake of the coronavirus ’ spread in the U.S. and the federal government ’ s mismanagement of the crisis , a wave of misinformation , disinformation , and conspiracy theories have spread like wildfire online as panicked and fear-stricken people search for answers and clarity in a digital landscape rife with disinformation .
Help support Latino Media . Subscribe for only $ 1.00 your first month .
Often times with the help of social media platforms passed along through viral tweets , Facebook posts , Instagram videos , and across other platforms like a perverse game of telephone , disinformation can spread to hundreds of thousands or even millions in just a matter of hours .
In the past , misinformation and even disinformation has seldom been viewed as threat to the general public . However , disinformation in today ’ s climate can have the real potential to reap serious and even dangerous consequences . Especially that which leaves the realm of the internet and comes from places of authority such as the white house .
Since declaring the coronavirus pandemic a national emergency nearly a month ago , Donald Trump has repeatedly lied and misled the public about the coronavirus and the threat that it poses to public safety .
Some of Trump ’ s lies include statements such as claims that the virus would dissipate as warmer weather approaches , despite the fact that health experts have warned that it ’ s far too early to tell if the virus ’ spread will slow in warmer conditions . Others claims include that pharmaceutical companies would be producing vaccines , despite the fact that Trump ’ s own experts have said a vaccine could take anywhere from a year to 18 months to produce .
They also include the claim that the FDA had approved the antimalarial drug chloroquine to treat COVID-19 , despite the fact that as of now there are still no proven safe and effective therapies for the coronavirus .
This of course , is just a very small cross-section of the lies Donald Trump has told over the course the outbreak . Trump ’ s remarks and comments are not only disingenuous , they continue to be a dangerous hindrance to getting accurate information out to inform and protect the public . Imperiling countless lives of with every passing day .
Where the real harm lies is the fact that whether concocted online or coming from the white house ; disinformation at a critical time like this ultimately muddies and obscures public discussions regarding public safety . Disinformation doesn ’ t just misinform or push an agenda , it effectively over time exhausts the public ’ s critical thinking on a mass level .
Disinformation not only obliterates truth , it destroys any sense of belief or confidence in the very concept of objective truth . Sowing seeds of uncertainty , ensuring that even when the truth is reported , it is swallowed up in a sea of half-truths and lies that feeds into a perpetual cycle of confusion and disillusionment .
Misinformation does more than just merely misinform , it destroys the institution of public consensus . And at a time when waiting days and even hours can make a difference , we desperately need public consensus regarding the facts and inherent dangers of the coronavirus .
There is a vast difference between cautious skepticism of developing stories and blindly parroting falsehoods megaphoned from the white house and factually bankrupt theories peddled online .
By in large most disinformation is scant in actual facts , evidence and seldom holds up under the pressure of principled , critical analysis . We can not afford to perpetuate fallacies and lies that only contribute to furthering public confusion and ignorance regarding the coronavirus .
Disinformation does nothing to help public health and safety . If anything , it only creates more doubt and panic , squandering precious time and resources that could be better spent educating the public on the facts and ways they can protect themselves .
In a time where every day and hour counts , and lives literally hang in the balance , ultimately it starts with us holding ourselves responsible in not abetting the proliferation of disinformation that ultimately will only hinder public health efforts , whether that comes from the web or the president himself .
To receive weekly updates like this in your inbox , subscribe to The ███ newsletter here .