Matthew Barnett has been on the front lines with his team , helping send out north of 14,000 meals every single day as the coronavirus pandemic continues .
In an interview with Faithwire , the Los Angeles Dream Center co-founder said he has been overwhelmed by the support he ’ s received from people like Kanye West and Bella Hadid — celebrities he never imagined would cross his path .
As of Tuesday morning , Barnett said the Dream Center has served more than 350,000 meals since beginning its effort in mid-March . The organization ’ s highest-profile partnership so far has involved West and Chick-fil-A , which has been donating 5,000 chicken sandwiches each week .
“ Consistency has been the greatest witness , I believe , during this time , ” Barnett said of his motivation to continue serving Los Angeles during the pandemic .
The Dream Center is open seven days a week , from 7:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. , serving food to kids who , before the pandemic , were getting their meals from school . And thanks to West ’ s generous donation , the faith-based charity is now able to deliver meals to at-risk seniors isolated at home .
FAITHWIRE : Sy Rogers , Famous Leader in Christian Sexuality , Dies at 63
Outside its Echo Park location , the Dream Center , founded in 1994 , is delivering food to 20 communities in Watts and Skid Row , too .
Barnett described the space between a need arising and being met as a “ miracle margin , ” explaining that — in most cases — as soon as a donation is received , it ’ s put into the distribution line .
“ Every Sunday night now , I stand on top of the food line , there ’ s a little porch that ’ s there , and stand above it , and for one hour , I tell everybody that goes through the line that I ’ m praying for every car , ” he said .
Since beginning this service nearly 40 days ago , Barnett said he ’ s seen people from so many different walks of life pass through the distribution line .
Barnett said he sees two “ viruses ” on a daily basis .
“ There ’ s two viruses going on , ” he explained , “ The virus , of course , that ’ s filling up the hospitals . But there ’ s also the horrible virus of loneliness , despair , isolation . That is a very real thing , and you see that when you see thousands of people come through . ”
Initially , Barnett and his team planned to continue this service until May 1 , but now he ’ s not even looking at an end date . Instead , he said , “ we ’ re gon na be doing this for a long time . ”
“ We ’ re not even talking about deadlines anymore , ” Barnett said . “ We ’ re just gon na keep showing up and standing up . ”
To learn more about the Dream Center or to make a donation , click here .