Hundreds of people are being detained illegally in New York City in violation of their right to an arraignment within 24 hours of their arrest , the Legal Aid Society alleges in a lawsuit filed against the New York Police Department ( NYPD ) Tuesday night , which demands the detainees ’ immediate release .
When the suit was first filed it alleged that at least 108 people were being illegally detained in Manhattan . As of Wednesday morning that number had now risen to at least 295 , the Legal Aid Society tells TIME . Legal Aid claims that many people have been held since Saturday .
For the past week thousands of New Yorkers — and hundreds of thousands around the world — have taken to the streets to protest police brutality and demand justice for the murder of George Floyd , a black man who was killed during an arrest in Minneapolis on May 25 . While the majority of protests have been peaceful , some demonstrations have grown violent , as the NYPD on multiple occasions has turned tear gas and rubber bullets on crowds . Some protesters have allegedly engaged in arson and looting .
Read more : ‘ ‘ I Couldn ’ t Just Sit and Watch. ’ Photographing New York City ’ s George Floyd Protests
At least 1,500 people have been arrested in New York since Floyd ’ s murder , according to the Associated Press . At least 700 people were arrested by the NYPD on Monday and as of Tuesday night around 400 people in Manhattan were awaiting arraignment , according to The City . In an attempt to contain the unrest , New York City officials implemented the city ’ s first curfew in 75 years on Monday — it is set to run from 8 p.m. to 5 a.m . ET through the week .
The New York Unified Court System did not respond to TIME ’ s request for comment , but in an interview with The City on Tuesday , a spokesperson for the New York Courts said that the delay in arraignments is in part because the NYPD has not swiftly filed information for criminal complaints . “ To docket the case and arraign someone , the court needs the arrest paperwork to be processed , which the Police Department is doing glacially , ” Lucian Chalfen , a courts spokesperson , told The City .
“ We are working as fast and safely as we can , ” the NYPD tells TIME in a statement .
“ This flagrant violation of law by the New York City Police Department appears to be designed to retaliate against New Yorkers protesting police brutality , ” Tina Luongo , attorney-in-charge of Legal Aid ’ s Criminal Defense Practice , said in a statement on Tuesday .
Luongo argued that under New York ’ s recent pretrial reforms — which removed bail requirements for many misdemeanors and non-violent crimes — most detainees should be released on their own recognizance once they ’ re arraigned . “ Instead , these New Yorkers are now being held illegally , deprived of due process and needlessly subjected to increased risk of contracting COVID-19 , endangering each of them as well as the entire community , ” she continued .
“ The accusation that officers are retaliating against New Yorkers who are protesting is disingenuous , exceptionally unfair , and perhaps deliberately ignoring the fact that the Police Department is dealing with a crisis within a crisis , ” Patricia Miller , Chief of the Special Federal Litigation Division of the New York City Law Department , said in a statement to TIME . “ We will respond in court . ”
The 1991 case Roundtree v. Brown set the standard that an individual arrested in New York must be arraigned — the formal reading of charges with the opportunity to enter a plea — within 24 hours of their arrest . Legal Aid tells TIME that , as of Wednesday morning , 400 people were being detained illegally due to their lack of arraignment throughout all of New York City : 295 people in Manhattan , 77 in the Bronx , 26 in Brooklyn and one in Queens . The suit filed on Tuesday night is specifically on behalf of those detained in Manhattan .
The suit comes amid increasing concern around the safety of New York City jails during the coronavirus pandemic . For months New York was the epicenter of COVID-19 in the U.S. and , as of Wednesday , at least 16,933 people have died from coronavirus in New York City alone , according to the New York City Department of Health .
The spread of COVID-19 is particularly difficult to contain in detention facilities because of crowding and the potential introductions of the virus by new intakes , the CDC found in May report . According to The Legal Aid Society , as of May 27 at least 348 people currently in Department of Correction ( DOC ) custody in New York City have had confirmed cases of COVID-19 . New York City correction officers have also been hit particularly hard by the pandemic ; as of May 20 , at least 1,259 officers had been infected and six had died , per the New York Times .
Savannah , 24 , tells TIME that she was detained in Manhattan for over eight hours after being arrested while protesting on Monday night , before being charged with unlawful assembly and released with a court summons . ( TIME is withholding her full name as her court case remains pending . ) She said that she was transported to a detention center in a van with eight other people “ all very close together with our masks down so we were worried about contracting [ coronavirus ] . ”
Many NYPD officers were also working without masks on properly , Savannah adds .
While the women she was transported with were put in holding cells that only allowed two people at a time , she claims the men were put in a large holding cell all together . She alleges that some officers “ kept asking if we were antifa and [ that we should ] call George Soros to bail us out . ”
The NYPD did not respond to TIME ’ s request for comment on Savannah ’ s claims .
The Legal Aid Society says the NYPD ’ s actions are similar to the mass arrests that took place in 2004 during protests of the Republican National Convention . The Society filed a similar suit against the NYPD at that time — arguing that protesters were being held illegally against their right to the 24-hour window for arraignment — and won .
The Coronavirus Brief . Everything you need to know about the global spread of COVID-19 Please enter a valid email address . Sign Up Now Check the box if you do not wish to receive promotional offers via email from TIME . You can unsubscribe at any time . By signing up you are agreeing to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy Thank you ! For your security , we 've sent a confirmation email to the address you entered . Click the link to confirm your subscription and begin receiving our newsletters . If you do n't get the confirmation within 10 minutes , please check your spam folder .