A second wave of coronavirus cases in the US could be even worse than the first , the country 's top health official has warned .
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) director Robert Redfield said the danger was higher as a fresh outbreak would likely coincide with the flu season .
It would put `` unimaginable strain '' on the US health care system , he said .
The US has seen more than 800,000 cases - the highest in the world .
More than 45,000 people have so far died with coronavirus across the US , according to a tally kept by Johns Hopkins University .
California had its highest one-day rise in new cases on Monday while New Jersey , the worst-hit US state apart from New York , saw its highest increase in deaths in one day .
President Trump says he will halt applications for US green cards - which give immigrants legal permanent residence and the opportunity to apply for American citizenship - for 60 days
Harvard University says it will keep an $ 8.6m-coronavirus grant despite pressure from President Trump to return it
California 's first cases of coronavirus occurred much earlier than previously thought , health officials have confirmed . A post-mortem examination has revealed that a person who died at home on 6 February in Santa Clara county is now the first known fatality in the US . Until now , the first fatality was thought to have been a man in Washington state who died on 26 February
The US Senate has unanimously approved $ 484bn ( £392bn ) in coronavirus relief , including funds designed to help small businesses . The legislation will go to the House of Representatives for approval on Thursday
In an interview with the Washington Post , Mr Redfield said that `` there 's a possibility that the assault of the virus on our nation next winter will actually be even more difficult than the one we just went through '' .
He urged officials in the US to prepare for the possibility of having to confront a flu and a coronavirus epidemic at the same time .
Mr Redfield stressed the importance of getting flu shots . He said that getting vaccinated `` may allow there to be a hospital bed available for your mother or grandmother that may get coronavirus '' .
The CDC chief said that coronavirus had arrived in the US as the regular flu season was subsiding . He argued that if it had arrived at the peak of the winter influenza season , `` it could have been been really , really , really , really difficult '' .
His warning comes as several US states are moving to ease lockdown restrictions .
Mr Redfield said that social distancing remained key to curb the spread of the virus and urged officials to keep stressing its importance even as restrictions on movement were lifted .
He urged state and federal officials to step up tests to identify those who have coronavirus and the people they have had contact .
He said that the Centers for Disease Control planned to hire more than 650 people - more than doubling its current staff - to help with contact tracing among other things .
The CDC was also exploring the possibility of using Census Bureau workers to help with contact tracing he said .