On Wednesday , the total number of COVID-19 cases stood at 1,382,304 , with deaths at 78,343 . The U.S. is continuing its phased reopening , but states are rolling back restrictions at different rates — and their residents are out and about to widely varying degrees .
To investigate the consequences of different approaches , we return to a survey of infectious disease experts organized by Thomas McAndrew and Nicholas Reich , both biostatisticians from the University of Massachusetts Amherst . For many questions , respondents are asked to provide their best estimate , as well as a best-case and worst-case possibility . Structuring the survey in this way lets the organizers generate probabilistic consensus forecasts , a tool that can answer questions about how likely various scenarios are .
In this week ’ s survey , conducted May 11 and 12 , most experts predicted that the total number of positive cases in the U.S. would be more than 1.45 million on May 17 . The experts also estimated some measures of the disease in Pennsylvania and Washington , two states with different reopening plans .
How many confirmed cases will be reported on May 17 ?
In recent weeks , the researchers have been given distinct ranges of total confirmed COVID-19 cases and asked to assign a probability to each bin . Last week , the experts nailed their forecast : The expert consensus was that on May 10 there would be between 1.3 million and 1.45 million confirmed positive cases reported by The COVID Tracking Project . The actual number reported on May 10 was 1,322,807 .
This week ’ s expert consensus puts the most probable range at somewhere between 1.45 and 1.55 million total confirmed cases on May 17 . But the expert consensus also assigned a 10 percent probability to a more pessimistic scenario — one in which there are more than 1.6 million cases .
With the president attempting to pressure Pennsylvania Gov . Tom Wolf into reopening his state more quickly , there is increasing tension between the governor ’ s three-phase plan and some counties ’ desires to open up faster . There have been 58,698 total cases of COVID-19 in Pennsylvania , and the current death toll stands at 3,943 . The experts were asked to forecast the total number of deaths in the state on June 13 . The consensus projection was 7,239 dead , with an 80 percent chance that the actual number will fall between 5,249 and 10,472 .
One expert even believes that the death count could plausibly reach 30,000 in the Keystone State , though that view is not shared by the rest of the panel .
Even as it extended its stay-at-home orders through the end of the month , Washington state has begun a four-phase reopening plan that Gov . Jay Inslee ’ s administration is calling “ Safe Start. ” The state plans to remain in each phase for a minimum of three weeks . The first phase of Safe Start allows for some recreation and construction activity , along with auto sales and commercial pet walking . At the time of the survey , five counties with fewer than 75,000 residents and no new reported cases in the past three weeks were allowed to begin Phase 2 , which allows the resumption of activity in restaurants , house cleaning services and hair and nail salons , among other businesses .
The experts were asked to forecast the average new cases per day in Washington for the first week of June . Their consensus estimate of 332 is in line with case counts near the peak of the outbreak in late March and early April , with an 80 percent chance that the actual daily average will fall between 158 and 644 cases .
Experts were also asked to estimate the average daily case count in the first week of June if all Washington counties were allowed to enter Phase 2 on May 16 . They forecast an average of 554 new daily cases under such a plan — an increase of 67 percent over their estimate of cases under the current plan .
What ’ s interesting about this prediction is that 554 average new daily cases is more than the 441 new cases on March 23 , which is thus far the highest number of new cases reported in a single day . Since the experts were asked to predict the average number of new daily cases over the course of a week , they appear quite pessimistic about the effects of an early rollout of Washington ’ s Phase 2 plan .