Trying to lop off glycoproteins is not why de Blasio got into politics . De Blasio has always looked past New York , has never hidden his national ambitions . Six months ago , he was a moderately credible presidential candidate . I went to a de Blasio event in Des Moines , Iowa , and was struck by the adulation directed his way . I was even more struck by how genuinely happy de Blasio seemed . After concluding his stump speech , he stayed for a good half hour , meeting voters , shaking hands . Through it all , he smiled .
Now he is telling people to wash their hands and cough into their elbows . Of course , every politician in the United States is lathering constituents in the same hand-washing , elbow-coughing advice . But de Blasio seems more irritated at having to do so than most .
He has indicated that irritation with the subtlety of a Times Square advertisement . As all New York tabloid readers know , de Blasio trekked daily from Manhattan to Brooklyn to exercise at the same gym he frequented before becoming mayor . De Blasio continued to travel back to Brooklyn right up to the day he ordered all gyms closed . That last gym trip has become the stuff of legend , an act of petulant defiance from which de Blasio ’ s reputation will probably never recover .
Leadership is never more apparent than when it is missing . De Blasio was slow to recognize the danger , telling New Yorkers to keep to their ordinary routines—as he did his—even after the World Health Organization had declared the coronavirus outbreak a pandemic .
De Blasio has often been spotted walking in Brooklyn ’ s Prospect Park , near his old house , even as most New Yorkers are confined to their homes and some New Yorkers fight the coronavirus in overcrowded hospitals . You may have heard that there are parks in Manhattan . Gracie Mansion , where de Blasio lives , is located inside one , an esplanade that follows the East River as it opens gloriously to embrace the Bronx and Queens . The same convoy of SUVs that whisks him to Brooklyn could get him to Central Park in five minutes tops .
I imagine that de Blasio knows where Central Park is , more or less . That ’ s rather beside the point . Throughout the coronavirus crisis , he has evinced no passion for New Yorkers , or New York . When he gave an interview to MSNBC last Sunday , what marked his face was not exhaustion but exasperation .
In fact , he hasn ’ t given up on the possibility that he can do nothing in this crisis other than attack Trump , just as he did in his days as a presidential contender . “ He ’ s not acting like a commander in chief , because he doesn ’ t know how , ” de Blasio said on MSNBC two weeks ago . “ He should get the hell out of the way. ” Even so , he has continued to plead with Trump to do everything in his power to help New York , making for an odd combination of bluster and helplessness .