( ███ ) - Gilead Sciences Inc on Monday priced its COVID-19 antiviral remdesivir at $ 2,340 per patient for wealthier nations and agreed to send nearly all of its supply of the drug to the United States over the next three months .
The price tag is slightly below the range of $ 2,520 to $ 2,800 suggested last week by U.S. drug pricing research group the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review ( ICER ) after British researchers said they found that the cheap , widely available steroid dexamethasone significantly reduced mortality among severely ill COVID-19 patients .
Remdesivir is expected to be in high demand as one of the only treatments so far shown to alter the course of COVID-19 . After the intravenously administered medicine helped shorten hospital recovery times in a clinical trial , it won emergency use authorization in the United States and full approval in Japan .
The drug is believed to be most effective in treating patients earlier in the course of disease than dexamethasone , which reduced deaths in patients requiring supportive oxygen and those on a ventilator . Still , remdesivir in its currently formulation , is only being used on patients sick enough to require hospitalization as a five-day treatment course .
The company is developing an inhaled version that could be used outside a hospital setting .
For U.S. patients with commercial insurance , Gilead said it will charge $ 3,120 per course , or $ 520 per vial . That is a 33 % increase over the $ 390 per vial Gilead said it will charge governments of developed countries and U.S. patients in government healthcare programs .
In an open letter , Gilead Chief Executive Daniel O ’ Day said the price is well below the value it provides given that early hospital discharges could save around $ 12,000 per patient in the United States .
Patient advocates have argued that the cost should be lower since remdesivir was developed with financial support from the U.S. government .
U.S. Representative Lloyd Doggett , a Democrat from Texas , said it was “ an outrageous price for a very modest drug , which taxpayer funding saved from a scrap heap of failures . ”
Remdesivir had previously failed as an Ebola treatment and has not shown that it can reduce COVID-19 deaths .
Gilead also said it agreed to continue to send most of its supply of remdesivir to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) , with the agency and states set to manage allocation to U.S. hospitals until the end of September .
There are currently more cases of COVID-19 in the United States than in Europe , with several U.S. states hitting new records for numbers of cases .
HHS has been distributing the drug since May and was due to run out after this week . A senior HHS official said the agency expects the drug will soon be a scarce resource , and so it wanted to remain involved in allocating it .
The agency said it secured more than 500,000 remdesivir courses for U.S. hospitals through September . That represents all of Gilead ’ s projected production for July and 90 % of its production in August and September , in addition to an allocation for clinical trials , HHS said .
Once supplies are less constrained , HHS will stop managing the allocation , Gilead said . The company did not discuss its supply strategy for developed nations outside the United States .
Remdesivir ’ s price has been a topic of intense debate . Experts have said Gilead would need to avoid appearing to take advantage of a health crisis for profits .
Analysts at Royal Bank of Canada forecast the drug could generate $ 2.3 billion in revenue 2020 , helping offset more than $ 1 billion in development and distribution costs . They said additional profits could be limited because vaccines and better treatments are on the horizon .
The European Union ’ s healthcare regulator last week recommended conditional approval of the drug when used in the critically ill .
Gilead has linked up with generic drugmakers based in India and Pakistan , including Cipla Ltd and Hetero Labs Ltd , to make and supply remdesivir in 127 developing countries .
Cipla ’ s version is priced at less than 5,000 Indian rupees ( $ 66.24 ) , while Hetero Lab ’ s version is priced at 5,400 rupees ( $ 71.54 ) .