President Trump on Monday signaled he wants the economy to be back in full swing as quickly as possible amid the ongoing coronavirus crisis . He said during a Coronavirus Task Force briefing that his administration will reevaluate the 15-day guideline the White House issued last week when that time is up and he will soon issue new guidelines on how to return to a more normalized workforce and economy .
`` Our country was n't built to be shut down . This is not a country that was built for this . It was not built to be shut down , '' Mr. Trump said in a briefing that heavily emphasized the need to reopen and boost businesses and the economy . `` We 're not going to let the cure be worse than the problem . ''
The president 's tone Monday represented a significant shift after a week of the White House issuing dire warnings and urging people to take social distancing seriously . Only days ago , the president stood at the same podium warning Americans the outbreak could last into July or August .
Mr. Trump said Monday that the U.S. `` will soon be open for business , '' even as public health officials warned Americans should be prepared to continue social distancing and closures for the time being . Mr. Trump insisted the country has learned from altering habits and can `` do two things at one time '' — social distancing and returning people to work . He also said he thinks his public health officials are n't opposed to the idea of easing up on restrictions in the future .
President Trump addresses the coronavirus response daily briefing at the White House on March 23 , 2020 . Reuters
Absent at Monday night 's press conference was Dr. Anthony Fauci , the nation 's leading expert in infectious diseases . Asked if Fauci agrees with his desire to move the economy back to normal soon , Mr. Trump said Fauci `` does n't not agree . ''
`` He is n't here because we 're not discussing what he 's best at , '' Mr. Trump said . Fauci is a leading expert on infectious diseases and a key member of the Coronavirus Task Force , who has made himself available for a wide range of media interviews to inform the public .
As ███ White House correspondent Paula Reid has reported , the president wants the economy to be set into gear as soon as possible , as business closures eliminate jobs and send the stock market spiraling .
U.S. surgeon general on federal government ’ s efforts to distribute medical supplies
The president announced the administration is working on distributing millions of masks to the hardest-hit areas .
`` FEMA is distributing 8 million N95 respirator masks and 13.3 million surgical masks across the country right now . Focusing on the areas with the greatest need , we have shipped 73 pallets of personal protective equipment to NYC and 36 pallets to the state of Washington , '' the president said .
Dr. Deborah Birx , a point person on the task force , said self-swab testing will be available soon . Birx said she tested negative for coronavirus after experiencing a low-grade fever over the weekend .
Over the weekend , Vice President Mike Pence 's office announced a member of his staff tested positive for the virus . Pence said he and his wife tested negative , and Mr. Trump said Monday that first lady Melania Trump had tested negative . Mr. Trump was tested last week and the White House said he tested negative .
The Senate has so far failed to pass procedural votes to advance a coronavirus stimulus package , while House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said she plans to submit her own proposal .
A growing number of governors are telling residents to stay in their homes and ordering businesses deemed nonessential to close their doors , ramping up the pressure on lawmakers to swiftly provide relief to those affected by the coronavirus . Mr. Trump told reporters Monday that he will be the oversight of any stimulus package .
Further adding to the tensions on Capitol Hill was the revelation that Senate Rand Paul , a Republican from Kentucky , tested positive for the coronavirus . Following the announcement , two other GOP senators , Mike Lee and Mitt Romney of Utah , said they would be self-quarantining for 14 days because they came in contact with Paul .
Republican Senators Rick Scott of Florida and Cory Gardner of Colorado were already self-quarantining due to possible exposure to the coronavirus .
In total , five Republicans are self-quarantining and are unable to vote in the Senate , dwindling their ranks .