LONDON/LOS ANGELES ( ███ ) - Twenty-one people aboard a cruise ship that was barred from docking in San Francisco have tested positive for coronavirus , U.S. officials said on Friday , adding to the more than 100,000 cases of the fast-spreading illness across the world .
Vice President Mike Pence , recently appointed as the U.S. government ’ s point man on the outbreak , said the cruise ship Grand Princess will be brought to an unspecified non-commercial port where all 2,400 some passengers and 1,100 crew members will now be tested .
“ Those that need to be quarantined , will be quarantined . Those that require additional medical attention will receive it , ” Pence told reporters at the White House .
The outbreak has killed more than 3,400 people and spread across more than 90 nations , with seven countries reporting their first cases on Friday . The economic damage has also intensified , with business districts starting to empty and stock markets continuing to tumble .
President Donald Trump on Friday signed a bill to provide $ 8.3 billion to bolster the capacity to test for coronavirus and fund other measures in the United States . Cases have now been reported in more than half of the 50 U.S. states . Fifteen people have died in the country .
In many affected countries , people were being asked to stay home from work , schools were closed , large gatherings and sports and music events were canceled , stores were cleared of staples like toiletries and water , and face masks became a common sight .
The World Health Organization ( WHO ) said every country should make containing the epidemic its top priority , pointing to Iran ’ s national action plan to combat one of the worst outbreaks after a slow start .
Iran ’ s death toll from the virus jumped to 124 , as more than 1,000 new cases were diagnosed over 24 hours .
The Vatican reported its first case , a patient in its health services , worsening the prospects of the virus having already spread further in the Italian capital , since most employees in the walled city-state live in Rome , and those who live in the Vatican frequently go in and out to the city that surrounds it .
Italy is the worst-hit European country , with a death toll as of Friday of 197 .
South Korea on Saturday reported 174 additional cases from late Friday , taking the national tally to 6,767 . Mainland China , where the outbreak started , reported 99 new confirmed cases but about a quarter of them came from outside the country , data showed .
About 3.4 % of confirmed cases of COVID-19 , the disease caused by the virus , have died , far above seasonal flu ’ s fatality rate of under 1 % , the WHO said this week .
Moves by some major economies , including the United States , to cut interest rates and pledge funds to fight the epidemic have done little to allay fears about the spread of the disease and the economic fallout . Supply chains have been crippled around the world .
“ There ’ s concern that while there has been a response from the Fed , given the nature of the problem , is this something the central bank can really help with ? ” said John Davies , G10 rates strategist at Standard Chartered Bank in London .
In New York , JPMorgan ( JPM.N ) divided its team between central locations and a secondary site in New Jersey , while Goldman Sachs ( GS.N ) sent some traders to nearby secondary offices in Greenwich , Connecticut , and Jersey City .
An ambulance drives away with a resident at the Life Care Center of Kirkland , a long-term care facility linked to several confirmed coronavirus cases , in Kirkland , Washington , U.S. March 6 , 2020 . ███/Lindsey Wasson
Bank of America Corp ( BAC.N ) is splitting its trading force from Monday and sending 100 New York-based staff to nearby Stamford , Connecticut , sources familiar with the matter said .
In London , Europe ’ s financial capital , the Canary Wharf district was unusually quiet . S & P Global ’ s large office stood empty after the company sent its 1,200 staff home , and HSBC asked around 100 people to work from home after a worker tested positive for the illness .
France ’ s prime minister said nurseries and schools would close for 15 days from Monday in the two areas worst hit by coronavirus infections , one north of Paris and the other in the northeastern part of the country .
The South by Southwest music and tech festival in Austin , Texas , and two music festivals in Florida were canceled over concerns about events that bring crowds of people into close proximity . The NCAA Division III men ’ s basketball tournament was scheduled to go ahead at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore this weekend , but without spectators .
Saudi Arabia will suspend public attendance at all sports events starting Saturday , the ministry of sports said .
The United Nations said it had canceled some meetings in Bonn , Germany , and elsewhere planned in the run-up to a crucial U.N. climate summit to be held in Scotland in November .
Yields on U.S. Treasuries plunged to historic lows on fears the outbreak will slam the global economy , and MSCI ’ s gauge of stocks across the globe .MIWD00000PUS shed 3.10 % . [ MKTS/GLOB ] U.S. stocks fell but ended well above their session lows . [ .N ]
Airline and travel stocks have been among the worst affected as people canceled non-essential travel . Norwegian Air Shuttle ( NWC.OL ) , the hardest-hit stock among European carriers , lost more than quarter of its market value on Friday and has fallen almost 70 % since the start of February .
“ If this really ramps up , we could see a lot more kitchen-sinking updates from the travel industry and airlines , ” said Chris Beauchamp , chief market analyst at IG .