NEW YORK ( ███ ) - A newly revised coronavirus mortality model predicts nearly 135,000 Americans will die from COVID-19 by early August , almost double previous projections , as social-distancing measures for quelling the pandemic are increasingly relaxed , researchers said on Monday .
The ominous new forecast from the University of Washington ’ s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation ( IHME ) reflect “ rising mobility in most U.S. states ” with an easing of business closures and stay-at-home orders expected in 31 states by May 11 , the institute said .
“ We expect that the epidemic in many states will now extend through the summer , ” the IHME director , Dr. Christopher Murray , said in a statement .
The projections reinforced warnings from public health experts that a rising clamor to lift restrictions on commerce and social activities - in hopes of healing a ravaged economy - could exact a staggering cost in terms of human lives .
The novel coronavirus is already known to have infected almost 1.2 million people in the United States , including 68,762 who have died from COVID-19 , the respiratory illness it causes , according to ███ ’ own tally .
The institute ’ s predictive coronavirus model , periodically revised to account for changing circumstances and scientific insights surrounding the pandemic , has become an influential data point often cited by the White House and public health authorities in gauging the crisis .
The IHME projections are presented as a statistical range of outcomes . The latest forecast predicts the cumulative number of U.S. deaths from COVID-19 will run from as few as 95,092 to as many as 242,890 by Aug. 4 - with 134,475 lives lost representing the most likely , middle ground .
By comparison , the previous revision issued on April 29 put the middle-case figure at 72,400 deaths , within a range between 59,300 and 114,200 fatalities .
The upward spike reflects increasing human interactions as more states begin to ease social-distancing requirements - the chief public health tool available to curb the spread of a highly contagious virus for which there is no vaccine and no cure .
The relaxation of social-distancing rules will more than offset any decline in transmissions that might come from warmer weather and stronger containment measures , such as more wide-scale testing and tracing the contacts of infected people so they too can be tested and isolated , Murray said .
The revised IHME projections coincided with disclosure of an internal Trump administration forecast predicting a surge in COVID-19 cases killing 3,000 Americans a day by the end of May , up from a current daily toll that a ███ tally places at around 2,000 .
That projection , first reported by the New York Times and confirmed by a ███ source , also forecast about 200,000 new coronavirus cases each day by the end of the month , up from the current rate of about 25,000 cases every 24 hours .
Asked about the confidential forecast , White House spokesman Judd Deere said : “ This is not a White House document , nor has it been presented to the Coronavirus Task Force or gone through interagency vetting . ”
President Donald Trump has given varying predictions for the number of people in the United States who will succumb to COVID-19 . As recently as Friday , he said he hoped fewer than 100,000 Americans would die , and had talked last week of 60,000 to 70,000 deaths .
But on Sunday night , the president acknowledged the death toll may climb much higher .
“ We ’ re going to lose anywhere from 75 , 80 to 100,000 people . That ’ s a horrible thing , ” he told Fox News .
In New York , the state that accounts for about a third of all U.S. infections , Governor Andrew Cuomo on Monday outlined plans to ease restrictions on a regional basis .
Without giving a specific time frame , Cuomo told a daily briefing that construction , manufacturing and the wholesale supply chain would be allowed to start up under the first phase of a four-step return to normality .
A second phase would permit insurance , retail , administrative support and real estate businesses to open again , followed by restaurants , food services , hotels and accommodation businesses in the third stage , Cuomo said . In the final phase , arts , entertainment and recreation facilities and education would restart .
Cuomo suggested that rural parts of New York might be relaxed ahead of “ higher-risk regions , ” including New York City .
California Governor Gavin Newsom said on Monday he would ease the state ’ s stay-at-home orders by Thursday , expanding the number of retail businesses that can provide curbside services .
“ This is an optimistic day , as we see a little bit of a ray of sunshine , ” Newsom told a news conference .
Florida began a gradual restart of its economy on Monday . In the first phase , retail merchants and restaurants will open , with indoor patronage limited to 25 % of capacity . Eateries are also allowed to open outdoor seating with social distancing , and medical practices can resume elective surgeries and procedures .
In Ohio , Governor Mike DeWine was allowing construction and manufacturing to reopen on Monday , and letting office workers return .
GRAPHIC : Tracking the novel coronavirus in the U.S. - here