A drug used to treat malaria is showing promise in lab and clinical studies for coronavirus , leading to reserved enthusiasm for some scientists .
French researchers found that hydroxychloroquine lowered virus levels in most patients who took part in a clinical study this month .
President Donald Trump asked his coronavirus task force about the drug during a briefing on Wednesday .
The results of a clinical trial in France and studies conducted in lab settings are building hope that a drug usually used to treat malaria and arthritis can treat and possibly cure coronavirus patients , though scientists say more data is needed before drawing a firm conclusion .
“ It has a lot of potential , though we ’ re not going on a lot of data yet , ” Dr. Peter Hotez , the dean for the National School of Tropical Medicine at the Baylor School of Medicine , said of early studies of hydroxycholoroquine , a malaria drug developed in the 1940s .
President Donald Trump asked the White House ’ s coronavirus task force about possibly using the drug , task force coordinator Dr. Deborah Birx said Wednesday .
Birx said that the drug is being studied “ very carefully , ” as are several other potential therapeutics .
On Tuesday , a team of French scientists released the first results of a clinical study of the use of hydroxychloroquine on 24 coronavirus patients from southeast France .
The research team , led by Didier Raoult , a renowned infectious disease expert from l ’ Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire in Marseille , administered the drug for 10 days along with azithromycin , a common antibiotic .
Researchers said the drugs cleared the virus in the nose and throat of most observed patients in three to six days . The study found that after six days of treatment , 70 percent of patients administered hydroxychloroquine were clear of the virus , compared to just 12.5 percent of patients who were not given drugs . ( RELATED : Fauci On Coronavirus In US : ‘ It ’ s Going To Get Worse ’ )
Azithromycin boosted the effect of hydroxychloroquine , according to the study . After six days of treatment , all patients treated with the drug combination “ were virologically cured , ” compared to 57.1 percent of patients treated with hydroxycholorquine by itself .
“ We therefore recommend that COVID-19 patients be treated with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin to cure their infection and to limit the transmission of the virus to other people in order to curb the spread of COVID-19 in the world , ” wrote researchers , who acknowledged the small sample size of the study .
Lab studies have shown that hydroxychloroquine , which was developed in the 1940s , inhibited coronavirus . A study published in Cell Discovery on Wednesday by three Chinese scientists found that hydroxychloroquine inhibited coronavirus in vitro , or in a lab culture .
Hotez , the infectious disease expert , told ███ News Foundation he was “ enthusiastic ” about early results of studies involving hydroxychloroquine , though he said more data is needed to determine if the drug can effectively treat coronavirus .
“ We urgently need to accelerate new antimicrobial therapies . If hydroxychloroquine could be approved in therapy it would be a game-changer , ” Hotez said .
“ The important next step is to show that it has an impact on reducing severity of symptoms in clinical disease . ”
Hotez said that an ideal study would be conducted in areas with high rates of transmission , such as the Lombardy region in Italy .
More clinical trials are underway . A researcher at Asan Medical Center , a top research hospital in South Korea , is conducting a clinical trial of 150 patients with mild cases of coronavirus . The lead researcher , Sung-Han Kim , estimates that the trial will be completed in May .
According to NBC News , French drug maker Sanofi is working with health authorities to study whether hydroxychloroquine can help with coronavirus . The company is encouraged by preliminary findings , according to NBC News , but still does not have enough data to determine its efficacy .
Health officials in Belgium and South Korea have recommended the use of hydroxychloroquine patients displaying either severe or mild symptoms from COVID-19 , the disease caused by coronavirus .
The United Kingdom appears to have some hope for the drug . On Sunday , government officials there banned the export and hoarding of hydroxychloroquine and two other drugs that could be useful as therapeutics , according to Pharmaceutical Technology .