Members of the Michigan militia said they wo n't allow police to arrest 77-year-old Karl Manke who opened his Owosso barbershop last week in defiance of Democratic Gov . Gretchen Whitmer 's coronavirus shutdown order , WEYI-TV reported .
`` We are here to make sure he does n't get arrested , '' Daniel Brewer told the station Saturday . `` We 're willing to stand in front of that door and block the entrance so the police will have no entry there today . ''
The barbershop has been open since last Monday against state order and received a packed lobby of customers his first morning — as well as two citations before Friday , WEYI said in a previous story .
Still dozens of supporters gathered outside Manke 's barbershop Saturday , and 15 customers were waiting in line outside the door for haircuts .
Manke told the station he followed Whitmer 's shutdown order for as long as he could — but after multiple extensions of the order and no money coming in after being twice denied unemployment , he had to return to work .
`` I 'm not trying to be a scofflaw . I 'm trying to make a living , '' he told WEYI . `` I tried for the unemployment . I was denied twice on unemployment . I have n't seen anything in one these other checks from the government . ''
Manke speaking inside his barbershop as he was cutting a customer 's hair told the Detroit Free Press that Whitmer `` is not my mother '' and `` I just made an adult decision that I was gon na open up . ''
Michigan barber shop reopens despite shutdown : Gov . Whitmer is 'not my mother ' youtu.be
On Friday night , state police issued Manke a health protection order from state Attorney General Dana Nessel 's office demanding he close his shop , noting that customers from Ann Arbor , Saginaw , Detroit , Jackson , and other areas have visited his business , which raises the risk of spreading the coronavirus , the station said .
Mr. Manke was given every opportunity to voluntarily comply with the Governor 's Executive Order and the order of the Michigan Department of Health & Human Services Director . As a result of his continued operation , today his business was deemed an imminent danger to the public health and ordered to be shut down by the DHHS Director . If he refuses , the Department of Attorney General will request an order from the Shiawassee County Circuit Court on Monday to close his business . Mr. Manke 's actions are not a display of harmless civil disobedience . His actions are counterproductive to the collective effort businesses and communities everywhere have made to slow the spread of COVID-19 , and by opening the doors to his business , he 's putting the lives of many more Michiganders at risk .
Robert Gordon , director of the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services , told the station in a statement that `` people continue to die in our state every day due to the coronavirus . It is critically important for businesses and the general public to follow the executive order to reduce further spread of COVID-19 and save lives . ''
The state health department also has been handing out free condoms and lubricant to help residents protect themselves against unintended pregnancy , STIs , and HIV .
Whitmer has been under fire for weeks with protests and demonstrations over her shutdown . She 's prohibited residents from visiting friends and family who live a few doors away and barred them from buying vegetable seeds and gardening supplies at a store . In fact , the state House and Senate sued Whitmer over her shutdown extension , which now will last until May 28 .
But when asked about Menke 's plight and his defiance of her order , the governor said it was all about saving his life and the lives of his customers :