New York and Kentucky announced new programs on Friday aimed at improving access to mail-in ballots , as both states work to find ways to limit interaction at the polls during upcoming elections amid the Covid-19 pandemic .
On Friday , New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo and Kentucky Gov . Andy Beshear both signed executive orders mandating applications for absentee ballots be sent to all of their states ’ voters — upon returning the applications to state officials , voters will receive ballots .
“ I am issuing an Executive Order to ensure every New York voter automatically receives a postage-paid application for an absentee ballot because no New Yorker should have to choose between their health and their right to vote , ” Cuomo said in a statement .
Kentucky ’ s plan does not include prepaid postage , but does require the state to create a website so voters can request ballots online . It also waives the requirement for absentee voters to notarize their ballot applications .
“ While there will be significant education and work required , we are committed to making sure this election will be held in a safe manner while we are in this worldwide health pandemic , ” Beshear said in a statement .
Both Kentucky ’ s and New York ’ s primary elections have been postponed to June 23 because of the coronavirus outbreak . New York ’ s was originally scheduled for April 28 , and Kentucky ’ s for May 19 .
New York has become the epicenter of the outbreak , with at least 271,000 confirmed Covid-19 cases as of April 25 , and more than 16,000 deaths . Kentucky has nearly 3,800 cases , with 200 deaths .
The push for increased absentee voting in both states comes weeks after a primary election in Wisconsin on April 7 illustrated the risk of forcing people to stand in long lines during an infectious disease outbreak . That election led to at least 19 Wisconsin voters being diagnosed with Covid-19 .
Hoping to avoid similar scenarios , other states — like Ohio — have begun making voting an entirely mail-in process . In some states that have not taken that step , certain specific jurisdictions , such as Florida ’ s Miami-Dade , Broward and Palm Beach counties — the last of which being where President Donald Trump is registered to vote — have also established their own plans to mail out absentee ballot request forms to all voters .
But such measures have faced political pushback , with many Republicans , including Trump , arguing that mail-in voting carries with it a risk of fraud . Voting experts have disputed these claims , finding voter fraud to be incredibly rare and noting that when it does happen , it does not privilege one party over another .
Scattershot efforts have some federal lawmakers calling for a national vote-by-mail system
Nationally , some lawmakers are working to expand mail-in voting for the long term . Sens . Ron Wyden ( D-OR ) and Amy Klobuchar ( D-MN ) introduced an updated bill that would expand early and absentee voting , and mandate voting contingency plans for future emergencies like coronavirus .
As ███ ’ s Ella Nilsen has reported , 34 states allow all voters to vote by mail . The remaining 16 states require applicants to provide an excuse — such as serving in the military or living abroad — to request a mail-in ballot . ( New York has such a requirement , which is functionally waived under Cuomo ’ s executive order . )
It remains to be seen how the coronavirus will affect November ’ s general election — and whether efforts to broaden the availability of vote-by-mail will come to fruition by then .
At a hearing on the subject on Wednesday , elections experts warned there may not be enough time to prepare for a nationwide mail-in election in November . States may not have the time or resources to acquire the envelopes , ballots , and scanning machines needed , Washington state Secretary of State Kim Wyman told Wednesday ’ s panel .
“ With the impacts of Covid-19 , I am very concerned that with only six months really to implement vote-by-mail or absentee voting in a jurisdiction , that it ’ s going to be a heavy lift , ” she said . And she added that poorly implemented absentee voting structures could undermine faith in the election ’ s result .
On the state level , Ohio has seen the difficulties Wyman outlined . In March , its primary was postponed at the last minute , causing confusion . The state decided to move to an entirely mail-in process . Now , some voters may not receive ballots in time to vote , Ohio ’ s secretary of state has said . It ’ s a reminder for increasingly cash-strapped states — and for federal lawmakers hoping to create national vote-by-mail programs — that to ensure a smooth transition to mass mail-in-voting this fall , action must be taken now .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .