Chinese president Xi Jinping arrives to speak at the Communist Party congress in Beijing , October 18 , 2017 . ( China Daily/via Reuters )
Its bad behavior in the wake of COVID-19 will leave it in its weakest global position in memory . And the U.S. will emerge stronger .
Sometime in late November the Chinese Communist Party apparat was aware that the ingredients of some sort of an epidemic were brewing in Wuhan . Soon after , it was also clear to them that a new type of coronavirus was on the loose , a threat they might have taken more seriously given the similar Chinese origins of the prior toxic SARS coronavirus and the resources of a Level 4 virology lab nearby .
Yet the government initially hid all that knowledge from its own people in particular and in general from the world at large . Translated into American terms , that disingenuousness ensured that over 10,000 Chinese nationals and foreigners living in China flew every day on direct flights into the United States ( Washington and California especially ) from late November to the beginning of February , until the Trump travel ban of January 31 .
All this laxity was also known to the Communist apparat in Beijing , which must have been amused when Trump was roundly damned by his liberal critics as a xenophobe and racist for finally daring to stop the influx on January 31 — the first major leader to enact such a total ban .
Yet , no thanks to the Chinese , America , so far , has been comparatively lucky — despite the grave risks of damaging a multi-trillion-dollar economy with the strictest quarantining , isolation policies , and social distancing in its history . Half the country lives in the interior away from ports of entry on the coasts . Medical care , sanitation , hygiene , and meat markets operate on different premises than in China , the supposed fated global hegemon . Transparency in a consensual society together with a free-market economy is encouraging tens of millions of citizens to work in tandem and independently to figure out creative ways to ameliorate the epidemic , politically , medically , socially , and economically . The result is that as of mid-March , the U.S. , the world ’ s foremost immigration destination and among the most visited of nations , had suffered fewer virus fatalities than some European countries a fifth or sixth of its population size .
No doubt when mass testing begins , the figures of known cases will soar , and fatalities will rise . Yet while we know pretty well the number of Americans who have died from the virus , we have in truth little idea of how many now carry it or how many have recovered from it , without knowing what sickened them or even whether they were ostensibly sick at all . In other words , the rate of new cases identified by testing may exceed the rate of new deaths , apprising us of a more precise — and perhaps lower — degree of viral toxicity .
Whereas annual flu toxicity is adjudicated by modeling case numbers , and by sophisticated and learned guesses at the number of likely infections , so far the death rate of the coronavirus is calibrated a bit differently — apparently predicated both on known deaths and known cases . When we make facile comparisons between the flu and coronaviruses , they may prove valid , but for now it ’ s still wise to remember that annual flu cases could be fewer than what is guessed at through modeling each year , and corona infections may be higher than the current known numbers of confirmed positives . The former reality might mean that the flu is at times a little more lethal than we think and the corona virus a little less deadly . That is not to suggest that most strains of flu are as lethal as the coronavirus , only that for the vast majority of Americans the current U.S. COVID-19 case-to-fatality ratio of 2 percent may eventually prove less , and influenza ’ s commonly cited 0.01 lethality rate may prove higher . In any case , 98–99 percent of Americans may well recover from the coronavirus — a rate that is not typical of most of history ’ s plagues .
The realities are paradoxical : If the coronavirus infects as many Americans as an average flu strain , then ten times more Americans could die — mostly over the age of 65 — even as the vast majority of all Americans will not . Statistics change hourly , but the CDC as of the afternoon of March 16 reports that there are currently 3,437 cases of known coronavirus infections and 68 deaths attributed to the virus , or about two deaths per 100 infected — the majority of them again likely over 65 .
To the degree that we are suffering death and economic hurt from COVID-19 , we can also attribute the toll to the Chinese Communist Party . Had it just called in the international medical community in late November , instituted early quarantines , and allowed its own citizens to use email and social media to apprise and warn others of the new disease , then the world and the U.S. would probably not have found themselves in the current panic . The reasons China did not act more responsibly may be inherent in communist governments , or they may involve more Byzantine causes left to be disclosed .
Add in the proximity of a Level 4 virology lab nearby Ground Zero of COVID-19 , which fueled Internet conspiracy theories ; the weird rumors about quite strange animals such as snakes and pangolins birthing the infection in primeval open meat markets stocked with live animals in filthy conditions in cages ; and pirated videos of supposed patients dropping comatose in crowded hospital hallways . With all of that , we had the ingredients of a Hollywood zombie movie , adding to the frenzy .
Plus , 2020 is an election year — echoing how the 1976 swine flu was politicized . The Left and its media appendages saw COVID-19 as able to do what John Brennan , James Clapper , James Comey , and Andrew McCabe , the Mueller team , and impeachment could not : destroy the hated Trump presidency .
That is , it will come to appreciate fully that the supposed efficiency , ruthlessness , and autocracy of the Communist Party — what had so impressed foolish American journalists who once marveled at Beijing ’ s ability to enact by fiat liberal pet projects such as high-speed rail and solar industries — were China ’ s worst enemies , ensuring that the virus would spread and that China ’ s international reputation would be ruined .
The coronavirus could be the straw that breaks the proverbial back of the Chinese camel , stooped under the recent weight of a trade war with the U.S. , the revelation of 1 million Uighurs in reeducation camps , the crackdown on Hong Kong democracy protesters , and news of the sprawling Chinese internal-surveillance apparat . The world is now both terrified and put off by China , and such anathemas will only harm its already suspect and misbegotten Silk Road neocolonial schemes .
Here in the U.S. , COVID-19 will create bipartisan pressure to adopt policies of keeping key U.S. industries — such as medical supplies , pharmaceuticals , and military applied high-tech — in America . Americans will not again wish to outsource the vast majority of their chemotherapy-drug , antibiotic , and heart-medicine production to a government that can not be trusted and that sees such globalized output as a weapon to be used in extremis .
Although we can not see it now , spin-off effects from the panic and frenzy will eventually fuel more economic recovery . Oil prices are nearing record modern lows , ensuring cheap gas for spring and summer American drivers . Cheap mortgages and car loans likewise will spur buying , as will relief once the virus wanes and splurging ensue .
It will be salutary for Americans to once again appreciate the value of muscular labor , as those who grow food , transport it , and provide us energy and sanitation while protecting us from danger , foreign and domestic , have allowed millions of Americans to stay home , sequestered and quarantined but safe with plenty of food , water , and uninterrupted sanitation and public safety . In these days of crisis , we should not forget that millions of often unmentioned Americans have made us the world ’ s greatest energy and most diverse food producer — a singular position that China , with over four times our population , envies .
Before the outbreak , China was trying to game its trade war in terms of how best to hurt the hated Trump administration . Ironically , its abhorrence only strengthened the U.S. in ways no one in the pre-COVID-19 days could have imagined .
Call it paradox , irony , karma , or even tragedy , but China emerges from its deceit about the coronavirus outbreak in its weakest position since its Westernization began under Deng Xiaoping . And the U.S. , after some rocky months ahead , if it stays calm , will likely reemerge in its strongest state in memory vis-à-vis its rivals .