As the coronavirus continues to spread around the world , boosting the need for ventilators , companies are ramping up their efforts to keep up with demand .
From the Netherlands to Wisconsin , to Southern California , companies that manufacture the lifesaving machines all said they are stepping up production .
A spokesman for Vyaire Medical Inc. , which is based in Illinois , said the company is adding a second shift at its Palm Springs , Calif. , factory and hiring more workers . As a global supplier , it has previously shipped ventilators to China and now is getting requests from Italy .
`` We 're prioritizing by where the hot spots are , '' he said .
Philips Healthcare of the Netherlands and GE , which manufactures ventilators in Wisconsin , have also begun implementing similar measures .
TEXAS DA CHARGES INDIVIDUAL WITH FALSELY CLAIMING POSITIVE COVID-19 TEST ON SOCIAL MEDIA
One major rental company , US Med-Equip , reported that U.S. hospitals have rented 60 percent more ventilators , monitors and other equipment over the past few weeks than at any time last year .
It said it has 6,500 ventilators on rent and expects 1,200 more to arrive within the next few weeks at its Houston headquarters .
`` Our team is working around the clock to provide patient-ready equipment so medical staff can focus on their lifesaving work , '' CEO Gurmit Singh Bhatia said in a statement .
The Society of Critical Care Medicine has projected that 960,000 coronavirus patients in the U.S. may need to be put on ventilators at one point or another during the outbreak . The organization estimates the U.S. has only about 200,000 of the machines -- and half are older models that may not be ideal for the most critically ill patients .
But whether medical equipment suppliers can turn out enough of the machines at a time when countries around the world are clamoring for them , too , is unclear .
In the most severe cases , the coronavirus damages healthy tissue in the lungs , making it hard for them to deliver oxygen to the blood . Pneumonia can develop , along with a more severe and potentially deadly condition called acute respiratory distress syndrome , which can damage other organs .
Ventilators feed oxygen into the lungs of patients with severe respiratory problems through a tube inserted down the throat . The machines are also used routinely to help other hospital patients breathe , namely those undergoing surgery while under general anesthesia .
HOW ARE HOSPITALS , US GOVERNMENT WORKING TO PROTECT AGAINST A POTENTIAL VENTILATOR SHORTAGE ?
The other problem is that there are only enough respiratory therapists , specialist nurses and doctors with the ideal type of critical care training in the U.S. for about 135,000 patients to be put on ventilators at any one time , the critical care organization said .
Dr. Lewis Kaplan , president of the Society of Critical Care Medicine , said postponing non-emergency surgeries in the event of a big surge in coronavirus cases could help free up some ventilators , as well as anesthesiologists and nurse anesthetists , to deal with the crisis .
On Tuesday , U.S. Defense Secretary Mark Esper said the Pentagon will provide 2,000 specialized ventilators to federal health authorities to help handle the outbreak . He said the machines are designed for use by troops , and the military will need to train civilians on how to use them .
President Trump said Monday that the government is seeking to acquire more ventilators .
Dr. Anthony Fauci , the Trump administration 's infectious disease expert , told ABC on Monday that the federal government has an estimated 13,000 ventilators in a Strategic National Stockpile , which keeps medical supplies on hand for states to use in emergencies . But whether the number of ventilators nationwide is enough depends on how well the country can contain the virus , Fauci said .