Two planes carrying hundreds of US citizens from a coronavirus-hit cruise ship in Japan have arrived in the US .
One plane landed at a US Air Force base in California and the other in Texas . Passengers will be isolated at military facilities for 14 days .
There were about 400 Americans on board the Diamond Princess . The ship , with some 3,700 passengers and crew , has been in quarantine since 3 February .
Meanwhile , China has reported 2,051 new cases in the past 24 hours .
Of those new cases , 94 % were from Hubei province , the epicentre of the outbreak .
More than 70,600 people across China have been infected by the virus , with 1,771 deaths . Most new cases and deaths have been reported in Wuhan , Hubei 's largest city .
In Japan , a public gathering to celebrate the birthday of new Emperor Naruhito later this week has been cancelled , due to concerns over the spread of the virus
Also in Japan , organisers of the Tokyo marathon due to take place on 1 March have cancelled the amateur part of the race , affecting some 38,000 runners , after cases of the virus were confirmed in the city . Only elite runners will be allowed to take part
China 's National People 's Congress standing committee said it would meet next week to discuss a delay of this year 's Congress - the Communist Party 's most important annual gathering - because of the outbreak
At the weekend , an American woman tested positive for the virus in Malaysia after leaving a cruise ship docked off the coast of Cambodia . There are fears for other passengers on the cruise , who are now dispersed around the world
A Russian woman who was ordered to go back to a quarantine facility by a St Petersburg court has returned to hospital . Last week , Alla Ilyina escaped from the facility after testing negative three times for the virus , but was told to remain quarantined for two weeks
More than 300 passengers were repatriated voluntarily , the US state department said . Fourteen of them were reported during transit to have tested positive for the virus and were being kept separate from the other passengers , it said .
They will all undergo a 14-day quarantine , on top of the time they have already spent confined on the ship .
US officials later said 13 of the passengers thought to be `` high risk '' were sent on to a special facility at the University of Nebraska in Omaha .
At least 40 US citizens who were already showing symptoms prior to the evacuation were not allowed on the planes and would be treated in Japan , Dr Anthony Fauci , Director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases told US broadcaster CBS .
Also , some Americans have declined to be evacuated , preferring to wait until the ship quarantine comes to an end on 19 February .
Passenger Matt Smith , a lawyer , said he would not want to travel on a bus to the plane with possibly infected people .
Skip Twitter post by @ mjswhitebread we would like to just finish the quarantine on the ship as planned , decompress in a non-quarantine environment in Japan for a few days , then fly back to the U.S. pursuant to our own arrangements . What 's wrong with that ? — Matthew Smith ( @ mjswhitebread ) February 15 , 2020 Report
The cruise ship was put in quarantine in Japan 's port of Yokohama after a man who disembarked in Hong Kong was found to have the virus .
On Monday , Japanese officials said there were 99 new cases of infections on board the ship , bringing the total to 454 confirmed cases . It is the largest cluster of cases outside China .
A Russian woman who was on board and tested positive is thought to be the first Russian national to contract the virus , Reuters news agency reports .
She will be taken to a hospital for treatment , the Russian embassy in Japan said .
To assist with relief efforts , Japan 's government has given away 2,000 iPhones to passengers on the ship - one for each cabin .
The smartphones were distributed so people could use an app , created by Japan 's health ministry , which links users with doctors , pharmacists and mental health counsellors . Phones registered outside of Japan are unable to access the app .
Other evacuation flights have been arranged to repatriate residents of Israel , Hong Kong and Canada . On Monday , Australia announced that it would evacuate 200 of its citizens too and the UK said it was considering organising an evacuation flight .
According to official figures for 16 February , 100 people died from the virus in Hubei , down from 139 on Saturday .
The Chinese authorities are tightening curbs on movement to combat the outbreak . People in Hubei province , which has 60 million people , have been ordered to stay at home , though they will be allowed to leave in an emergency .
In addition , a single person from each household will be allowed to leave the building or compound they live in every three days to buy food and essential items .
On housing estates , one entrance will be kept open . It will be guarded to ensure that only residents can enter or leave .
All businesses will stay closed , except chemists , hotels , food shops and medical services .
There will be a ban on the use of private cars , but vehicles used for the delivery of essential goods are exempt .
In the Chinese capital , Beijing , authorities have ordered everyone returning to the city to go into quarantine for 14 days or risk punishment .
China 's central bank will also disinfect and store used banknotes before recirculating them in a bid to stop the virus spreading .
New cases spiked last week after a change in the way they were counted , but have been falling since .
National Health Commission spokesman Mi Feng said the figures showed China was managing to curb the outbreak .
Taiwan has reported a death from the illness - a taxi driver , 61 , who had not travelled abroad recently but had diabetes and hepatitis B , Health Minister Chen Shih-chung said .
The minister said many of his passengers had come from China .
Outside China , there have been more than 600 cases in nearly 30 countries . Four others have died outside mainland China - in France , Hong Kong , the Philippines and Japan .
The virus is a new strain of coronavirus and causes an acute respiratory disease which has been named Covid-19 .
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist . You can also contact us in the following ways :