In this image provided by the McConnell Center at the University of Louisville , Mitch McConnell sits with his parents , Julia `` Dean '' and A.M. McConnell in this image from the mid 1940 's in Five Points , Ala. As the coronavirus pandemic unfolds , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell flashes back to an earlier crisis that gripped the nation , and his own life , when he was a boy . He was struck with polio . ( McConnell Center at the University of Louisville via AP )
In this image provided by the McConnell Center at the University of Louisville , Mitch McConnell sits with his parents , Julia `` Dean '' and A.M. McConnell in this image from the mid 1940 's in Five Points , Ala. As the coronavirus pandemic unfolds , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell flashes back to an earlier crisis that gripped the nation , and his own life , when he was a boy . He was struck with polio . ( McConnell Center at the University of Louisville via AP )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — Mitch McConnell ’ s earliest childhood memory is the day he left the polio treatment center at Warm Springs , Georgia , for the last time .
He was just a toddler in 1944 , when his father was deployed to World War II , his mother relocated the family to her sister ’ s home in rural Alabama and he came down with flu-like symptoms . While he eventually recovered , his left leg did not . It was paralyzed .
Two long years later , after shuttling young McConnell to and from the center where then-President Franklin Roosevelt received polio care , his mother was told that day that her young son would be able walk into his life without a leg brace .
She immediately took the 4-year-old shopping for a new pair of shoes .
More than 70 years later , Senate Majority Leader McConnell walked into the U.S. Senate to pass a sweeping coronavirus rescue package — and shutter the chamber for the forseeable future — as another dangerous flu-like virus fills the nation with anxiety , quarantines and unimaginable disruptions to American life .
“ Why does this current pandemic remind me of that ? I think No . 1 is the fear , ” said McConnell in an interview with The ███ .
“ And the uncertainty you have when there ’ s no pathway forward on either treatment or a vaccine and that was the situation largely in polio before 1954 . ”
The two crises now bookend McConnell ’ s years , making the Kentucky Republican an unexpected voice of personal experience and reflection in what he calls these “ eerie ” times .
It ’ s an unusual role for the famously guarded leader , who rarely says more when less will do , and relishes an image as a sly political tactician . But as more than 16,000 people in the U.S. have died from the coronavirus , the echoes are all too familiar . So too is the solution , as he sees it , to care for the nation ’ s sick and produce treatments , and an eventual vaccine .
“ There ’ s hope that we ’ re going to get on top of this disease , ” he said , “ within a year , year and a half . ”
Polio ignited a dreadful fear across the U.S. in those years , especially in summertime . The virus particularly struck children , forcing swift closures of schools and playgrounds and , in the sweltering heat , swimming pools . Towns shuttered , families isolated . Thousands died , others were hospitalized and some left permanently paralyzed or with post-polio syndrome . The Salk vaccine was still years away .
“ It was a scary virus , ” said Stacey D. Stewart , president & CEO of March of Dimes , which started as FDR ’ s National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis but quickly took on the name that reflected the public service call for Americans to donate their dimes for a polio solution .
“ You didn ’ t understand how you got it , ” she said , and because it impacted so many young people , for “ so many parents , what ’ s worse for a parent than having your child get sick ? ”
As a toddler , McConnell was taught to stay off his feet . His mother understood if he tried to walk too soon after the illness he might require a leg brace for the rest of his life . She began taking him on the hour drive each way to Warm Springs where Roosevelt ’ s condition was a warning sign to Americans the disease spared no one . Back home , she would would run through the physical therapy with her son “ like a drill sergeant , ” he said .
McConnell doesn ’ t remember much from those earliest days . Much of it he knows from his mother ’ s retelling and his own reading of books of the era .
But he does remember what happened in the years after she bought him those saddle oxfords on their last trip home from Warm Springs .
He couldn ’ t run as fast as the other kids . When he put on a swimsuit , his left leg had a narrower circumference , leaving him embarrassed . Even now , he says he has trouble climbing stairs .
“ I was lucky , ” he said , choking up as he recalls his mother , “ who was determined to see me walk again . ”
Of “ tenacity , hard work and not giving up , ” he said , ” My mother instilled all that in me before I was 4 years old and I think it ’ s been a guiding principle in how I lead my life . ”
One of the first things McConnell did when he was elected to public office in Kentucky , he writes in his memoir , was buy a new pair of shoes .
In the Senate last month , McConnell began linking past to the present “ just as soon as it became clear that we were actually endangering each other to be together . ”
Senators were self-isolating and one , Rand Paul , announced he tested positive .
With the Capitol all but shuttered , the Senate raced to approve the rescue package . The votes tallied , McConnell adjourned the Senate .
“ Let ’ s continue to pray for one another , ” he said . “ And for our country . ”
Now from a quiet Capitol Hill -- he is working from the second floor of his townhouse , his wife Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao on the third — the two suddenly find themselves like other Americans stumbling through the new stay-at-home normal .
A year ago , he returned to Warm Springs for the first time . At what is now a historic site , he reviewed files about his condition , his visits . He learned he sometimes received treatments when Roosevelt did , including the week the former president died .
Asked how his mom afforded his own medical care , he was stumped . Were there bills ? “ Honestly , I don ’ t know the answer to that , ” he said . He said he would try to find out .
One memory that does stand clear is the arrival of the polio vaccine , and the relief it brought a weary populace .
As Congress considers the next aid package , he said he wants more money for health care .
“ I ’ ve had a normal life , but I ’ ve been acutely aware of the disease that I had and the relief that the country had when they found the vaccine , ” he said .