Seen through a bridge glass panel covered in graffiti a man wearing a face mask walks in Sarajevo , Bosnia , Wednesday , May 6 , 2020 . After nearly two months in lockdown , mosques in Bosnia have reopened to believers celebrating the islamic holy month of Ramadan , who can attend three daytime prayers as long as they observe social distancing rules and use protective equipment . ( AP Photo/Kemal Softic )
Seen through a bridge glass panel covered in graffiti a man wearing a face mask walks in Sarajevo , Bosnia , Wednesday , May 6 , 2020 . After nearly two months in lockdown , mosques in Bosnia have reopened to believers celebrating the islamic holy month of Ramadan , who can attend three daytime prayers as long as they observe social distancing rules and use protective equipment . ( AP Photo/Kemal Softic )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — As Europe and the U.S. loosen their lockdowns against the coronavirus , health experts are expressing growing dread over what they say is an all-but-certain second wave of deaths and infections that could force governments to clamp back down .
“ We ’ re risking a backslide that will be intolerable , ” said Dr. Ian Lipkin of Columbia University ’ s Center for Infection and Immunity .
Elsewhere around the world , German authorities began drawing up plans in case of a resurgence of the virus . Experts in Italy urged intensified efforts to identify new victims and trace their contacts . And France , which hasn ’ t yet eased its lockdown , has already worked up a “ reconfinement plan ” in the event of a new wave .
“ There will be a second wave , but the problem is to which extent . Is it a small wave or a big wave ? It ’ s too early to say , ” said Olivier Schwartz , head of the virus unit at France ’ s Pasteur Institute .
In the U.S. , with about half of the states easing their shutdowns to get their economies restarted and cellphone data showing that people are becoming restless and increasingly leaving home , public health authorities are worried .
Many states have not put in place the robust testing that experts believe is necessary to detect and contain new outbreaks . And many governors have pressed ahead before their states met one of the key benchmarks in the Trump administration ’ s guidelines for reopening -- a 14-day downward trajectory in new illnesses and infections .
“ If we relax these measures without having the proper public health safeguards in place , we can expect many more cases and , unfortunately , more deaths , ” said Josh Michaud , associate director of global health policy with the Kaiser Family Foundation in Washington .
Cases have continued to rise steadily in places such as Iowa and Missouri since the governors began reopening , while new infections have yo-yoed in Georgia , Tennessee and Texas .
Lipkin said he is most worried about two things : the reopening of bars , where people crowd together and lose their inhibitions , and large gatherings such as sporting events , concerts and plays . Preventing outbreaks will require aggressive contact tracing powered by armies of public health workers hundreds of thousands of people strong , which the U.S. doesn ’ t yet have , Lipkin said .
Worldwide the virus has infected more than 3.6 million people and killed over a quarter-million , according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University that experts agree understates the dimensions of the disaster because of limited testing , differences in counting the dead and concealment by some governments .
The U.S. has recorded over 70,000 deaths and 1.2 million confirmed infections , while Europe has reported over 140,000 dead .
This week , the researchers behind a widely cited model from the University of Washington nearly doubled their projection of deaths in the U.S. to about 134,000 through early August , in large part because of the easing of state stay-at-home restrictions . Newly confirmed infections per day in the U.S. exceed 20,000 , and deaths per day are running well over 1,000 .
In hard-hit New York City , which has managed to bring down deaths dramatically even as confirmed infections continue to rise around the rest of the country , Mayor Bill de Blasio warned that some states may be reopening too quickly .
“ My message to the rest of the country is learn from how much effort , how much discipline it took to finally bring these numbers down and follow the same path until you ’ re sure that it ’ s being beaten back , ” he said on CNN , “ or else if this thing boomerangs , you ’ re putting off any kind of restart or recovery a hell of a lot longer . ”
A century ago , the Spanish flu epidemic ’ s second wave was far deadlier than its first , in part because authorities allowed mass gatherings from Philadelphia to San Francisco .
“ It ’ s clear to me that we are in a critical moment of this fight . We risk complacency and accepting the preventable deaths of 2,000 Americans each day , ” epidemiologist Caitlin Rivers , a professor at Johns Hopkins , told a House subcommittee in Washington .
President Donald Trump , who has pressed hard to ease the restrictions that have throttled the economy and thrown more than 30 million Americans out of work , pulled back Wednesday on White House plans revealed a day earlier to wind down the coronavirus task force .
He tweeted that the task force will continue meeting indefinitely with a “ focus on SAFETY & OPENING UP OUR COUNTRY AGAIN . ”
Underscoring those economic concerns , the European Union predicted the worst recession in its quarter-century history . And the U.S. unemployment rate for April , which comes out Friday , is expected to hit a staggering 16 percent , a level last seen during the Great Depression of the 1930s .
Governors continue to face demands , even lawsuits , to reopen . In Michigan , where armed demonstrators entered the Capitol last week , the Republican-led Legislature sued Democratic Gov . Gretchen Whitmer , asking a judge to declare invalid her stay-at-home order , which runs at least through May 15 .
In hard-hit Italy , which has begun easing restrictions , Dr. Silvio Brusaferro , president of the Superior Institute of Health , urged “ a huge investment ” of resources to train medical personnel to monitor possible new cases of the virus , which has killed about 30,000 people nationwide .
He said that contact-tracing apps — which are being built by dozens of countries and companies — aren ’ t enough to manage future waves of infection .
German Chancellor Angela Merkel said after meeting with the country ’ s 16 governors that restaurants and other businesses will be allowed to reopen in coming weeks but that regional authorities will have to draw up a “ restriction concept ” for any county that reports 50 new cases for every 100,000 inhabitants within a week .
Britain , with over 30,000 dead , the second-highest death toll in the world behind the U.S. , plans to extend its lockdown but has begun recruiting 18,000 people to trace contacts of those infected .
On Thursday , New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern outlined a plan for a further relaxation of its lockdown rules , under which the country would reopen bars , retail stores and hair salons beginning next week and once again allow domestic travel .
In other developments , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said nearly 5,000 coronavirus illnesses and at least 88 deaths have been reported among inmates in American jails and prisons . An additional 2,800 cases and 15 deaths were reported among guards and other staffer members .
A 57-year-old immigration detainee at Otay Mesa Detention Center in San Diego died Wednesday from complications related to the coronavirus , authorities said , marking the first reported death from the virus among about 30,000 people in U.S. immigration custody . Otay Mesa has been a hotbed for the spread of the coronavirus .