For emergency planners , there ’ s a simple maxim : “ If you ’ re ready for an earthquake , you ’ re ready for a lot of different things , ” Barb Graff ( no relation ) , head of emergency management in Seattle , once told me . But for her in Seattle , it ’ s also a necessity : The most real threat the Pacific Northwest faces is a megathrust earthquake along what ’ s known as the Cascadia Subduction Zone .
California ’ s “ Big One , ” along the San Andreas Fault , gets most of the attention , but there are three other U.S. faults that cause emergency planners perhaps even more heartburn .
First , the Cascadia Subduction Zone , a fault running for about 700 miles off the Pacific Coast of Oregon and Washington , or what the New Yorker called in 2015 , “ The Really Big One. ” The fault , when it goes , might unleash “ only ” an earthquake between 8 and 8.6 magnitude , which itself would rank as one of the most powerful and destructive quakes to ever hit the United States . But a so-called full margin rupture of the fault would prove truly catastrophic , potentially topping 9.0 . Beyond the quake ’ s damage from the shaking , it could cause a multihundred-mile tsunami to inundate the West Coast with just 15 minutes warning . FEMA ’ s projections show 13,000 initial deaths from the quake and the tsunami , and upward of a million people displaced . These are hardly abstract threats ; geologists say there ’ s a 1-in-3 chance of an 8.0 earthquake in the region in the next 50 years . “ The amount of devastation is going to be unbelievable , ” Oregon geologist Rob Witter said in 2009 , after calculating that a full 9.0 quake has a 10 percent to 14 percent chance of occurring in the next half century . “ People are n't going to be ready for this . ”
Second , the New Madrid Seismic Zone—named for a Missouri town and running from Arkansas up to Illinois—has historically produced the strongest earthquakes in the lower-48 states . In the winter of 1811-1812 , a series of three quakes shifted land more than 15 feet , liquified the ground and caused whole islands to disappear . In a 2019 regional exercise , known as “ Shaken Fury , ” local , state and federal officials drilled on how to respond to a 7.7 magnitude New Madrid earthquake . Daniel Kaniewski , a managing director at Marsh & McLennan who until February served as the No . 2 at FEMA , recalls visiting one major state emergency operations centers and discovering that officials there refused to even simulate a quake of that strength ; they ’ d determined that the local devastation would be so great that emergency planners would have no adequate response , even in a tabletop exercise . “ Just the exercise alone could so tax the system that there would n't be valuable lessons learned , ” he recalls . “ That earthquake is one that we as a nation are very vulnerable to . ”
The U.S. Geological Survey estimates that the New Madrid Seismic Zone has roughly a 7 percent to 10 percent chance of a catastrophic-level 8.0 quake in the next 50 years , but given the region ’ s lack of preparedness , weaker building codes than California , and a civilian population largely unaware , even a 6.0 earthquake—which has a 25 percent to 40 percent chance of occurring in the next half-century—might prove devastating .
“ What has been so unique about Covid is the national impact—it ’ s the first time we ’ ve seen simultaneous emergency declarations in all 50 states—and the closest thing to that level is a New Madrid event . It would be a large-scale significant disruption across the heartland—a lot of your protein production , your food and agriculture , goods that get shipped via the Mississippi , or across the country on tractor-trailers , ” Krebs says .
Third , and probably least known of all , is the Wasatch fault zone , stretching across Utah and Idaho , tracing the rough outline of the Salt Lake Valley , and which has been active even just in recent days ; in March , it recorded a 5.7 magnitude quake . “ The earthquake in Idaho and Utah was a big wake-up call , ” Phoenix , the volcanologist , says . Larger earthquakes in the region might quickly prove devastating . “ Wasatch is every bit as concerning as a Southern California quake , not simply because of the magnitude potential but because of the vulnerabilities present there , ” Kaniewski says . “ Much of the building construction in Salt Lake City is unreinforced masonry—URM—and it crumbles when a quake happens . ”
Of course , California ’ s “ Big One , ” whenever it arrives , will be no walk in the park either . In 2008 , the U.S. government released the results of an extensive , multiyear effort by 300 experts to model a devastating earthquake in Southern California . Known as the “ Great California Shakeout , ” the report modeled a 7.8 earthquake on a southern portion of the San Andreas Fault that last shook in 1690 . “ The Shakeout ” would result in 1,800 deaths , 50,000 injuries , and more than $ 200 billion in damage ; many of the deaths would come in the fires afterward . The U.S. Geological Survey currently estimates that there is a 60 percent chance of a 6.7 magnitude or larger quake in the next 30 years in Los Angeles and a 72 percent chance of a 6.7 or larger quake in San Francisco .
As Krebs , Kaniewski and Graff all point out , any major quake isn ’ t just about the shaking—it ’ s a regional economic calamity and humanitarian crisis delivered without warning in just a minute or two . The systemic impacts are huge ; the headquarters and major operations of the nation ’ s four trillion-dollar companies—Amazon , Microsoft , Apple and Google—exist in these high-risk quake zones , and much of the nation ’ s imports and exports come into ports on the West Coast that could be rendered unusable by a large quake .
Then of course there ’ s the most frightening scenario emergency planners could face this year : several of the above . As FEMA preps for a hurricane season made all the more complex by the Covid outbreak , it faces the entirely foreseeable ( even likely ) possibility of confronting three or more large-scale disasters unfolding simultaneously this summer and fall : Wildfires out West , hurricanes in the Atlantic , and Covid-19 anywhere and everywhere . Add in the always-real possibility of , say , an earthquake ( Kaniewski ’ s maxim , informed by his years working in FEMA , is simply , “ It 's always earthquake season. ” ) a string of powerful tornadoes , or a geopolitical event like a cyberattack , as Phoenix says , “ You get the exponential growth of awful . ”
Matheny says one of the primary worries many forecasters have is just how little we actually know about the world around us . As science and technology advance , we ’ re constantly learning about new threats and pushing the boundaries of human interactions with the physical world .
It may seem easy now to dismiss scientists on the Manhattan Project who considered the theoretical possibility that the first nuclear test—the so-called TRINITY blast in New Mexico—might ignite Earth ’ s atmosphere ( it didn ’ t ) or those who worry that the Large Hadron Collider experiment might open a black hole on Earth ( it hasn ’ t—so far ) , but there are all manner of unimaginable things that could pose an existential threat to modern society . “ It ’ s worrisome how many catastrophic risks have been discovered only relatively recently , like supervolcanoes and space weather , ” Matheny says . “ There ’ s a lot we don ’ t understand . ”
No one knew that the Cascadia Subduction Zone even existed half a century ago , and when scientists in the 1980s first posited it was responsible for mega-earthquakes , they were met with skepticism . Now it stands as the nation ’ s possible biggest natural disaster-in-waiting of all time .
The unknown is particularly challenging for policymakers and business leaders , who are often driven by short-term incentives like elections and shareholders , often causing them to be more reactive than active . “ The fact that we don ’ t have any large-scale effort to understand existential threats to the U.S. or the world seems like a failure , ” Matheny observes . “ We ’ re already not that great at prioritizing risks that we know about ; we ’ re even more negligent thinking about risks that we haven ’ t categorized that are over the horizon . ”
Moreover , Gordon says , advances in science leave us exposed to structural challenges we have never even considered . “ I always worried about what would happen if we discovered that DNA could be manipulated—what does that do to our legal system ? ” she says . “ If our adversaries did something that forced us to consider whether anything DNA-wise could be trusted in our legal system , what does that do to our ability to seek justice ? ”
Richard Clarke , a former White House national security official during the Clinton and Bush administrations , proposed in his 2017 book , Warnings : Finding Cassandras to Stop Catastrophes , establishing a “ National Warning Office ” to work on imagining such risks . The closest modern-day analogue might be the Department of Homeland Security ’ s National Risk Management Center , part of the new Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency , which is trying to master and define the nation ’ s critical functions , understand how the U.S. economy actually works and overlay those systems with how they ’ d be impacted by various events , from cyberattacks to earthquakes . Last year , CISA published a list of 55 critical functions , things like generating electricity to conducting elections to transporting cargo . “ We are working to get a better understanding of the infrastructure itself , ” explains Krebs , CISA ’ s founding director . “ And then you start layering the scenarios on top . ”
Identifying those critical functions to keep the economy humming is especially important as every disaster seems to unveil new , unexpected and unknown interconnections between supply chains and industries . The long-term power outage in Puerto Rico that followed Hurricane Maria led to unexpected national shortages of IV bags and saline for hospitals because the nation ’ s main manufacturing plants were located there . The Covid crisis , similarly , is making clear how seemingly mundane business moves—like the market consolidation of the meatpacking industry—can lead to large-scale consequences in a disaster : Today , pork and beef are running short in large sections of the country .
“ It ’ s highly likely that we ’ re not going to see the next thing coming , so we need to build more resilience into our society and ensure we ’ re adaptive to whatever comes , ” Matheny says . “ The fact that everything is unraveling amid what ’ s actually a relatively mild pandemic does not bode well . ”