███ is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power . Sign up to receive our biggest stories as soon as they ’ re published .
In defense of a controversial policy to send COVID-19 positive patients from hospitals into nursing homes , New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo ’ s health department issued a report on Monday saying that the directive did not significantly contribute to the nearly 6,500 deaths that have occurred to date in homes across the state .
Howard Zucker , commissioner of the New York State Department of Health , said at a news conference that sickened staff members were the chief source of infection for residents at the state ’ s more than 600 nursing homes . He said some 37,500 workers at the homes — nurses , administrators , maintenance staff — had tested positive for the virus since the pandemic began to sweep through the state .
The report said the staff members “ transmitted the virus unknowingly — through no fault of their own — while working , which then led to resident infection . ”
In the days since its release , the report has come under withering criticism , from some nursing home executives , medical experts , scientists , and elected officials in both New York and Washington . The critics have challenged the report ’ s conclusions as dubious speculation and accused Cuomo and Zucker of issuing a cynical document meant to insulate themselves from blame .
“ I don ’ t think this report convincingly demonstrates that the policy was not another important driver of deaths , ” said Denis Nash , an epidemiologist and executive director of the CUNY Institute for Implementation Science in Population Health . “ The key consideration here is a question of ‘ what if. ’ What if there had been no such policy . … Would there have been fewer deaths ? How many fewer ? ... They didn ’ t fully leverage epidemiological methods to rigorously address that question , in my view . ”
On March 25 , Cuomo , saying he feared that an onslaught of COVID victims would overwhelm hospitals , issued an order that required nursing homes to accept COVID-19 patients being discharged from hospitals , so long as they were “ medically stable. ” Under the policy , the nursing homes receiving the patients were barred from testing the patients to see if they might still be contagious .
As ███ reported last month , New York ’ s nursing homes suffered a larger percentage of deaths relative to its total nursing home population than several states that did not have such a policy in place .
The state ’ s directive infuriated many health experts , families of residents and nursing home operators who said they were already ill-prepared and struggling to keep residents safe amid the growing COVID threat . They worried that the policy would needlessly lead to additional infections and deaths inside the homes .
Cuomo ultimately rescinded the policy on May 10 , after more than 6,000 residents had died and the fears about overwhelmed hospitals had faded . At the time , Cuomo also implemented a range of measures to protect nursing home residents , including routine testing of all staff .
In its report , the health department minimizes any role the admissions of COVID patients might have played in the spread of disease in the homes , citing a review of data made available by the nursing homes themselves .
The report asserts that the majority of the more than 6,000 admissions of COVID patients occurred after the deadliest days at the homes . It says that some 80 percent of the homes that took in COVID patients had already seen either staff or residents infected . It also says that many of the COVID patients sent to the homes were likely not still contagious .
“ If you were to place blame , ” Zucker said of the number of people who died inside nursing homes , “ I ’ d blame coronavirus . ”
Michael Dowling , chief executive officer of Northwell Health , the largest hospital organization in the state , appeared at the news conference with Zucker and endorsed the report ’ s conclusions .
At the conference , he said the “ study confirms what we saw in our own facilities around the state : that when the virus hit our local communities , it quickly spread through asymptomatic carriers into our nursing homes , hospitals , places of worship and other congregate settings. ” But he did not respond to further questions for this story .
The report asserts that the highest number of nursing home staff reporting symptoms occurred on March 16 , nine days before the controversial directive was issued . The peak number of reported nursing home fatalities , the report said , was reached April 8 . The report uses the timeline to conclude that workers at the home were the ones driving infections and deaths .
To bolster that claim , the report says that the greatest numbers of daily COVID patient admissions did not occur until later in April .
“ If admissions were driving fatalities , the order of the peak fatalities and peak admissions would have been reversed , ” the report concludes .
Rupak Shivakoti , an epidemiologist at Columbia University ’ s Mailman School of Public Health , said a fundamental flaw with the report was that while infected workers at the homes might have been a major driver of infections and death , the report deals almost not at all with whether the admissions of COVID patients added to infections and deaths .
Get Our Top Investigations Subscribe to the Big Story newsletter .
Indeed , while April 8 may have been the single deadliest day for nursing home residents — roughly 250 died — more than 4,000 additional residents would perish in the days and weeks to come as thousands of COVID patients continued to arrive at the homes .
“ Their data needs to be much more convincing than just saying the peaks of the nursing home health workers infection matched a later peak of mortality , ” Shivakoti said .
Catherine Troisi , an infectious disease epidemiologist at the UTHealth School of Public Health in Houston , also said this conclusion amounted to speculation on the part of the state .
“ It certainly is circumstantial evidence , ” she said . “ There ’ s no way to provide causality . ”
John Rowe , former CEO of health insurance giant Aetna and a Columbia University professor of health policy and aging , however , defended the state ’ s report as “ pretty solid. ” In an email , he said it contained “ rather detailed analytics , lots of testing data , a large sample of nursing homes ” and other important findings . He added that ███ could consider his opinion a “ peer review , the term used by academic journals for the process of independently assessing research before publication .
Christopher Laxton , executive director of the Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine , has criticized the state ’ s policy as having been enacted without adequate input from experts in nursing home health care . He told ███ that the report amounted to “ defensive politics on the part of the governor . ”
He told ███ that the report amounted to “ defensive politics on the part of the governor . ”
In Washington , Rep. Steve Scalise of Louisiana , the Republican leader of a House subcommittee focused on the COVID crisis , said the report was consistent with Cuomo ’ s unwillingness to take responsibility for a misguided and deadly policy . Scalise has demanded that Cuomo turn over records related to the policy and the outcomes at the state ’ s nursing homes , but Cuomo has so far refused to do so .
Read More A Spike in People Dying at Home Suggests Coronavirus Deaths in Houston May Be Higher Than Reported In Houston , one of the nation ’ s fastest-growing coronavirus hot spots , more residents are dying before they can make it to a hospital . Medical examiner data shows that an increasing number of these deaths are the result of COVID-19 .
On Thursday , Scalise sent a letter to Cuomo , urging his compliance with the congressional inquiry and saying many parts of the state ’ s report were “ divorced from science . ”
“ NYSDOH ’ s report appears to be little more than your administration ’ s latest attempt to deflect criticism and shift blame for the consequences of your deadly nursing home order , ” the letter said . “ But blame-shifting , name-calling and half baked data manipulations will not make the facts or the questions they raise go away . The families of those affected by your March 25 order deserve answers about why it was put in place and , rest assured , we will not give up until we get those answers . ”
Rich Azzopardi , an adviser to Cuomo , dismissed Scalise ’ s request for documents as partisan grandstanding , and mocked the idea that Republican lawmakers in Washington had much respect for science .
The health department ’ s report was done with the aid of the consulting company McKinsey & Co . The report says it drew on data collected from nursing homes through surveys . It does not list a single author by name , in or out of the health department . McKinsey itself is only listed in a footnote . The health department ’ s website lists four independent reviewers , none of whom are epidemiologists . Two are hospital executives : Michael Dowling , the Northwell hospital chain CEO , and Dr. David L. Reich , president and chief operating officer of Mount Sinai Hospital . Neither answered emailed questions for this story . The health department would not say who , exactly , authored the report , or how much it paid McKinsey for its involvement . McKinsey declined to comment for this story , but did not cite a reason .
“ We will not have any comment . Thank you for reaching out , ” DJ Carella , a spokesman for the company .
In determining that COVID patients discharged from hospitals could not have been a significant threat , the report says 252 of the 310 homes that received those COVID patients already had noted infected staff or residents .
The report seems to suggest that adding more COVID positive patients to those 252 homes did not increase the risk to the staff and residents .
The report is silent on a seemingly important question raised by its own data : Some 58 nursing homes did not have a single case of a sickened staff member or resident prior to the arrival of a COVID patient from the hospital . The report does not say how many , if any , residents or staffers at those homes became sick or died .
Asked by ███ about those 58 homes , Jonah Bruno , a spokesman for the health department , would not answer .
“ They won ’ t address what happened when they sent COVID patients to homes with no COVID because it ’ s damaging to their false narrative , ” said Steve McLaughlin , the Rensselaer County executive .
McLaughlin has publicly warred with Cuomo since the March 25 directive was issued . He refused to allow COVID patients into the nursing home run by the county , and the 300-bed facility has not had a single case of COVID . At Diamond Hill , a private nursing home in the county that took in four COVID patients , 18 residents died .
“ The entire report is a whitewash and a sham , ” McLaughlin said .
Bruno , the department spokesman , did not respond when told of McLaughlin ’ s claims .
The report , in arguing that the COVID patients did not add significantly to the death tolls , said that the COVID-19 positive patients were admitted to nursing homes at a median of nine days after hospital admission . The report claimed that most health experts agree such patients would no longer be infectious at that point .
In fact , the science on the length of infectiousness is still unsettled . The CDC , on its website , says just that .
Denis Nash , the CUNY epidemiologist , said the state ’ s own claim meant that roughly 3,000 COVID patients were sent to nursing homes within nine days after admission to the hospital , so by the Cuomo health department standard , many patients were still potentially contagious .
Nash said that it would be useful to know how many patients were sent to nursing homes one , two or three days after admission , when they were likely more infectious .
“ While ‘ most ’ of the patients were likely not contagious , at least at the peak of times , there might have been a small percentage who were , ” he said . “ Due to the easy spread in nursing homes , this is still a risk . ”
Bruno did not respond when asked why the state chose to use the median as its metric .
The report compares the timing of peak deaths to peak admissions , but it reflects no effort to trace the path of viral transmission : There is no indication that the investigators tried to identify workers or the residents they cared for , or who may have given the virus to whom .
Jim Malatras , an adviser to the governor on the coronavirus response , seemed to concede its imperfections in a remark to a reporter for City and State .
“ All you can do is measure things , and then point out the strongest factors , ” he said , acknowledging that the science on how long someone can be infectious remains in flux . “ If you put a gun to my head and say : You know with 1 million percent certainty ? ’ Of course not . ”
███ first contacted the health department on Monday with questions about the report , and asked for an interview with Zucker and some of the underlying data behind the report ’ s conclusions . Four days later , Bruno , the department spokesman , had not answered the questions or provided the data .
The state report says that “ over the course of the crisis , New York State provided nursing homes with an unprecedented 8,510,729 pieces of PPE for their workers and others . ”
The New York State Nurses Association believes that figure is deceptive and that the state provided too little too late . The association tried to sue the Department of Health earlier this year over its failure to provide sufficient protective gear to nurses in both hospitals and nursing homes . The lawsuit was ultimately dismissed because a federal judge said the association lacked standing .
“ New Yorkers deserve a full accounting of what happened over the past four months , and the NYSDOH nursing home report , unfortunately , does not move us forward . The need is plain for a comprehensive , independent review of nursing home practices , the role of for-profit operators , and NYSDOH oversight . ”
Read More “ Fire Through Dry Grass ” : Andrew Cuomo Saw COVID-19 ’ s Threat to Nursing Homes . Then He Risked Adding to It . A nursing home in Troy , New York , followed the governor ’ s order to accept patients being treated for COVID-19 . Six weeks later , 18 residents were dead of the disease .
Richard Gottfried , the Democratic chairman of the New York State Assembly ’ s health committee , has already called for such an independent investigation .
“ The report seems accurate as far as it goes , but also somewhat beside the point if we are interested in determining the specific consequences of the governor ’ s March 25 directive , ” Gottfried said . “ The question about the order is not how the virus first got into the nursing homes . It ’ s whether patients returning from the hospital were still contagious , and what should be done if the patient is still contagious . The report was done by the head of the department under scrutiny , and endorsed by two hospital executives with close ties to the department . I respect all three . But the report would have been more valuable and reassuring if it came from independent medical experts , preferably academic . ”
The state report argues that New York compared favorably to other states with respect to its nursing home death toll . It cites a New York Times analysis that found that New York “ ranks 46th in the nation — meaning 45 states had a greater percentage of fatalities . ”
But that ranking is based on the number of nursing home deaths relative to each state ’ s overall death count , not each state ’ s nursing home population .
As ███ reported last month , New York lost about 6 % of its more than 100,000 nursing home residents . New Jersey , which had a similar policy , lost roughly 12 % of its more than 43,000 residents . In Florida , where such transfers were barred , just 1.6 % of 73,000 nursing home residents died of the virus . California briefly had a similar policy in place but then revised it , losing 2 % of its 103,000 nursing home residents as of mid-June . Louisiana had stricter rules and lost 4 percent , suffering 1,075 deaths out of 26,000 residents .
Any state-by-state comparison is difficult to make because many states count deaths differently . New York , for example , does not count the deaths of nursing home residents in hospitals as nursing home deaths , as many other states do .
In defending its policy , the Cuomo administration has stressed that nursing homes incapable of safely caring for COVID patients could have declined to accept them . Several nursing home experts have said many homes feared denying admissions because of the state ’ s directive .
Shivakoti of Columbia said he thought it would have been preferable for the state , along with doctors and hospitals , to have decided where COVID patients could have best been cared for .
“ All this was likely difficult to do for the first wave but can be planned for the subsequent waves , ” he said ..
Tamara Kanetzka , a University of Chicago professor of public health sciences , said that the New York mandate to send COVID-19 patients to nursing homes was “ misguided , ” and that certain aspects of the report were speculative or disingenuous .
But she accepted that staff members were likely the single greatest source of infection at the homes .
What is beyond dispute , however , is that county , local and federal authorities had “ grossly failed nursing home residents nationwide and probably will continue to do so as the virus surges in much of the country , ” she said .
“ We need to stop finding people to blame and try getting resources and assistance to nursing homes located in the new virus hotspots , ” she said .