“ The 360 ” shows you diverse perspectives on the day ’ s top stories and debates .
It ’ s a commonly accepted truth that the only way the coronavirus pandemic will come to an end is through the development of an effective vaccine . The effort to accomplish that goal has been underway for months in countries around the world , at a scale and speed that have never been seen before .
There are currently more than 100 potential vaccines in some stage of development , some of which have advanced to human trials . The Trump administration launched “ Operation Warp Speed ” in May with the goal of having millions of doses available by the end of the year . Dr. Anthony Fauci , the nation ’ s top infectious disease expert , recently said he was “ cautiously optimistic ” a vaccine could be ready by early 2021 .
Experts say the virus will continue to spread until about 70 percent of the population has developed immunity . A vaccine is the quickest and safest way to establish what ’ s known as “ herd immunity. ” The other path — waiting until enough people have been infected — could lead to millions of deaths , epidemiologists say .
Despite promising progress on a number of vaccine candidates , there are still significant reasons to be skeptical of the idea that a game-changing vaccine is just a few months away , experts say . Developing a vaccine by the end of the year or even by next summer would shatter the record for the fastest vaccine ever developed , which currently stands at four years . Even if that extraordinary feat is accomplished , drug companies will still need to produce hundreds of millions of doses and distribute them to the people who need them .
It ’ s possible that will happen , but some experts worry about investing too much in what would be a best-case scenario . “ We ’ ve never seen everything go perfectly , ” a former Trump administration health official told Congress . A better plan , some argue , would be to prepare as if it might take years before a vaccine is widely available by developing effective systems of testing , tracing and therapeutic medicines that can last as long as they ’ re needed . There is even concern that the idea of a vaccine being right around the corner may be holding back efforts to put the virus mitigation measures we need right now in place .
Others have suggested that rushing development may backfire by increasing the risk that an unsafe vaccine might be the first to make it to market . Any setbacks could increase already pervasive anti-vaccine sentiment among the public , which may undermine herd immunity . There is also the possibility that any new vaccine may not be entirely effective or may provide immunity only for a short period of time .
“ An approved coronavirus vaccine won ’ t do any good if people aren ’ t willing to roll up their sleeves for it. ” — Editorial , Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
A vaccine won ’ t be a magic solution , but it ’ s still the best path out of the pandemic
“ If you ’ re imagining there ’ ll be one golden day when a vaccine is approved and the pandemic will be over — Finally ! We can all crowd into one another ’ s living rooms and resume choir practice again — I ’ m afraid it won ’ t be quite like that . But it will be the beginning of the end . There ’ s much to be hopeful about , and enormous challenges lie ahead. ” — Caroline Chen , ProPublica
“ It would be a shame if production and supply chain bottlenecks , such as the ones faced for medical supplies , slow down vaccine availability after discovery . Production must be done globally to prevent bottlenecks , hoarding and to facilitate efficient distribution of vaccines to local clinics. ” — Krishna B. Kumar , Mahshid Abir and Christopher Nelson , The Hill
Waiting on a miracle cure in the future is causing unnecessary deaths right now
“ Like an overly optimistic doctor , some policymakers are banking on a future vaccine that , at best , may arrive in 2021 while people are sick and dying now and the economy continues to be hobbled with an unclear path forward to stability . The tragedy is that there is a playbook that can reduce the number of cases and deaths right now. ” — Eric Schneider , Los Angeles Times