In 2010 , the moral philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah made a list of practices that he believed people in the distant future will condemn our generation of humanity for , much as people in the 21st century almost universally condemn slavery or the denial of women ’ s suffrage .
His four candidates were the American prison system , which cages about 2.3 million Americans at any given time ; the exploitation of animals in factory farms ; the abandonment of America ’ s elderly ( and the elderly of many rich countries ) in nursing homes ; and environmental degradation .
My friend Avi Zenilman , a journalist turned nurse , sent me Appiah ’ s piece a few weeks into the coronavirus pandemic , when Appiah ’ s list started to read like a premonition . Excluding the environment — climate change specifically , which has gotten a temporary respite as we do much less carbon emitting under quarantine — Appiah ’ s list doubles as a rundown of the most prominent and brutal vectors of Covid-19 in the US .
Coronavirus outbreaks have been reported at carceral facilities across the country , including pretrial detention centers like Rikers Island where most inmates have not yet been convicted of the offense with which they ’ re charged ; one prison in Ohio reported that 78 percent of inmates tested positive . More humane states are releasing prisoners simply to avoid a medical catastrophe that feels inevitable if they stay caged .
The Tyson , Smithfield , and JBS meat production companies have shut down pork plants that collectively produce 15 percent of America ’ s pork due to coronavirus spread . Tyson ’ s CEO took out a full-page newspaper ad warning that the nation ’ s food supply is breaking down . That ’ s a ludicrous exaggeration ( experts say the US isn ’ t about to run out of food ) , but it is true that the factory farming industry is particularly vulnerable to Covid-19 and poses a pandemic risk generally .
Nursing homes for both older people and those with disabilities are likewise seeing widespread coronavirus outbreaks . The Washington Post analyzed news reports and state data releases and found almost 1 in 10 nursing homes in the US have reported coronavirus cases . The Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that in the 23 states for which data exists , 27 percent of deaths from Covid-19 have occurred in nursing homes . In several states , like Massachusetts and Pennsylvania , most deaths have occurred in nursing homes .
It ’ s not a coincidence that Covid-19 is foregrounding these institutions . This crisis has cast a spotlight on inequalities that have plagued American life for decades , and it is forcing us to look seriously at how we relate to one another . Social distancing has a way of clarifying social reality , and America ’ s social reality is one of haves and have-nots .
What nursing homes , prisons , and factory farms have in common
If I were more religious , I would say this feels like a biblical plague , a force beyond our control identifying our worst societal sins to get us to finally pay attention . But that would be incorrect , because in many ways the spread of this virus is within our control . That the coronavirus has ripped through the US via these vectors only underscores how complicit Americans have been in making ourselves more vulnerable to this disease .
What factory farms , prisons , and nursing homes have in common is that they ’ re warehousing efforts . They all involve placing people or animals into confined facilities where most of society doesn ’ t have to think too hard about them anymore . They are institutions optimized for neglect .
Few people would likely be able to eat a Chicken McNugget if each order came with a photo of the tortured chickens who were killed to fulfill that order ; but because that torture takes place behind closed doors , confined to a few big facilities in rural areas and staffed by invisible low-wage workers , people are free to forget about the actual chickens and the working conditions there and eat their nuggets in peace . It ’ s no fluke that “ ag gag ” laws banning the dissemination of information about factory farms are one of the industry ’ s main lobbying priorities . Big corporations know perfectly well what would happen if people actually paid attention .
Prisons enable governments to take people civilian society doesn ’ t want to deal with anymore and stash them out of sight so that average citizens can forget about them . That enables truly horrendous conditions . Groups of prisoners in Washington , DC , and Texas are so desperate that they ’ ve sued for access to soap , cleaning supplies , and toilet paper amid the pandemic . “ On at least one unit , a closet full of cleaning supplies and clean rags is present , but residents are told they will be punished if they attempt to access or use those supplies to clean the unit , their own cells , or their hands and bodies , ” the DC lawsuit alleges .
These conditions are hardly new — a one-sheet-per-day rationing of toilet paper and a ban on showering more than once a week were among policies at Attica state prison in New York that sparked a 1971 prisoner takeover there . But this neglect is increasingly deadly in a pandemic .
Nursing homes are not necessarily an injustice , and there are plenty of valid reasons for families to place relatives there , or for residents to ask to be placed in homes . My family is no exception . But the same mechanisms through which nursing homes ease pressure on family caregivers make them places where widespread neglect is possible . Richard Mollot , an advocate for long-term care patients , notes that about one-third of Medicare beneficiaries admitted to nursing homes reported suffering some kind of harm within two weeks of entering the home .
“ These are the short-term residents for whom homes are paid the most and who are typically most able to articulate their concerns if something is wrong , ” Mollot writes . “ Where does that leave a majority of residents who are there long-term , most of whom are older , frail and cognitively impaired ? ”
Warehousing leaves its victims vulnerable to Covid-19 through at least two mechanisms . First , it forces affected individuals into close proximity with one another — including those maintaining the warehouse , like factory farm workers or prison guards or nursing home attendants . It ’ s difficult to socially distance under those conditions .
But the second mechanism is subtler and arguably just as important . Warehousing fosters social inequality , and we know that social inequality kills .
Pandemics are times of scarcity . Tests are scarce , doctors and nurses are scarce , masks and gloves are scarce . And scarce goods tend to be distributed according to existing social inequalities , because those inequalities reflect varying levels of respect paid to various groups by governments , businesses , and other social decision-makers .
So it is with coronavirus . It ’ s fairly well-known at this point that Covid-19 has disproportionately affected black Americans . Recent data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggests that of Covid-19 patients for whom race is known , 30 percent are African American , more than double African Americans ’ share of the overall population .
What factory farms , prisons , and nursing homes have in common is that they ’ re warehousing efforts
Unauthorized immigrants in detention , or working close-proximity jobs at farms and as delivery staff , or just existing in the US without access to most of the social safety net , are uniquely vulnerable too , and not just in the US but in many rich countries . Many report fear of seeking out health care because of the risk that their status will be uncovered .
We see the same inequalities with factory farms , nursing homes , and prisons . Incarcerated people , especially ones locked up for violent offenses , have long suffered from politicians ’ , and the public ’ s , conviction that their past deeds make them undeserving of help . That ’ s especially true now , with grave consequences for both them and their guards .
Nursing home patients are victims not just of density but of a broader societal disregard toward older people and those with disabilities . Texas Lt. Gov . Dan Patrick famously suggested that Americans 70 and older should be willing to die to get the economy back running again .
Meanwhile , the Covid-19 outbreaks at factory farms aren ’ t among their animals but among their workers and those at meatpacking facilities , who are disproportionately black , Latino , and/or immigrants . Warehousing hurts the people enlisted to do the warehousing , too . ( And , it should be noted , even though the novel coronavirus didn ’ t originate in a factory farm , factory farms are a pretty big pandemic risk — if not this pandemic , it may well be the next one . )
None of this is an accident . Social inequality , as the political theorist Judith Shklar taught us , fosters cruelty . In unequal societies , where one group of individuals is privileged in power above others , that power differential creates the social estrangement necessary for the powerful to treat the less powerful with cruelty .
But social equality can remedy social cruelty . “ If such social distances create the climate for cruelty , then a greater equality might be a remedy , ” she wrote . “ Even Machiavelli had known that one can not rule one ’ s equals with cruelty , but only one ’ s inferior subjects . ”
Covid-19 is not simply a natural disaster . It is a brutal reminder of the consequences of inequality Shklar identified . And it is a reminder that things can be different . The US can shrink its prisons . It can create housing laws , social supports , and other structures that enable older people to live with their families whenever possible . It can abolish factory farming , for both the animals ’ and the workers ’ sakes .
Pandemics are social phenomena , and addressing pandemics requires attacking social inequalities head-on .
███-mark Sign up for the newsletter Future Perfect Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week . Email ( required ) By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Notice and European users agree to the data transfer policy . For more newsletters , check out our newsletters page Subscribe
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .