Despite Coronavirus Risks , The U.S. Senate Returns For Normal Business
Though the coronavirus remains a serious threat in Washington , D.C. , U.S. senators return to the Capitol from their home states on Monday , more than five weeks after their last formal gathering and roll call votes .
`` All across our nation , American workers in essential sectors are following expert advice and taking new precautions while they continue reporting for duty and performing irreplaceable work their country needs , '' Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said in a statement Friday . `` Starting Monday , the Senate will do the same . ''
That means up to 100 senators — along with their staffs , support workers , visitors and others — will return to the Capitol building , with some new health guidelines .
Washington , D.C. , Mayor Muriel Bowser noted recently that members of Congress are considered essential workers . As a result , Congress does n't have to adhere to her stay-at-home order and closure of nonessential businesses .
The Senate 's return will also start a new wave of worries about more coronavirus infections on Capitol Hill , where dozens of workers , staffers and members of Congress have already been sickened or quarantined .
McConnell , R-Ky. , has led efforts to resume Senate business over the objections of some members . The chamber is slated to consider several presidential nominations this week , including a confirmation vote for an agency official Monday .
Democrats have said the move could put those in the Capitol complex and beyond in danger . They have also said the Senate should narrow its legislative focus to coronavirus aid or its oversight . The Democratic-led House is not returning this week .
After approving about $ 3 trillion in aid so far , Republicans and Democrats are split on a new infusion of cash into the badly strained economy . Democrats say state and local governments should be the priority , while Republicans are holding out for new liability protections for businesses .
`` Senate Republicans should be laser focused on the health and economic crises caused by COVID-19 , not confirming right-wing judges or protecting big business from legal liability , '' Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , wrote on Twitter .
On Friday , McConnell shared new Senate guidelines from Brian Monahan , the attending physician to Congress , to avoid gatherings and wear masks when possible . The guidelines also advise members and others to maintain 6 feet of distance , limit staff and visitors in offices , and participate in health monitoring programs .
`` I strongly urge my colleagues to consult these guidelines as we carefully resume in-person work , '' McConnell said .
But like much of the rest of the country , there is no widespread testing program on Capitol Hill . Meanwhile , none of the new Senate safety measures are mandatory .
`` I think this is crazy . I really do , '' Dr. David Relman , a professor of microbiology and immunology at Stanford University , said after reviewing Monahan 's guidance . `` We do n't want them to have to undertake the kinds of risks that put not only themselves in grave jeopardy , but others . And furthermore , we want them to be role models and they are not behaving as role models when they undertake this kind of convening in large numbers . ''
Late Friday , Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said the agency would send 1,000 coronavirus tests to Congress . President Trump lauded the move .
But on Saturday , McConnell and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , issued a rare joint statement , declining the offer and saying the tests should be directed to front-line workers since national testing access remains limited .
Still , Relman says , the current parameters for the Senate 's return signal a misunderstanding of the measures required for essential workers to protect themselves and others . And that includes a clear plan for testing .
`` I 'm just having a hard time here , understanding what the rationale is and how this can be good for our nation , '' said Relman , who is also chief of infectious diseases at the Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System in California . `` These essential workers are not embracing the known measures that will reduce risks down to some reasonable level for them . It 's sort of capricious and dangerous . ''
Also , with the average age of the Senate above 60 , the dangers are even higher , Relman said . Members will carry different levels of risk of exposure depending on which region they 'll travel to and from .
He pointed to the Canadian and British parliaments as better models , where government leaders have installed remote meeting options . Such a move has been blocked in the Senate by McConnell and remains under debate in the House .
Without remote plans , members and others meeting in person in Congress should be tested twice a week and adhere to weekly antibody tests , Relman said . Social distancing requirements should also be mandatory , he added .
Meanwhile , it could be weeks before senators find out the impacts of meeting in person , since the illness can have a lengthy incubation period .
`` It 's a huge ripple effect that has ramifications for lots of people , including many other members of the very same body of political leaders that they have suggested are essential , '' Relman said .
The Senate will take up the nomination of Robert Feitel to be the next inspector general for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission on Monday . On Tuesday , the Senate Intelligence Committee will hear from Trump 's nominee for director of national intelligence , Republican Texas Rep. John Ratcliffe .
It 's a reminder that the Senate 's focus remains on regular business since new coronavirus aid talks are stalled .
One key hangup : McConnell and other Republicans are pushing for new liability protections for businesses in a next wave of funding . Democrats are opposed .
`` Senate and House Republicans agree these protections will be absolutely essential to future discussions surrounding recovery legislation , '' McConnell and House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy , R-Calif. , said in a joint statement .
But Democrats say state and local governments facing dire financial shortfalls are the priority . Pelosi said a plan could total nearly $ 1 trillion to keep critical front-line workers such as first responders and nurses from losing their jobs .
`` They are risking their lives to save lives , and now , they 're going to lose their jobs . It is just stunning , and we have to address it , '' Pelosi told reporters recently .
The House was slated to return as well on Monday , but Democratic leaders reversed course after consulting with Monahan , the attending physician .
Now , House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer , D-Md. , is seeking new advice from Monahan on how the House can return safely . Until then , members are meeting remotely or holding hearings when possible . Talks are also underway for the House to consider new options for remote voting and hearings .
Earlier last week , Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz , D-Fla. , raised concerns during a caucus call about returning the chamber 's more than 400 members , plus thousands of staff , to Washington , D.C. , in the midst of the pandemic .
She was pleased at leadership 's later reversal on the plans .
`` I 'm proud that our House leadership struck a balance between staff and member safety , with a desire to urgently address America 's dire health and economic crisis , '' Wasserman Schultz said . `` A safe , well-thought-out re-entry to the workplace is something every American wants right now , and our House Democratic leaders recognize that . ''