“ The 360 ” shows you diverse perspectives on the day ’ s top stories and debates .
Leaders around the world are grappling with the challenge of trying to reopen parts of society while avoiding new outbreaks of the coronavirus . Every safety measure that ’ s lifted in an effort to alleviate the economic pain of lockdown brings potential risk of another wave of infections .
There is one group , however , that may be able to return to everyday life without the danger of contracting the virus : people who have already had it . Some countries have proposed creating a system of “ immunity passports ” that grant those who have recovered from COVID-19 — and are presumably shielded from a second infection — the right to return to normal activities .
The Chilean government was set to issue the world ’ s first immunity passports earlier this month before halting the plan . The U.K. , Germany and several other nations have discussed similar programs . Infectious disease expert Dr. Anthony Fauci said passport plans “ have some merit ” once the science around immunity is established .
When we get sick , the body triggers an immune response to fight off whatever we ’ ve come down with . After we ’ ve recovered , antibodies remain in our systems that protect us from future infections . A vaccine works in a similar way , using a benign version of a pathogen to spark an immune response without the threat of initial infection .
While it ’ s still too early to know whether contracting the coronavirus leads to enduring immunity , scientists suspect it may give at least some temporary protection , based on studies of similar outbreaks .
There ’ s near unanimous agreement that not enough is currently known about immunity and the coronavirus to safely start any immunity passport programs . If more clarity comes from research in the coming months , supporters of the passports believe that recovered people could be a critical part of establishing a sustainable “ semi-normal ” society until a vaccine is widely available .
Issuing immunity passports could allow people to safely return to work , which could stimulate the economy for everyone . Those people might also be able to help support vulnerable populations , since they are unlikely to pass the virus along to others .
The idea has been met with significant skepticism from many public health experts . A key concern is over how much immunity , if any , recovered patients have . It ’ s also impossible to know in the short term how long that immunity might last , they say . Some pathogens provide protection for decades ; in others , only a few months .
Another problem is the accuracy of tests used to determine who has antibodies to the virus . Critics of passport plans say currently available tests have too high a failure rate to be relied upon for any public policy . Especially worrying is the high rate of false positives , which leads people to think they are safe from the virus when they are not .
Even if all the scientific issues were to be resolved , there are reasons not to create immunity passports , some argue . The passes risk dividing society into two groups , the vulnerable and a small privileged class with rights denied to the rest of society . The system might also cause people to deliberately infect themselves so they can go back to work if they ’ re able to survive .
The passports could help bring the economy back to life if immunity is proven
“ If everything works , the antibody tests and the assumption that recovered people get enough immunity to not get COVID-19 again , then immunity passports would help us get out of stay-at-home orders and economic shutdown . In theory , people who have an immunity passport could safely return to work because they would not get sick again and start passing the virus around. ” — Chia-Yi Hou , The Hill
Anyone with a false positive result would be a huge threat to those around them
“ Imagine the psychological state of a person who thought they were in the all clear and has gone back to work in a care home and ended up killing several people. ” — Health psychologist Susan Michie to Wired
People who aren ’ t at risk have a right to return to their normal lives