The company ’ s stock , along with the Dow Jones industrial average , soared on the report that eight participants who received low and medium doses of Moderna ’ s vaccine had blood levels of virus-fighting antibodies that were similar or greater than those in recovered covid-19 patients . That suggests , but doesn ’ t prove , that it triggers some level of immunity .
Another 17 people had immune responses at a level similar or greater than recovered patients , but scientists had not yet tested whether their antibodies neutralized the virus .
Moderna ’ s announcement comes days after one of its directors , Moncef Slaoui , stepped down from the board to become chief scientist for Operation Warp Speed , a White House initiative to speed up vaccine development . Watchdogs called out Slaoui ’ s apparent conflict of interest . Filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission show Slaoui ’ s stock options in Moderna are worth more than $ 10 million with the company ’ s share price at $ 66.69 . In regular trading Monday , Moderna ’ s stock soared almost 20 percent to $ 80 .
Moderna also received $ 483 million from the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority , a federal agency . Moderna has also partnered with a contract development and manufacturing firm , Lonza , and Slaoui stepped down from that company ’ s board on Monday .
Slaoui is divesting his Moderna stock holdings , effective Tuesday morning , a spokeswoman for the Department of Health and Human Services said Monday afternoon . He will donate the value the Moderna stock gained since Thursday , before the announcement of his position leading Operation Warp Speed , to cancer research .
Companies and countries are racing to create a coronavirus vaccine and taking on financial risk to manufacture doses in large quantities before they even know whether the products are safe and effective . The United States is aiming to have hundreds of millions of doses of a vaccine broadly available by the end of the year .
An effort led by the University of Oxford , in partnership with pharmaceutical giant AstraZeneca , plans to have millions of doses of vaccine available by fall . Last week , those researchers disclosed that more than 1,000 patients had already enrolled in the initial trial of its vaccine , which began in late April .
A Chinese company , Sinovac Biotech , recently published a study in the journal Science showing that its vaccine protected rhesus monkeys against infection and is being tested in 144 people . Two other safety trials are ongoing in the United States , led by Pfizer and Inovio Pharmaceuticals .
Vaccine experts have said these accelerated development timelines are theoretically possible but extremely optimistic — and depend on everything going right . They stress that it will be crucial to gather convincing data that the vaccines are safe and effective before using them broadly — and the new data are promising but preliminary , from the earliest phase one trials that test safety in healthy people .
“ I would certainly take this as good news , and it ’ s certainly worth moving forward ” into later-stage trials , said Daniel Salmon , director of the Institute for Vaccine Safety at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health . “ There ’ s just historically , if you look at vaccine development , lots of vaccines that look good out of Phase 1 that don ’ t turn out to be good products . ”
The data released Monday by Moderna is encouraging but represents only a first step in a long process to bring a vaccine to market . It comes from an interim report on dozens of patients followed over weeks , whereas vaccine approval requires broad testing in thousands of patients followed over many months or years .
Paul Offit , director of the Vaccine Education Center at the Children ’ s Hospital of Philadelphia , said that the data looked promising and that it made sense to proceed to a large trial this summer .
“ The fact that the vaccine elicited neutralizing antibody amounts comparable or higher to those found in convalescent sera [ plasma ] is very encouraging , ” said Arturo Casadevall , chair of molecular microbiology and immunology at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health , who is spearheading the initiative to test plasma as a treatment .
Peter Jay Hotez , who is working on developing a coronavirus vaccine at the Baylor College of Medicine , said it would be important to understand the level of antibodies detected in the patients beyond the information provided in a company news release . He pointed to emerging evidence that many recovered patients do not muster high levels after they recover — and that high levels of antibodies may be needed to neutralize the virus .
The vaccine showed few safety signals , aside from redness at the injection site for one patient and some transient “ systemic ” symptoms in three patients given the highest dose — which the company will not be using in future trials .
The interim data comes from a clinical trial aimed at showing the safety of its experimental vaccine and helping the company select the correct dose . The company has not yet picked the final dose , or announced the size or length of the large trial that it will start in July , which will be the key one that regulators consider to decide whether the vaccine is safe and effective .
This month , the company received permission from the Food and Drug Administration to begin a 600-person , Phase 2 trial to begin to test the effectiveness of the vaccine .
“ We are very , very happy because first the vaccine was generally safe , ” Stephane Bancel , chief executive of Moderna , said in an interview . “ The piece that was really exciting and was the big question , of course , was can you find antibodies in people in enough quantities ” to prevent disease .
Moderna also reported that the vaccine protected mice who were vaccinated and then exposed to the virus , preventing it from multiplying in their lungs .
Moderna ’ s vaccine uses a genetic material called messenger RNA that codes for the distinctive spike protein that studs the outside of the novel coronavirus . The vaccine delivers the messenger RNA to cells , which then follow the genetic instructions to create the virus protein — allowing the body to learn to recognize and neutralize the pathogen .