Under a statewide `` safer-at-home '' order intended to prevent more widespread COVID-19 infection , Wisconsinites are going to the polls to vote in person Tuesday , after a series of legal battles over whether or not the primary election could be delayed and whether the voting period for absentee voters could be extended .
On Monday , the U.S. Supreme Court blocked the lower court ruling that would have allowed more time for absentee voting . As a result , all ballots must be postmarked by Tuesday , April 7 . Also on Monday , Wisconsin Governor Tony Evers tried to delay the primary until June 9 by executive order , but Republicans in the legislature sued , and the Wisconsin Supreme Court blocked the order .
Although the election remains in place for Tuesday , Wisconsin Elections Administrator Meagan Wolfe told reporters Monday night that results will not be reported until next week .
`` The guidance for clerks is going to be that they can not release any tallies until April 13 after 4 p.m. , '' Wolfe said . `` The court order today from the Supreme Court again extended that deadline for ballots to be received , if they 're postmarked by Election Day , to be received up through the 13th at 4 p.m. And so the tally can not be released until all the ballots have been accounted for . ''
There is another wrinkle that may cause some absentee voters not to have their votes counted . Wolfe said that voters who returned their ballots without a witness signature — if they provided a written statement they could n't get one — may see their votes discarded .
This April 6 , 2020 photo provided by Scott Trindl shows the sole polling location for city of Waukesha , Wisconsin , residents . Scott Trindl / AP
Wisconsin requires absentee ballots to have a witness signature to be counted . But last week the district court judge said that because of the coronavirus , if voters certified that they were n't able to get a witness signature on their ballot , then they could still turn in their ballots , if they provided a written statement saying they were n't able to get the necessary signature .
On Friday night , the appeals court overruled the lower court , meaning all ballots — even those sent during the period the district court judge 's order was in effect — must meet the witness requirement . So , if that ballot was received without a signature , it will not be counted .
And these voters are n't able to get a new ballot at the polls Tuesday either , because of the Wisconsin law that says voters may not vote at the polls if they sent in their absentee ballots .
Wolfe said that precautions were being taken for Tuesday 's primary , and there would be everyone hand sanitizer , wipes and social distancing signs .
Wisconsin state Republicans celebrated the decisions and welcomed the opportunity for people to come to the polls in person . The chairman of the state election commission , Dean Knudson said , `` It 's very important in our system of representative democracy that citizens have a right to choose their representatives , especially during a crisis . Even in times of war and during pandemic worse than the current crisis , we still go to the polls and we vote for our leaders . ''
But Democratic appointee , Commissioner Ann Jacobs condemned the decision and said they had failed the voters .
`` The fact of the matter is , is that voters will be brave enough to go tomorrow . And they should n't have to . Because this is n't a situation where we should be expecting ordinary people to risk their lives , the lives of people around them , the lives of people around them to go vote . And we failed them , '' Jacobs said . `` And the glee with which this has been extolled as a victory is astonishing . We should be embarrassed that this many votes are not going to be counted . We should be embarrassed that the absentee ballots did n't even get out to people so they could choose how to safely vote . ''