A New York Police Department officer wears a protective mask during the coronavirus outbreak in New York City , March 20 , 2020 . ( Andrew Kelly/Reuters )
On the menu today : a report that the CDC might want us to start wearing masks after all , some encouraging signs about America ’ s fevers from a thermometer system that the NSA would envy , how police ought to approach the issue of defiant religious gatherings during a pandemic , and a recent Morning Jolt reaches a milestone .
Are We About to Be Urged to Start Wearing Masks ?
Saturday , Dr. Matt McCarthy , an assistant professor at the medical school of Cornell University , tweeted , “ CDC guidance on masks expected to change in next 10 days . Americans will be advised to wear masks in everyday life . Current recommendation is for high-risk groups only . ”
But later that day , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention responded to his tweet , appearing to shoot down that idea . “ CDC does not have updated guidance scheduled to come out on this topic. ” They referred to the current guidance , which is :
But this morning , the Washington Post reports the same thing McCarthy claimed :
Officials at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are considering altering the official guidance to encourage people to take measures to cover their faces amid the coronavirus pandemic , according to a federal official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because it is an ongoing matter of internal discussion and nothing has been finalized . CDC guidance on masks remains under development , the federal official said . The official said the new guidance would make clear that the general public should not use medical masks — including surgical and N95 masks — that are in desperately short supply and needed by health-care workers . Instead , the recommendation under consideration calls for using do-it-yourself cloth coverings , according to a second official who shared that thinking on a personal Facebook account . It would be a way to help “ flatten the curve , ” the official noted .
I realize the CDC is dealing with an unprecedented situation , and we ’ re still learning about this virus . But either masks help or they don ’ t ; if they don ’ t help at all , it doesn ’ t make sense that they would be needed by health-care workers . ( I ’ m reminded of the head miner confronting the officials in the HBO miniseries Chernobyl , scoffing at a not-so-persuasive claim that the masks would offer protection from inhaling radioactive dust . “ If these worked , you would be wearing them . ” )
There are a lot of problems with the concept of the “ noble lie , ” and a big one is that it makes it harder for the truth to come out later — and once it does , the authority ’ s credibility is damaged . If you tell the public that masks don ’ t work because you don ’ t want them running out and buying them and hoarding them , some people are not going to believe you if you come back with a different message later . If the CDC wants people to start wearing masks , they ’ re going to have to persuade a chunk of the public that will instinctively say , “ Why should I wear one ? I heard those things don ’ t work . ”
Back in late February , Vox reported “ most health experts said there ’ s no good evidence to support the use of face masks for preventing this disease in the general population , ” and quoted one professor as saying , “ wearing a mask can also appear ‘ overly alarmist . ’ ”
Because we sure as heck didn ’ t want people seeming alarmist about the coronavirus back in late February , now did we ?
America Is Having Fewer Fevers . Is That a Sign We ’ re Winning ?
Kinsa Health produces Internet-connected thermometers and is collecting and analyzing all of that data coming in every day . It ’ s fascinating , as long as you ’ re okay with your thermometer doing the kind of consistent surveillance of the details of American lives that we usually associate with , say , the NSA .
To identify clusters of coronavirus infections , Kinsa recently adapted its software to detect spikes of “ atypical fever ” that do not correlate with historical flu patterns and are likely attributable to the coronavirus . As of noon Wednesday , the company ’ s live map showed fevers holding steady or dropping almost universally across the country , with two prominent exceptions . . . By Friday morning , fevers in every county in the country were on a downward trend , depicted in four shades of blue on the map . . . As of Monday morning , more than three-quarters of the country was deep blue . A separate display of the collective national fever trend , which had spiked upward to a peak on March 17 , had fallen so far that it was actually below the band showing historical flu fever trends — which meant that the lockdown has cut not only Covid-19 transmission but flu transmission , too .
Those exceptions were a broad swathe of New Mexico and a ring of Louisiana parishes surrounding New Orleans .
One catch : if you ’ re dealing with a severe case of the coronavirus , are you using a Kinsa thermometer , or is the hospital using some other one ? In other words , is the Kinsa data a good way to measure the milder cases ?
Let ’ s Avoid Unneeded Confrontations with Religious Communities during This Crisis , Okay ?
The silver lining to the Hillsborough County Sheriff ’ s Office arresting Pastor Rodney Howard-Browne in Florida is that the conflict did not escalate to a physical altercation . Local authorities really , really , really don ’ t want the River at Tampa Bay Church to hold services that continue to involve large groups of people getting together and remaining close together , in violation of the CDC ’ s “ social distancing ” recommendations .
If you want to persuade someone , you first have to see the world through their eyes , and understand what drives them , what motivates them , and what they value . The moment you turn it into a contest of wills , people dig in their heels . If law enforcement has someone religious in the ranks , that might be the right person to persuade someone that a particular action is consistent with their religious principles . The Hillsborough authorities are at least trying to assure Christian citizens that temporarily suspending services is consistent with their religious values .
That ’ s why Howard-Browne was arrested Monday on misdemeanor charges of unlawful assembly and violating quarantine orders during a public health emergency , said Hillsborough Sheriff Chad Chronister . ‘ Because of the reckless disregard of public safety and after repeated requests and warnings , I worked with our state attorney , Andrew Warren , to obtain a warrant for unlawful assembly and violation of public health emergency rules , both of which are second degree misdemeanors , ’ Chronister said . “ Our goal here is not to stop anyone from worshiping , but the safety and well-being of our community must always come first. ” Chronister and Warren held a news conference Monday announcing the charges before the pastor was in custody . That day , the number of confirmed coronavirus cases across Florida surged past 5,700 . Warren then took to the lectern and quoted the Bible . ‘ I ’ d remind the good pastor of Mark 12:31 , which said there ’ s no more important commandment than to love thy neighbor as thyself , ’ Warren said . ‘ Loving your neighbors is protecting them , not jeopardizing their health by exposing them to this deadly virus . ’
Hard cases make bad law , and we are in the textbook definition of extreme circumstances . In just about any other situation , the state attempting to restrict , block , or ban gatherings of religious believers would be straight-up unconstitutional , no questions asked .
You don ’ t have to be a fervent believer to be wary about state officials who deem religious services as a unnecessary luxury during this crisis , but who also insist every Planned Parenthood facility must remain open . New York City mayor Bill de Blasio , who has managed to botch a great many decisions during this crisis , had to go even further and threaten to permanently shut down any religious institution that violates state orders to not hold services . ( He doesn ’ t have that authority . ) Yesterday , large numbers of New Yorkers gathered in crowds that violated CDC rules in order to watch the U.S. Navy hospital ship arrive at the pier . The NYPD only offered verbal warnings . While the social distancing rules apply to everyone , religious groups who have a preexisting tense relationship with a nonreligious mayor may fairly wonder if they ’ re being singled out for particular enforcement .
In a situation such as this , state authorities would be wise to at least try to help the religious communities find alternative arrangements . Here in Virginia , some churches that can find the space are holding “ drive-in services , ” where families attend in their cars and remain in their vehicles , honking their horns in rejoice . That idea may not work in more urban environments , but you look at a problem differently when you stop seeing the question as , “ How can I stop this religious community from gathering ? ” and instead see it as , “ How can I help this religious community find a way to feel a sense of connection that is safe and won ’ t run afoul of the social-distancing guidelines ? ”
David Koresh may have been a maniac , but the Branch Davidians didn ’ t deserve to die for their actions , and had law enforcement understood the belief system of those inside better , maybe that terrible outcome could have been avoided . “ While many religious scholars have differing interpretations of the event , they agree that Waco remains the case study on how religious literacy is critical to peacefully enforcing the law in a pluralistic society , whether dealing with apocalyptic groups like the Branch Davidians or the polygamous FLDS. ” Living in a free country means allowing people to believe things that the rest of us find nutty ; the question is how we figure out a way that functions and abides with the law in a pluralist society .
ADDENDUM : Without going into the specific numbers , I can now say that the timeline of China ’ s false statements about the coronavirus is the most-read piece I have written at ███ in at least two years , probably much longer .