Known as the `` Phase 3.5 '' coronavirus stimulus package , lawmakers are hopeful a new $ 484 billion bill will be enough to keep American small business going , but Republican leaders say it 's just a stop-gap .
`` Unless we get our economy up and running again there is not any way we can spend enough to continue to prop up the country , '' said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , ( R-KY ) .
$ 383 billion of this latest stimulus bill will be earmarked specifically for small business programs , including the Paycheck Protection Program .
`` We want to make sure this money is available to small businesses that need it , people who have invested their entire life savings , '' Secretary of the Treasury , Steven Mnuchin said at Tuesday 's White House Coronavirus Task Force briefing .
The new legislation is on its way to the House after being passed Tuesday by the Senate . Meanwhile , much of the country is working to re-open .
`` Twenty states representing 40 percent of the population , have announced that they are making plans and preparations to safely restart their economies in the very near future , '' President Trump announced Tuesday .
Still , some of the states rushing to re-open do n't meet the White House guidelines . Georgia 's governor is preparing to open gyms , bowling alley 's , and barbershops this week , despite not seeing a two-week decline in cases of COVID-19 .
`` When we have more people moving around we 're probably going to see more cases continue to go up but we 're a lot better prepared now than we were over a month ago , '' Gov . Brian Kemp said .
`` I certainly can not in good conscience say that I agree with his order and I will continue to use my voice as mayor of Atlanta to ask people to continue to stay home , follow the science , and exercise common sense , '' said Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms .
CDC Director Robert Redfield warned that a second wave of COVID-19 could coincide with the start of flu season and prove to be even more devastating than what we now face . Dr. Deborah Birx says , if there is another wave , the country will be much better prepared .
`` We are going to continue that surveillance from now all the way through the fall to be able to give us that early warning signal , '' Birx said during Tuesday 's briefing .
Meanwhile , the FDA says its granted emergency clearance to the first in-home test for COVID-19 . And , in the United Kingdom , researchers at Oxford University are beginning the first human trials on a potential vaccine .