In the novel coronavirus , President Donald Trump has finally met a problem that can ’ t be solved with his usual bag of political tools : obfuscation , denial , deflecting blame , and misinformation .
That hasn ’ t stopped him from trying , even if it means saying things that endanger public health .
As of March 12 , the US has seen 1,323 confirmed cases of Covid-19 , the disease stemming from the coronavirus , and 38 deaths , according to the Johns Hopkins tracker . Public health officials , including those in his own administration , now estimate that millions of people may eventually be infected with Covid-19 .
“ If we are complacent and don ’ t do really aggressive containment and mitigation , the number could go way up and be involved in many , many millions. ” Dr. Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a member of the White House coronavirus task force , told the House Oversight Committee yesterday .
Trump , who addressed the nation from the Oval Office Wednesday night , has consistently sought to downplay the public health risk of the burgeoning pandemic while his administration has been slow to respond to the crisis .
Perhaps most concerning has been Trump ’ s instinct to outright contradict the facts and statements of the government ’ s top infectious disease experts as his administration has struggled to contain the outbreak . Here are seven of his coronavirus lies .
Trump ’ s statement to the nation Wednesday evening was his most serious treatment of the outbreak to date . He “ injected gravity and even a sense of crisis into a topic that he and right-wing media have downplayed for weeks , ” making it a “ critical step in the right direction , ” ███ ’ s Kelsey Piper explained .
Unfortunately , it was also deeply flawed . Several of his statements , like a trade restriction with Europe along with his travel ban , had to be swiftly walked back by White House officials . Trump was unclear about exempting American citizens and permanent residents from the ban , leading to panicked crowds congregating in enclosed spaces at many European airports like Charles de Gaulle in Paris , France .
Bedlam at U.S.-bound airlines at CDG in Paris early this a.m. , as Americans pay as much as $ 20,000 for last-minute flights . pic.twitter.com/kkbOAEFn4Y — Mike McIntire ( @ mmcintire ) March 12 , 2020
Perhaps most egregious was his claim that major insurance companies would cover treatment for Covid-19 free of charge , when in actuality they had agreed only to coronavirus testing without a co-pay .
Trump 's claim tonight that health insurers `` have agreed to waive all copayments for coronavirus treatments '' seems to be news to them .
“ For testing . Not for treatment. ” a spokesperson for the major insurance lobby AHIP says . — Sarah Owermohle ( @ owermohle ) March 12 , 2020
While Trump ’ s speech Wednesday evening finally sent a signal to the American public that the novel coronavirus is very serious , the mixed-up details undermined the endeavor .
In a phone interview with Sean Hannity on March 4 , Trump contradicted public health experts ’ estimates of the death rate for Covid-19 — based on a “ hunch . ”
To be sure , a precise death rate for Covid-19 is difficult to measure , in part because testing hasn ’ t been done on a large enough scale to measure accurately . Earlier this month , the World Health Organization had the death rate pegged at about 3.4 percent . Many experts think that number may be too high , given the struggles with adequate testing , putting the true number likely closer to 1 percent .
Trump , however , told Fox viewers that the death rate was even lower — a “ fraction of 1 percent ” — based on his “ hunch. ” Here ’ s the rest of the quote :
Now , this is just my hunch , but based on a lot of conversations with a lot of people that do this , because a lot of people will have this and it is very mild ... So if , you know , we have thousands or hundreds of thousands of people that get better , just by , you know , sitting around and even going to work , some of them go to work , but they get better and then , when you do have a death like you had in the state of Washington , like you had one in California , I believe you had one in New York , you know , all of a sudden it seems like 3 or 4 percent , which is a very high number , as opposed to a fraction of 1 percent .
Trump may have sought to downplay the mortality risk of Covid-19 in order to reassure nervous Americans and a jittery economy , but instead created a much more dangerous situation where people weren ’ t taking the virus seriously enough . It ’ s true that the risk of dying is highest for elderly people and immunocompromised people ( the US has plenty of both ) , but as ███ ’ s Dylan Scott and Eliza Barclay explained , “ the speed at which the outbreak plays out matters hugely for its consequences ” :
What epidemiologists fear most is the health care system becoming overwhelmed by a sudden explosion of illness that requires more people to be hospitalized than it can handle . In that scenario , more people will die because there won ’ t be enough hospital beds or ventilators to keep them alive .
So not taking the virus seriously — at the bureaucratic and individual levels — means fewer people taking suitable precautions , and possibly more cases and more deaths .
3 ) “ It ’ s going to disappear . One day , it ’ s like a miracle , it will disappear ”
On February 28 , Trump said that coronavirus will “ disappear ” like a “ miracle ” while speaking at a press conference for his coronavirus task force . On Tuesday , he told reporters on Capitol Hill that coronavirus “ will go away. ” In late February , he speculated that warm weather would kill the virus and stop its spread . None of these statements are backed by science or infectious disease experts within his own administration . ( Though some diseases — like the seasonal flu — do diminish in warmer seasons , there is currently no evidence the novel coronavirus will behave this way . )
Experts all along have predicted that without drastic measures to prevent outbreaks from growing bigger or the rapid development of a vaccine , the novel coronavirus will likely continue spreading and become endemic , a regular disease like the common cold .
On March 7 while visiting the CDC in Atlanta , Georgia , Trump said that anyone who wants a test for Covid-19 can get one .
As countless viral Twitter threads , local news stories , and more have recounted , that promise has not rung true . Take the “ Kafkaesque ” story physician ’ s assistant Julie Eaker told ███ ’ s Brian Resnick and Dylan Scott about trying to get one patient tested in California :
First , Eaker called her local health department and was told her patient didn ’ t qualify for testing since they hadn ’ t traveled to China , per the guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at the time . After the CDC relaxed its testing criteria , the patient was still sick , so Eaker called again . “ I didn ’ t receive a phone call back , ” she says . The patient thought they had pneumonia and asked to be tested for peace of mind . Finally , last week , after Eaker ordered some test kits herself from a private lab , she got a call back . “ The health department told me I was not allowed to use those test kits — that I ordered — without their permission ! ” Eaker was horrified . So she called the CDC to confirm if the local health department was correct . “ I did not get through , ” she says . “ I spent hours and hours and hours on hold . … So I thought I would just call the White House and talk to Vice President Pence , who is in charge of the coronavirus task force. “ She didn ’ t get Pence , but a White House switchboard operator told her to call the CDC . “ Somebody has got to help us , ” she says , exasperated . “ We ’ re out here on the front lines trying to take care of people . ”
But the problem has been bigger than that . The administration had promised to quickly deliver 1 million testing kits to private labs . But on March 6 , the White House announced that it would fall far short of that goal for testing kit distribution .
According to virologists , the best way to prevent an outbreak of a highly contagious virus like coronavirus is through aggressive testing . Knowing who is infected and when they became infected allows traditional measures like quarantines to work more effectively . If people don ’ t know they have it , they aren ’ t able to take their own steps to prevent spreading it to others .
In that , the administration has failed . So far , the US only has a limited capacity to process coronavirus tests every day , meaning we likely don ’ t have accurate numbers for the scale of this virus ’ s spread . The CDC has recommended that hospitalized patients displaying Covid-19 symptoms , as well as those who belong to at-risk populations , should get priority for testing , but anecdotal accounts of people with symptoms being denied a test have begun popping up on social medial .
At first , Trump blamed an Obama-era FDA rule for its slow response in distributing test kits , but experts have since revealed that claim to be false .
During that March 4 call with Hannity , Trump also compared coronavirus with the flu . He mentioned that the flu kills anywhere between 27,000 and 77,000 people every year , implying that coronavirus isn ’ t as serious of a threat to public health as Influenza .
3 . Suggests it 's fine for people w/ Covid-19 to go to work
4 . Compares coronavirus to `` the regular flu , '' indicating he does n't get the difference pic.twitter.com/uC9c03zX31 — Aaron Rupar ( @ atrupar ) March 5 , 2020
Trump ’ s own infectious disease experts have said that idea is wrong . Dr. Fauci told Congress on March 11 that “ the mortality of [ Covid-19 ] is multiple times what the seasonal flu is . ”
The reason why lies in the numbers . The CDC estimates that the seasonal flu has resulted in between 9.3 million and 49 million illnesses in the US each year since 2010 , putting the flu ’ s death rate at about 0.1 percent . Even if WHO ’ s 3.4 percent death rate for coronavirus is high due to inadequate testing capacity , using other public health expert ’ s estimations of around 1 percent would mean that Covid-19 could be as much as 10 times deadlier than the seasonal flu .
If 49 million Americans were to be infected with the coronavirus , a 1 percent death rate would cause 490,000 deaths , much more than the flu .
On February 25 , Trump promised that a vaccine would be available soon . “ Now they have it , they have studied it , they know very much , in fact , we ’ re very close to a vaccine , ” Trump said during a state visit to India . That simply isn ’ t possible even if development of a vaccine were prioritized and pushed through the regulatory process as fast as possible — as pharmaceutical executives explained to Trump himself .
Dr. Fauci estimates that it would be at least a year or a year and a half before a vaccine would be available to the general public . Several potential vaccine solutions for coronavirus are in early development in China , but Daniel O ’ Day , CEO of Gilead Sciences , told Trump that those are only now entering clinical trials . It ’ s likely that a vaccine will eventually be developed and available to the general public , but it ’ s not going to save us from this current outbreak .
7 ) The US was “ most prepared country in the world ”
Trump has repeatedly claimed that the US was the most prepared country in the world . This is , frankly , Trump ’ s usual political bluster . The reality is that his administration , with the help of a Republican-controlled Congress , hampered the country ’ s ability to fight pandemics like Covid-19 , as explained by ███ ’ s Matthew Yglesias :
In fact , the Trump administration remains committed to cutting funding to fight potential pandemics . When confronted in a congressional hearing about a 15 percent cut of $ 1.2 billion to the CDC and a $ 35 million decrease to the Infectious Diseases Rapid Response Reserve Fund ’ s annual contribution in the White House ’ s proposed 2021 budget , acting director of the White House Office of Management and Budget Russ Vought defended the proposed cuts .