A little more than a week ago , Isaac Budmen heard that a coronavirus testing site was going to be set up in Syracuse , New York , not far from where he lives with his partner , Stephanie Keefe . The couple , who are both artists , own a company that makes 3-D printers . They knew that medical workers had a shortage of face shields , one kind of personal protective equipment ( P.P.E . ) , and they wondered if they could help . On a recent Saturday evening , after a few hours of research , Budmen and Keefe designed and printed a face-shield prototype . It wasn ’ t very good , Budmen told me . They modified the design , adding sizes for different face shapes , making sure there would not be a space between the shield and the wearer ’ s forehead , where microbes might be able to reach the eyes , nose , or mouth . With their printers running all night , they figured they could make a total of fifty shields . The office of the Onondaga County executive asked them to make three hundred .
According to a survey released by the U.S. Conference of Mayors on Friday , about ninety-two per cent of the group ’ s members ( two hundred and thirteen mayors , from forty-one states and Puerto Rico , representing forty-two million Americans ) do not have enough testing kits or face masks for first responders and health-care workers ; eighty-five per cent said that their hospitals do not have enough ventilators . The U.C.S.F . Health hospital system , in San Francisco , is running out of nasal swabs for testing , and a health-care system in Texas that serves a million people is in danger of shutting down testing sites because of a shortage of protective gear . In New York , where people are now waiting in long lines outside of emergency rooms and refrigerated trucks have been deployed as temporary morgues , Governor Andrew Cuomo asked the federal government to help the state get thirty thousand ventilators . But that help doesn ’ t appear to be coming anytime soon . In a recent interview on Fox News , Donald Trump said , “ I don ’ t believe you need forty thousand or thirty thousand ventilators . You go into major hospitals sometimes , and they ’ ll have two ventilators . And now all of a sudden they ’ re saying , ‘ Can we order thirty thousand ventilators ? ’ ”
Across the United States , an ad-hoc corps of health-care workers , designers , engineers , and fabricators like Budmen and Keefe have stepped into the breach . Dr. Paul Biddinger , the chair of emergency preparedness at Massachusetts General Hospital , recently said , at a virtual town hall for the newly formed Massachusetts General Brigham Center for COVID Innovation , that the situation requires “ an Apollo 11 moonshot. ” Dr. Gary Tearney , a pathologist and the co-director of the Center , said that the initiative was set up to marshal “ the enormous outpouring of support ” following the hospital ’ s recent public plea to anyone with 3-D printing and other prototyping capabilities , to make personal protective equipment for health-care workers . “ We ’ re looking at designs and coördinating a way to print the most promising , ” Tearney told me . “ We have to make sure they are safe for providers and patients ” while bypassing the standard , protracted , ways of vetting new equipment , he said . On a separate call , Dr. Reza Farivar , a neuroscientist at McGill University , likened the effort to the Apollo 13 mission , “ you know , when they had to build a filtration system out of tubes , and so on . ”
The New England Journal of Medicine recently predicted that the United States may need as many as a million ventilators , and estimates put the country ’ s current stock at no more than a hundred and sixty thousand . Some of these are non-functional , as Californians found out last week , when Los Angeles received a hundred and seventy broken ventilators from the federal emergency reserve . Farivar has put his brain research on hold to organize the Code Life Ventilator Challenge , a two-week competition to design a coronavirus-specific ventilator so simple that it can be built and deployed anywhere on the planet . The challenge comes with a hundred-and-forty-thousand-dollar prize from the Montreal General Hospital Foundation , and nearly seven hundred teams from all over the world have signed up to participate . “ This is an all-hands-on-deck situation , ” Farivar said . “ All of us are anxious , but the antidote to anxiety is creativity . ”
A similar competition , the CoVent challenge , created by a group of fourth-year anesthesiology residents at Massachusetts General Hospital , is just getting under way . “ The ventilators that are used in the I.C.U . cost twenty to thirty thousand dollars and have millions of parts , ” Dr. Richard Boyer , the founder and director of the challenge , told me . “ We ’ re looking for something less sophisticated , that can keep someone alive. ” These efforts join a number of global crowdsourced initiatives , like # ProjectOpenAir , in Portugal , Open Source Ventilator , in Ireland , and M.I.T. ’ s E-Vent project , in which participants are trying to create an emergency ventilator by mechanizing a manual resuscitation bag . For Boyer , who is just coming off a fourteen-day quarantine after being exposed to the coronavirus , the challenge is personal : he and the other anesthesiology residents are responsible for intubating patients and controlling their mechanical ventilators .
One of the people on the Center for COVID Innovation call was Dan Baker , in Nashville . Baker is the global supply chain officer at Smile Direct Club , a company that makes “ invisible ” aligners . It turns out that a printed nylon his company uses can be employed to fabricate face shields . On Friday , Smile Direct Club shipped its first thousand face shields to a hospital in Boise , Idaho . Baker and his crew are also figuring out how to make N95-like filtration masks that snap together like Legos . “ Our R. & D. and engineering team was in the lab all weekend , ” Baker told me , “ working like mad scientists , pulling designs off the Internet , making different things . We ’ re at the final stages of designing and testing to prove the efficacy of the design to enable multiple use , that they can be sterilized and used safely. ” The mask is a Class II medical device which requires approval from the F.D.A . Once they get the go-ahead , he estimates that Smile Direct Club can crank out three thousand masks a day , repurposing thirty to sixty of the company ’ s industrial 3-D printers to do so .
Last week , shortly before the White House was set to announce a collaboration between General Motors and Ventec Life Systems to retool a car-parts factory to produce ventilators , Trump balked at its billion-dollar price tag . ( He later invoked the Defense Production Act and ordered G.M . to make ventilators , though a G.M . spokesperson said that this directive did not change its production plans . ) Retooling a 3-D printer , by contrast , is a matter of changing its software to design and model the item being produced . Industrial 3-D printers are now so sophisticated that they are used to make prosthetics , airplane parts , and hip replacements . “ With 3-D printing , we can go from design to production within an hour , ” Ramon Pastor , the acting president of 3-D printing and manufacturing at HP Inc. , told me . “ But in traditional manufacturing you have to work from a mold , and the mold has to be made first . ”