LOS ANGELES ( ███ ) - Walt Disney World in Florida on Wednesday announced plans to reopen and MGM Resorts said guests could soon return to Las Vegas casino hotels , as more Americans emerging from the coronavirus lockdown marked a somber milestone of 100,000 dead .
The death toll rose from COVID-19 , the disease caused by the coronavirus , even as the daily average has declined , businesses have reopened and stay-at-home orders have ended across the country .
A top White House coronavirus adviser , Dr. Anthony Fauci , told CNN that U.S. states should proceed cautiously as they lift sweeping restrictions to constrain the pandemic , saying he wore a mask to show Americans it was the right thing to do .
“ I want to protect myself and protect others , and also because I want to make it be a symbol for people to see that that ’ s the kind of thing you should be doing , ” said Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases .
Walt Disney World , the world ’ s largest theme park , could begin opening in phases starting on July 11 if plans win approval from Florida ’ s governor , Walt Disney Co ( DIS.N ) executives said during a webcast meeting .
Shanghai Disneyland reopened on May 11 and now accommodates about 20,000 people per day with mandatory masks , temperature screenings and social distancing for visitors and employees .
MGM Resorts ( MGM.N ) said that on June 4 it would reopen four Las Vegas casinos - the Bellagio , New York-New York , the MGM Grand Las Vegas and The Signature . All employees would be screened for COVID-19 using regular temperature checks and testing .
In Washington , D.C. , New York Governor Andrew Cuomo met with President Donald Trump and urged Congress to release more federal funds as states suffered from the economic damage from closed businesses and stay-at-home orders .
“ States that bore the brunt of the COVID-19 pandemic account for one-third of the national GDP , ” said Cuomo , a Democrat whose state has been hit hard by the outbreak . “ How can you tell one-third of the country to go to heck ? ”
Cuomo said his meeting with the Republican Trump on Wednesday focused on how to “ supercharge ” the economy by investing in infrastructure .
Businesses across the country are opening doors after shuttering in mid-March as states and local governments took drastic measures to slow the spread of COVID-19 .
Cuomo , who has criticized Trump ’ s handling of the pandemic , wants to revive the economy by undertaking major transport and other projects . He told reporters on Tuesday he would discuss a federal role in investments to modernize the nation ’ s bridges , roads and rail systems .
Trump has said he believed infrastructure spending could help the economy recover from the pandemic , embracing a massive $ 2 trillion plan at the end of March . Before the pandemic , he planned to focus his November re-election campaign on a booming economy .
( This story corrects casino openings in paragraph 7 to June instead of July )