Public polling in the Democratic presidential primary contest showed former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. with a sizable advantage over Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont , though Mr. Sanders won a landslide victory over Hillary Clinton in Wisconsin four years ago . Mr. Sanders last week called for the election to be postponed .
Mr. Evers and Republican lawmakers have wrangled for weeks over whether voters can safely cast in-person ballots in the midst of a pandemic . Already , 15 other states and one territory have either pushed back their presidential primaries or switched to voting by mail with extended deadlines .
Even with Wisconsin ’ s election scheduled to proceed , local officials have said that a number of polling places will be unable to open because poll workers are either sick or unwilling to show up . Many clerks and poll workers said they feared for their safety if in-person voting were held on Tuesday .
With reported coronavirus cases in the state doubling in the last week and national officials warning of a coming surge , the political conflict finally hit a breaking point on Monday .
In recent days , Mr. Evers had called for holding an all-mail election , sending absentee ballots to every voter and extending voting to May . On Saturday , state lawmakers rejected those proposals , gaveling out a special legislative session within seconds .
Prominent Democrats in the state , including the mayor of Milwaukee , have urged voters to stay at home on Tuesday , as have some local health officials . Some Democrats blame Mr. Evers for letting the situation get out of hand , saying that his early refusal to push for a delay of the primary — instead proposing workarounds like deploying the National Guard to work at understaffed polling places — created electoral confusion .
All weekend , Mr. Evers ’ s aides and lawyers debated what authority he might have to delay the election . On Monday morning , his team decided to assert his power to order a postponement and announce it early in the day , expecting the court challenge .