At 4:18 a.m. on February 1 , 1997 , a fire broke out in the Aisin Seiki company ’ s Factory No . 1 , in Kariya , a hundred and sixty miles southwest of Tokyo . Soon , flames had engulfed the plant and incinerated the production line that made a part called a P-valve—a device used in vehicles to modulate brake pressure and prevent skidding . The valve was small and cheap—about the size of a fist , and roughly ten dollars apiece—but indispensable . The Aisin factory normally produced almost thirty-three thousand valves a day , and was , at the time , the exclusive supplier of the part for the Toyota Motor Corporation .
Within hours , the magnitude of the loss was evident to Toyota . The company had adopted “ just in time ” ( J.I.T . ) production : parts , such as P-valves , were produced according to immediate needs—to precisely match the number of vehicles ready for assembly—rather than sitting around in stockpiles . But the fire had now put the whole enterprise at risk : with no inventory in the warehouse , there were only enough valves to last a single day . The production of all Toyota vehicles was about to grind to a halt . “ Such is the fragility of JIT : a surprise event can paralyze entire networks and even industries , ” the management scholars Toshihiro Nishiguchi and Alexandre Beaudet observed the following year , in a case study of the episode .
Toyota ’ s response was extraordinary : by six-thirty that morning , while the factory was still smoldering , executives huddled to organize the production of P-valves at other factories . It was a “ war room , ” one official recalled . The next day , a Sunday , small and large factories , some with no direct connection to Toyota , or even to the automotive industry , received detailed instructions for manufacturing the P-valves . By February 4th , three days after the fire , many of these factories had repurposed their machines to make the valves . Brother Industries , a Japanese company best known for its sewing machines and typewriters , adapted a computerized milling device that made typewriter parts to start making P-valves . The ad-hoc work-around was inefficient—it took fifteen minutes to complete each valve , its general manager admitted—but the country ’ s largest company was in trouble , and so the crisis had become a test of national solidarity . All in all , Toyota lost some seventy thousand vehicles—an astonishingly small number , given the millions of orders it fulfilled that year . By the end of the week , it had increased shifts and lengthened hours . Within the month , the company had rebounded .
Every enterprise learns its strengths and weaknesses from an Aisin-fire moment—from a disaster that spirals out of control . What those of us in the medical profession have learned from the COVID-19 crisis has been dismaying , and on several fronts . Medicine isn ’ t a doctor with a black bag , after all ; it ’ s a complex web of systems and processes . It is a health-care delivery system—providing antibiotics to a child with strep throat or a new kidney to a patient with renal failure . It is a research program , guiding discoveries from the lab bench to the bedside . It is a set of protocols for quality control—from clinical-practice guidelines to drug and device approvals . And it is a forum for exchanging information , allowing for continuous improvement in patient care . In each arena , the pandemic has revealed some strengths—including frank heroism and ingenuity—but it has also exposed hidden fractures , silent aneurysms , points of fragility . Systems that we thought were homeostatic—self-regulating , self-correcting , like a human body in good health—turned out to be exquisitely sensitive to turbulence , like the body during critical illness . Everyone now asks : When will things get back to normal ? But , as a physician and researcher , I fear that the resumption of normality would signal a failure to learn . We need to think not about resumption but about revision .
Start with health care as a delivery system . In this state of emergency , delivering care has required both personal protective equipment ( masks , gowns , gloves ) for medical personnel and devices ( including supplemental oxygen and ventilators ) for patients . In the absence of effective drugs , care is mainly supportive . As the pandemic advanced , the delivery of these goods to hospitals and clinics should have been akin to a soldierly deployment , a meticulous , coördinated response—Toyota reassembling a supply chain within a matter of days . Instead , the medical infrastructure of one of the world ’ s wealthiest nations fell apart , like a slapdash house built by one of the three little pigs .
N95 respirators , those heavy-duty face masks with two straps and a metal nose bridge , are a case in point . Before the pandemic , each cost between fifty cents and a dollar or so . They come in various sizes and styles , and every year health-care workers have their size “ fit tested , ” to make sure that air can ’ t get in around the edges . ( A puff of aerosolized saccharin might be sprayed near your face ; if you can detect the sweetness , the mask isn ’ t fitting properly . ) The N95 , meant for a single use , is designed to filter particulates as small as 0.3 microns in diameter . In the pre-pandemic world , when I encountered a patient suspected of having influenza or TB , say , I would put one on , and discard it in the biohazard trash after each use .
But mid-crisis , when the need for these masks in hospitals and clinics was most acute , doctors and nurses ran short . An anesthesiologist from New Jersey told me that he was forced to reuse his mask for the whole day : “ We get one , per shift , per day. ” His nursing staff , he said , initially got none . A resident in Boston who worked in an E.R . told me that he had no N95 mask until the end of March ; the few that were available were reserved for medical staff performing intubations and bronchoscopies—procedures that can send viral particles airborne , and pose the highest risk of infection . He recalled seeing a patient with symptoms that could have signalled COVID-19 : “ When I went to examine him , I had a surgical mask ” —a simple clothlike cover , leaky at the sides— “ and a face shield I had been cleaning and reusing for a month . ”
We ’ ve all heard stories about the absence of masks in hospitals ; we know that their production was typically outsourced to suppliers in China , which were buffeted by the very contagion that made these devices so necessary . Meanwhile , the shortage of these mass-manufactured fifty-cent items has imperilled the safety of our medical personnel . The question is : Why ? Days after the Aisin fire , a typewriter factory was putting out brake-system components . Why weren ’ t our suppliers responding with the same urgency and resilience ?
The story of Mike Bowen , a manufacturer in North Richland Hills , Texas , offers some clues . His company , Prestige Ameritech , which he and his partners started fifteen years ago , is among the country ’ s largest domestic manufacturers of surgical and N95 masks . Because companies that moved manufacturing abroad—including Bowen ’ s old employer , Kimberly-Clark—would undercut him on price , he often had a hard time landing orders . “ Hospitals typically don ’ t order masks as individual buyers , ” he told me . He spoke deliberately , with the slightest Texan drawl . Instead , they negotiate contracts as members of a Group Purchasing Organization—representing hundreds or thousands of hospitals—and , as Bowen explained , the G.P.O . always “ chooses the cheapest bid. ” His business struggled . In 2009 , though , preparations were made for the H1N1 influenza pandemic , and Bowen was asked to ramp up his production of face masks to meet the anticipated demand . “ We bought the old Kimberly-Clark factory , ” he recalled . “ We outfitted it with new machines . We hired an extra hundred and fifty people . And then , when it ended , the whole thing fell apart . The people that we helped went back to the foreign-made masks . So we had to lay off all of those people. ” Bowen almost went bankrupt . “ Hospitals promised to retain us as suppliers after the flu. ” But promises are not contracts . “ We were just naïve , ” he said .