The Trump administration rejected guidelines proposed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) on how to take public health precautions to safely reopen the economy , according to The New York Times .
The guidelines drafted were meant to instruct how schools , restaurants , churches and other establishments can safely reopen .
They include using disposable dishes and utensils at restaurants , closing every other row of seats in buses and trains while restricting transit routes to areas experiencing high levels of coronavirus infection .
They also recommend separating children at school and camps into groups that shouldn ’ t mix throughout the day , among other suggestions .
White House officials reportedly rejected the guidance due to concerns that it could hamper the administration ’ s efforts to swiftly reopen the economy .
One Department of Health and Human Services official rejected any guidance in churches , claiming the measures would infringe on religious liberties , according to the newspaper .
According to the drafted guidance obtained by the Times , the CDC recommends that religious congregations maintain social distancing by observing services via live streaming , especially if certain members of the community are elderly , or otherwise at risk .
The public health agency also recommends against the `` sharing of frequently touched objects '' such as worship aids , hymnals , prayer books , bulletins and other books , among other suggestions .
“ Governments have a duty to instruct the public on how to stay safe during this crisis and can absolutely do so without dictating to people how they should worship God , ” said Roger Severino , the director of the Department of Health and Human Services Office for Civil Rights , according to the Times .
The news comes as Vice President Pence this week signaled the White House would wind down the work of the task force as many states being reopening processes . However , Trump reversed course Wednesday , saying that the task force would not be dissolved entirely but would evolve .
The president said it would remain in place “ indefinitely ” but that he may “ add or subtract ” task force members .