Share All sharing options for : The next coronavirus crisis will be a shortage of doctors and nurses
The United States may soon face a dangerous shortage of health care workers to fight the sprawling Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic .
With the number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in the US expected to soon surpass anywhere else in the world , the medical workforce is more strained than ever . Doctors and nurses are reporting gear shortages , lax protocols , and a high level of stress in their workplaces — with the worst still to come . Some of them told ███ that they consider getting infected with the coronavirus an inevitability .
Staffing problems are already becoming acute in New York City , the epicenter of the US pandemic so far with more than 20,000 cases and approaching 300 deaths , as of March 25 . City officials were not able to provide any numbers on how many medical workers there have tested positive for Covid-19 , but doctors work in fear for their own safety .
An internal medicine physician at New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan shared an internal communication with ███ that said staff are being required to wear masks “ only when clinically indicated. ” This person requested anonymity to avoid potential retribution from their employer . They found the potential for exposure to the virus without protective equipment upsetting . Given how extensive community spread is and how high-risk health workers are , some other hospitals are requiring all staff to keep their masks on at all times .
The New York hospital is also reevaluating its current policy of not having staff wear scrubs when they treat Covid-19 patients , though that is the standard in places like China . And it has required pregnant people on its staff to continue working , though there is limited information about the risk to that population . The hospital cited the 2003 SARS outbreak , Covid-19 cases in South Korea and China , the assessment of the hospital ’ s senior medical staff , and the effectiveness of the protective gear in an internal communication seen by ███ .
“ My frustration is that I have never felt like my safety is important , ” this physician said . “ When I ’ m going to work , I could endanger me and my family and I feel like my institution doesn ’ t even care at all . ”
Reached for comment about the concerns of its staff , New York-Presbyterian said it is “ treating a large influx of COVID-19 patients , as anticipated . The health and safety of every patient in our care , as well as our entire staff , continues to be our highest priority . ”
“ We continue to implement measures to increase capacity , including triage tents and reassignment of beds and units , cancellations of all elective surgeries , and utilization of telemedicine if possible , ” the hospital said in a statement . “ We are also conserving supplies , including personal protective equipment , to help meet this challenge , which we expect to continue . ”
New York is living through what other cities may soon experience . Morale is low and the mood anxious across the country , as the pandemic continues to worsen . Based on what we ’ ve seen already in other countries , a lot of doctors and nurses are highly likely to get sick .
“ As soon as you have the first case , you immediately have a staffing problem ; you ’ re probably furloughing people who made the first contacts before you had test results , ” Chip Kahn , president of the Federation of American Hospitals , said . “ Then as you get further into it , it gets more and more intense . ”
And the problem that other countries face may be worse in America .
“ With already lower staffing ratios plus the very real risk of losing more [ health care workers ] due to illness , this could spiral and get much worse , ” Jen Kates , who leads the global health program at the Kaiser Family Foundation , said .
If too many doctors and nurses get infected themselves and can ’ t care for patients , or if hospitals lay off workers because they are losing revenue with many of their other operations on hold , the health system ’ s capacity is going to deteriorate even further .
Health care workers face more exposure to the coronavirus , and they may also get sicker
Doctors and nurses may have a higher chance of getting seriously ill from the coronavirus if they do get infected . The numbers from the initial Wuhan , China , outbreak indicate 15 percent of the roughly 1,700 Covid-19 cases for medical personnel as of mid-February were critical or severe . Five had died .
The World Health Organization ’ s report found that health care workers were actually not more at risk of infection than other people . But the WHO also noted that “ attention to the prevention of infection in health care workers is of paramount importance in China . Surveillance among health care workers identified factors early in the outbreak that placed [ health care workers ] at higher risk of infection , and this information has been used to modify policies to improve protection . ”
“ It ’ s not that they ’ re getting infected at higher rates ; instead , they ’ re getting sicker than one might expect on the basis of their age , ” says Peter Hotez , the dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College , of health care workers in Wuhan .
One theory for why that could be : Medical staff are exposed to high levels of the virus as they work in hospitals and interact with patients . But we don ’ t know for sure .
The early data from the European countries hit the hardest by Covid-19 indicates health care workers account for a significant share of their Covid-19 cases . In Spain , government officials reported on Tuesday that medical staff accounted for 14 percent of the country ’ s nearly 40,000 reported cases . In Italy as of March 22 , almost 1 in 10 coronavirus cases was a health care worker .
And in America , given our known shortage of protective medical gear and lax protocols reported at some hospitals , we can not necessarily expect the same resilience among our medical staff as China saw . More than 100 workers in Boston ’ s three biggest hospitals have already tested positive for Covid-19 , according to local news reports on Wednesday .
“ The burden it ’ s placing on our hospitals , with the lack of equipment — we feel ill-prepared for it , ” said Stefan Flores , an assistant professor of emergency medicine at Columbia University in New York City .
“ It ’ s like showing up to war with a knife at this point . I don ’ t know if I am going to have a mask the next day , ” Flores said . He keeps two or three masks in a bioprotective bag at the end of the workday , washing it and preventing it from being soiled , because he doesn ’ t know when they ’ re going to get more . He leaves them in a designated section of his apartment .
An ER doctor in Pennsylvania told ███ that as hospitals face personal protective gear shortages , incomplete protection from exposure means more doctors and medical staff out sick . That will lead to worse outcomes overall for coronavirus patients .
But they have no choice but to adapt to these circumstances ; hospitals and ERs can ’ t shutter in the middle of an outbreak because they lack protective equipment .
Demand for personal protective gear has been extraordinary ; one health care supply company reported it had seen demand for N95 masks double during the outbreak . Some hospitals have reportedly run out of a month ’ s worth of supplies in just a few days .
Meanwhile , hospitals are already pushing staff to the limit in an effort to keep enough doctors and nurses on call to respond to the pandemic . One nurse at a major metropolitan hospital , who asked for anonymity to avoid angering their employer , told ███ that staff had been instructed to come to work as long as their temperature did not exceed 101 degrees Fahrenheit and they weren ’ t coughing , regardless of their known exposure to the coronavirus . They were given brown bags to keep their N95 mask in so the mask could be reused .
Flores said that initially , doctors and medical staff at his hospital were asked to quarantine if they were simply exposed to a coronavirus patient . “ Obviously , that very changed quickly once we realized with the sheer number of people who actually were infected with [ coronavirus ] was so high that it was fine ; you were going to be exposed . Now , it ’ s as long as you ’ re symptomatic . ”
It ’ s not just infections that could shrink hospital staff . Many hospitals are starting to postpone elective surgeries ( which can include procedures for serious conditions like cancer and heart disease , as well as less urgent surgeries ) so as to free up more staff for coronavirus response and to reduce the risk of more people getting infected .
Canceled surgeries mean a loss in revenue for those hospitals . One rural hospital in Georgia told Modern Healthcare it could lose half of its revenue with elective services delayed . Industry leaders have warned that hundreds of hospitals could close without a huge infusion of cash from Congress . The deal recently struck in the Senate would pump $ 100 billion into US hospitals in a bid to stave off disaster .
If doctors and nurses can ’ t work , hospitals can ’ t care for as many people
Before the coronavirus ever came to our shores , America was at a hospital staffing disadvantage compared to other rich countries . Overall , US hospitals employ as many people or more per capita as our economic peers . But staffing is disproportionately tilted toward administrative work in the United States .
If you focus on health care professionals specifically , US hospitals trail behind most European countries and Canada . Our hospitals employ almost as many administrative staff as medical staff , according to estimates from the Peterson-Kaiser Health System Tracker .
And US hospitals were already at risk of being overrun if the number of Covid-19 cases explodes before fears about staffing shortages fully set in .
America has about 924,000 hospital beds , about 98,000 of which can be used for people who need intensive care , according to the American Hospital Association . The number of Covid-19 cases that will require ICU care could expand far beyond what the US is currently capable of providing .
Imperial College London projections from last week , while just one set of estimates among many and based largely on modeling for influenza outbreaks instead of the current facts on the ground , painted a grim picture . It found even the most aggressive mitigation strategies — general social distancing , quarantines , closing schools — would not be enough to prevent US hospitals from eventually being overwhelmed unless the country is willing to commit to these drastic measures until a vaccine becomes available .
For people 60 and older , between 17 and 25 percent of cases are expected to require hospitalization ; of those , 25 percent or more will require intensive care ( as many as 70 percent for patients 80 and older ) , according to this analysis . The ability of hospitals to provide that care will be imperative if we are to protect those most vulnerable populations .
Italian hospitals could provide a frightening preview of what ’ s to come in the US as their system is overwhelmed by coronavirus and medical personnel are put at risk . A group of doctors from a hospital in Bergamo , Italy , facing 4,305 Covid-19 cases in their city with just 48 ICU beds available , painted a grave picture in a recent New England Journal of Medicine op-ed :
We are learning that hospitals might be the main Covid-19 carriers , as they are rapidly populated by infected patients , facilitating transmission to uninfected patients . Patients are transported by our regional system,1 which also contributes to spreading the disease as its ambulances and personnel rapidly become vectors . Health workers are asymptomatic carriers or sick without surveillance ; some might die , including young people , which increases the stress of those on the front line .
The toll on hospital workers will manifest in many ways . Research out of China found high levels of stress and depression among health care workers who were responding to the coronavirus outbreak .
Already , US doctors are on edge . Kevin Tien , a pediatric resident at a hospital in Houston , Texas , which has so far seen a small number of cases , described the mood as “ a quiet simmering of anxiety . ”
“ Everyone is on edge , waiting for the crest of the wave to crash . ”
The highest priorities right now are to prevent any more health care workers from getting sick , and to help ill hospital staff return to swabbing noses , running tests , and treating patients . But these efforts remain hampered by shortages in critical equipment , so resolving these shortfalls is essential to slowing the spread of Covid-19 .
President Trump has invoked the Defense Production Act but has not yet used it to order US manufacturers to make more medical supplies to address these shortfalls . But whether there is an official order or not , it will take some time for assembly lines to spool up .
Testing could also help health care workers who were sick with Covid-19 return to the job . In particular , serologic tests can establish whether someone has been infected and has mounted an immune response to the infection . These tests look for antibody proteins to the virus . They aren ’ t as accurate for diagnosing active infections since it can take days for an infected person to produce antibodies , but serologic tests are useful for finding out who has fought off the virus .
Some researchers are optimistic about using these tests in exposed health workers , but only if they can know for sure that surviving the virus grants immunity from future infections .
“ I ’ ve publicly stated that I support that if we can verify that [ testing positive for an immune response to Covid-19 ] really is protective ” against the disease , said Marc Lipsitch , a professor of epidemiology at Harvard University . “ We need to check to make sure the protection is real before doing that on a large scale , but I do think that will be an important part of the strategy because we ’ ll need to keep health care workers in action . ”
But Covid-19 tests remain in short supply , which means hospitals and health officials will have to decide whether to use what they have to find out who has the virus , or to probe past infections .
States and localities are also preparing for this oncoming staffing crisis by trying to recruit retirees and even medical students to fill the voids , when they happen . In New York , Gov . Andrew Cuomo said 40,000 people have signed up to be part of the state ’ s health care reserve . New York University is allowing some medical students to graduate early help with coronavirus patients , provided they can get the proper certifications .
However , one of the most important ways to protect hospital workers remains public health measures to slow the spread of the virus . Proper hand-washing and social distancing can reduce the number of simultaneous cases of Covid-19 . Flattening the curve of cases will help ensure that there are enough beds , ventilators , protective equipment , and medical staff to attend to patients at a given time . That , in turn , will reduce stress on doctors , nurses , and orderlies and allow them to spread out potential exposures to the virus .
So everyone else staying home from work can help keep hospitals working .
Still , new Covid-19 cases are increasing , and the situation for health workers seems poised to get worse before it gets better . “ It ’ s almost a question , I feel like , for us as health care workers : not if we get sick , when we get sick , ” Flores said .
“ It ’ s definitely anguishing , and it ’ s definitely scary , ” he added . “ But just like anything , too , I think it will pass . I think we ’ re taking appropriate measures . It ’ s just unfortunately going to get worse before it gets better . ”