The US reopening is coming , but ‘ normal ’ is still a ways off
FILE - In this April 27 , 2020 , file photo , pedestrians and motorists wear personal protective equipment as they pass a small grocery that is one of the few businesses open on the street in New York . As some governors across the United States begin to ease restrictions imposed to stop the spread of the coronavirus , hopes are soaring that life as we knew it might be returning . But the plans emerging in many states indicate that “ normal ” is still a long way off . ( AP Photo/John Minchillo , File )
FILE - In this April 27 , 2020 , file photo , pedestrians and motorists wear personal protective equipment as they pass a small grocery that is one of the few businesses open on the street in New York . As some governors across the United States begin to ease restrictions imposed to stop the spread of the coronavirus , hopes are soaring that life as we knew it might be returning . But the plans emerging in many states indicate that “ normal ” is still a long way off . ( AP Photo/John Minchillo , File )
NEW YORK ( AP ) — Everyone wants to know : When , oh when , will it go back to normal ?
As some governors across the United States begin to ease restrictions imposed to stop the spread of the coronavirus , hopes are soaring that life as Americans knew it might be returning . But plans emerging in many states indicate that “ normal ” is still a long way off .
White House adviser Dr. Deborah Birx says social distancing will be with Americans through the summer . Louisiana Gov . John Bel Edwards warns of a “ different way of life ” until there is a widely available vaccine — maybe not until next year . New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo says : “ There is no return to yesterday in life . ”
From the beginning , the pandemic forced impossible choices : physical health or mental health ? Economic well-being or medical safety ? Most states joined the world and turned the dial down hard , closing shops and restaurants , factories and schools . Asking people to largely keep to their homes . Now , the dial is beginning to inch in the opposite direction .
In Georgia , Gov . Brian Kemp is pushing one of the most aggressive reopening plans in the United States . Barbershops , gyms and nail salons were allowed to reopen Friday , and dine-in restaurant service and movie screenings were freed to resume Monday — despite warnings that , without sufficient testing , the state could see a surge in infections .
Even there , though , life was far from normal . Patrons went to restaurants with X ’ s on some tables , chatted across the room to one another and gave orders to servers whose faces were covered by masks .
In Alaska , restaurants are keeping logs with every customer ’ s name and phone number — in case they ’ re needed for contact tracing .
Draft guidance for reopening from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provided more evidence that “ normal ” would not be on the menu — at restaurants or anywhere else . No break rooms for employees and no field trips for school children , the guidelines recommended . Children should eat in their classrooms , and congregants should stay 6 feet apart in church .
In Maryland , Gov . Larry Hogan laid out a phased reopening . First small shops could open , and some outdoor recreation could resume , then perhaps restaurants and bars . Phase three , which the administration cautions it has no realistic time frame for reaching , would allow larger social gatherings and high-capacity bars , restaurants and entertainment venues could reopen .
You know — the stuff that two months ago might have just been called “ city life . ”
Even with strict rules in place , it ’ s a delicate dance , as Dennis McKinley learned this weekend . He had planned to open two of the three branches of his restaurant , The Original Hot Dog Factory , for dine-in service in the Atlanta area . He reversed himself Monday after getting about 40 calls from politicians , community leaders and customers urging him to keep diners out .
“ Ultimately , The Original Hot Dog Factory can ’ t make it without the community ’ s support , so I felt it was important to hold back and wait , ” McKinley said .
What he calls community support , economists might refer to as confidence . Economies run on that , especially the American one , in which consumer spending accounts for 70 % of all activity . When people are scared or times uncertain , they tend not to shell out .
“ After an initial pop to growth , when businesses do reopen , it ’ s going to be a slog until there ’ s a vaccine , ” said Mark Zandi , chief economist at Moody ’ s Analytics . “ I think there ’ s going to be a lot of cautious people and therefore a lot of cautious businesses . ”
For most people , the new coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms . For some , especially older adults and people with existing health problems , it can cause more severe illness and lead to death . And while many point to a vaccine as the surest path to normal , public health experts see another way that ’ s no less daunting : millions more tests , 100,000 or more health workers to track and isolate those exposed to COVID-19 , and a seamless data network to coordinate the effort .
The U.S. is far from implementing this . So in the absence of a vaccine or other reassuring measures — and in the face of a threat that is largely invisible — how will Americans believe that it ’ s safe to go out again ?
“ You know when a flood is there and when it ’ s gone , ” says Steven Taylor , a professor at the University of British Columbia who wrote “ The Psychology of Pandemics. ” He predicts confidence will return when people see others hugging , shaking hands and crowding into elevators — and not getting sick .
While Taylor believes most people will bounce back quickly , he notes that some calamities like the Great Depression have caused lasting changes to habits .
What will fade and what will survive after the coronavirus ? Friday nights in restaurants where the tables are just a few inches apart , jostling for space in sweaty nightclubs , a peck-on-the-cheek hello ? What about sleepaway camp and freshmen bunking together in dorms and the ever-shrinking seats in economy class ?
Historian Francis Bremer can ’ t help but wonder whether the new normal will ever mean an end to “ doing history from my dining room. ” Like many others , the professor emeritus of history at Pennsylvania ’ s Millersville University has found that much can be done from a distance — in his case , through the rapidly expanding online availability of historical documents .
Clues lie in places that are weeks , even months ahead of the United States in this global experience .
In China , where the virus emerged late last year , people proven healthy can generally move around within their own cities now — tracked by mobile apps and monitored with temperature checks in public . Germany has seen far fewer deaths than many of its European neighbors , but life remains curtailed : While it allowed smaller shops to reopen last week , it stuck to strict social-distancing guidelines and continued widely requiring face masks in public .
As spring blooms , Americans look to a whole new set of activities they hope they won ’ t be barred from . Californians flooded beaches and river fronts this past weekend as temperatures soared , prompting warnings that they might lose the few privileges they have .
But in Pennsylvania , the dial is turning the other way . Gov . Tom Wolf announced Monday he would lift some restrictions on outdoor recreation . Not just because the virus was starting to be contained , but also because people simply needed it .
“ As the weather warms and daylight lengthens , ” Wolf said , “ enjoying time outdoors is an important way to manage stress . ”