Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
A class-action lawsuit filed in Florida this month seeks to `` make China pay for what they 've done '' in its handling of the coronavirus crisis , saying the country acted `` negligently in their handling of the COVID-19 outbreak . ''
A personal injury law firm based in Boca Raton , Fla. , is bringing the suit against China and various Chinese government agencies on behalf of `` individuals and business owners in the United States and State of Florida , for damages suffered as a result of the Coronavirus pandemic . ''
The suit claims China `` knew that COVID-19 was dangerous and capable of causing a pandemic , yet slowly acted , proverbially put their head in the sand , and/or covered it up in their own economic self-interest . ''
`` This is an undertaking against a world superpower who has the ability to pay for what they 've done , '' Jeremy Alters , the chief strategist and non-attorney spokesperson for the Berman Law Group , the class-action firm backing the suit , told Fox News .
`` They have the money to pay for what they 've done , and we should all together make China pay for what they 've done , '' he said .
WHITE HOUSE , SENATE STRIKE DEAL ON HISTORIC $ 2T CORONAVIRUS RELIEF BILL , BUT HOUSE SUPPORT REMAINS UNCERTAIN
The original complaint has just a handful of named plaintiffs but the lawyers familiar with the case at Berman Law Group say they plan to file an amended complaint at some point with significantly more plaintiffs , including individuals who have gotten sick because of the coronavirus .
The lawsuit does not name a specific dollar amount being sought from China , asking for `` compensatory and other damages to Plaintiffs and the Class Members , for their economic and non-economic damages ... to the full extent permitted by the law . '' Alters , however , made clear that though lawyers for Berman would be seeking potentially `` tens of trillions '' from the communist nation , the suit was largely about the symbolism of forcing China to defend its actions in American courts .
`` We want the court to make them pay for what they 've done , '' Alters said . `` They have unleashed ... a massive pandemic on the world . It appears they knew about it long before they gave information about it to the rest of the world . We want our courts to say , 'China , you are going to be held accountable here in our courts because you have harmed hundreds of millions of Americans . ' ''
The suit also has the potential , according to its backers , to bring to light documents and other information about the coronavirus that China may still be withholding from other governments and health experts worldwide .
This class-action suit is not the only one filed against China over the coronavirus , but it is the main serious complaint . The D.C.-based far-right organization Freedom Watch filed a $ 20 trillion suit in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Texas accusing the Chinese of creating the coronavirus as a bioweapon — an allegation that has been debunked .
The Florida-based suit , however , seeks damages based on the Chinese government 's negligence in containing the coronavirus after it first was transmitted from animals to humans , an allegation with a large amount of supporting evidence .
THE CORONAVIRUS DID NOT ESCAPE FROM A LAB : HERE 'S HOW WE KNOW
This is made difficult , however , by the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act ( FSIA ) which prevents Americans from suing other countries except under specific circumstances . The plaintiffs claim they fit under the exceptions for commercial activity and `` personal injury or death '' that stems from `` the tortious act or omission of that foreign state or of any official or employee of that foreign state while acting within the scope of his office or employment . ''
Yale law professor Stephen L. Carter , however , argued in a Bloomberg column Tuesday that the Florida suit 's claims do n't fall under the FSIA exceptions .
`` The Florida class action suit asserts that the exception for commercial activities applies , but it ’ s not easy to see how , '' Carter writes .
Carter also notes that the second exemption the Florida plaintiffs claim `` specifically bars any claim 'based upon the exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function regardless of whether the discretion be abused . ' It ’ s hard to find a way around this restriction . ''
But Alters says China 's negligence in its response to the coronavirus should fall under the exceptions to FSIA because of how egregious it is .
`` There is a lengthy history of precedent for bringing foreign nations to our courts for their bad acts that affect Americans , '' he said Tuesday . `` I do n't know in history whether there has been another bad act like this that has affected this many Americans at once , where the entire economy is basically at a standstill and 14 states are now in a stay-at-home order . ''
The Florida suit against China also is important , according to its backers , because of the collaboration between two very different firms working the case .
CORONAVIRUS HITTING NEW YORK LIKE A 'BULLET TRAIN ' AS CASES ARE 'DOUBLING ABOUT EVERY 3 DAYS ' , CUOMO WARNS
Berman Law Group counts presidential candidate Joe Biden 's brother , Francis , as a senior adviser . Alters , a spokesman for Berman , is a veteran of both Obama presidential campaigns and the 2004 John Kerry presidential campaign .
The lobbying and public relations firm working on the case , Lucas Compton , is closer to the right side of the aisle . George Sorial is a partner at Lucas Compton and worked in the Trump Organization for several years before leaving the company to become a campaign surrogate for the now-president .
`` It transcends politics , '' Sorial said of the effort to sue China . `` Even if you look at the collaboration of our two firms , two firms on very different sides of the aisle . ... They are who they are , we are who we are , but this transcends politics . ... This is a nonpolitical bipartisan effort on behalf of the United States citizenry . It 's almost a patriotic thing to hold that country accountable . ''
Beyond the FSIA difficulties , another likely weakness in the case is the fact that it treats the idea that the coronavirus potentially came from a lab -- which has been debunked -- as a legitimate `` alternative theory . '' This could potentially undermine the majority of its case , which pushes the widely understood story that the virus was transmitted from an animal to a human at a wild animal market in the city of Wuhan before China responded to the health threat with obfuscation and censorship .
Responding to a question about the inclusion of the manmade virus theory in their lawsuit , Alters said the presence of a high-security bio-agent lab in Wuhan `` can not be ignored . ''
`` [ The Wuhan Institute of Virology ] handles the most dangerous viruses , '' he said . `` It resides in the epicenter of the outbreak in Wuhan . In that lab they cultivate viruses from exotic animals . The wet markets were supposed to be shut down years ago and the Chinese government turned a blind eye to the ongoing operations . This is not coincidental . They also knew of the active and routine trade of these exotic animals which harbor these viruses . The Chinese government has allowed the sale , exchange and consumption of these animals by putting their head in the sand knowing of the dangers this presented locally and internationally . ''
The initial conference in the case is set for May 1 before Judge Ursula Ungaro .