Most taxpayers will get a check from the $ 2tn economic package , the largest in US history
US coronavirus stimulus checks : are you eligible and how much will you get ?
The US has agreed on a $ 2tn stimulus package , the largest economic stimulus in US history , in response to the economic impacts of Covid-19 . While corporations will be the biggest recipients of the bailout , some of that money will be paid directly to Americans hit by the pandemic .
Most taxpayers will get a check in the mail , while those directly affected by the economic effects of Covid-19 are slated to receive robust government support .
Here ’ s what we know so far about how the new stimulus package will directly affect Americans in the coming weeks :
Congress will spend about $ 250bn for checks up to $ 1,200 per person that will go directly to taxpayers .
To be eligible for the full amount , a person ’ s most recently filed tax return must show that they made $ 75,000 or under . For couples , who can receive a maximum of $ 2,400 , the cutoff is $ 150,000 .
If a person makes more than $ 75,000 , the amount given goes down incrementally by $ 5 for every $ 100 increase in salary . So a person who makes $ 85,000 would get $ 700 while a person who makes $ 95,000 would get $ 200 .
If a person makes above $ 99,000 , or a couple makes above $ 198,000 , no check will be given .
There are some requirements and exceptions . Those getting a check must be living and working in the US and have a valid social security number . If a person is listed as a dependent on their parents ’ tax return – the case for many college students – they are excluded .
The Tax Foundation , a DC-based thinktank , estimates that 93.6 % of Americans will be eligible for a check coming from the stimulus package .
Taxpayers will be given $ 500 per child 16 or under listed as a dependent on their latest tax return .
That is still unclear . Experts say that Americans will probably not get the money until May , given how long it takes the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) to send out checks . The treasury secretary , Steven Mnuchin , said those whose bank account information is already with the IRS from previous tax returns can expect a payment “ within three weeks ” .
For those who still need to give the IRS their bank account information , a web-based portal will be opening soon to allow people to provide the IRS with their information . The IRS says this is to make sure people get their checks immediately , instead of sending them through the mail .
This is not the first time the government has sent checks to Americans . The federal government gave up to $ 300 in 2001 and $ 600 in 2008 to taxpayers who met a certain income bracket to similarly stimulate the economy .
What if a person did not file their 2018 or 2019 return ?
The IRS recommends people file their 2018 or 2019 tax return as soon as possible to get the payment . A check will be sent to any qualified person so long as they file their return within 2020 .
A person may still be eligible even if they do not file the taxes . The IRS says people who typically do not file taxes – low-income taxpayers and some veterans – will need to file a “ simple tax return ” in order to get the payment . Social security beneficiaries will not need to fill out the tax return , even if they do not file their taxes , to get the payment .
Yes , specifically the bill will increase unemployment insurance by $ 600 for 13 weeks – about four months – for every person , added to the existing unemployment compensation a person gets from their state ’ s program .
The length and amount of compensation varies from state to state . A majority of states providing a maximum of 26 weeks of compensation , while average weekly compensation ranges from 20 % of a person ’ s wage to just over 50 % .
While unemployment insurance typically does not cover people who are self-employed – freelancers , contractors and gig workers – the bill comes with a “ pandemic unemployment assistance ” measure that will extend insurance to those workers .
Play Video 2:25 'The universe is collapsing ' : Bernie Sanders mocks Republicans over coronavirus aid – video
Not in this bill . Earlier last week , Donald Trump signed the Families First Coronavirus Response Act , a bill worth about $ 100bn meant to expand paid sick leave and emergency paid leave , but it came with major loopholes . Companies with over 500 employees were not mentioned in the bill , while companies with under 50 employees can apply for exemptions .
The bill mandates 10 days of fully paid sick leave for employees of companies with 500 employees or less . Parents of those companies affected by their children ’ s school closing and those leaving for medical reasons can get 12 weeks of pay at 67 % of their salary .
Will there be anything to offset healthcare costs related to Covid-19 ?
Again , not in this bill . The Families First Coronavirus Response Act included a measure that mandated all Covid-19 testing is free , but treatment for any symptoms ( there is currently no cure for the illness ) still comes at a cost .
A few states have reopened enrollment for their health insurance programs to allow those concerned about costs to enroll , and three major health insurance companies said they will be waiving any high costs for treatment , but there are still stories of people getting bills for as much as $ 34,000 to cover treatment of the virus ’ s symptoms .