With the Wuhan coronavirus wreaking havoc to the U.S. economy , the Trump White House put together a $ 2 trillion relief package that was needlessly derailed by politics , thanks to Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-NY ) and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi . You remember the theatrics . Senate Democrats and Republicans had a bipartisan package after working through the week and weekend . On March 21 , it was pretty much a done deal and then Pelosi , who had taken the week off , decided to announce that House Democrats would put forward their own relief bill , killing the Senate package . The markets tanked , which is what Democrats wanted to do . The House relief bill was trash , loaded with left-wing goodies and voting rights provisions that had nothing to do with helping American businesses and workers afflicted by the Wuhan virus outbreak . And after all of this , the package that was passed was not all that much different from the one that was unnecessarily nuked by sore-loser Democrats who still can not get over the 2016 election .
Pelosi is still trying to play politics during this crisis . Yet , while she does that , she 's also trying to give the core of the Democratic Party relief as well : millionaires . Yeah , only a moron believes that the Democratic Party is the party of the working man , the working poor , or the little guy . A large slice of the House Democratic majority hail from California , Connecticut , and New York—that 's where a lot of rich Democrats live . You have to give these `` poor '' people relief , right ? For a party that bashes the rich , Trump and GOP for not being for working families , the Democratic Party sure likes to make maneuvers to ensure millionaires can collect their benefits too ( via NYT ) :
“ More than half the benefits of such an effort would go to millionaires. ” https : //t.co/kZuQOZBKgn — Jonathan Swan ( @ jonathanvswan ) March 31 , 2020
If you support eliminating the SALT Cap -- a $ 620 billion tax cut of which :
Then you deserve to be mocked every time you yell `` tax the rich '' ever again . https : //t.co/SA2fJcQIjC — Brian Riedl ? ? ( @ Brian_Riedl ) March 31 , 2020
As lawmakers prepare for another round of fiscal stimulus to address economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic , Speaker Nancy Pelosi suggested the next package include a retroactive rollback of a tax change that hurt high earners in states like New York and California . A full rollback of the limit on the state and local tax deduction , or SALT , would provide a quick cash infusion in the form of increased tax rebates to an estimated 13 million American households — nearly all of which earn at least $ 100,000 a year . [ … ] In the 2018 midterm elections , Democrats wielded the SALT limits in House campaigns against Republicans in wealthy blue-state suburbs of cities like New York , Los Angeles and Chicago . Democrats voted last year to repeal the cap , but the effort died in the Republican-controlled Senate . Republicans called the effort hypocritical , saying that it would primarily benefit wealthy households in high-tax states . Democrats had roundly denounced the 2017 law , which included rate cuts for businesses and individuals , as a handout to the rich . But the SALT deduction overwhelmingly benefits high earners . The congressional Joint Committee on Taxation estimated last year that a full repeal of the SALT limit for 2019 alone would reduce federal revenues by about $ 77 billion . Americans earning $ 1 million a year or more would collectively reap $ 40 billion of those benefits . Most of the rest would go to households earning $ 200,000 or more . That is a contrast with the bill Mr. Trump signed on Friday , which began to phase out direct payments for households earning $ 150,000 or more .
Oh , yes , we have limousine liberals going for a joy ride here . Also , you can totally see why a supporter of Bernie Sanders would n't vote for anyone else but him in an election , because , if you 're a die-hard progressive revolutionary , why would you back anyone who votes for a SALT rollback ? You can also bet that if this is taken for a spin and makes its way to the Senate , Sanders will and should block it if he is truly a left-wing revolutionary . Who is hurting more ? Small businesses and workers impacted by the Wuhan outbreak…or millionaires ? Do they really need their projected $ 40 billion in benefits now ? Do they ?