Speaking before the largest inauguration crowd in human history , Donald Trump made a bold prediction .
Coronavirus US live : single Republican may stall $ 2.2tn stimulus package Read more
“ From this day forward , a new vision will govern our land . From this moment on , it ’ s going to be America First , ” he declared .
“ I will fight for you with every breath in my body – and I will never , ever let you down . America will start winning again , winning like never before . ”
And so it came to pass that America is indeed winning like never before . First among nations , to be sure . With all the new vision that an ostrich has while examining the sand from below .
The news that Donald Trump ’ s America is first in the world for coronavirus cases should give nobody any pleasure . The fact that the nation passed this grim milestone on the same day it reported a record number of unemployment claims – 3.3 million in just one week – underscores the superlative nature of this presidency .
He represents the greatest , the biggest , and the most tremendous failure of leadership in living memory . He has made America great again in ways nobody could ever imagine or conceive .
How did Trump mark this date which will live in infamy ? By praising himself , of course . If he had been president at the time of Pearl Harbor , he would have claimed that the bombing was just confirmation that he had built the world ’ s greatest navy .
“ It ’ s a tribute to the amount of testing that we ’ re doing , ” he said on Thursday . “ We ’ re doing tremendous testing , and I ’ m sure you ’ re not able to tell what China is testing or not testing . I think that ’ s a little hard . ”
To be honest , it ’ s a little hard to tell what ’ s happening here too . As of Thursday evening , there have been 519,000 tests performed in the United States , among a population of 327 million . That ’ s 0.15 % of all Americans . In South Korea , with a population one-sixth of the size , they have performed more than 357,000 tests .
Overtaking South Korea in total tests was of course a reason to celebrate in Trump ’ s very small book . It was also a reason to lie .
“ Just reported that the United States has done far more ‘ testing ’ than any other nation , by far ! ” he tweeted . “ In fact , over an eight day span , the United States now does more testing than what South Korea ( which has been a very successful tester ) does over an eight week span . Great job ! ”
Yes , great job ! Totally awesome . We ’ re only six times behind where we should be on the South Korean scale of what Trump considers to be “ testing ” .
It ’ s not entirely clear that anyone has “ tested ” Trump with a multiple-choice quiz about this pandemic and how to end it . Lobbed an obvious question about the tests on Wednesday , he spun his tale of failure into a Technicolor tapestry of dopey lies and lazy delusions .
“ We have tested , by far , more than anybody . We ’ re testing more than anybody right now . There ’ s nobody even close . And our tests are the best tests . They ’ re the most accurate tests , ” he riffed , as if his words had uncoupled themselves from the gravitational pull of meaning and begun floating into the upper reaches of his empty skull .
“ But if you ’ re saying we ’ re going to test 350 million people , ” he continued , “ I disagree with it . We can go to certain states – I could name them now , but I ’ m not going to do that – but we can go to certain states right now . They have virtually no problem or a very small problem . ”
There is only one place where that claim is true , and that would be the state of denial : Donald Trump ’ s home state when the going gets tough .
For those looking at far less important numbers , like Trump ’ s rising approval ratings or the yo-yo stock market , these are confusing times . How can anything be rising when we have such catastrophically incompetent leadership ?
This is the crackerjack team that is dithering over a $ 1bn deal to produce 80,000 critically needed ventilators while waving through a $ 2tn stimulus bill that includes $ 50bn for airlines . Flying may be important to the economy , but breathing is surely worth one-fiftieth of the support .
Trump would dearly love to tell a story about Democratic states suffering while Republican ones are virus-free . But Florida complicates that picture , and the pesky numbers show the virus has reached every state in the union . Even with the fractional testing that we ’ re doing .
Like every con artist , Trump knows when the mark has moved on . You can fool some of the people all of the time , especially if they watch Fox News . You can even fool a plurality of the people at election time , with a billion dollars of Facebook disinformation . But you can ’ t fool all of the people , especially at a time of pandemic and recession .
So his numbers are sliding downwards just as surely as the virus numbers are climbing upwards . Only one of these numbers are important , and they don ’ t belong to Donald Trump .
'Hell is coming ' : how Bill Ackman 's TV interview tanked the markets and made him $ 2.6bn Read more
There is real leadership out there in America , as there is across the world . There are courageous citizens who demonstrate every day and night what it means to take responsibility for the vulnerable , to be selfless at a time of anxiety and adversity .
Our hospital workers have more character than the commander-in-chief . So do our supermarket and delivery workers , our city employees , and our first responders . They didn ’ t need an inauguration speech to declare they would never , ever let us down . They don ’ t need a White House briefing to tell us they ’ re the best .
“ We will bring back our jobs , ” Trump promised on his great inaugural disappointment . “ We will bring back our borders . We will bring back our wealth . And we will bring back our dreams . ”
Thanks for all that . The jobs and wealth are evaporating before our eyes . The virus didn ’ t respect the borders . And the dreams we lost seem like letters from a distant land .