Larry Hogan has got another of his ideas , and this one cracks him up . “ I ’ m gon na call Pence ! ” says Hogan , startling his chief of staff , Matthew Clark , who sits across a large , round faux-wood table . Hogan , the Republican governor of Maryland , is meeting with his coronavirus command team , a skeleton crew of state officials still reporting to the capitol in Annapolis . The conference rooms are all too narrow , so they are gathered in a cavernous event room , seated in alternate chairs to maintain social distancing . Hogan , a ruddy 63-year-old with jug-handle ears , has in front of him a dispenser of hand sanitizer , a can of Diet Coke and a starfish-shaped conference-call speaker .
The President , Hogan reminds the group , recently chided him for going around Vice President Mike Pence ’ s coronavirus task force to procure supplies . “ Remember , Trump said , ‘ He ’ s wasting his time . He should ’ ve just called Mike ! ' ” He laughs a wheezy laugh . “ So I ’ m gon na joke with him and say , ‘ Hey , Mike , where ’ s my tests ? The President said I should just call you ! ’ But then seriously say , ‘ You both said we can use federal labs . When can we start ? ' ”
“ I got a feeling they ’ re gon na backpedal on all that , ” Hogan says .
Governor Larry Hogan , wearing a mask decorated with Maryland ’ s state flag , and his staff participate in meetings and a press briefing at the State House in Annapolis on April 24 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Like every other governor in America , Hogan is dealing with a crisis for which there is no playbook . The team assembled here began its April 22 briefing on a somber note , as the state ’ s health secretary , Bobby Neall , read off the numbers : 14,775 total confirmed cases of COVID-19 , up 582 from the day before ; 631 deaths in the past five weeks , up 47 from the previous day ’ s count . Hogan was briefed about a possible outbreak at a chicken plant on the Delaware border and about a convention center being converted into a field hospital ; he got word that his latest shipment of testing supplies from South Korea had arrived , greeted at Baltimore-Washington International Airport by his Korean-American wife Yumi with platters of crab cakes and kimchi .
Hogan has worked around the clock since declaring a state of emergency 48 days earlier , issuing 38 executive orders and calling up the state ’ s National Guard . The closest thing he can imagine is a natural disaster , he says , but even that doesn ’ t capture it . “ This is like a hurricane that hits all 50 states every single day , ” he tells me later , crammed into a navy blue armchair in his spacious office decorated with memorabilia . “ And it continues in intensity . It doesn ’ t go away . It just keeps hitting , hitting , hitting . ”
From Tallahassee to Olympia , in big states and small , every governor in America has improvised something like this , scrambling to keep up with the outbreak . The governors are constantly comparing notes–in the past 24 hours , Hogan tells me , he ’ s texted with New York Governor Andrew Cuomo , Illinois Governor J.B. Pritzker and Arizona Governor Doug Ducey . As chairman of the National Governors Association ( NGA ) , Hogan has tried to coordinate their efforts , convening a series of calls in which they trade ideas and information .
The cooperation has been crucial . Governors will tell you they ’ re always the officials whose leadership most directly affects people ’ s lives . But that ’ s been truer than ever in the current crisis , as Trump has been more occupied with defending his performance and casting blame than with mounting the kind of coordinated national effort that other countries ’ leaders have orchestrated . While the White House has funneled some supplies to the states , Trump has disavowed responsibility for testing and equipment shortfalls and passed the buck to the governors . The result has been a kind of federalist free-for-all , with state leaders pitted against one another in bidding wars for scarce equipment , and against the President , whose very office was created to avoid such anarchy .
Purell and Coronavirus statistics on a conference room table during a meeting between Governor Larry Hogan and his staff at the Maryland State House on April 24 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Governor Larry Hogan and staff meet at the Maryland State House on Annapolis on April 24 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Now the governors face perhaps their hardest decision : how and when to ease COVID-19 restrictions and start to reopen their states . The question of how to balance public health and economic activity has transcended partisanship : Democrat Jay Inslee of Washington and Republican Mike DeWine of Ohio are among those who have drawn praise for their efforts to curb the spread of the virus . Hogan , a popular moderate who didn ’ t vote for Trump in 2016 and doesn ’ t plan to in November , has drawn acclaim for his similarly aggressive tack . One recent poll found 84 % of Marylanders approved of his handling of the crisis . The GOP veteran , who was re-elected by a healthy margin in 2018 , has emerged as a unifying figure in his role as head of the NGA .
A protester , part of a caravan of cars that descended on the State House in Annapolis , Md. , on April 18 , opposing coronavirus-related restrictions . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
A caravan of cars that descended on the Maryland State House in Annapolis on April 18 , protesting coronavirus-related restrictions . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Protesters drive in a caravan of cars that descended on the Maryland statehouse in Annapolis on April 18 , during the Governor 's stay-at-home order . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
It ’ s not what Hogan envisioned for his chairmanship , a largely ceremonial position that he ’ d planned to use to push for national infrastructure when he took it last July . In early February , when the governors converged on Washington for their semiannual meeting , Trump was still casting the virus as a nonissue that would go away on its own . Hogan arranged for the group to be briefed by experts including Dr. Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , and Dr. Robert Redfield , the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . The stark warning the experts delivered was so at odds with the public discussion that it made many of the governors sit up in their seats and return home with a sense of urgency . If the U.S. muddles through the current crisis , it will be because America ’ s governors stepped up to the plate–at least in part because of Hogan . Perhaps not coincidentally , several of the governors who ’ ve come in for the most criticism for their lackadaisical handling of the pandemic–including Georgia ’ s Brian Kemp and Florida ’ s Ron DeSantis–are not dues-paying NGA members and weren ’ t at the meeting .
The crisis has provided a lesson not just in the governors ’ varying levels of executive competence but also in the nature of political leadership itself . The virus doesn ’ t care about the policy debates and penny-ante scandals that dominate political campaigns . In an all-consuming crisis , what people want is empathy and urgency : the steady hand , the decisive manager , the clear communicator . The kind of leader creative enough to negotiate with a foreign government 13 time zones away to procure the testing kits the federal government has failed to provide . Hogan was one of the first governors in America to declare a state of emergency and the first in the region to order public schools to close . He ’ s overseen the addition of 6,000 new hospital beds to the state ’ s capacity . “ I want them to know that we ’ re making decisions based on the science and the facts , ” Hogan says of his constituents , “ but also that we care , that I empathize with what they ’ re going through . ”
Teri O ’ Meara fills her sewing basket to the brim with masks for police in Centreville , Md. , on March 30 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
A closed playground during the stay-at-home order due to the Coronavirus in Baltimore , Md. , on April 24 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
At 1 P.M. , Hogan settles back at the table for today ’ s governors-only teleconference . Forty-four governors have dialed in to the call , the 16th Hogan has convened since the start of the pandemic . “ My question is , for those who received the Abbott machines , we received 15 , but we only received 120 cartridges and/or kits we could actually test with , ” says Andy Beshear , the governor of Kentucky . “ Is anybody getting any more of these kits from the federal government ? ”
The rapid-testing device made by Abbott Laboratories , a sleek white gizmo the size of a bread box , was touted by Trump in a March 29 Rose Garden press conference . The President called the machine , which can produce a result in as little as five minutes , “ a whole new ballgame. ” The truth fell far short of that boast .
“ Andy , this is Andrew , ” New York ’ s Governor Cuomo replies . “ My experience is , these companies will sell the machines , which are several million dollars each , but then they don ’ t deliver the test kits and the reagents . And then they say the federal government is doing the allocation of the test kits. ” ( In a statement , Abbott said the allotment to states was “ only a fraction ” of its tests and that its ID NOW machines cost less than $ 5,000 each . )
A food distribution site for the needy during the Coronavirus pandemic in Baltimore , Md. , on April 24 . The project is a joint partnership between the Maryland National Guard and the Maryland Food Bank . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
A Food distribution site in Centreville , Md. , on April 17 . The Maryland Food bank has seen a 100 % demand increase coupled with a massive decline in donations of food as people conserve their non-perishable canned goods . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Two more governors say they ’ ve faced some of the same difficulties , while another says she can ’ t even figure out whom in Washington to call about tests . ( Hogan gives her a name . ) Several of the governors complain that the Administration seems less interested in helping than in finding ways to shift blame to the states .
These calls have been a lifeline for the governors , their principal source of unfiltered information and advice from their colleagues in the trenches of the battle against the virus . “ The NGA ’ s never been as important as it is now , probably in decades , if not ever , ” Cuomo says . The governors have been thrust into a no-win situation by the federal government , he says , making it all the more important that they stick together .
As the governors speak , Congress and the White House have just struck a deal to spend $ 484 billion to replenish a small-business aid fund . But money for state and local governments got negotiated away , shelved for the next bill . It ’ s a major problem for the governors , whose tax revenues have taken a massive hit from the crisis . Just 90 days of state-ordered sheltering in place is projected to blow an estimated $ 3 billion hole in Maryland ’ s $ 50 billion annual budget . The very governments that are providing vital services to keep their locked-down states afloat have been thanked for their efforts with a pile of bills they can ’ t pay . And while Trump has repeatedly expressed support for sending aid to the states , Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell threw cold water on the idea , saying states should explore bankruptcy instead .
Maryland National Guard members prepare a food distribution site for the needy in Stevensville , Md. , on April 17 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Overview of a food distribution site during the stay-at-home order in Centreville , Md. , on April 17 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
That ’ s not the only burden the states face . The recent congressional aid package that expanded unemployment benefits mandated that they be extended to independent contractors and the self-employed . But the package gave the states , which administer unemployment insurance , no mechanism to distribute these benefits . The phone lines of Maryland ’ s unemployment office were jammed with tens of thousands of calls , Hogan says . The governors on the call exchange tips on creating websites to deal with the problem .
Outlet stores shut down during Coronavirus pandemic in Queenstown , Md. , on April 14 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Hogan crouches impatiently over the conference-call starfish , rifling through his stack of papers . He ’ s short and round , with a pronounced Maryland accent . Once blessed with a big white swoosh of Republican-real-estate-developer hair , he ’ s worn it close-shaved since recovering from lymphoma in 2015 . As with most authentic-seeming politicians , there ’ s more than a little ambition behind Hogan ’ s regular-guy persona . His father was a Republican Congressman–the first Republican member of the U.S. House Judiciary Committee to call for President Richard Nixon ’ s impeachment–and a young Hogan hoped to follow him into politics . But after two failed runs for Congress , he went into business instead , pausing to serve a stint as appointments secretary to Governor Robert Ehrlich from 2003 to 2007 .
When Hogan sought the governorship in 2014 , he cast himself as a fiscally focused uniter who would cut taxes and forswear social issues . But Maryland was trending so blue that the forecaster Nate Silver gave Hogan a less than 10 % chance of victory . “ This is a guy nobody thought had a chance to win , but I could just tell he had real skills , ” says Hogan ’ s friend Chris Christie , the former New Jersey governor .
Worshipers pray at Jesus ’ Church Sunday `` Drive Thru '' service in Great Marsh Park , Cambridge , Md. , on April 5 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Worshipers pray together at Jesus ’ Church `` Drive Thru '' church service in Cambridge , Md. , on April 26 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Pastor Abraham Lankford of Jesus ’ Church leads Sunday `` drive thru '' church service in Cambridge , Md. , on April 12 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Hogan was tested early . Three months after he was sworn in , riots broke out in Baltimore over the death in police custody of 25-year-old Freddie Gray . Hogan went to Baltimore and set up a command post , working from the city and walking the streets every day . Keiffer Mitchell , a Democratic former Baltimore city councilman who now serves in Hogan ’ s cabinet , recalls advising Hogan against approaching a group of gang members with neck tattoos . But the governor ignored him and won them over , Mitchell says , promising to attend to priorities like rec centers if they ’ d help him keep the city safe .
Just two months after the protests , Hogan was diagnosed with Stage III non-Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma . Rather than seclude himself during his treatment , he chronicled the illness on Facebook , posting pictures of himself hooked up to chemotherapy tubes or working from the hospital . Letters and comments poured in from Marylanders who ’ d been through or watched a loved one go through a similar ordeal .
The current crisis has showcased Hogan ’ s resourcefulness . Faced with the shortage of testing kits that has bedeviled many states , Hogan noticed that his wife Yumi ’ s native South Korea had a surplus . The country had a policy of not selling to states . But over three weeks of intensive negotiations in her native language , Yumi Hogan–an abstract painter who is thought to be America ’ s first Korean-American first lady–helped broker a deal to purchase 500,000 tests and fly them to Maryland on idled Korean Air passenger planes . The talks were conducted in secrecy to prevent the federal government from intercepting and commandeering the shipment , as it has done with other supplies acquired by states . The Food and Drug Administration cleared the tests while the plane was in the air .
Route 50 is quiet during the Coronavirus stay at home order in Wye Mills , Md. , on April 18 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
Hogan ’ s testing coup angered Trump . “ He didn ’ t understand too much about what was going on , ” Trump said of Hogan on April 20 . Hogan says Washington followed up by sending him a list of laboratories in his state , none of which had coronavirus tests on hand . Most were federal government labs the state couldn ’ t even access . Hence the appeal to Pence .
Hogan ’ s reputation for pragmatism and moderation has won him approval scores in the 70s from Republicans , Democrats and independents alike and from both white and African-American residents . “ I can ’ t even find Democrats in my own family who disapprove of the job he ’ s doing , ” says Donna Edwards , a former Democratic Congresswoman from Maryland ’ s D.C. suburbs . In 2016 , Hogan boycotted the Republican National Convention and wrote in his father ’ s name on his presidential ballot . “ That was the kind of Republican that I wanted to vote for , ” Hogan tells me . Last year , a group of anti-Trump Republicans tried to persuade Hogan to run for President . Hogan , as he puts it , “ didn ’ t throw them out of my office , ” but eventually decided Trump ’ s popularity with the Republican base made him unbeatable in a primary .
Hogan ’ s father died in 2017 . The governor hasn ’ t decided whom to vote for this November . He doesn ’ t rule out voting Democratic . As for Trump , Hogan says , “ he hasn ’ t done anything to make me change my mind . ”
When i ask Hogan what he misses most about life before the pandemic , he gets wistful . “ I ’ m a people person , ” he says . “ Usually I ’ d be at events all day and all night. ” One of the highlights of Hogan ’ s year is opening day of the baseball season in the spring , when he spends hours walking around Oriole Park at Camden Yards , greeting people , shaking thousands of hands and taking hundreds of selfies . This year , of course , there was no opening day . “ That ’ s what I miss about normal life , ” he says . “ I miss people . ”
On April 24 , Hogan announced a phased reopening plan based on a series of testing and tracing benchmarks . The point is to keep people safe , he tells me , but also to give them hope : they have to know there ’ s a light at the end of this tunnel . That the leaders they ’ ve elected have a plan , even if it ’ s far from clear when they ’ ll be able to put it into effect .
Street signs during the Coronavirus pandemic in Ocean City , Md. , on April 16 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
The credibility Hogan ’ s built with his constituents will be critical to the reopening effort . It ’ s a quality that ’ s been in short supply in the White House , where a few hours after Hogan speaks , Trump will force Redfield to “ correct ” an article that quoted him accurately , and where the next day the President will muse about injecting disinfectant into people ’ s bodies . After receiving hundreds of calls to its hotline , Maryland ’ s emergency-management agency is forced to issue a warning that “ under no circumstances should any disinfectant product be administered into the body through injection , ingestion or any other route . ”
For the most part , Maryland ’ s residents have followed Hogan ’ s lead . A small protest erupted in Annapolis on April 18 , demanding an end to the governor ’ s stay-at-home order . Hogan wasn ’ t there to see it because he was at the airport receiving the South Korean test kits . “ I didn ’ t think it was helpful for the President to be encouraging people to go out and protest , ” he says . Trump ’ s tweets urging people to “ liberate ” certain states , he notes , came the day after the President ’ s own Administration issued guidelines calling for the stay-at-home orders to be kept in place for now .
To the protesters , however , Hogan offers not a rebuke but sympathy . “ I get the frustration , ” he says . “ I want it to be over , you know ? I ’ m tired of it also. ” As the pandemic response moves into its next phase , it will be up to Hogan and the other governors to lead the way .
Update , April 30 : This story was updated on April 30 to note the price of the Abbott Laboratories ID NOW coronavirus testing instrument .
An empty parking lot in the beach town of Ocean City , Md. , on April 16 . Peter van Agtmael—Magnum Photos for TIME
This appears in the May 11 , 2020 issue of TIME .
Get The Brief . Sign up to receive the top stories you need to know right now . Please enter a valid email address . Sign Up Now Check the box if you do not wish to receive promotional offers via email from TIME . You can unsubscribe at any time . By signing up you are agreeing to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy Thank you ! For your security , we 've sent a confirmation email to the address you entered . Click the link to confirm your subscription and begin receiving our newsletters . If you do n't get the confirmation within 10 minutes , please check your spam folder .