For indispensable reporting on the coronavirus crisis and more , subscribe to ███ ' newsletters
Last month , after the coronavirus began to transform the way Americans live and shop , Minnesota and Vermont classified grocery clerks as emergency workers , qualifying them for free child care . Since then , more than a dozen states have provided free , subsidized , or income-dependent child care to grocery workers , bringing the total of number of states offering this benefit to 20 .
As they continue to put themselves at risk of infection , many grocery workers say they need even more protections . At least 41 grocery workers have so far died from the coronavirus , according to the Washington Post . The United Food and Commercial Workers union , along with major supermarket chains Kroger and Albertsons , have been calling for federal and state officials to designate grocery workers as first responders , which would give them priority access to masks and gloves . They ’ re also calling for mandatory guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to require sanitation , social distancing , and personal protective equipment in grocery stores .
David Madland , a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress , told me last week that the first-responder status was a step in the right direction , but it still wouldn ’ t be enough to keep them out of harm ’ s way . “ Essential workers need more than just masks and gloves , ” he said . “ They need a broad set of protections to enable them to safely go to work. ” Madland supports the Essential Workers Bill of Rights , proposed by Sen. Elizabeth Warren ( D-Mass . ) and Rep. Ro Khanna ( D-Ca . ) , which would mandate protective equipment , sick leave , child care , health care , and a pay raise for essential employees like grocery workers .
In the absence of meaningful federal protections , workers ’ protections are set by the companies they work for and state and local governments . Even as grocery workers are increasingly hailed as heroes for their service during the coronavirus crisis , only a handful of states have so far taken action to provide them protections from the virus .
Some states , including Delaware and Illinois , have issued guidance for grocery stores to limit the number of customers and enforce social distancing in lines , and a growing number are requiring shoppers to wear masks . But so far , only a handful of states , including Connecticut , Rhode Island , New York , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania , are requiring employers to provide grocery workers with personal protective equipment .
Massachusetts has made free , priority coronavirus testing available to grocery workers . California expanded paid sick time to food sector workers and , along with Nevada and Maryland , granted grocery workers the right to wash their hands every 30 minutes .