President Trump said the U.S. will stop funding to the World Health Organization while his administration reviews its role in “ mismanaging ” the coronavirus .
He said the U.S. contributes up to $ 400 million while superpowers like China , where the outbreak began , contribute closer to $ 40 million .
“ The United States has a duty to insist on full accountability , ” Mr. Trump said .
He cited the WHO ’ s lack of pushback to Beijing ’ s foggy reporting on the virus in the early going , saying it cost the rest of the world valuable time .
He also blasted the WHO ’ s opposition to bans on travel from China , accusing it of putting “ political correctness above life-saving measures . ”
“ Countless more lives would have been saved . Instead , look at the rest of the world , ” he said , citing the rampant spread of the virus in Europe .
SEE ALSO : Dr. Robert Redfield : WHO has been a ‘ longstanding partner ’ for CDC
He said U.S. funding wasn ’ t put to good use and the WHO failed to vet and share information in a timely fashion .
Mr. Trump said the freeze will last 60 to 90 days and should have been done by previous administrations .
He said he will channel the money to the areas that most need it .
The president also accused the WHO of failing to contain samples of the virus from China and getting a team into the source country , though WHO ultimately did get a team in with cooperation from Beijing .
Mr. Trump ’ s decision to cut off funding to the public health arm of the U.N. in the middle of a pandemic is sure to raise eyebrows , though the president may resume funding after sending “ powerful letters ” to the organization and discussing it with other nations .
The WHO , based in Switzerland , is considered the world leader in public health emergencies , such as the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo that has been nearly stamped out amid violent conditions .
Mr. Trump frequently criticizes multilateral organizations that cost plenty of U.S. money . Yet even as he accuses the WHO of being “ China-centric , ” he ’ s been reluctant to attack Chinese President Xi Jinping , who controls the centralized communist government in Beijing .
Mr. Trump and Mr. Xi struck a phase-one trade deal earlier this year and were set to negotiate phase two when the pandemic hit .
“ China has been working very hard to contain the Coronavirus . The United States greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency . It will all work out well . In particular , on behalf of the American People , I want to thank President Xi ! ” Mr. Trump tweeted Jan. 24 , as the virus swamped the city of Wuhan .
Mr. Trump responded to a question about his praise indirectly , pointing to his trade deal and the need for Mr. Xi to live up to it .
One week later , Mr. Trump decided to ban foreign nationals who ’ d been in China over the past 14 days from entering the U.S .
The president said his move prevented a far worse outbreak , though critics say he squandered that time by failing to set up a robust diagnostics program and supply chain during February .
Sen. Jeff Merkley , Oregon Democrat , said “ multiple failures ” at the national and international level led to the problems the U.S. is facing now . But he said America needs to keep its seat at the table in global talks .
“ It ’ s crucial that the United States is at the center of the discussion , not on the sidelines , as the international community determines what path the World Health Organization ( WHO ) takes moving forward . Cutting back on America ’ s support and involvement will mean that the United States does not have a full seat at the table during these discussions , and will only magnify the already troubling influence of China at the WHO , ” he said .
“ Additionally , the activities that are most needed right now to reopen society — global disease surveillance , information sharing , and technical assistance for testing and contact tracing — are exactly the activities that the WHO exists to help coordinate , ” he added . “ Backing away from the WHO at this moment will inflict great damage on the United States , as well as the international community . ”