Fionnuala D. Ní Aoláin , a United Nations special rapporteur for human rights , says emergency powers , once enacted , are rarely rolled back . “ Even if they are created on the basis of being temporary aberrations , they essentially become permanent additions to the legal architecture of the state , ” she warns .
“ There are interests and obviously appetites for governments to take advantage of this opportunity to test out tracking and privacy-breaking technologies , ” says Alex Gladstein , chief strategy officer at the Human Rights Foundation .
Technology – including surveillance drones , facial recognition algorithms , and smartphone geolocation trackers – has emerged as a powerful weapon in the battle against COVID-19 . But its rapid deployment raises important ethical questions reminiscent of those raised by the war on terror . Governments are turning to telecommunications companies , social media platforms , and app developers for help monitoring individuals who contracted the virus and identifying at-risk clusters – with and without consent .
The coronavirus pandemic has brought into sharp focus the work of doctors , nurses , and delivery workers . Less obvious , but equally significant , is the work of those in an altogether different field : surveillance . As they scramble to bring the pandemic under control , governments around the world are implementing or considering the use of sophisticated , and at times intrusive , monitoring techniques .
The coronavirus pandemic has brought into sharp focus the work of doctors , nurses , and delivery workers . Less obvious , but equally significant , is the work of those in an altogether different field : surveillance .
As they scramble to bring the pandemic under control , governments around the world are implementing or considering the use of sophisticated , and at times intrusive , monitoring techniques .
Technology – including surveillance drones , facial recognition algorithms , and smartphone geolocation trackers – has emerged as a powerful weapon in the battle against COVID-19 . But its rapid deployment raises important ethical questions reminiscent of those raised by the war on terror .
Many observers are voicing the concern that extraordinary measures implemented today will become permanent .
“ The single largest , immediate challenge we are seeing is an explosion of emergency or exceptional laws across the globe , ” says Fionnuala D. Ní Aoláin , a law professor and the United Nations special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism .
Emergency powers , once enacted , are rarely rolled back , she says . “ Even if they are created on the basis of being temporary aberrations , they essentially become permanent additions to the legal architecture of the state , ” she warns .
International law makes provisions for states to limit citizens ’ rights during a crisis , but the danger is overreach . Professor Ní Aoláin says it worries her that many of the legislative measures being adopted around the world have a “ pre-cooked ” quality .
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán seized on the COVID-19 crisis to cement executive powers . In the United Kingdom , there are concerns that the government ’ s emergency powers under the Coronavirus Act – a document more than 300 pages long – will relax restrictions on mass surveillance . Israel wants its intelligence services to track those who have the virus .
Emergency measures have spread from Europe , collectively the epicenter of the pandemic , to the United States , the country with the most confirmed cases . Governments are turning to telecommunications companies , social media platforms , and app developers for help monitoring individuals who contracted the virus and identifying at-risk clusters – with and without consent , with and without anonymizing personal data .
Human rights and privacy advocates say a cautionary tale on mass surveillance taken to the extreme can be found in China , which even before the pandemic had employed that measure to repress dissent in Xinjiang , home to the ethnic Uyghur minority .
Wuhan , a city of 11 million people in Hubei Province and the point of origin of the coronavirus outbreak , had been placed under full lockdown , and appears to be emerging from the crisis . But a phone app now determines whether Chinese citizens should remain in quarantine or have the right to move freely , all while sharing personal data with local authorities .
“ There are interests and obviously appetites for governments to take advantage of this opportunity to test out tracking and privacy-breaking technologies , ” says Alex Gladstein , chief strategy officer at the Human Rights Foundation , a global nonprofit that focuses on authoritarian regimes . “ Even in open societies , like Taiwan and South Korea , you are unfortunately seeing very aggressive surveillance tracing of people in quarantine or who are positive . ”
The practice of surveilling and restraining those believed to be contagious is nearly as old as civilization itself . Chapter 13 of Leviticus details which dermatological symptoms call for forcible isolation by public authorities . Writing in the first century B.C. , the Roman statesman Cicero coined the motto “ salus populi suprema lex esto ” – “ the health of the people should be the supreme law ” – a phrase that John Locke , writing nearly 1,700 years later , would characterize as a foundational principle of government .
“ There is an old-fashioned law that the health of the many outweighs the rights of the individual , ” says Howard Markel , a physician and historian of medicine at the University of Michigan . “ We ’ re all neighbors . We ’ re all responsible for one another . ”
Our modern conception of quarantine dates to 14th-century Venice , Italy , when some arriving ships would be required to sit at anchor for 40 days – quaranta giorni in Italian – in an attempt to contain the bubonic plague . The rise of germ theory in the 19th century further cemented the ethos that broad police powers were justified in the face of infectious disease . By 1905 , in response to a smallpox outbreak in Cambridge , Massachusetts , the U.S. Supreme Court established that the rights of the individual must be subordinate to reasonable public health measures .
Thomas Peter/Reuters A software engineer works on a facial recognition program that identifies people when they wear a face mask , at the development lab of the Chinese electronics manufacturer Hanwang ( Hanvon ) Technology in Beijing , March 6 , 2020 .
Perhaps the most famous example of overreach by public health officials is the story of Irish immigrant Mary Mallon , better known as Typhoid Mary . A cook for wealthy families in the New York City area at the turn of the 20th century , she was an asymptomatic carrier of typhoid fever . After several members of the families she cooked for fell ill , authorities identified her and forcibly quarantined her on North Brother Island . Three years later , Ms. Mallon was released on the condition that she not work as a cook . But she returned to preparing food , and was placed back in quarantine for the rest of her life – all told , nearly three decades in isolation .
Her plight represents “ the quintessential example of what happens when public health comes into conflict with civil rights , ” says medical historian Judith Walzer Leavitt , author of the 1997 book “ Typhoid Mary : Captive to the Public ’ s Health . ”
Most of the stringent public health laws remained intact through the rise of the civil rights and civil liberties movements of the 1960s and 1970s . It was only with the HIV/AIDS epidemic near the end of the 20th century that the tension between privacy and public health came to the forefront .
Reflecting on the lessons learned from that epidemic , UNAIDS Deputy Executive Director Shannon Hader argues that trust , engagement , and the cooperation of communities are indispensable to truly conquer COVID-19 , as is the ready access to services for those who need them .
“ In the HIV response , we ’ ve seen effective surveillance systems with extremely private information put into place that have strict protections and have had no breaches of confidentialities , ” says Dr. Hader . “ Yes , there are absolutely ways – even with new technologies and artificial intelligence – to do sound and important public health surveillance that does not compromise the health and safety of individuals . ”
From the World Health Organization in Geneva to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , efforts are underway to develop apps that could help contain the pandemic . One challenge is that privacy laws around the world have struggled to keep pace with technological advances that have delivered facial recognition , biometrics , artificial intelligence , and big-data analysis .
But Joe Cannataci , the U.N. special rapporteur on the right to privacy , says that a data-driven response to the coronavirus is possible while still adhering to ethical standards .
“ We shouldn ’ t be surprised that in exceptional circumstances exceptional measures should be taken , ” says Professor Cannataci from his home office in Malta , where he is adhering to a precautionary 14-day quarantine after extensive travel . “ The problem is , however , do we have the right safeguards in place ? Do we have the right oversight systems in place ? ”
Roughly a third of countries worldwide have no privacy laws at all . Experts consider Europe ’ s General Data Protection Regulation , which came into force in 2018 , as the closest thing to an international gold standard . However , as Professor Cannataci points out , it does not apply to security services .
What does apply , at least in the context of the 47 states of the Council of Europe plus eight other ratifying nations , is Convention 108 . This imposes the obligation to introduce surveillance that is necessary , proportional , and provided for by law in a democratic society .
The right safeguards , in his view , would take the form of a supervising authority that is independent and set up by law , and includes both legal and technological experts in the authorization process for surveillance operations . “ You have to have very clearly specified data searches , very clearly specified surveillance , and very clearly specified time periods , ” says Professor Cannataci . “ You can ’ t do this all the time . ”
“ The risks are that you leave the system in place , and instead of saying coronavirus , instead of flagging the people with coronavirus , you flag all those people who are critical of the government , ” he adds . “ The tools can be so misused that they would make 1984 look like kindergarten . Big Brother would become Little Brother compared with what the state can do . ”
As many countries explore surveillance options , Israel stands out for its explicit intention to repurpose technology designed to tackle suspected terrorists to instead track down information that is useful in fighting the coronavirus .
The Israeli government approved emergency powers for its internal security agency to do so , but met immediate pushback from private and civil rights advocates who find the measure too extreme . The Supreme Court stepped in , issuing an order to bar the use of such technology until a parliamentary committee can be set up to oversee its workings .
But the parliament has not been functioning amid a power struggle between the caretaker government and the opposition following the most recent elections . In the meantime , the Shin Bet , Israel ’ s version of the FBI , continues to use cellphone data to trace where coronavirus-positive people have been and who they would have come into contact with . Israelis joke that if you have an extra blue check on your WhatsApp messaging app , that means Shin Bet has read the message as well .
Critics of the policy worry it will put a damper on political expression and mobilization .
“ When people know they are monitored , they regulate their behavior , ” notes Michael Bar-Sinai , a computer science and privacy researcher at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev . “ So if Big Brother is watching you , you always try to behave in a way that would not annoy Big Brother , especially when your democracy is very fragile as we see now . It could prevent people from self-organizing in their own self-interest . ”
Yohanan Plesner , president of the Israel Democracy Institute and a former lawmaker , does not buy the slippery-slope argument of critics that tracking citizens in the age of the coronavirus necessarily marks a decline in Israel ’ s democracy .
He sees it as an innovative and possibly effective tool for safeguarding public health , provided it is used for a limited time and with parliamentary oversight .
“ I don ’ t think privacy is an absolute value , and public health is also an important goal . Since every individual has a cellphone , we can make good use of this to save lives . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Staff writer Eoin O ’ Carroll in Amherst , Massachusetts , and correspondent Dina Kraft in Tel Aviv , Israel , contributed reporting .