In times of crisis , liberal democratic institutions and values are vulnerable to authoritarian power grabs , or corona coups , as we are seeing around the world today . One of the first victims , as always , is freedom of speech . But the current attack on free speech is particularly dangerous , because it does not only target , reasonably , “ fake news ” on coronavirus , but also critique of inadequacies in hospitals by healthcare workers .
Repressive measures against fake news have been a popular topic for years now , having reached feverish levels in the wake of the 2016 US presidential elections . Even though the actual effects of “ fake news ” and “ Russian interference ” remain unclear and highly disputed , many mainstream politicians have convinced themselves that the spread of fake news is one of the main reasons that they are losing votes and power to populists .
UN secretary general : recovery from the coronavirus crisis must lead to a better world | António Guterres Read more
Social media platforms are pressured into “ fighting fake news ” and a true cottage industry of factcheckers has emerged – many reputable , some not . Still , too little progress has been made . This is not that surprising , though , given the daily barrage of fake news coming out of some of the most powerful political offices in the world , including Downing Street and the White House .
Since the term was popularized by Donald Trump , it should come as no surprise that populists in power have enthusiastically embraced the fight against “ fake news ” . And now the coronavirus has given them an opportunity to intensify that fight by passing draconian new laws , allegedly to prevent fake news from worsening the crisis .
One of the worst examples , as so often in recent years , comes out of Hungary , where the rubber stamp parliament has passed a set of “ emergency measures ” – without actually facing an emergency ( as of 31 March , Hungary has officially had only 492 cases , including 16 deaths ) – to give the far-right prime minister Viktor Orbán “ dictatorial powers ” . As Orbán rules by decree , anything that he deems “ fake news ” will be punishable to up to five years in prison – a death sentence for independent media , in so far as it still exists in Hungary .
Perhaps even more dangerous is the attack on the free speech of people at the frontlines of the fight against the coronavirus : healthcare workers . These are the people best informed about the situation , and thus the best potential antidotes to fake news . Yet , according to the Independent , British NHS doctors are being gagged over protective equipment shortages , while NHS England has taken control of communications for many NHS hospitals and staff .
In the US , one of the few western democracies without a universal public healthcare system , individual private hospitals are doing the censoring . Prioritizing their brand and profits over the health of their patients and staff , private hospitals across the US have threatened staff with termination if they speak out about the lack of protective gear . Several hospital staff have already been fired after speaking out , an incredible waste of crucial but sparse resources during a pandemic .
Leaving aside the problem of employers regulating the speech of their employees , incidentally an increasingly common development ( even at universities ) , censoring healthcare professionals is outright dangerous to the broader community . These are the people who actually have day-to-day experience with the coronavirus and risk their lives to help others – particularly if their employers don ’ t provide them with adequate protective gear .
Free speech makes us more rather than less safe , both as citizens and patients
Moreover , we know how dangerous this type of censorship is from recent experiences in China . Max Fisher has written an excellent New York Times exposé of how China ’ s authoritarian structure had worsened the country ’ s response to the coronavirus outbreak . And western media have devoted ample attention to the tragic case of Li Wenliang , the Chinese whistleblower doctor who died of the coronavirus in February .
The irony is that some of the same politicians who support , or at least allow , the censorship of healthcare professionals in their own country have been outspoken critics of the Chinese approach . For instance , the British cabinet minister Michael Gove recently blamed China for failing to stop the spread of coronavirus , while Michael McCaul , the top Republican on the House foreign affairs committee , even called China ’ s response “ one of the worst cover-ups in human history ” .
To ensure that we are not making the same mistakes as China , and to protect the health and lives of the heroic healthcare workers ( including the many volunteers ) who are putting their lives on the line every day to keep us alive and healthy , we must resist these dangerous attacks on free speech , as well as other unnecessary authoritarian measures in response to the coronavirus crisis . Irrespective of the hype about fake news , free speech makes us more rather than less safe , both as citizens and patients , even in times of a health crisis .