Florida Gov . Ron DeSantis announced Tuesday that the state will not reimpose sweeping shutdowns amid rising coronavirus infections , saying that going back to lockdowns would cripple the economy without saving lives .
DeSantis drew the line even as Texas Gov . Greg Abbott last week ordered all bars closed , and Arizona Gov . Doug Ducey told residents to stay home and declared that the state was “ on pause . '' Just last week , after the state recorded 25,000 new infections in just five days and 9,000 in one day alone , Florida once again prohibited the on-premises consumption of alcohol at bars ; there are no restrictions on occupancy at gyms or stores .
`` We 're not going back , closing things , '' DeSantis told reporters . `` I do n't think that that really is what 's driving it , people going to a business is not what 's driving it . I think when you see the younger folks , I think a lot of it is more just social interactions , so that 's natural . Obviously , you had a lot of different activities going on in different parts of the state . ... So that 's just the reality . ''
BIG-CITY DEMS WHO IMPOSED STRICT CORONAVIRUS RESTRICTIONS NOW CHAMPION 'BLM ' PROTESTS
Protests around the country , and in Florida , have seen a dramatic decline in social distancing in recent weeks . While data show that infections in Florida outpace new testing , the numbers also indicate that many of the newly infected are young and are not becoming seriously ill .
DeSantis added that doomsday predictions about Florida 's coronavirus numbers were off-base , and urged young residents to `` protect the vulnerable '' by socially distancing and steering clear of the elderly -- stopping short of other governors , who have suggested residents should generally stay home .
`` We 're open , we know who we need to protect , most of the folks in those younger demographics , although we want them to be mindful of what 's going on , are just simply much much less at risk than the folks who are in those older age groups , '' DeSantis added .
Earlier this month , DeSantis adopted a different posture , telling constituents that the worst was over .
“ In our phase two , we will be going with bars being able to operate consistent with this guidance diminished standing room occupancy so basically outdoor seating with social distance , a certain amount indoors , but you ’ re seated to get served . I mean ... go enjoy . Have a drink . It ’ s fine , '' DeSantis said . “ We want to kind of not have huge crowds piling in . ”
At the same time , DeSantis has issued a stark warning to businesses that defy the state ’ s social distancing guidelines , threatening to revoke business licenses from bars and restaurants .
“ If you go in and it ’ s just mayhem , like ‘ Dance Party USA ’ and it ’ s packed to the rafters , that ’ s just cut-and-dry and that ’ s not just an innocent mistake , ” DeSantis said .
NEW YORK STATE WEBSITE DELETES GOV . CUOMO 'S ORDER , LINKED TO SCORES OF NURSING HOME DEATHS
As Florida ’ s reported cases spiked to record highs the past two weeks , though , DeSantis ' administration ordered bars to essentially shut down again . Officials in New York and New Jersey have also debated slowing their reopenings as a result .
That move sent Kylie Davis , a 23-year-old bartender in Tampa , Fla. , back to unemployment . She had returned to work May 23 after two months without a job , struggling to collect unemployment benefits from Florida ’ s backlogged system . The tips , she said , were good .
“ People were so understanding , ” she said , “ that we had been out of work for a while and were extremely generous . ”
Yet after a few weeks , Davis was coughing and exhausted and had lost her sense of taste and smell . On June 12 , she tested positive for the virus and couldn ’ t return to work when Florida bars reopened .
The jarring reversal underscores what many economists had been stressing for months : That the economy and the job market can ’ t regain their health until business shutdowns have lasted long enough to reduce infections and most Americans feel confident enough to return to restaurants , bars , hotels , shopping malls and airports .
“ It is the virus , not lockdowns , that dictates the course of the economy , ” said Yongseok Shin , an economist at Washington University and a research fellow at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis . “ We can not have a full economic recovery without reining in the epidemic . ''