FILE - In this April 22 , 2020 , file photo , President Donald Trump listens during a briefing about the coronavirus in the James Brady Press Briefing Room of the White House , in Washington . After two months of frantic response to the coronavirus pandemic , the White House is planning to shift President Trump ’ s public focus to the burgeoning efforts aimed at easing the economic devastation . ( AP Photo/Alex Brandon , File )
FILE - In this April 22 , 2020 , file photo , President Donald Trump listens during a briefing about the coronavirus in the James Brady Press Briefing Room of the White House , in Washington . After two months of frantic response to the coronavirus pandemic , the White House is planning to shift President Trump ’ s public focus to the burgeoning efforts aimed at easing the economic devastation . ( AP Photo/Alex Brandon , File )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — Businesses should close break rooms . Restaurants should consider disposable menus and plates . Schools should have students eat lunch in their classrooms .
These are some of the recommendations offered in new federal plans designed to help restaurants , schools , churches and businesses safely reopen as states look to gradually lift their coronavirus restrictions .
The draft guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been sent to Washington but still could be revised before the Trump administration unveils it to the public . The recommendations were obtained from a federal official who was not authorized to release them publicly .
The CDC put together so-called “ decision trees ” for at least seven types of organizations : schools , camps , childcare centers , religious facilities , mass transit systems , workplaces , and bars/restaurants .
White House officials previously released a three-phase reopening plan for the nation that mentioned schools and other organizations that come back online at different points . But it hadn ’ t previously offered more specific how-to guidelines for each kind of entity .
The new guidance still amounts to little more than advice . State and local officials will be the ones to adopt and enforce them . Some state and local governments have already put rules in place for businesses that are operating . For example , Michigan requires businesses to limit how many customers can be in a store at one time .
New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo on Sunday said that each business that wants to reopen will have to submit a plan to the state on how to do that .
The new guidance could give state officials cover if their requirements for businesses are challenged in the courts , said Lindsay Wiley , an American University public health law expert .
“ It allows the state to say ‘ well the CDC said to do it this way , ’ and the judge then is very happy to say ‘ well yes you consulted CDC and that ’ s the appropriate body , ’ and then uphold the restrictions and say they ’ re appropriately evidence based . ”
—In the initial reopening phases , schools should space desks six feet apart , nix any field trips and school assemblies , and have students eat lunch in their classrooms instead of the cafeteria .
—Churches should hold services through video streaming or at drive-in or outdoor venues as much as possible . They should also encourage everyone to wear cloth face masks , use a stationary collection box , and schedule extra services if necessary to make sure church pews are not packed and congregants stay at least six feet from each other .
—Restaurants should consider using throwaway menus , single-service condiments , and disposable forks , knives , spoons , and dishes . They should install sneeze guards at cash registers , limit the number of employees on a shift , and avoid having buffets , salad bars , and drink stations .
The guidance for religious groups includes providing congregants spiritual and emotional care “ on a flexible or virtual basis or refer them to other available resources . ”
Allen Fagin , executive vice president of the Orthodox Union , said that as much as worship in synagogues is “ one of the most fundamental aspects of Jewish life , ” his faith also believes that “ the sanctity of life is more important than any other aspect of observance . ”
Application of any guidelines are likely to have significant regional and demographic variation , Fagin added . “ There ’ s going to have to be a great deal of both training and soul-searching in particular communities to make certain the guidelines are understood and will in fact be adhered to , to the letter , ” he said .
Various trade groups have also started coming out with their own recommendations . For example , the National Restaurant Association last week put out guidance to restaurants considering reopening . The association said restaurants should clean and sanitize reusable menus , while the CDC suggests using disposable menus . And the CDC recommends that employees use cloth masks when interacting with customers , but the association doesn ’ t . But some guidance is similar . The association and the CDC both recommend seating dining parties at least 6 feet apart .
Larry Lynch , a senior vice president at the trade group , said the restaurant industry is already heavily regulated in order to prevent foodborne illnesses . So he doesn ’ t think additional guidelines from the CDC are onerous .
“ The fact is we ’ re probably already 80 % of the way there with the mandates coming out of the food code , ” he said .
Lynch said the biggest concern for restaurant owners isn ’ t federal guidelines , but convincing people that it ’ s safe to return to restaurants .
Many companies , especially those with strong remote work capabilities , are already drawing up plans that go beyond the CDC ’ s guidelines , said Bhushan Sethi , global people and organization leader at PwC , a consulting firm . He said many companies are considering keeping their employees working from home well after authorities lift stay-at-home orders .
“ It ’ s a bare minimum compared to the playbook that many firms are putting in place , ” Sethi said of the CDC guidelines on workplaces . “ Firms are acknowledging that people are going to be fearful . ”
About 65 % of companies recently surveyed by PwC are planning to reconfigure work sites to allow physical distancing . Some 52 % are planning staggered shifts or alternating crews , according to the April 18-22 survey of chief financial officers at 305 U.S. companies .
Stobbe reported from New York . AP staff writers Alexandra Olson and Elana Schor contributed to this report from New York , and Dee-Ann Durbin contributed from Ann Arbor , Michigan .