Nor is it just Republican governors and state legislatures . According to the new New York Times/Siena poll , voters over all strongly favor giving control of the pandemic priority over reopening the economy — but Republican voters , presumably taking their cue from the White House and Fox News , take the opposite position .
And it ’ s not just about policy decisions . Partisanship seems to be driving individual behavior , too , with self-identified Democrats significantly more likely to wear face masks and engage in social distancing than self-identified Republicans .
The question , then , isn ’ t why “ America ” has failed to deal effectively with the pandemic . It ’ s why the G.O.P . has in effect allied itself with the coronavirus .
Part of the answer is short-term politics . At the beginning of this year Donald Trump ’ s re-election message was all about economic triumphalism : Unemployment was low , stocks were up , and he was counting on good numbers to carry him through November . He and his officials wasted crucial weeks refusing to acknowledge the viral threat because they didn ’ t want to hear any bad news .
And they pushed for premature reopening because they wanted things to return to what they seemed to be back in February . Indeed , just a few days ago the same Trump officials who initially assured us that Covid-19 was no big deal were out there dismissing the risks of a second wave .
I ’ d suggest , however , that the G.O.P. ’ s coronavirus denial also has roots that go beyond Trump and his electoral prospects . The key point , I ’ d argue , is that Covid-19 is like climate change : It isn ’ t the kind of menace the party wants to acknowledge .
It ’ s not that the right is averse to fearmongering . But it doesn ’ t want you to fear impersonal threats that require an effective policy response , not to mention inconveniences like wearing face masks ; it wants you to be afraid of people you can hate — people of a different race or supercilious liberals .