There has been no sustained community transmission of the coronavirus in the United States so far , and many Chinese churches such as Raleigh Chinese Christian Church ( RCCC ) are doing their best to keep it that way .
Taped to the entrance of the church ’ s glass doors is a yellow notice with the word “ ATTENTION ” in capital letters . It warns parents not to bring their children to church if they ’ ve traveled to Asia in the past 14 days .
Churches such as RCCC—a nondenominational congregation with services in Mandarin , Cantonese , and English—have taken it upon themselves to self-quarantine , in keeping with Centers for Disease Control guidance .
Many others have taken additional precautionary measures , such as canceling small group gatherings , Sunday lunches , and other communal events .
“ I think there ’ s caution , ” said Jerry Miller , RCCC ’ s youth pastor . “ There may be a little bit of fear mixed in with that too , which is understandable . ”
The outbreak of the virus , which began in Wuhan , China , has sickened thousands and has killed more than 2,700 people . At least 35 people in the US are infected with the so-called COVID-19 virus—all linked to overseas travel , including 18 people evacuated from the Diamond Princess , a cruise ship docked in Yokohama , Japan .
No Americans have died from the coronavirus thus far , and those infected have not spread it to the wider community .
Still , it is the Chinese American community that has borne the brunt of the health scare and it has also been the one to implement wide-ranging safety precautions .
The virus impeded communal celebrations of Chinese New Year , which fell on January 25 . The lunar holiday is typically a time when hundreds of millions of people travel in China to reunite with family .
Stateside , parties , get-togethers , and other holiday celebrations were nearly all called off .
Attendance at US Chinese churches dropped as much as 50 percent beginning in late January . It is slowly beginning to pick up , according to half a dozen pastors interviewed for this story .
“ We ’ ve all been impacted in very similar ways , ” said Carter Tan , English ministries pastor at Grace Chinese Baptist Church of Richmond , Virginia .
Tan , whose church is part of the Southern Baptist Convention ( SBC ) , said many US Chinese churches have members grieving the loss of family or friends who have died in Wuhan , a city of 11 million people in central China .
“ We have one woman whose father passed away because of the coronavirus last week , ” Tan said , adding that this isn ’ t just affecting those in China . “ It has hit home pretty personally . ”
The major airlines—Delta Air Lines , American Airlines , and United Airlines—suspended service to mainland China on January 31 , so any Chinese Americans headed to China for work , school—or the funeral of a loved one—are unable to go . Chinese nationals who were visiting the US before the air travel restrictions were put in place can not return home ; so too , Americans who happened to be visiting China before the epidemic started .
Chinese Americans are mostly secular ; 52 percent do not affiliate with a particular religion . But 31 percent consider themselves Christians and 15 percent are Buddhist , according to a Pew Research Center survey .
Most Christian Chinese Americans are Protestant and describe themselves as evangelical . Nondenominational and Baptist churches dominate .
There are between 200 and 250 Chinese churches affiliated with the SBC , said Amos Lee , executive director of the Chinese Baptist Fellowship of USA and Canada . Most are small with about 100 members , but there are larger ones , especially in the big cities such as San Francisco , Los Angeles , and Dallas .
To avoid contagion , Lee said Southern Baptist Chinese churches have been advised to use individualized pre-filled and sealed Communion cups containing grape juice and a wafer .
Many churches are used to pre-filled Communion elements and have been using them since the global SARS epidemic in 2003 , Lee said .
Chinese Baptist Church ( CBC ) in Raleigh set out a basket with face masks at the door , though Jane Pan , the pastor , said few have taken advantage of them .
“ We did have some that wore face masks in the beginning , but not anymore , ” said Pan .
The church , located a few blocks from North Carolina State University , has canceled its Chinese student fellowship meetings this month . The fellowship , which includes about 40 students , may resume meeting in March , though no decision has been made .
Likewise , the church has called off Sunday ’ s communal lunch after services .
Charlotte ’ s Chinese Baptist Church changed the way it serves Sunday lunch . Instead of having people line up buffet style , it now arranges plates heaped with food on a table and servers wearing face masks and gloves hand them to church members .
“ Our church is on alert , ” said Kevin Fu , a lay leader . “ That ’ s not just our church . It ’ s the whole Chinese community . ”
Chinese restaurants and grocery stores in the US and across the world have reported sharp sales declines .
In response , Chinese American churches and nonprofits have also been fundraising for the people of Wuhan . Chinese Americans from across the Carolinas donated toward an effort to buy boxes of face masks .
Other organizations have offered help , as well . Samaritan ’ s Purse , for example , donated 78 pallets of medical supplies and personal protective equipment through the US State Department , said Kaitlyn Lahm , a spokesperson for the North Carolina-based ministry .
World Vision distributed masks to 50,000 people in the impacted province .
The New York Timesreported that several donations from overseas faith-based groups have not been well received . Local officials have rejected some donations because they fear trouble for cooperating with what the centralized government considers to be illegal organizations . The government in China recognizes five faiths , but at the same time it co-opts state-sanctioned religious organizations .
Cathy Kimball , a resident of Cary who attends CBC Raleigh , said that despite the difficulties , church members are not isolated . Social media has allowed Chinese Americans to stay in touch with friends and family in China , primarily through WeChat , the Chinese messaging and social media app .
“ Everybody is involved discussing the topic , ” said Kimball , a 56-year-old permanent resident who has lived in the US since 2003 and manages a local Chinese news site . “ We don ’ t feel alone . ”
Just when things will return to normal is hard to say .
“ There ’ s a lot of uncertainty as to what to expect , ” said Lee . “ We really don ’ t know what the whole picture is like . So people are taking it cautiously . ”