After weeks of closures due to the coronavirus pandemic , New Mexico governor Michelle Lujan Grisham said Wednesday that retailers and churches in the state may open at partial capacity , but that gyms and salons must stay closed , and that residents must wear face masks in public .
But the 65,000 residents of Chaves County have little to fear should they violate these orders .
Coronavirus Coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic , criminal justice and immigration . Related Stories
“ My department will not be out citing anyone for not wearing a mask , ” Mike Herrington , the county sheriff , told ███ on Thursday . “ I will not be enforcing any of those orders. ” Herrington has already allowed at least one gym , among other businesses , to reopen in recent weeks .
Chaves County—which has reported 30 positive diagnoses of COVID-19 , and two related deaths—encompasses Roswell , the town famous for its association with a debunked-but-widely-believed UFO sighting in the 1940s . It ’ s also one of many rural communities hit hard by the recent economic shutdown ; the cancellation of the annual UFO Festival this month potentially deprived local businesses of a million dollars in revenue , according to KRQE .
Herrington is one of at least 60 sheriffs nationwide , spread across more than a dozen states , who are publicly opposing restrictions issued by governors , according to a Marshall Project analysis of news reports and official statements . There are likely many more quietly declining to enforce them .
All law enforcement officers have a great deal of discretion , but the power of sheriffs in particular stretches deep into American history , to the end of the Civil War and the settling of the frontier . This history can help us make sense of their increasingly central role in partisan battles about public health and economic recovery , as they clash with governors through viral Facebook posts and media appearances .
While police chiefs are appointed and thus insulated from politics , sheriffs are elected and many have built their reputations by defying state and federal laws in areas ranging from immigration to gun control . The best known sheriffs in America in recent years , Joe Arpaio of Arizona and David Clarke of Wisconsin , used racially charged criticism of President Obama to become high-profile allies of President Trump .
The stay-at-home orders are just the latest opportunity for sheriffs to get noticed , particularly in states with Democratic governors . ( Seventy-five percent of the sheriffs in ███ count were in such states . ) “ Very rarely are they able to do things that voters know about , ” said Zoe Nemerever , a political science graduate student who studies sheriffs . “ Everybody knows about COVID . ”
But to truly understand the role that sheriffs are currently playing in the political conversation , it ’ s necessary to go back much further—all the way to Reconstruction .
After the Civil War , sheriffs assumed the power vacuum left behind by slave owners , according to Douglas Blackmon , author of the 2009 Pultizer-winning history “ Slavery by Another Name : The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II. ” They were empowered by Black Codes to make arrests for congregating in public and being unemployed , and they oversaw the leasing of black prisoners as laborers in an economic system that in effect continued slavery . “ Arrests surged and fell , not as acts of crime increased or receded , but in tandem to the varying needs of the buyers of labor , ” Blackmon wrote .
Gilbert King , author of two books featuring Willis V. McCall , a violent , racist sheriff in 1950s Florida , found that throughout the civil rights era sheriffs were known members of the Ku Klux Klan . In the 1960s , Sheriff Jim Clark of Dallas County , Alabama , famously oversaw the beating of black voting rights demonstrators in Selma , Alabama . Giving power to sheriffs was in the interest of pro-segregation Southern leaders because it would be much harder for the federal government to track the actions of hundreds of individual counties .
The idea that a sheriff could stand as a bulwark of local control against state and federal laws shifted in the 1970s , from opposition to civil rights to the more arcane intellectual sphere of the Christian Identity movement . Minister William Potter Gale “ preached that the Constitution was a divinely inspired document intended to elevate whites above Jews and racial minorities , ” journalist Ashley Powers wrote in The New Yorker . This thinking underpinned the “ Posse Comitatus ” movement of the 1980s , which violently clashed with federal law enforcement while promoting the idea of “ sheriff supremacy , ” and which , Powers wrote , “ cross-pollinated with other kinds of right-wing thought . ”
The open racism receded while the idea of the sheriff ’ s power remained . Although sheriffs generally enforce state laws , in 1994 , a group of sheriffs in Arizona and Montana sued the federal government , challenging a law that required them to perform background checks on people who wanted to buy handguns . The Supreme Court ruled in the sheriffs ’ favor . One of the sheriffs , Richard Mack of Arizona , went on to found the Constitutional Sheriffs and Peace Officers Association , which advocates that sheriffs not enforce all laws they believe to be unconstitutional . In 2016 , Mack was a prominent supporter of the Bundy family during their standoff with FBI agents over their right to let cattle graze on public lands .
The organization claims roughly 5,000 members . Political scientist Mirya Holman says the number of sheriffs who actively consider themselves members may be fewer than a hundred .
But even when they do not take loud political stands , their personal views shape the local justice system . Holman and a colleague surveyed hundreds of sheriffs and found that those who believed myths about domestic violence , including the idea that it is easy for women to leave abusive partners , are less likely to arrest domestic violence suspects .
Still , sheriffs do not always fall on the conservative side of partisan divides , especially when the federal government itself is led by a conservative president . In the Trump era , sheriffs from Charlotte to Cincinnati have been elected after promising to not cooperate with federal immigration authorities . Holman points out that sometimes sheriffs are simply requesting that the federal government work with them before sending federal agents into high risk situations in their counties .
As COVID-19 began hitting urban centers in March and governors began issuing lockdown orders , sheriffs began quelling rumors of checkpoints and mass arrests . “ This is not Nazi Germany or Soviet Russia where you are asked for your papers ! ” wrote Sheriff Scott Nichols of Franklin County , Maine . Although Nichols noted that his deputies would still arrest people , his post was celebrated in conservative media as a “ rebellion ” against Gov . Janet Mills , a Democrat . ( Nichols did not respond to a request for comment . ) Other sheriffs simply said they didn ’ t have the resources to enforce these orders , having already been stretched thin by having to respond to everything from mental health episodes to drug overdoses .
Where Arpaio and Clarke built their reputations over many years , the route to political stardom has quickened in the COVID age , especially when a Democratic governor can serve as a foil . “ Washington , Oregon , and Wisconsin are all examples where you have a liberal governor that ’ s been largely elected by the urban centers of the state , and a more conservative , rural area that feels like they ’ re being ignored and their interests are not being heard in the political process , ” said Holman . “ The sheriff becomes the representation of that conflict . ”
Sheriff Adam Fortney , in Snohomish County , Washington , has been publicly feuding with the state leaders , and is now facing a potential recall election , while his supporters are raising money on GoFundMe . On May 5 , Chad Bianco , the sheriff of Riverside County , California , told county commissioners , “ I refuse to make criminals out of business owners , single moms , and otherwise healthy individuals who are exercising their constitutional rights. ” A video of his comments went viral , and on May 8 he appeared on “ Fox & Friends , ” a show that had already hosted a Michigan sheriff critical of Gov . Gretchen Whitmer ’ s orders .
Herrington was elected sheriff of Chaves County , New Mexico , in 2018 , after two decades as a deputy in his hometown of Roswell . He speaks less to the deep historical legacy of his role than to the daily struggles of his constituents . He ’ s sympathetic to the constitutional sheriff movement , but also cordial to his governor and eager to stress the non-partisan nature of his job , although he ran for office as a Republican .
In April , after Gov . Lujan Grisham extended the stay-at-home order until mid-May , Herrington said he was approached by small business owners , some of them literally in tears . They complained that Walmart and Target , allowed to stay open because they sold food , were also selling televisions and other big items to residents looking to spend their stimulus checks . These owners told Herrington that by opening , they could reduce crowding at the big box stores.The head of the New Mexico Sheriffs ’ Association wrote a letter last week to Attorney General William Barr , asking him to consider whether the governor ’ s orders violated the civil rights of New Mexicans , and he similarly focused on how big-box stores have reaped the economic benefits of the closures .
“ These are my friends and family , ” Herrington said . “ To look at the fear in their eyes , the fear of losing everything they have , tells me I have no choice but to stand and take on this fight . ”
In his public statements , Herrington has told the governor he doesn ’ t want to be defiant , and invited her to negotiate on how to let businesses reopen sooner while still protecting public health . “ Since before the birth of America the duty of the Sheriff has been to secure the Rights of the People , ” he wrote on Facebook . “ Every business in Chaves County is essential when the people are dependent upon that income to provide for themselves and their families. ” Gov . Lujan Grisham has responded with a press statement asking New Mexicans to “ stay the course ” and follow her guidelines . There is little she can do to punish the sheriff .
Herrington did say no to drag races and little league games , and he ’ s encouraging people to stay home if they are sick , immunocompromised , or simply don ’ t want to put themselves at risk . He has also encouraged residents to stop threatening state police officers who were trying to enforce the governor ’ s orders . He is worried about crime going up as residents grow economically desperate .
For children ’ s birthdays , Herrington organizes small parades—more than one per day , he said—in which police and firefighters drive by their houses with lights and sirens . “ We are delivering groceries , medicine , everything , to anybody , not just the elderly , ” he said . “ You call me with your receipt number , we ’ ll deliver it to your front porch . ”
“ We are saying : If you want to come out , you have that God-given right under the First Amendment , ” Herrington explained , but “ if you ’ re scared , if you ’ re being cautious , I will help you . ”