The United States surpassed 3 million coronavirus infections on Wednesday , a grim milestone as the virus surges in more than half of all states , and a predicted waning of infections this summer never occurred .
Data from the John Hopkins University Coronavirus Resource Center showed the U.S. had 3,009,611 cases at midday on Wednesday .
On Tuesday , the U.S. set a record with 60,000 new cases . California and Texas both had more than 10,000 new cases in a single day , shattering previous records .
Arizona , Florida , and South Carolina led the world in new cases over the last seven days , according to New York Times data .
Hospitals in Florida have run out of beds in their intensive care units , even as Gov . Ron DeSantis Ronald Dion DeSantisFlorida records more than 15,000 new COVID-19 cases in one day , the highest single-day increase in any state Teachers union president casts doubt on schools reopening full-time DeSantis on Florida schools reopening : 'If you can do Walmart , ' then 'we absolutely can do the schools ' MORE ( R ) continues to downplay the situation and refuses to release critical information about hospitalizations .
While experts previously predicted a summer lull in infections , that never materialized . Many states , facing pressure from business leaders and from the White House , rushed to reopen without fully anticipating the impact on new infections .
White House coronavirus task force coordinator Deborah Birx on Tuesday said in a Sirius XM interview that states ignored guidelines put in place by federal and local public health officials , and “ stepped on the gas ” while reopening , causing this new surge .
After calling on governors to reopen state economies , the Trump administration has now shifted its attention to pressure schools to fully reopen in the fall .
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently released guidance for safely reopening schools , but President Trump Donald John TrumpDavis : Supreme Court decision is bad news for Trump , good news for Vance Meadows trying to root out suspected White House leakers by feeding them info : Axios Pressley hits DeVos over reopening schools : ' I would n't trust you to care for a house plant let alone my child ' MORE on Wednesday tweeted his displeasure with his own public health agency . He said the guidelines were too burdensome and `` expensive , '' and indicated he would be meeting with the agency in an effort to change them .
Testing capacity is being strained in those states with the largest number of new infections , and supply chain issues that plagued the country early in the pandemic have resurfaced .
While Trump and other administration officials have latched onto a declining fatality rate as a sign of progress , Anthony Fauci Anthony FauciSunday shows - Spotlight shifts to reopening schools US testing official : 'Dr . Fauci is not 100 percent right ' Trump flails as audience dwindles and ratings plummet MORE on Tuesday said focusing on that one statistic is a `` false narrative . ''
`` There 's so many other things that are very dangerous and bad about this virus , do n't get yourself into a false complacency , ” Fauci , the nation 's leading infectious disease expert , said .
Deaths are a lagging indicator in an outbreak , and will rise as people generally don ’ t die until weeks after they become sick . In addition , many of the newly infected have been young people , who generally tend to be healthier
“ But that doesn ’ t mean that you could not get seriously ill , ” Fauci said .