New York Governor Andrew Cuomo accused President Donald Trump of `` spoiling for a fight '' , as the US leader lashed out at `` Democrat Governors '' .
Several states , including New York , have begun cautious talks on reopening , but Mr Trump has claimed he has `` total '' power to lift virus lockdowns .
Mr Cuomo refuted the claim on Tuesday as Mr Trump took to Twitter to criticise the governor .
The US is the epicentre of the pandemic with 592,743 cases and 25,239 deaths .
New York state has the most cases , with almost 190,000 cases and over 10,000 deaths . However , it has seen signs of improvement , with the number of people hospitalised due to coronavirus falling for the first time on Tuesday .
On Monday , Mr Trump wrote on Twitter that deciding when to reopen states was `` the decision of the president '' , not state governors , although he added that he would make his decision `` in conjunction with governors '' .
The US Constitution says that states maintain public order and safety . So far , it has been individual state governors who have issued lockdown or shelter-in-place orders .
Also on Monday , several US state governors discussed plans to resume economic activity without apparent input from the Trump administration .
Ten states - seven on the East Coast , led by New York Governor Andrew Cuomo , and three on the West Coast , led by California Governor Gavin Newsom , said they would co-ordinate how to reopen businesses after the outbreak is contained . All but one of the states is led by a Democratic governor .
Now , a row has erupted over who has the ultimate authority to lift lockdown orders .
On Monday night , Mr Trump gave a combative press conference where he feuded with reporters , criticised their coverage of how he handled the outbreak , and said that when it came to reopening the economy , `` the president of the United States calls the shots '' .
`` When somebody is the president of the United States , the authority is total , '' he said , adding : `` They ca n't do anything without the approval of the president of the United States . ''
His position has been contradicted by governors and legal experts . It also contrasts with his earlier position that the responsibility for fighting the outbreak and order lockdowns lies primarily with state governors .
The row continued on Tuesday , as Mr Cuomo told CBS Mr Trump did not have total authority to decide when to reopen businesses , because `` we do n't have a king , we have a president '' .
During his daily press briefing , Mr Cuomo criticised Mr Trump , adding he would `` not engage '' in a fight with him , but would have `` no choice '' if the president the threatened the welfare of New Yorkers .
He added : `` I put my hand out in total partnership and co-operation with the president . ''
Meanwhile , Mr Trump took the row to Twitter on Tuesday , criticising Mr Cuomo and issuing an oblique snipe at other governors .
`` Tell the Democrat Governors that 'Mutiny On The Bounty '' was one of my all time favourite movies , '' Mr Trump , a Republican , wrote .
`` A good old fashioned mutiny every now and then is an exciting and invigorating thing to watch , especially when the mutineers need so much from the Captain . '' The tale tells of a ship 's revolt in which mutineers meet with unhappy ends , with Mr Trump appearing to compare himself to the captain .
The president aimed particular fire at Mr Cuomo , who he said was calling `` daily , even hourly , begging for everything , '' like hospitals , beds , ventilators for his state . New York remains the US state hardest-hit by the coronavirus outbreak , reporting 778 deaths in the past 24 hours .
However , Mr Trump struck a less combative tone later on Tuesday , saying he would make a decision on the economy `` in conjunction with governors '' soon .
`` We have tremendous support from governors , and what I do is going to be done in conjunction with governors . ''
The Trump administration had previously signalled 1 May as a potential date for easing the restrictions .
The current White House recommendations for Americans to avoid restaurants and non-essential travel and keep in-person gatherings to no more than 10 people expire on 30 April .
However , the US 's top infectious diseases adviser , Dr Anthony Fauci , told AP on Tuesday that the 1 May date might be `` a bit overly optimistic '' .
Referring to testing and tracing procedures , he said : `` We have to have something in place that is efficient and that we can rely on , and we 're not there yet . ''
Globally , different approaches have been adopted to loosening lockdown restrictions .
The Chinese province of Wuhan , where coronavirus was first reported last December , has partially reopened after more than two months of isolation .
Spain has allowed around 300,000 nonessential workers to return to their jobs .
Italy - the hardest-hit country in Europe - will allow a narrow range of businesses to resume operations this week .
In France , President Emmanuel Macron has announced the country 's near-lockdown will extend until 11 May .
The UK government has said no one should expect any changes to its lockdown restrictions this week .
Mr Trump told Monday 's briefing he did not intend to fire Anthony Fauci - a day after the president shared a tweet with the hashtag `` # firefauci '' .
Dr Fauci incurred the ire of the president 's supporters after he told CNN that lives could have been saved if the US had shut down earlier during the coronavirus outbreak .
Mr Trump invited Dr Fauci - a key member of the White House coronavirus task force - to the stage in the opening minutes of the briefing .
The president said that he and Dr Fauci had been on the same page `` from the beginning '' and declared he liked the respected doctor .
`` I think he 's a wonderful guy , '' Mr Trump said , while adding that not everyone was happy with the health expert .
Dr Fauci has contradicted or corrected Mr Trump on scientific matters during the public health crisis . But on Monday , he conceded he had used `` a poor choice of words '' in his CNN interview .
While Mr Trump initially played down the threat of coronavirus , he was by no means alone among US public officials in doing so .
Dr Fauci himself on 17 February said the danger from coronavirus is `` just minuscule '' compared with the `` real and present danger '' of flu .