Nevertheless , Trump claims the White House physician prescribed it for him , although the physician ’ s letter meant to back up Trump ’ s dubious claim stated merely that he had discussed the topic with Trump and concluded the benefits ( what benefits ? ! ) outweigh the risks . Trump ’ s press secretary claims he is taking the drug , which proves nothing , since she has already demonstrated a propensity to say anything her boss requires .
The debate over whether the president is actually doing something so reckless as to put his own life at risk or merely lying about doing so , thereby risking other people ’ s lives who will follow his example , is instructive in four respects .
First , virtually nothing Trump says about himself , his actions , the world and his advisers can be taken at face value . In one sense , this is an improvement for the mainstream media , which no longer gives him the presumption of truthfulness extended to other presidents . And of course , if he would lie about taking a potentially dangerous treatment , he will lie about anything ( e.g . falsely stating America tests more than all the other countries combined ) . If Republicans actually believed Trump on this one , they ’ d be up in arms that he might be putting his life in danger .
Second , Trump corrupts everyone around him . He has either induced a doctor to violate his professional responsibilities , ignore FDA warnings or , at the very least , to write a letter sounding like he did . Virtually no one in the administration ( e.g . White House physician , Justice Department lawyers ) has the nerve to say , “ This goes too far. ” Their assumption that they are impervious to public , legal and professional sanctions suggests that state medical boards and state bar associations need to rethink their policing function and public obligations .
Third , the notion that Trump would never put the country at risk — say , by ignoring a pandemic or by recklessly risking war with Iran or by weakening an ally in a war against Russia — has been permanently discredited . He too often tries to “ own the libs ” by demeaning experts , denying science and lying to make himself look smarter than others . If it means some of his own supporters die , well , that is of no apparent concern to Trump . ( He has yet to fly flags at half-mast or even declare a day of prayer or mourning for the nearly 90,000 Americans we have lost , likely a reflection of his total absence of empathy and his insistence on projecting normalcy so as to preserve his chance for reelection . )
Finally , any other person taking to the airwaves or social media to induce the public to engage in dangerous activity should be booted off the platform . ( Remarkably , even Fox News commentators such as Neil Cavuto deplored the president ’ s conduct . ) A relative engaging in this behavior would be advised to seek counseling . And yet an entire political party fervently backs Trump and wants him to remain in power , propagating goodness knows what for four more years . Trump is not the only menace to public health and safety . Every Republican who tolerates , supports and advocates his reelection is equally to blame for the harm that ensues .