Within a month , the Korean outbreak was effectively contained . In the first two weeks of March , new daily cases fell from 800 to fewer than 100 . ( This morning , the nation of 51 million reported zero new domestic infections for the third straight day . ) On April 15 , the country successfully held a national parliamentary election with the highest turnout in three decades , without triggering another wave . South Korea is not unique in its ability to bend the curve of daily cases ; New Zealand , Australia , and Norway have done so , as well . But it is perhaps the largest democracy to reduce new daily cases by more than 90 percent from peak , and its density and proximity to China make the achievement particularly noteworthy .
In the time that South Korea righted its course , the United States veered into disaster . In mid-March , the U.S. and South Korea had the same number of coronavirus-caused fatalities—approximately 90 . In April , South Korea lost a total of 85 souls to COVID-19 , while the U.S. lost 62,000—an average of 85 deaths every hour . That the U.S. population is approximately six times larger than South Korea ’ s does little to soften the horror of the comparison .
Juxtaposing the South Korean response with the American tragedy , some commentators have chalked up the difference to an ancient culture of docile collectivism and Confucianism across the Pacific . This observation isn ’ t just racist . It also exoticizes Korea ’ s success and makes it seem like the inevitable result of millennia of cultural accretion , rather than something the U.S. , or any other country , can learn from right now . The truth is that the Korean government and its citizens did something simple , admirable , and all too rare : They suffered from history , and they learned from it .
South Korea ’ s COVID-19 policy was forged in the crucible of previous public-health crises . In 2002 , the SARS outbreak killed several hundred people in East Asia . In 2009 , the H1N1 influenza , which likely originated in Mexico , spread to more than 1 million people globally and killed several hundred South Koreans . From these epidemics , South Korean public-health officials recognized the necessity of early testing and the importance of isolating new patients to prevent secondary infections .
But 2015 ’ s Middle East Respiratory Syndrome , or MERS , created the playbook that the country has used to break the back of COVID-19 .