“ I ’ m the captain of my own ship , ” says Dennis Roberson , a divorced and now unemployed father in Georgia , down to his last $ 200 . “ And it ’ s not moving at the moment . ”
In Chicago , food-service workers are offering free food to former colleagues . And a new GoFundMe campaign hopes to raise $ 50,000 to help 100 gig workers on the dole . For people like Jesús Morales , a Chicago hotel worker now relying on unemployment benefits to pay his bills , the top-of-mind concern is when job opportunities will return .
Just as storms typically wreak more havoc on trailer parks than ritzy suburbs , this one appears to have hit the most vulnerable workers first , especially those in close contact with the public . Some help is on the way in the form of onetime federal checks for low- and middle-income adults , and higher and longer-lasting unemployment benefits , with rules loosened to include gig workers and the self-employed .
Three weeks ago , workers like food server Dolly Harris in South Haven , Michigan , and handbill entrepreneur Cam Jennings in Las Vegas had jobs . Suddenly they don ’ t . The threat of the coronavirus has hit the economy like a tempest out of nowhere .
With terrible timing – like buying stocks in 1929 – Cam Jennings started his company , ACTIVATE.vegas , on March 2 . The start-up ’ s mission is printing and distributing handbills for businesses on the Las Vegas Strip . Two weeks later , Nevada ’ s governor ordered all the casinos to close , and Mr. Jennings had no choice but to suspend operations .
“ We kind of hit the ground running on the Strip , but there was no Strip to get running on , ” he says , ruefully .
For Alyson Arnold of Warwick , Rhode Island , the problem was postponements . A ceremony officiant , specializing in outdoor weddings , she was preparing to conduct 60 weddings in 2020 , her best year ever . But in early March , as concerns grew about travel , the postponements began rolling in : two in March , three in April . Of the five ceremonies scheduled in May , two are already being rescheduled .
One of the worst things ? The uncertainty . “ Everyone ’ s sitting on the edge of their seat waiting for what will happen , ” she says .
Three weeks ago , these workers had jobs . Suddenly they don ’ t . The threat of the coronavirus hit the economy like a tempest out of nowhere . And just as storms typically wreak more havoc on trailer parks than ritzy suburbs , this one appears to have hit the most vulnerable workers first . But there ’ s more : Because “ social distancing ” is the essence of the virus response , jobs rooted in social contacts face some of the biggest disruptions .
Those , like Mr. Jennings , in the experiential marketing industry , staffing booths at conventions or handing out branded memorabilia at sporting events , quickly lost gigs when the first restrictions on huge crowds were put in place . Self-employed people reliant on private gatherings , like Ms. Arnold , were next .
Now , the forced closure of nonessential businesses in many parts of the United States has pushed huge numbers of full-time employees – often in low-paid service industries – onto the unemployment rolls .
Dennis Roberson , a divorced father of four , can chuckle about his last paycheck from the Wormhole – a bar and music venue in Savannah , Georgia , that like other nonessential businesses in town was forced to close . The check got torn in half by accident . When he went to cash it Monday , it got a little surreal .
There was a long queue outside the bank . That was a new one . It was “ one in , one out , ” he says . Still , the check cleared . Its amount : $ 195 . “ I realized that ’ s all I have for the foreseeable future , ” he says . “ Pretty wild . ”
Richard Mertens Jesus Morales , who lost his job at The Drake hotel , stands in front of his home in Chicago .
Now , he has arrived at Forsyth Park , sporting a knit cap , sunglasses , and a white beard , after biking to Domino ’ s to pick up a free pizza from a promotion . He sits down under a tree to eat , puts his ear buds in , and closes his eyes .
It ’ s not yet clear how many Americans have been laid off . Last week , the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that a record 3.3 million workers filed a first-time claim for unemployment – more than four times the previous record set in 1982 . This week 's Thursday report set another new record , 6.6 million more for a two-week total near 10 million .
On Wednesday , payroll firm ADP ’ s research institute released a report showing that as early as mid-March , sectors such as retail and wholesale trade , transportation , construction , and administrative support services ( including temp work ) were starting to shed thousands of workers .
“ Much bigger job losses are coming , ” warns Mark Zandi , chief economist of Moody ’ s Analytics . Some 56 % of U.S. counties , representing 80 % of the nation ’ s GDP , are in some form of lockdown , he says , although many employees continue to work from home . In all , about a quarter of the economy is shut down , he estimates , so he expects the unemployment rate to hit 10 % to 13 % this month .
That would be as bad or worse than at the height of the Great Recession . Some economists expect even higher levels of unemployment . The data also suggest that workers in some of the lowest-paid occupations were among the first to be laid off . “ Low and low-middle income households are being hit hardest by the crisis , ” Mr. Zandi says .
In Massachusetts , one of the top five states reporting first-time jobless claims last week , the biggest surge came in the health-care and social assistance sector . These workers run the gamut . Nearly half of them are home health aides , delivering care to the home-bound and earning nationally an average $ 24,000 a year . The rest are licensed nurses ( earning twice as much ) and medical and health services managers ( earning four times as much ) . Last week , more than 18,000 of them filed for unemployment in Massachusetts , up from 440 the week before , a mind-bending 4,000 % increase .
“ Over 37 million U.S. jobs may be vulnerable to potential layoffs in the short term , ” conclude researchers at Cornell University ’ s law school . That ’ s assuming that the current crisis does not result in wider-spread , long-term layoffs . Of those 37 million nonsupervisory jobs , all but 2 million are low-quality , low-paid ones paying less than $ 28,000 a year , as measured by the researchers ’ U.S . Private Sector Job Quality Index . The biggest group , more than a quarter of those at risk : workers in restaurants and other food-service positions .
In the Lake Michigan shoreline community of South Haven , Michigan , Dolly Harris has been a server at downtown ’ s Phoenix Street Café for 19 years . She and her co-workers were laid off March 16 , as Gov . Gretchen Whitmer called on restaurants and bars to close except for takeout or deliveries . Now Ms. Harris will be relying on Social Security and unemployment benefits to help make ends meet . She was able to complete the online process of applying for unemployment after a few frustrating hours of system freeze-ups . As of March 29 , she still did not know how much she will be receiving , but expects to learn this week .
Finances aren ’ t the main concern for Ms. Harris . The virus is top of mind , particularly because her husband has been diagnosed with a pulmonary disease that makes breathing difficult . “ I ’ m afraid to go out and do something in public , ” Ms. Harris says . “ I thought about working a job at Meijer [ a regional supermarket ] , but I really don ’ t want to bring anything home like the virus . ”
The distinguishing feature of the current downturn is its speed . “ It was like bing , bang , boom ! Next day , no restaurants ! ” says Joe Ryal , a bartender at a restaurant on Chicago ’ s North Side . “ We ’ re all unprepared . ”
Courtesy of Kristen Kloostra Kristen Kloostra , a massage therapist , yoga instructor , and small business owner in Wisconsin Dells , Wisconsin , had to shut down her business and has no other source of income . Her situation exemplifies how jobs that normally involve close proximity among people are heavily at risk in the coronavirus emergency .
Retail workers face similar shocks . This week , a slew of chains announced extended closures and furloughs , including Macy ’ s ( a majority of its 125,000 employees ) and JCPenney ( many of its 85,000 workers ) .
And the sudden brake-pedal on economic activity isn ’ t affecting low-paid occupations alone .
“ I ’ m 100 % commission based . When they issue a stay-at-home order , they made us part of that , ” says Eric , a commercial realtor in the southwest part of Michigan who declined to have his last name published . Because of the long lag time between showing a property and closing a sale , “ the impact if you ’ re not working can be severe . ... When you have three months where you can ’ t show any properties , that ’ s more like eight or nine months where you ’ re not making money . ”
How long the virus threat and its economic repercussions will last is a burning question for many of the newly unemployed .
“ To be honest , it ’ s been pretty scary , ” says Ashley D. , a bartender at a major national restaurant chain outlet in Oakland County , Michigan . “ I ’ m hopeful life will be back to normal in a few months , but even if this did all quickly resolve or improve , I ’ m afraid it would take a lot of time for people to feel comfortable coming back , both employees and guests . I know I ’ m leery about coming back right away . ”
“ We are confident , we are thinking hopefully , that business will come back , ” says Jesús Morales , who worked conventions , banquets , and private meetings for 33 years at the Drake , one of Chicago ’ s fanciest hotels , serving the wealthy and occasionally the famous , including Bill Clinton , George W. Bush , and Princess Diana . ( Noticing his name tag , she told him she was delighted to be served by a man named Jesus , he recalls . )
When tips were generous , he could bring home more than $ 1,000 a week . Now , as he relies on unemployment payments to cover his bills , he worries about when the hotel business and other activity will recover .
“ I don ’ t think it will come back as strong as before . I think it ’ s going to take a while , ” he says .
According to Mr. Zandi , the economist , it will take three to four years to get back to something resembling full employment .
Some help is on the way to ease the adjustment . Congress ’ s new $ 2.2 trillion Coronavirus Aid , Relief , and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act authorizes $ 1,200 for adults and $ 500 for children in low- and middle-income families . Checks are expected to go out over the next three weeks . Unemployment benefits also get a boost over the next four months : extra money and extra weeks of eligibility . Crucially , for many of the newly jobless gig workers and self-employed , the guidelines have been loosened so they qualify for the first time .
Ms. Arnold , the wedding officiant in Rhode Island , was able to sign up online on Monday . Mr. Jennings , the Las Vegas handbill entrepreneur , has had too many gigs to file online and so far has only gotten a busy signal when calling in to the unemployment office .
In the meantime , he ’ s serving as spokesman for the Help the Gig Economy – Coronavirus Income Relief fund , a GoFundMe campaign aimed at helping 100 experiential marketing workers , who often travel from state to state to work conventions and other events . The sponsors aim to raise $ 50,000 in 100 days . As of Wednesday , they ’ d raised more than $ 5,400 and helped 12 of the more than 600 people who have applied for aid .
“ It ’ s been very grassroots , ” Mr. Jennings says . “ Most of our donations are people within the industry kicking in 20 bucks . ”
A similar spirit is taking place in Chicago as workers in the food industry rally to help each other . On a warm spring day , the newly jobless Mr. Ryal has just emerged from the Big Star restaurant , which is giving away free food to workers in the service industry from 5 to 7 p.m – a scene repeated at other venues around the city .
“ I ’ ll be able to survive , ” says Mr. Ryal , holding a brown paper bag of groceries and a Styrofoam container holding a serving of carne asada . “ We ’ re leaning on other people . ”
Back in Savannah , Forsyth Park is nearly empty due to the stay-at-home order .
“ I ’ m the captain of my own ship – and it ’ s not moving at the moment , ” says Mr. Roberson , the now-unemployed father . “ Still , my plan for now is just to ride the waves to where they are going to take me . ”
He looks down at the pizza box . His predicament of looming poverty isn ’ t so dire as to exclude consideration for others . “ Want a slice ? ” he asks .
This story was reported by Monitor staff writers Laurent Belsie in Waltham , Massachusetts , and Patrik Jonsson in Savannah , Georgia , and by contributors Lee A . Dean in Plainwell , Michigan , and Richard Mertens in Chicago .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
As a public service , we ’ ve removed the paywall for all our coronavirus coverage . It ’ s free .