Five senior US Republicans have quarantined themselves after coming into contact with a person who tested positive for coronavirus .
The members of Congress , who include Texas Senator Ted Cruz , self-isolated after they shook hands with an infected individual at a conference .
President Donald Trump , who was also at the event last month , insists he is in good health and has not taken a test .
One Democrat has also self-isolated after she met someone with the virus .
There are more than 700 confirmed cases in the US and 26 people have died so far .
Mr Cruz , Arizona Congressman Paul Gosar , Georgia Congressman Doug Collins and Florida Congressman Matt Gaetz are all self-quarantining for the recommended 14-days after they met the same infected person at CPAC , a conservative political conference , at the end of February .
Republican Representative Mark Meadows , President Donald Trump 's newly appointed chief of staff , also met the person and is in self-quarantine . He is not exhibiting any symptoms and a precautionary test came back negative , a spokesman said .
Mr Trump and Vice-President Mike Pence attended the same event in Maryland but neither of them interacted with the individual . Mr Trump did shake hands with the conference chairman who had had contact with the patient .
But , on Monday , the White House announced that Mr Trump had not been tested for the virus . `` He has neither had prolonged close contact with any known confirmed Covid-19 patients , nor does he have any symptoms , '' a spokeswoman said .
`` President Trump remains in excellent health , and his physician will continue to closely monitor him , '' she added .
The White House announcement came as it warned the number of cases in the US was likely to rise . `` There will be more cases , '' Mr Pence told reporters . `` But we simply ask today for the American people to engage in the common sense practices . ''
The vice-president , who also confirmed he had not been tested for the virus , said the administration was consulting Congress on providing paid sick leave to workers .
Separately , in brief remarks , Mr Trump said he would take `` major '' steps to protect the economy against the impact of the outbreak . `` We 'll be discussing a possible payroll tax cut or relief , substantial relief , '' he told reporters .
He did not provide further details on his plans , but said there would be a news conference on Tuesday .
`` This blindsided the world , and I think we 've handled it very , very well , '' he said of the virus .
The president 's comments came as stock markets plunged . Shares around the world had their worst day since the financial crisis on Monday , and analysts described the market reaction to the coronavirus as `` utter carnage '' .
Cases of the virus have been recorded in 34 states plus Washington DC .
There have been 738 confirmed cases and 26 deaths , according to Johns Hopkins University .
Meanwhile , passengers aboard a virus-hit cruise liner in California have begun disembarking after being kept off the coast of San Francisco for five days .
Nineteen crew members and two passengers on the Grand Princess have tested positive for Covid-19 . Most of the passengers will go into quarantine at military bases or , if they require more immediate medical attention , nearby hospitals .
Several hundred foreign passengers , including 140 Britons , will be repatriated to their home countries .
The ship 's crew members will remain quarantined on board , which will depart from Oakland as soon as the passengers have disembarked , officials said .
The cruise ship came to the attention of the authorities when a previous voyager on the vessel died last week after being stricken by the coronavirus .
The 71-year-old , who had an underlying health condition , had been on a round trip from San Francisco to Mexico .
In neighbouring Canada , as of Monday morning , there were 76 confirmed or presumptive cases of people carrying the coronavirus disease . There was one confirmed death in North Vancouver , British Columbia .
Most of the cases are in the provinces of Ontario and British Columbia , though some have also been discovered in Quebec and Alberta .
Canadian public health officials are advising against all cruise ship travel . Just last week , Canadian passengers of the Diamond Princess cruise ship were released from quarantine .
Italy now has the highest number of confirmed infections outside China , where the outbreak originated in December . It has confirmed 7,375 cases and overtaken South Korea , where the total number is 7,313 .
Some 16 million people - a quarter of Italy 's population - are under strict quarantine measures .