New York Mayor Bill de Blasio speaks after the USNS Comfort pulled into a berth in Manhattan during the coronavirus outbreak in New York City , March 30 , 2020 . ( Carlo Allegri/Reuters )
In the middle of March , New York City mayor Bill de Blasio was among those not entirely sold on social distancing as a prophylactic measure against the coronavirus epidemic . “ If you love your neighborhood bar , go there now , ” he famously said . A few days later , he was threatening to padlock the city ’ s synagogues — permanently — if social-distancing protocols went unheeded .
We sympathize with those New Yorkers driven to drink or inspired to prayer by Mayor de Blasio ’ s incompetence , vanity , and stupidity , which have been highlighted by but are by no means limited to his response to COVID-19 . For the time being , they must suffer in their households rather than in congregation .
In all likelihood , the coronavirus has been spreading in New York since February . The city ’ s jam-packed subway system , carrying five million riders a day , should have counseled particular vigilance . But even with the examples of California ’ s and Washington ’ s cities before him , the mayor was slow to move . He dragged his staff along to a crowded YMCA for a workout even as he was ordering gyms closed around the city . The city schools remained open until March 15 , and it was left to New York governor Andrew Cuomo to negotiate their closure while teachers were threatening a wildcat strike . De Blasio delayed against the advice of his own aides and health experts . A 36-year-old principal subsequently died of COVID-19 . The city ’ s refusal to disclose infections in the schools “ kept families in the dark and left more lives at risk , ” as one city councilman put it .
De Blasio was warned in early March that the city needed to take more aggressive action against the epidemic , but he wrote off advice from health commissioner Oxiris Barbot and others , worried that a lockdown would hurt the city ’ s economy . Extended deliberations controlled by political concerns rather than medical ones wasted precious time . “ He has long distrusted the top brass of the health department , ” Politico reports , “ feeling they do not understand politics and public relations. ” That may be the case , but their job is not public relations — it is public health .
Ignoring the advice and recommendations of the relevant experts in order to tend to his political concerns , Mayor de Blasio effectively became a member of that class of villain most hated by his progressive allies : a denier . His refusal to concede the facts and his desire to subordinate good policy to political expediency were compounded by his general executive incompetence , for instance in leaving city agencies without necessary guidance for implementing work-from-home policies . He insisted that the city ’ s hospitals were well prepared for the crisis ; the actual situation in the city ’ s public hospitals was shortly thereafter described as “ apocalyptic ” by one physician .
De Blasio did manage to name his wife as head of a coronavirus-recovery panel . He always has time for that sort of thing . Mrs. de Blasio is fresh off of watching $ 1 billion walk out the door while overseeing a fruitless mental-health initiative . She has time on her hands and is rumored to be considering a run for elected office herself .
De Blasio moved with much less dispatch than did colleagues in California and Ohio , among other places . And then , after dawdling for so long , de Blasio flipped . We always are happy to see a politician amend his views to accommodate new facts , but Slowpoke de Blasio ’ s subsequent overcompensation , and the sanctimony and viciousness he brings to the effort , is something else .
De Blasio launched a broadside against “ the Jewish community ” after a large crowd turned out for a rabbi ’ s funeral in Williamsburg as though the event corporately implicated the more than 1 million Jews living in New York City , drawing criticism from the city ’ s ADL and other local Jewish leaders .
De Blasio has instructed police to follow a “ zero tolerance ” rule on gatherings and has threatened to enforce his policy with arrests . Perhaps he has not entirely thought through the social-distancing implications of mass arrests .
The coronavirus epidemic was a test for Mayor de Blasio , and he has been found wanting — which should be no surprise to anybody who has witnessed the dramatic decline in the quality of city life under his watch . The tricky question of balancing the consequences of an enforced economic stoppage against the risks of an unknown and poorly understood viral epidemic in a free society with democratic norms has gotten the better of better men and better mayors than Bill de Blasio .
His incompetence has endangered the lives of his constituents and made the coronavirus situation worse than it had to be . But it is his tinpot-tyrant posturing and his ridiculous preening that really set him apart from your run-of-the-mill municipal bungler .
Unhappily , there is no treatment for what ails Bill de Blasio , and no cure in sight for New York .