House Democratic leaders vowed Friday morning that the lower chamber will pass a massive $ 2 trillion coronavirus relief bill later in the day , despite last-minute hurdles erected by a conservative member that have sent lawmakers scrambling to return to Washington .
`` We 're going to pass it today , '' Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiMnuchin emerges as key asset in Trump 's war against coronavirus Graham : Pelosi comment on Trump is 'most shameful , disgusting statement by any politician in modern history ' The coronavirus pandemic versus the climate change emergency MORE ( D-Calif. ) said as she entered the Capitol shortly before 9 a.m .
House leaders had sought to pass the enormous stimulus package , approved by the Senate Wednesday night , without having to call the full chamber back to Washington amid fears of travel and crowding . They intended to do so by using a voice vote , a procedure that would allow some members to debate the legislation — and lodge their concerns — without the full House reconvening .
But a conservative lawmaker , Rep. Thomas Massie Thomas Harold MassieSunday shows preview : Lawmakers , state governors talk coronavirus , stimulus package and resources as pandemic rages on Overnight Health Care — Presented by PCMA — US coronavirus cases hit 100,000 | Trump signs T stimulus package | Trump employs defense powers to force GM to make ventilators | New concerns over virus testing Overnight Defense : Trump signs T coronavirus relief package | What 's in it for defense | Trump uses defense powers to force GM to make ventilators | Hospital ship arrives in Los Angeles MORE ( R-Ky. ) , has threatened to force a roll-call vote Friday morning , compelling leaders in both parties to weigh a contingency plan for moving the package to President Trump Donald John TrumpHealth insurers Cigna , Humana waive out-of-pocket costs for coronavirus treatment Puerto Rico needs more federal help to combat COVID-19 Fauci says April 30 extension is ' a wise and prudent decision ' MORE ’ s desk .
House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer Steny Hamilton HoyerDC argues it is shortchanged by coronavirus relief bill Lysol , disinfecting wipes and face masks mark coronavirus vote in House ███ 's 12:30 Report : House to vote on .2T stimulus after mad dash to Washington MORE ( D-Md . ) has been talking to House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyMcCarthy says fourth stimulus bill might not be necessary Sunday shows preview : Lawmakers , state governors talk coronavirus , stimulus package and resources as pandemic rages on Lysol , disinfecting wipes and face masks mark coronavirus vote in House MORE ( R-Calif. ) in search of a quick path forward .
“ I ’ ve talked to McCarthy last night and we ’ re working together to get this done , ” Hoyer said .
Hoyer said that if Massie were to force a roll-call vote , party leaders expect to have enough lawmakers on the floor Friday to form a quorum — the minimum number of members required to stage a recorded vote . If that ’ s the case , the House can approve the measure on Friday , despite Massie ’ s gambit .
The House opened the floor at 9 a.m. to begin that debate , which was initially expected to run for two hours . But Pelosi said it 's now been extended to three .
`` We will respect the congressional traditions and we will have a little longer debate than we had anticipated , and that 's a good thing . ... My understanding is it will be extended to three hours , and then we 'll have the votes , '' she said .
Asked if it will move by voice vote or recorded vote , Pelosi left it up in the air .
Rep. Kevin Brady Kevin Patrick BradyPelosi not invited by Trump to White House coronavirus relief bill 's signing Democrat refuses to yield House floor , underscoring tensions on coronavirus vote Democratic leaders say trillion stimulus will pass House on Friday MORE ( R-Texas ) , speaking earlier on CNBC , remained slightly uncertain on the Friday vote , underscoring how leaders were still scrambling on Friday morning .
`` So we get this done one way or the other today or tomorrow , '' said Brady , the top Republican on the House Ways and Means Committee .
`` I think there 's a better than even chance we get this done today . We do have some names mentioned of people who might call for a roll-call vote . I hope that does n't happen . But in case it does , members are coming back for this vote , '' he said .