The U.S. economy added 4.8 million jobs in June , according to data released Thursday by the Labor Department , as the gradual easing of coronavirus-related restrictions helped more businesses reopen and bring back workers .
The unemployment rate also fell to 11.1 percent last month , according to the report , as more workers who were laid off earlier this year were able to return to their pre-pandemic jobs .
Economists expected the U.S. to add anywhere between 1 million and 3 million jobs for the month after the U.S. added 2.7 million in May , according to revised figures , despite widespread predictions of another decline .
Despite the rising job numbers , surging coronavirus cases across the South and Sun Belt have already slowed the pace of the rebound in many states , according to recent data .
A more current indicator , weekly initial unemployment claims , remained elevated at historic levels . For the week ending June 25 , new claims came in at 1.43 million , down from 1.48 million the previous week . The figure , while continuing a steady downward trend , was also well above the 1.38 million economists were expecting .
The June jobs report also showed troubling signs the recession is spreading far beyond the industries hardest hit by businesses closures and social distancing orders .
The number of U.S. workers who permanently lost their jobs climbed in June by 588,000 to a total of 2.8 million . The number of workers who 've been jobless for at least 15 weeks also rose by 825,000 , and those who have been unemployed for more than 27 weeks rose by 227,000 .
The June jobs numbers came after the ADP Research Institute and Moody ’ s Analytics reported Wednesday that private businesses added nearly 2.4 million workers to their payrolls last month .
Like in May , most of June 's jobs gains are from the rehiring of leisure and hospitality workers that were laid off or furloughed as the pandemic spread through the U.S . The number of workers on temporary layoffs declined by 4.8 million in June to roughly 10.6 million , likely making up most of the month 's job gains .
The leisure and hospitality industry added 2.1 million jobs in June , led by a gain of 1.5 million jobs at dining and drinking establishments . The retail industry added 740,000 jobs last month as more nonessential stores were allowed to reopen , and the resumption of nonemergency medical procedures helped the education and health services industry add 568,000 workers .
The continued rebound of the labor market has helped cut the losses of the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression . The U.S. lost more than 21 million jobs between March and April as the pandemic forced thousands of businesses to close and lay off workers .
June 's jobs report also gave a clearer picture of the labor market than in the previous months of the pandemic , which showed unemployment lower than its likely actual level .
The Bureau of Labor Statistics said that the June report included substantially fewer misclassified survey respondents , meaning the actual unemployment rate is likely 1 percentage point higher than the figure reported June . Misclassified workers may have suppressed the unemployment rate by nearly 5 percentage points in April and nearly 3 percentage points in May .
Economists fear that a second wave of COVID-19 infections nationally could derail the nascent recovery and plunge the U.S. deeper into a devastating recession .
“ By the time the June jobs report comes out , we will have already started estimating the damage to the labor market wrought by pullbacks and shutdowns of business because of an intensification of the pandemic , ” wrote Joe Brusuelas , chief economist at tax and audit firm RSM , earlier in the week in a preview of the jobs report .
Niv Elis contributed to this report , which was updated at 8:58 a.m .