███ is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power . Sign up to receive our biggest stories as soon as they ’ re published .
Sen. Richard Burr was not the only member of his family to sell off a significant portion of his stock holdings in February , ahead of the market crash spurred by coronavirus fears . On the same day Burr sold , his brother-in-law also dumped tens of thousands of dollars worth of shares . The market fell by more than 30 % in the subsequent month .
Burr ’ s brother-in-law , Gerald Fauth , who has a post on the National Mediation Board , sold between $ 97,000 and $ 280,000 worth of shares in six companies — including several that have been hit particularly hard in the market swoon and economic downturn .
A person who picked up Fauth ’ s phone on Wednesday hung up when asked if Fauth and Burr had discussed the sales in advance .
In 2017 , President Donald Trump appointed Fauth to the three-person board of the National Mediation Board , a federal agency that facilitates labor-management relations within the nation ’ s railroad and airline industries . He was previously a lobbyist and president of his own transportation economic consulting firm , G.W . Fauth & Associates .
Burr came under scrutiny after ███ reported that he sold off a significant percentage of his stocks shortly before the market tanked , unloading between $ 628,000 and $ 1.72 million of his holdings on Feb. 13 in 33 separate transactions . As chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee and a member of the health committee , Burr had access to the government ’ s most highly classified information about threats to America ’ s security and public health concerns .
Before his sell-off , Burr had assured the public that the federal government was well-prepared to handle the virus . In a Feb. 7 op-ed that he co-authored with another senator , he said “ the United States today is better prepared than ever before to face emerging public health threats , like the coronavirus . ”
That month however , according to a recording obtained by NPR , Burr had given a VIP group at an exclusive social club a much more dire preview of the economic impact of the the coronavirus , warning it could curtail business travel , cause schools to be closed and result in the military mobilizing to compensate for overwhelmed hospitals .
The timing of Burr ’ s stock sales drew widespread outrage , allegations of insider trading , calls for his resignation and an FBI investigation .
Gerald Fauth , Burr ’ s brother-in-law , was appointed by Trump to the National Mediation Board in 2017 . ( National Mediation Board via Wikipedia )
Burr defended his actions , saying he relied solely on public information , including CNBC reports , to inform his trades and did not rely on information he obtained as a senator .
Fauth avoided between $ 37,000 and $ 118,000 in losses by selling off when he did , considering how steeply the companies ’ shares fell in recent weeks , according to an analysis by Luke Brindle-Khym , a partner and general counsel of Manhattan-based investigative firm QRI . Brindle-Khym obtained Fauth ’ s financial disclosure from the Office of Government Ethics and shared it with ███ . Government forms only require that the value of stock trades be disclosed in ranges . After the February sales , the total value of Fauth ’ s individual stock holdings appears to be between $ 680,000 and $ 2 million .
Alice Fisher , Burr ’ s attorney , told ███ that “ Sen . Burr participated in the stock market based on public information and he did not coordinate his decision to trade on Feb. 13 with Mr. Fauth . ”
She did not respond to a question about whether Burr discussed anything he learned as a senator with Fauth or any other relatives .
A review of Fauth ’ s financial disclosure forms since 2017 show that he is not a frequent stock trader , but that he also had a major day of sales in August 2019 .
Read More Sen. Richard Burr Is Not Just a Friend to the Health Care Industry . He ’ s Also a Stockholder . The Republican of North Carolina , who is under investigation for his stock trading , regularly flips health care stocks even as he pushes for legislation to help the industry .
On Feb. 13 , Fauth or his spouse sold between $ 15,001 and $ 50,000 of Altria , the tobacco company ; between $ 50,001 and $ 100,000 of snack food maker Mondelez International ; and between $ 1,001 and $ 15,000 of home furnishings retailer Williams-Sonoma . He also sold stakes in several oil companies , which have been hit particularly hard , including between $ 15,001 and $ 50,000 of Chevron ; between $ 1,001 and $ 15,000 of BP and between $ 15,001 and $ 50,000 of Royal Dutch Shell .
The finances of the Burrs and Fauths have intersected before . Federal Election Commission records show that Burr ’ s leadership PAC , Next Century Fund , has paid $ 120,348 since 2002 to his sister-in-law , Mary Fauth , Gerald ’ s wife , who serves as treasurer . The PAC has also paid $ 104,850 in rent and utilities over the same period to 116 S. Royal St. Partners , in which Gerald Fauth is a partner .
Do you have access to information about stock trading by Trump administration officials or members of Congress that should be public ? Email [ email protected ] or reach him on Signal/WhatsApp at 213-271-7217 . Here ’ s how to send tips and documents to ███ securely .
Update , May 6 , 2020 : This story was updated with new comment from Sen. Richard Burr ’ s attorney .
Tell Us More About Coronavirus Are you a public health worker , medical provider , elected official , patient or other COVID-19 expert ? Help make sure our journalism is responsible and focused on the right issues . This form requires JavaScript to complete . Powered by Screendoor .