Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
Deregulation has been the most effective tool in dealing with the coronavirus pandemic . As of this writing at least 350 regulations at the national and state level have been waived to help fight COVID-19 .
Regulations can make things worse . A well-named regulation can do great damage . Regulations sometimes do the opposite of what was promised or hoped for .
The recent Trump deregulatory actions continue the progress made by Trump appointees since 2017 .
We saw this when the Federal Communications Commission had the regulatory humility to repeal one of the most onerous regulations of all - Title II public utility-style regulation of the internet . This regulation was called “ net neutrality ” which sounds good . But it gave federal , state and local governments excessive powers to meddle with the internet ’ s infrastructure .
For the two years the Obama-era “ net neutrality ” was in place , the regulations reduced investment in the internet infrastructure . Costs did not fall . There was no improvement in quality . But some self-appointed activists claimed that repealing the “ net neutrality ” regulations would bring about the end of the internet as we know it and even the end of democracy .
The COVID-19 crisis calls the bluff of so-called net neutrality advocates who claimed the internet would load a single word at a time , in order to continue their vast fund-raising efforts to “ save the internet . ”
Despite the gnashing of teeth on the left , the internet—without “ net neutrality ” regulations -- is thriving even as COVID-19 causes a huge uptick in internet traffic and more than 700 companies have pledged to keep Americans connected through the crisis . More people are connected , as companies offer free access and reduced rates , while networks deftly handle increased traffic from work-at-home , school-at-home , health-at-home , and entertain-at-home .
The networks have been able to handle , in some instances , a 70 percent surge in at-home internet traffic . Wireline broadband providers report that total traffic increased by a range of 17.3 to 37.4 percent , with an average increase of 25.5 percent .
Over the major wireless carriers , mobile voice traffic during COVID has increased between 7 and 24.3 percent compared to average usage pre the crisis , while mobile data traffic usage has increased between 0.7 and 9.2 percent compared to average data traffic over mobile networks . For example , AT & T reported wireless voice up 28 percent and Wi-Fi calling minutes are up 84 percent from the pre-crisis average usage baselines .
All of this is largely possible because of the 2017 Restoring Internet Freedom vote where the FCC reclassified internet service providers as a Title I information service , not a Title II public utility . In 2015 , the Obama FCC majority called a law designed to regulate public monopolies like taxi medallions and power plants “ net neutrality ” and tried to end the open internet consensus harkening back to the 1990s .
The Title II “ net neutrality ” regulations were an outlier in the history of U.S. Internet policy . Before Obama administration imposition of Title II regulations in 2015 , the internet was mostly free from government regulation .
For nearly 20 years , the U.S. employed a light-touch regulatory framework and where providers build their own networks over which they provide services , known as facilities-based competition . As a result , broadband investment maintained an upward trajectory in the U.S. – except for its downward blip under the 2015 public-utility style net neutrality rules .
While the public utility-style net neutrality rules were in effect from 2015-2017 , annual capital investments from internet service providers declined for the first time since 2008/2009 . After the repeal , broadband providers immediately increased investment with approximately $ 80 billion pouring into the networks in 2018 alone .
Meanwhile , Europe continues to impose public utility-style “ net neutrality ” regulations and its infrastructure investments continue to lag . The European Telecommunications Network Operators reported its members invested significantly less per capita in 2018 , EUR89 ( ~104USD ) , compared to US companies investing EUR213.3 ( ~249USD ) per capita , and said it would be a long road ahead to reach parity with the likes of the U.S. and Japan .
The European Commission actually had to require Netflix and YouTube to degrade quality . That is what over-regulation looks like .
The COVID-19 crisis calls the bluff of so-called net neutrality advocates who claimed the internet would load a single word at a time , in order to continue their vast fund-raising efforts to “ save the internet . ”
Life during and after COVID-19 will rely even more on internet connectivity . Telework and telehealth will be a larger part of new norms . American ISPs are at the forefront of keeping America connected and our technology companies are at the forefront of getting us back to work .
What we have learned in this crisis is that it imposing “ net neutrality ” was a politically driven mistake and repealing it was vital for consumers , the internet , and the flexibility of the American economy .
Grover Norquist is president of Americans for Tax Reform . Follow him on Twitter @ GroverNorquist .