Illinois Gov . J.B. Pritzker ( D ) filed an emergency rule on Friday that allows for business owners to be charged with a Class A misdemeanor for violating the state 's coronavirus stay-at-home order , the New York Times reported .
Owners of businesses such as restaurants , bars , barbershops , salons , and gyms could now face a fine up to $ 2,500 and up to one year in jail for operating in defiance of shutdown orders implemented in an attempt to slow the spread of COVID-19 , the disease caused by the novel coronavirus .
A spokesperson for Pritzker 's office told the Times that the measure was an `` additional enforcement tool for businesses that refuse to comply with the most critical aspects of the stay-at-home order '' and that `` only businesses that pose a serious risk to public health and refuse to comply with health regulations would be issued a citation . ''
`` The rule gives law enforcement a tool that may be more appropriate and less severe than closing the business altogether , '' the spokeswoman , Jordan Abudayyeh , said .
Illinois has seen 94,191 confirmed cases of the coronavirus and 4,177 deaths tied to the disease as of Sunday statistics provided by state health officials .
Illinois Republican state Sen. Dan McConchie issued a statement criticizing Pritzker 's emergency rules change .
`` The new emergency rule [ from Pritzker ] that makes it a crime to violate his executive orders is an affront to the separation of powers , '' McConchie wrote on Twitter . `` Legislatures make laws . Governors enforce them . Period . ''
The Illinois stay-at-home order is set to expire at the end of May if it is not extended .
After a Texas hairstylist was sentenced to jail for operating her salon in violation of a judge 's temporary restraining order , Texas Republican Gov . Greg Abbott responded to outrage by retroactively revising his executive order to remove the jail time penalty .
California Democratic Gov . Gavin Newsom , another governor whose state is still under strict lockdown measures , accurately described the pain the lockdowns are putting on Americans .
`` I deeply understand the stress and anxiety that people have , that entire dreams have been torn asunder because of the shutdowns , their savings account depleted and their credit rating destroyed , '' Newsom told CNN on Sunday .