U.S. Coronavirus Testing Still Falls Short . How 's Your State Doing ?
To safely phase out social distancing measures , the U.S. needs more diagnostic testing for the coronavirus , experts say . But how much more ?
The Trump administration said on April 27 that the U.S. will soon have enough capacity to conduct double the current amount of testing for active infections . The country has done nearly 248,000 tests daily on average in the past seven days , according to the nonprofit COVID Tracking Project . Doubling that would mean doing about 496,000 a day .
Will that be enough ? What benchmark should states try to hit ?
One prominent research group , Harvard 's Global Health Institute , proposes that the U.S. should be doing more than 900,000 tests per day as a country . This projection , released Thursday , is a big jump from its earlier projection of testing need , which had been between 500,000 and 600,000 daily .
Harvard 's testing estimate increased , says Ashish Jha , director of the Global Health Institute , because the latest modeling shows that the outbreak in the United States is worse than projected earlier .
`` Just in the last few weeks , all of the models have converged on many more people getting infected and many more people [ dying ] , '' he says .
But each state 's specific need for testing varies depending on the size of its outbreak , explains Jha . The bigger the outbreak , the more testing is needed .
On Thursday , Jha 's group at Harvard published a simulation that estimates the amount of testing needed in each state by May 15 . In the graphic below , we compare these estimates with the average numbers of daily tests states are currently doing .
To make their state-by-state estimates , the Harvard Global Health Institute group started from a model of future case counts . It calculated how much testing would be needed for a state to test all infected people and any close contacts they may have exposed to the virus . ( The simulation estimates testing 10 contacts on average . )
`` Testing is outbreak control 101 , because what testing lets you do is figure out who 's infected and who 's not , '' Jha says . `` And that lets you separate out the infected people from the noninfected people and bring the disease under control . ''
This approach is how communities can prevent outbreaks from flaring up . First , test all symptomatic people , then reach out to their close contacts and test them , and finally ask those who are infected or exposed to isolate themselves .
Our chart also shows another testing benchmark for each state : the ratio of tests conducted that come back positive . Communities that see about 10 % or fewer positives among their test results are probably testing enough , the World Health Organization advises . If the rate is higher , they 're likely missing a lot of active infections .
What is apparent from the data we present below is that many states are far from both the Harvard estimates and the 10 % positive benchmark .
Just nine states are near or have exceeded the testing minimums estimated by Harvard ; they are mostly larger , less populous states : Alaska , Hawaii , Montana , North Dakota , Oregon , Tennessee , Utah , West Virginia and Wyoming .
Several states with large outbreaks — New York , Massachusetts and Connecticut , among others — are very far from the minimum testing target . Some states that are already relaxing their social distancing restrictions , such as Georgia , Texas and Colorado , are far from the target too .
Researchers at the Global Health Initiative at Harvard considered three different models of the U.S. coronavirus outbreak as a starting point for their testing estimates . They found that while there was significant variation in the projections of outbreak sizes , all of the models tend to point in the same direction , i.e. , if one model showed that a state needed significantly more testing , the others generally did too .
The model they used to create these estimates is the Youyang Gu COVID-19 Forecasts , which they say has tracked closely with what 's actually happened on the ground . Still , the researchers caution , these numbers are not meant to be taken literally but as a guide .
The Harvard testing estimates are built on a model that assumes that states continue social distancing through May 15 . And about half of states have already started lifting some of those .
Jha says that without the right measures in place to contain spread , easing up could quickly lead to new cases .
`` The moment you relax , the number of cases will start climbing . And therefore , the number of tests you need to keep your society , your state from having large outbreaks will also start climbing , '' warns Jha .
A community ca n't base the decision that it 's safe to open up on testing data alone . States should also see a consistent decline in the number of cases , of two weeks at least , according to White House guidance . If their cases are instead increasing , they should assume the number of tests they need will increase too .
And , Jha warns , testing is step one , but it wo n't contain an outbreak by itself . It needs to be part of `` a much broader set of strategies and plans the states need to have in place '' when they begin to reopen .
In fact , his group 's model is built on the assumption that states are doing contact tracing and have plans to support isolation for infected or exposed people .
`` I do n't want anybody to just look at the number and say , we meet it and we 're good to go , '' he says . `` What this really is , is testing capacity in the context of having a really effective workforce of contact tracers . ''
States that have reached the estimated target should think of that as a starting point .
`` We 've always built these as the floor , the bare minimum , '' Jha says . More testing would be even better , allowing states to more rapidly tamp down case surges .
In fact , other experts have proposed that the U.S. do even more testing . Paul Romer , a professor of economics at New York University , proposed in a recent white paper that if the U.S. tested every resident , every two weeks , isolating those who test positive , it could stop the pandemic in its tracks .
Jha warns that without sufficient testing , and the infrastructure in place to trace and isolate contacts , there 's a real risk that states — even those with few cases now — will see new large outbreaks . `` I think what people have to remember is that the virus is n't gone . The disease is n't gone . And it 's going to be with us for a while , '' he says .