President Donald Trump with Vice President Mike Pence and members of his coronavirus task force for a news conference at the White House , February 26 , 2020 . ( Carlos Barria/Reuters )
With the coronavirus in the air , we need the version who ’ s not afraid to attack the problem .
The wrong Donald Trump has shown up to deal with the coronavirus . One might have expected Donald Trump , a germophobe who spent much of his campaign lambasting the Chinese , to take an aggressive approach on the Wuhan virus . You ’ d expect the Trump who breaks taboos and shuts things down until “ our country ’ s representatives can figure out what is going on . ”
As the spread of the new and still somewhat mysterious virus ramps up in Italy and Iran , and a few more cases emerge in the United States , maybe that ’ s the Trump we ’ ve needed . But we ’ re getting Trump the market whisperer . We ’ re getting a Trump who is obviously bothered by the drop in the Dow Jones . We ’ re getting a Trump who plans to campaign on the conventional measures of success favored by his predecessors . We ’ re getting a Trump who is downplaying the seriousness of this disease , who is probably acting too late , and who is making promises he can ’ t keep .
The pattern was established very early in his press conference when he vowed that the United States government was “ totally prepared ” and cited an already outdated study of pandemic readiness putting the United States as , Trump called it , the “ best prepared people in the world . ”
At that briefing , Trump seemed to make the same mistake the media did , in comparing the total deaths related to the flu to the comparably small numbers of those infected by the coronavirus from Wuhan . But this is silly . What we don ’ t want is for the Wuhan virus to spread as widely as the flu , or as persistently , because it is 20 times deadlier than the flu , and it may be easier to communicate . And because our medical system doesn ’ t have as much experience in dealing with its peculiar attack on human respiratory systems .
“ It ’ s going to be under control , ” Trump promised . Asked about the Centers for Disease Control ’ s prediction that an outbreak in the United States was a matter of “ when , not if , ” Trump contradicted the agency and said it wasn ’ t inevitable . “ We ’ re going to be at five people , and we could be at just one or two people ” in the near future , he said . He has no standing to say this and no reason to believe this is true .
It was an obvious and transparent attempt to downplay the problem , but currently the U.S. is far behind in testing people for the coronavirus . If the president is predicting that we ’ re likely to go down , then when the number of cases jumps by four- or fivefold , confidence in his administration ’ s ability to handle it will begin to deplete .
You know what Wall Street traders like : competence . They would prefer and respond positively to Trump taking the problem seriously , to the administration performing better than the expectations it set in the beginning . And in fact , the day after his press conference there already appeared reports of the executive branch bungling how it handled infected Americans coming back home from abroad , possibly spreading the disease from quarantined patients to the public .
Trump also announced a task force to deal with the Wuhan virus . A group like this in the United States would normally be tasked with coordinating federal health and service agencies that don ’ t have to work together in ordinary circumstances . It would facilitate exchanges of information . But Trump seems to have the market in mind .
Already the task force has brought on White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow and Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin . Trump seems to be signaling to Wall Street that he will protect them , but it doesn ’ t work like that .
No set of positive messages from the White House can just reverse the obvious supply-chain issues that major Chinese-dependent companies are facing . Apple is predicting disruptions that could not have been expected before , and markets must price those downward results in . No cheerleading from Trump can start the factories in Shanghai . Nothing that Larry Kudlow says is going to make people rebook their holiday vacation plans to northern Italy .
The only thing that will work to stop a society-wide loss of confidence in the ability to travel , the advisability of going to the airport , or keeping up with one ’ s vacation plans is a competent response focused on stopping the spread of the coronavirus and the efficient and effective treatment of those who contract it .
Trump ’ s late panicky response , his professed confidence in Chinese efforts to get the disease under control , and his flop sweat about the market are the exact opposite of what America needs in its president at a time when fear of a pandemic is finally settling on the broader public . Trump is afraid that a dip in the market can topple his presidency . In fact , a competent response could make markets soar again by the fall and guarantee his reelection . But a botched one could give Bernie Sanders the chance to say that Donald Trump not only favors Wall Street with his economic policy but that he favors Wall Street ’ s next quarter more than the lives of your parents and grandparents .