( CNN ) More than a dozen Americans evacuated on US-chartered flights from a cruise ship docked in Japan were being tested for the novel coronavirus at the University of Nebraska Medical Center , health officials said Monday .
The 13 patients , who were among 300 Americans quarantined aboard the Diamond Princess for nearly two weeks , had either tested positive for the virus or had a high likelihood of testing positive because of their symptoms said , Dr. Chris Kratochvil , an executive director of the Global Center for Health Security at the hospital in Omaha .
The patients arrived at the hospital early Monday and were awaiting test results . Twelve patients were transported to the hospital 's National Quarantine Center . One patient with a chronic condition was taken to a bio-containment unit for further evaluation , health officials said .
`` I think they were relieved to be here . I think they felt comfortable . They saw our teams arrive , and I think we were Nebraska-nice and friendly but also we were confident we could care for them , '' Kratochvil said .
In all , 14 passengers from the Diamond Princess had tested positive for the novel coronavirus , US departments of State and Health and Human Services said .
Some were being treated in Omaha and at facilities near Travis Air Force Base near Fairfield , California , said Dr. William Walters of the US Department of State 's Bureau of Medical Services .
Jumbo jets arrived to evacuate US citizens from the Diamond Princess cruise ship .
A charter flight carrying 177 American evacuees arrived Sunday night at Travis Air Force Base near Fairfield , California , Walters , said . He said 151 people were aboard a flight to Joint Base San Antonio-Lackland in San Antonio , Texas .
`` The individuals will stay in the quarantine unit for 14 days unless they have developed symptoms or certain signs . At that point we will have to reassess . ''
Co-Medical Director , National Quarantine Unit , UNMC/Nebraska Medicine — University of Nebraska Medical Center ( @ unmc ) February 17 , 2020
Health officials in Omaha said they are testing the individuals at the medical center .
`` We 're not going to make any assumptions about anything that 's passed along verbally . We 're going to go ahead and just test everybody , '' said Shelly Schwedhelm , the nurse who has clinical oversight of the quarantine and the biocontainment units .
The patient who was taken to the biocontainment unit was feeling lightheaded and had shortness of breath , said Dr. Mike Wadman , an emergency physician and co-medical director of the quarantine unit . The patent was in stable condition , he said .
The patients in the quarantine unit are being housed in separate rooms , officials said . All patients will stay in the quarantine unit for 14 days regardless of the test results , officials said .
The 13 patients were brought to the medical center after talks with the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness Response and local law enforcement , health officials said .
`` These individuals were brought here because we have the personnel , we have the facilities , we have the resources and the expertise to handle these kind of individuals , '' Kratochvil said .
The quarantine center is a state-of-the art 20-bed unit , according to officials . The biocontainment unit was launched 15 years ago , officials said . The biocontainment unit team cared for three patients with Ebola in 2014 , the hospital said .
Carl Goldman , 66 , and his wife , Jeri Seratti-Goldman , who were aboard the Diamond Princess , were under quarantine at the Omaha facility .
`` I am being tended to by two nurses in full hazmat suits and the doctor who visited me was also in a hazmat suit , '' Goldman told CNN .
`` My wife and I are in separate wings of this facility and we 're talking to each other via Facetime , '' he said .
Goldman said he tested positive for the virus , while his wife tested negative .
Karey Maniscalco sobbed after learning she and the hundreds of other Americans evacuated would face 14 days of quarantine in the US . They had already been quarantined on the cruise ship since February 4 .
`` They have sent over a dozen emails assuring us that there would not be an additional quarantine , and they just told us that we 'd be re-quarantined for 14 more days , '' Maniscalco said .
Passengers arriving to Travis Air Force Base will be housed in the same facility as evacuees who arrived from Wuhan earlier this month , a spokesperson for the base told CNN . New evacuees will be kept in a separate area of the Westwind Inn on the base , the spokesperson said .
Ashley Rhodes-Courter said her parents , who were aboard the Diamond Princess , tested negative for the virus . Gay and Phil Courter are now in Texas , their daughter said .
`` This is an incredibly stressful situation , that is being handled as best as it can , '' said Rhodes-Courter , who kept in touch with her mother through text messages .
She said : `` We are tremendously grateful that our parents are back on US soil receiving all the care and medications they need to hopefully stay healthy . ''
Rhodes-Courter said her parents feel a responsibility to keep `` the American people safe . ''
`` They have no intention on spreading this virus . They want to ensure that they are healthy , '' Rhodes-Courter said .
Before news broke of the 14 infected flight passengers , some Americans on the Diamond Princess said they did n't want to evacuate for fear of possible infection .
Sacramento resident Matthew Smith told CNN affiliate KOVR that he would rather deal with issues in Japan than be evacuated and quarantined in the United States .
`` We decided we would just face whatever consequences here rather than exposing ourselves to that situation , '' Smith said .
His wife , Katherine Codekas , was met with some surprise when she told authorities that she and her husband did n't want to evacuate yet .
`` I said no , we 're not going , and they very sincerely wished us luck , '' Codekas told KOVR . `` But there was a little look of surprise on their face . ''