It might be worse than that , of course . The CBO assumed that social distancing measures ( e.g. , stay-at-home orders , shutting down nonessential businesses ) peaked in April . “ The agency expects that , from that peak , social distancing will drop by roughly two-thirds during the second half of this year and diminish further , but by smaller amounts , through the third quarter of 2021 , ” the report states . “ That decline is in the middle of the distribution of possible outcomes , in the CBO ’ s assessment , and allows for regional and seasonal variation. ” However , if we get a second waveof covid-19 infections , those social distancing measures will go right back to where we were in April . In short , the CBO ’ s is making an informed economic decision based on the supposition we will not have to close down again , a questionable premise considering the experience in China and some European countries .
Even in the best-case scenario , when stay-at-home orders are relaxed , improvement in the labor market “ will not be large enough to make up for earlier losses . Compared with their values two years earlier , by the fourth quarter of 2021 real GDP is projected to be 1.6 percent lower , the unemployment rate 5.1 percentage points higher , and the employment-to-population ratio 4.8 percentage points lower. ” And , of course , should the Republican-held Senate refuse to enact more fiscal stimulus , the economy could sink further and the recession could last longer , according to Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome H. Powell .
A significant part of the economic collapse was the plunge in consumer spending . ( “ Most states ordered businesses to close and people to stay home during the last two weeks of March , which greatly curtailed consumer spending . . . . Spending may have been down by almost 28 percent as a result of the pandemic ; spending on accommodations and restaurants declined by 60 percent to 80 percent ; and spending for some goods ( such as clothing ) dropped by similar amounts. ” Even after stay-at-home orders are lifted , unemployed Americans will have less to spend and others may not feel safe returning to stores , entertainment venues , restaurants and bars . To be candid , until there is a cure or a vaccine , do not expect that we will get back to a healthy economy soon .
Given the dismal figures , the aversion from the administration and Senate Republicans to new stimulus seems extremely ill-advised . Democrats prodded Powell and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin in a hearing on the pandemic ’ s economic meltdown to get behind a stimulus , but Republicans seem unmoved . Sen. Ben Sasse ( R-Neb . ) fussed that the Fed would be buying up defunct malls . Powell retorted : `` I think the credit risk is minimal to us. ” The danger he kept reminding the senators is that we are doing too little , not spending and lending too much .
Powell reiterated his view that Congress may have to authorize additional spending to prevent long-term damage to the economy . `` What Congress has done to date has been remarkably timely and forceful , '' Powell said . “ I do think we need to take a step back and ask , over time , ‘ Is it enough ? ’ And we need to be prepared to act further . And I would say we are if the need is there , ” Powell added .
Mnuchin , following the lead of Trump and other Republicans , seemed less enamored of passing new legislation .
Democrats such as Sen. Elizabeth Warren ( D-Mass . ) are rightly perturbed that loans are going to big businesses and the well-connected without sufficient guarantees to keep workers employed . Equally distressing is how little of the original stimulus money has been disbursed .
Trump , rather than be concerned with executing the laws Congress passed and encouraging more fiscal action , is caught up in conspiracy theories , sneering at “ blue state bailouts ” and pushing crank remedies . As bad as the CBO ’ s projections were , they might have been duly optimistic .