So , did I hear that right ? The House of Representatives could have passed the coronavirus funding bill sooner , but Speaker Nancy Pelosi held it up because the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee wanted to run anti-GOP ads on Super Tuesday ? Elizabeth Vaughn over at RedState wrote about this . House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy ( R-CA ) detailed this in his interview with Fox News ’ Laura Ingraham on Monday :
What a scam—Speaker Pelosi held up the vote on coronavirus funding so that her campaign team could run ads against Republicans for Super Tuesday .
Instead of putting America first , she is putting politics first . pic.twitter.com/ws0nn0hUXP — Kevin McCarthy ( @ GOPLeader ) March 3 , 2020
Speaking with Fox News ’ Laura Ingraham on Monday night , House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy said , “ Look how much politics they want to play . The dirty little secret . We have the coronavirus . We need to fund this . You know what Nancy Pelosi , the Speaker , did ? She withheld the bill last week . You know why ? So the DCCC could run ads against seven Republicans. ” Ingraham asked , “ How many people ran ads on the coronavirus , fundraising appeals ? ” “ I don ’ t know how many ran , but they actually took the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , spent money , went into these seven Republican seats to campaign against them about the coronavirus when she ’ s the Speaker of the House . Instead of putting America first , she put her politics first and kept the bill from coming to the floor , ” McCarthy explained .
I agree with Vaughn that this isn ’ t shocking . It ’ s par for the course as this virus has become another avenue from which the Left can attack this White House . The coronavirus has infected some 100,000 people and killed 3,000 . In the U.S. , around a dozen people have died . Is it tragic ? Yes . Is it worth the hysteria that has ensued ? No . Not by a long shot . As Democrats try to make corona Trump ’ s Katrina and paint the administration as incompetent , they disregard simple facts . One is that 40-70 percent of those infected are asymptomatic . Some of us have the virus right now and don ’ t even know it . Second , and more importantly , this isn ’ t some superbug here , folks . The U.S. sees 32-45 million cases of the seasonal flu every year . Anywhere from 12-45,000 people die from the seasonal flu every year . Over 500,000 people are hospitalized with the flu every year . There is nothing wrong with taking common-sense precautions , but we have the governor of Washington State saying people should avoid large crowds . The NBA is telling its players to avoid high-fiving and signing autographs for fans . Most of the deaths in the U.S. are due to the virus infecting a nursing home facility in Washington , a hub where those most susceptible to being killed by the virus are cloistered . Of course , it spread like a brushfire there .
The funding bill finally passed yesterday , but the fact that it was delayed so that Nancy and the DCCC could run ads against the Republicans is just another day that ends in “ y. ” Oh , and of course , if the House GOP majority was accused of such antics , this would be a major scandal , but Democrats can rest easy in the shade of the liberal media .