Over the past few weeks , as the Covid-19 coronavirus has made its way around the world , I ’ ve found myself preoccupied with worry . Am I washing my hands enough ? Am I touching my face ? What am I touching on the subway ? What if I get infected and don ’ t realize it , and unknowingly pass on the virus to older or immunocompromised loved ones ? Maybe I should start wearing a surgical mask when I visit my parents . Maybe I should stop visiting my parents . Maybe I should stop leaving the house .
As someone who lives with OCD , I ’ m used to having my anxious thoughts take over — and , thanks to the work I ’ ve done in therapy , I ’ m usually pretty good at flagging thoughts as anxiety and OCD rather than a legitimate concern . But as the coronavirus outbreak has put the world on high alert , many of the thoughts I ’ d ordinarily dismiss as a product of my anxiety have started to seem like rational worry , and I find it harder to push back .
Although many people associate OCD with obsessive cleanliness — a habit that might seem helpful in the midst of an outbreak — the reality is much more complicated . For many people , OCD involves extreme hypochondria or intrusive thoughts about harm coming to oneself or loved ones . The stress of an outbreak can exacerbate those fears , leading to a resulting increase in compulsive behavior , like time-consuming rituals that disrupt one ’ s life , or extreme self-isolation .
It ’ s not just people who live with OCD . For anyone with generalized anxiety or other mental disorders that make one prone to excessive worrying and irrational behavior , outbreaks can be a particularly dangerous time . As we work to protect ourselves from pathogens , it ’ s easy to get caught up in panic — and that panic can threaten the tenuous control we maintain over our mental health .
So how can you avoid infection without spiraling out of control ?
For starters , avoid the temptation to learn everything you possibly can about Covid-19 . While more information might seem like the best defense against illness , it ’ s far more likely to ramp up your panic — especially if you ’ re getting that information from a place like Twitter , where the takes are fast , furious , and frequently unverified . On social media , “ the information is coming so fast and so thick and so unverified that it ’ s very easy to get overwhelmed , ” says bioethicist Kelly Hills . “ If you don ’ t need to stay on top of this for your job or your academic work , don ’ t . ”
Hills recommends limiting your Covid-19 news consumption to once a day , and only getting that news from a trusted , verified source . While staying informed is important , sensationalistic coverage is far more likely to inflame panic and cause more harm . “ We have to regulate and make choices about what we are exposing ourselves to , ” says therapist Jenn Brandel , noting that managing anxiety around outbreaks requires us to focus on facts rather than emotions . If it ’ s friends and family , rather than the news , who are inundating you with Covid-19 updates , it ’ s okay to mute them on social media , or ask them not to message you with anything related to the crisis .
Second , set a basic safety regimen — and avoid the temptation to add to it . As you ’ ve likely heard , regular hand-washing is one of the most essential components of coronavirus prevention , but washing your hands repeatedly , for far more than 20 seconds at a time , is moving out of disease prevention territory and into compulsion territory . Too much hand-washing can actually work against that effort .
The CDC and the WHO recommend several basic measures to help prevent the spread of respiratory diseases such as Covid-19 : Wash your hands often for at least 20 seconds .
Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue , then throw the tissue in the trash .
touch your face . DON ’ T travel if you have a fever and cough .
travel if you have a fever and cough . DON ’ T wear a face mask if you are well . Face masks should be used by people who show symptoms . Information on the coronavirus outbreak , including its severity , may change as it spreads . Stay informed , and stay safe , with ███ ’ s guide to Covid-19 .
“ If you are washing your hands so much that they are raw or chafed , you are washing your hands too much , ” says Hills . Washing your hands , she points out , isn ’ t about preventing an infection from seeping in through your skin ; it ’ s about removing pathogens before you pass them on to points of entry like your eyes , nose , and mouth . If your hand-washing leads your skin to crack and bleed , you ’ ve created a new entry point for the virus — meaning you could be more , not less , likely to get infected . ( If you or a loved one are at elevated risk due to a comorbidity , Hills notes you can also wipe down light switches , phones , countertops , and other frequently touched surfaces with a Clorox wipe once a day — but once a day should be sufficient , and the entire process should only take a few minutes . )
If you ’ re worried that a self-quarantine might amp up your anxiety or depression , staying on top of your general fitness and wellness regimen is even more important during a stressful time like this one . Make sure you ’ re sleeping enough , eating a balanced diet , and getting some exercise . Even if you ’ re unable to leave the house , there are plenty of at-home workouts ( everything from aerobics to Zumba ) that you can use to get your heart racing from activity rather than anxiety .
And if you ’ re feeling really overwhelmed , remember that you don ’ t have to go through this alone . Therapy , Brandel says , can be an important part of managing your mental health during a crisis . If therapy isn ’ t an option for you , a trusted source — a doctor , a family , or a friend — who can help you analyze what is a rational concern or safety measure , and what is a panicked , anxious overreaction , is another excellent option .
And as social distancing becomes more widespread , with more of us finding ourselves having to work from home or stay in to care for children who can ’ t go to school , it ’ s good to plan some strategies to stay in touch with your support system remotely . Group chats and video chat can be a great way to feel connected to friends and family , but it ’ s also a good idea to check if your therapist is available to do sessions remotely over video chat or phone .
In my case , it ’ s been helpful to talk things through with friends and family , making a safety plan I can stick to that doesn ’ t go overboard . When I feel the urge to wash my hands , I stop and think about whether there ’ s actually a chance I ’ ve picked up new pathogens since I last scrubbed them , applying the same mindfulness techniques I ’ ve always applied to help manage my intrusive thoughts and compulsions .
Ultimately , the best way to get through these trying times is to just “ keep doing your work , ” says Brandel . “ It ’ s easier to do our work around managing intrusive thoughts or managing compulsive impulses when we ’ re in the best of conditions . These aren ’ t the best conditions for someone with OCD [ or other mental illnesses ] — these are going to be hard conditions . But the work is still the same . ”
Whether you ’ re struggling with OCD , generalized anxiety , or another mental illness that ’ s feeling more intensified in these trying times , you ’ ll be able to get through this outbreak the same way you get through everything : taking it day by day .
Lux Alptraum ’ s work has appeared in a wide range of publications including the New York Times , Cosmopolitan , and Hustler . Her first book , Faking It : The Lies Women Tell About Sex — And the Truths They Reveal , explores our cultural obsession with feminine deceit . Find her on Twitter @ luxalptraum .