As coronavirus outbreaks are slowly brought to heel in many places around the world , the US is among a handful of countries facing a surge of new infections .
More than two dozen states are now seeing increases in new cases over the last 14 days .
Of these , Texas , Florida , Arizona and California have emerged as the country 's latest virus epicentres .
But while cases are clearly rising , state leaders and health experts are divided on the cause .
Here 's a look at these four US hotspots , the facts and figures raising alarm , and the theories that may help explain each surge .
First , it 's important to note that across the US , more efficient testing has played some role in the climbing case count . The number of Covid-19 tests being administered now is nearly double what it was in April and May .
But the positive test rate tells us that testing ca n't explain away the rise .
If lots of tests are being conducted and the spread of the coronavirus has been reduced , then the positive case rate would fall in tandem . The World Health Organization says that states should have a positive case rate at or below 5 % for two weeks before they loosen restrictions on movement .
Even with testing success stories , it 's clear that the southern and western US are seeing a particularly sharp spike in infections and their rate .
As of 30 June , Texas , Florida , Arizona or California all fall under that category - and all fail to meet the bar .
After nearly three months of new cases hovering between 1,000 and 2,000 each day - Texas ' infection count has spiked in the last two weeks , with up to 6,000 new illnesses reported in a single day .
The sharp rise in cases has been mirrored by record highs in hospital admissions - reaching at 5,913 on Monday - and stoking fears that the state 's hospitals will soon be overwhelmed .
If this trajectory persists , Houston , the state 's most populous city , `` would become the worst affected city in the US '' , possibly rivalling what 's happening now in Brazil , wrote Peter Hotez , director of the Center for Vaccine Development at Texas Children 's Hospital , on Twitter . `` I can not really see how things get better on their own . ''
Why the rise ? Many point to the south-western state 's leading role peeling back lockdown measures .
Texas Governor Greg Abbott allowed his stay home order to expire on 30 April , with almost all businesses - including bars and restaurants - operating to at least 50 % capacity by early June . Last week , amid the surge , the governor shut down all bars and ordered restaurants to cut down capacity from 75 to 50 % .
`` If I could go back and redo anything , it probably would have been to slow down the opening of bars , '' Mr Abbott said to El Paso station KVIA-TV . A `` bar setting , in reality , just does n't work with a pandemic '' .
Packed restaurants and bars may also fit with another national trend : the average age of people diagnosed with Covid-19 has decreased gradually throughout the pandemic .
In certain counties , people under the age 30 make up the majority of Covid patients , Mr Abbott said at a press conference earlier this month , which `` typically results from people going to the bar-type settings '' .
Parts of the state are now also enacting rules on face coverings .
Policies on masks are one of the factors differentiating states like Texas from those seeing lower transmission rates .
In 11 states with mask rules in place - including New York and Illinois - the number of new cases has declined 25 % in the last two weeks , according to an analysis by the Philadelphia Inquirer . On the other hand , in states where only some employees have to wear masks , new cases have risen by an average of 70 % .
Florida 's stay home order expired shortly after Texas ' , on 4 May .
While the state 's most populous counties , Miami-Dade and Broward , held off until 18 May , Florida still had one of the more aggressive reopening strategies in the US .
Disney properties and beaches began reopening by the end of last month , just as Americans across the country celebrated the Memorial Day holiday . Days into June , bars , restaurants , gyms , and shops were also resuming business .
Now , the Sunshine State is seeing a surge in Covid-19 - this past weekend saw over 8,500 new cases per day . In the last two weeks , cases have increased fivefold , according to the New York Times .
Hospitalisations are up as well , but Florida 's death toll has not seen so sharp a rise thus far .
The governor 's answer for why that may be lines up with what the White House has said : more testing and more young people with infections .
Republican Governor Ron DeSantis said a backlog `` test dump '' coupled with transmission in the 18 to 35 age range is behind the concerning counts . He said that 20 % of Floridians aged 25 to 34 are testing positive , and called on younger residents to be more careful , citing graduation parties that ignored social distancing rules .
`` We 've been stressing avoiding the three Cs , which are : closed spaces with poor ventilation , crowded places with many people nearby and close-contact settings , such as close-range conversations , '' Mr DeSantis said .
But some experts say even with testing , the numbers still point to community spread linked to more social contact .
Former CDC Director Tom Frieden told Fox News on Sunday : `` As a doctor , a scientist , an epidemiologist , I can tell you with 100 % certainty that in most states where you 're seeing an increase , it is a real increase . It is not more tests ; it is more spread of the virus . ''
Mr DeSantis has stopped short of enacting any mandatory measures to curb Covid-19 transmission - however , mayors in South Florida , the hardest-hit region of the state , have been discussing next steps .
In Miami , Fort Lauderdale and Palm Beach , beaches will be closed for the Fourth of July Independence Day weekend . Miami-Dade County Mayor Carlos Gimenez will also be limiting gatherings to no more than 50 people , with masks required .
Arizona may be the region with the most concerning surge in America . In mid-June , a Harvard epidemiologist noted the state had a higher case count and percent positivity rate than Brazil and Peru at the time .
It 's a familiar story here too : the south-western state 's spike follows its reopening timeline .
Republican Governor Doug Ducey lifted Arizona 's stay-at-home order on 15 May . In the time since , dine-in restaurants , bars , casinos , gyms , golf clubs and swimming pools reopened . There were health recommendations but no mandate on face coverings or enforcement of social distancing .
As of 30 June , cases have been increasing by 85 % in a 14-day period , according to the Covid Exit Strategy tracker . Saturday alone saw a new record of over 3,500 new infections reported .
Arizonians between 20- and 44-years-old make up the bulk of the nearly 80,000 confirmed cases , but 1,200 of its 1,600 deaths are from those aged 65 and up , according to state data . Native Americans make up 18 % of the state 's deaths , but just over 5 % of the state 's population .
In addition to the case counts , it 's the speed at which they 're increasing that concerns health experts .
Arizona 's summertime climate could be adding to the problem , as many opt for indoor activities thanks to the triple-digit temperatures . Among indigenous groups , some households are without running water , making frequent hand-washing difficult , and live in areas with limited access to healthcare facilities .
There has also been local pushback to following health guidance , with anti-lockdown and , more recently , anti-mask rallies .
Amid this new outbreak , Arizona 's hospitals - which are in emergency mode - have warned intensive care units ( ICU ) could soon be overwhelmed . Bed space is already in short supply , with 88 % of ICU beds and 84 % of hospital inpatient beds occupied , according to AZ Central .
The state 's health director on Monday announced hospitals could activate `` crisis care standards '' that would allow them to prioritise resources to patients based on factors like likelihood of survival .
Following criticism from public health officials and Democrats over his inaction , Mr Ducey ordered bars , nightclubs , gyms , movie theatres and water parks to shut for at least 30 days to `` relieve stress '' on the healthcare system on 29 June .
Of the four states hit hardest by the resurgence , California is in many ways an outlier .
Its 19 March stay home order - the first in the nation - is widely credited with helping guard against the death tolls seen in other large states like New York and New Jersey .
But two months after Governor Gavin Newsom said the Covid curve had `` arguably flattened '' , cases are now sharply on the rise , hitting an all-time single day high of new cases on 30 June , with 8,086 confirmed new cases . Hospital admissions jumped 43 % in the last two weeks .
Los Angeles County has the most Covid-19 cases confirmed in the nation , at over 100,000 as of 30 June , according to a Johns Hopkins University count . Local health officials have warned that one in 140 residents may unknowingly have the virus - last week , that estimate was one in 400 .
California officials pin the surge in part to a rise in social and family gatherings , particularly among residents in the 18-49 age group , who make up the majority of California 's positive cases .
Easing restrictions on indoor businesses , like gyms and restaurants , likely also played a role . State leaders have also noted that many bars and restaurants were not following social distancing protocols or requiring face coverings .
Seven counties on Sunday , including Los Angeles , were ordered to shut their bars . Counties and cities , like San Francisco , have reversed reopening plans . Disney also delayed plans to reopen , citing a lack of guidance from the state .
Clusters of the virus have emerged in prisons , nursing homes , as well as rural and urban areas .
The San Francisco Bay Area 's San Quentin Prison reported more than 1,000 Covid-19 cases among its 3,500 inmates this week , following a transfer earlier this month from a prison experiencing an outbreak .
State data also shows a significantly higher number of Latino residents have been infected : Latinos account for around 39 % of the state 's population , but 56 % of the total positive cases as of 30 June .
California 's big cities , like thousands across the nation , also saw massive protests in the wake of George Floyd 's death - though we still do n't have data on how those gatherings may affect the virus ' spread .