All but three of the 15 students in Evan Lancia ’ s senior writing class at Cranston High School West were logged into a Google Meet one recent Thursday afternoon . A young woman sat at a desk in her bedroom , offering poignant thoughts about the mental health of those in quarantine . Another classmate joined from outdoors , explaining that he wanted to focus on ways students can stay active .
At 80 percent attendance , Lancia ’ s otherwise successful class was actually below average these days for Rhode Island , where more than 90 percent of students log in each day . But it ’ s far better than many communities in neighboring Massachusetts , including Boston where only about 50 percent of students log in .
The two states epitomize the starkly different approaches states are taking to learning in the era of COVID-19 . Tiny Rhode Island , with just 142,000 public school students , laid out a clear mandate that teachers and students would continue with business as usual — except now online . Massachusetts , by contrast , has left the extent and depth of online learning largely up to individual school districts and teachers while encouraging them to avoid introducing any new content for the time being .
There are no statewide numbers for student participation in Massachusetts , but individual districts report widely varying numbers , from about 95 percent in Andover and other suburban towns , to 30 percent in Chelsea , where the virtual classrooms are much emptier .
Some of my students “ need more structure , ” said Shanae Paulino , who teaches English as a second language at Boston ’ s Madison Park Technical Vocational High School . She ’ s tweaked her approach every week , settling recently on offering one “ live lesson ” each week over Zoom , for which attendance is usually about 20 percent .
Paulino applauds the Boston district for securing laptops and Internet connections for all students but wishes that officials had then followed up with clearer guidance on what “ school ” should look like these days . If the state had provided clearer expectations , Paulino said , many teachers and students would have risen to the occasion .
“ Massachusetts is not using the bully pulpit in the way that you ’ d want to see , ” said Mike Petrilli , president of the Thomas B. Fordham Institute , a Washington , D.C.-based education policy think tank . By contrast , he described Rhode Island ’ s “ tough love approach ” as ultimately more “ loving ... because I think what we ’ re learning is what kids are desperate for right now is some sense of normalcy . ”
Massachusetts ’ leaders counter that their approach is more practical and realistic for the circumstances of this state , with over 400 school districts in starkly different circumstances when it comes to Internet access and much more .
“ There are some people who think we should demand that everyone comply with state mandates , but that would never work in a local control state like Massachusetts , ” said state Education Commissioner Jeffrey Riley in a recent interview .
In Massachusetts and Rhode Island , competing philosophies about what children and families need in a crisis also seem to be driving these decisions . Massachusetts officials have said focusing too much on academics could exacerbate inequality if some students can ’ t — or don ’ t choose to — access the courses and material ; safety and emotional health should take priority , they say . Meanwhile Rhode Island officials believe the best way to ensure equity is to focus on academics .
Students and teachers should be “ spending as much time and effort as you would if you were in school , ” said Rhode Island Governor Gina Raimondo , speaking at a press conference not long after schools in the state shut down . “ This is only going to work if it ’ s all hands on deck . ”
Rhode Island was the first New England state to decide to close schools , and immediately thereafter state officials made a series of swift and resolute decisions about what teaching and learning should look like .
On Friday , March 13 , a student at a high school in Cranston tested positive for COVID-19 , bringing total cases in the state to 16 . By that afternoon , Raimondo ordered all the state ’ s schools to close and start their one-week April vacations the next Monday . That would give teachers a week with students off to plan .
Raimondo required districts to submit distance learning plans to state Education Commissioner Angélica Infante-Green for approval , who was upfront with districts that she did not intend to set a lower bar . “ Our kids need ... the normalcy of learning , ” she said . Districts had to submit proposals that mapped out between four and six hours of instructional time each day , a plan to ensure students had access to computers and the Internet , and daily communication between teachers and students .
Not every class is required to run for the same amount of time that students would be in a traditional classroom , but a similar workload is expected . Rather than assign grades to students , the state has encouraged districts to adopt a pass/fail model .
Rhode Island ’ s firm approach was made possible by quick buy-in from its teachers unions , which received assurances from the state that the virtual days would count toward the 180-day school year and that teachers and other staffers would continue getting paid . State officials plan to announce Thursday that they are extending closures through the end of the school year .
“ Everything was thought out early on , and we made adjustments as we went along , ” said Larry Purtill , president of National Education Association Rhode Island , the state ’ s largest teachers union . “ It ’ s not perfect . It ’ s not as good as it was . But there ’ s still education happening . ”
Most states have not been as dogmatic as Rhode Island — with only a few , including Texas and Alabama , requiring districts to teach new material .
In Massachusetts , guidance to schools has come out more gradually . On March 15 , Governor Charlie Baker ordered schools statewide to close for three weeks . By that point , the number of COVID-19 cases in Massachusetts had grown to 164 . State officials said nothing specific then about teacher and student expectations during the closure .
A week and a half later , shortly after extending the closures to early May , Riley , the education commissioner , issued the first recommendations for how online learning should work . Riley suggested schools focus on “ reinforcing skills already taught this school year . ”
“ We recognize this is a traumatic time for our kids . We want to get them settled , and then we want to get them in a routine , ” he said .
Massachusetts ’ other recommendations , endorsed by the state ’ s largest teachers union , were that students “ engage in meaningful and productive learning ” for about half of a regular school day through a combination of teacher-directed and “ self-directed learning . ”
The Globe obtained an earlier , written draft of the state ’ s recommendations — and an e-mail thread responding to it — that show how the guidance changed with the input of teachers unions , superintendents , and others . The initial draft circulated by the state on March 24 suggested a few hours of instruction each day from teachers and , “ ideally , ” daily contact .
In an e-mail , Max Page , vice president of the Massachusetts Teachers Association , responded with his union ’ s view : “ This is not a normal time . We will fail our students , their families and educators if we try to impose ‘ normalcy ’ on them . Do not pretend that education can proceed as before , that school can be replicated at home . ”
Superintendents had their own concerns . Some worried about spotty Internet connectivity , according to Tom Scott , executive director of the Massachusetts Association of School Superintendents . Others , in economically depressed areas , worried that unemployed parents and families would focus on daily survival , not homework .
In the end , Glenn Koocher , executive director of the Massachusetts Association of School Committees , credits Riley for issuing guidance that was “ flexible enough to let districts figure out what to do . ”
Riley said in a recent interview that he may recommend teachers do more in the future , but he declined to elaborate . When Massachusetts announced Tuesday that schools would be closed through the end of the academic year , Riley said he would issue more guidance soon .
The state shouldn ’ t make significant changes without first collecting more data and information on how well things have been going , Merrie Najimy , the association ’ s president , said in a recent interview . She wants to know , for instance , whether families ’ basic food needs are being met .
Najimy also contends that requiring more formal academic instruction right now could actually widen achievement gaps between students of different socioeconomic and racial backgrounds . That ’ s because wealthier districts and families have more Internet access , parents with flexible schedules , and more physical space and resources to accommodate children ’ s learning .
“ If we try to meet the needs of the affluent communities ” in forging ahead full speed , Najimy said . “ We deepen the divide . ”
But Robin Lake , director of the Washington-based Center on Reinventing Public Education , believes the opposite . “ A lot of the state guidance was to wait and think through equity and try to get this right before you do anything , ” Lake said . “ That was pretty dangerous to do because private schools and advantaged families were not going to wait . ”
Massachusetts ’ approach has led to vastly different experiences across the state , depending partly on local leadership and the kinds of deals teachers unions have struck .
In Boston , for example , when schools closed in mid-March , teachers were tasked with communicating with students once a week ; there was no guidance on how much instruction students should receive each day . An agreement the teachers union and district signed last week requires teachers to communicate with students at least once every three school days and to track daily student attendance ; it specifies that remote learning will generally take place for three hours in the morning or afternoon . Teachers are not required to have face time with students .
Paulino , the Madison Park teacher , said she ’ s torn on whether holding more than one Zoom class a week would be a help or a hindrance . On the one hand , some of her students , many of whom have only been in the country for a year or two , tell her they wish they had classes each day during “ real school ” hours .
“ My students just feel more comfortable knowing that I ’ m physically there when they can ask a question , ” she said . But others are dealing with a lot of trauma and upheaval ; Paulino hasn ’ t even heard from 15 students since school ended .
In Rhode Island , too , remote learning hasn ’ t always gone smoothly . Derrick Ciesla , a parent who lives in Coventry , said his high school son — who already had a school-issued computer and had worked a lot online — has fared well . But his elementary-age son and that child ’ s teachers didn ’ t have the same comfort level with the technology . The requirement to keep learning new material has led to `` a lot of frustration , ” he said .
Justin Reich , director of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ’ s Teaching Systems Lab , believes that Massachusetts ’ approach might ultimately be more realistic . “ The vast majority of American schools are not set up to rapidly switch to remote , online learning , ” he wrote in a recent report .
He predicts the barriers to online learning will only grow during the pandemic as more people get sick or lose jobs and have to focus all their energies on daily survival . “ Keep it simple , ” he wrote . “ Schools that do a few simple things well ... will likely be in the best position on the other side of this crisis . ”