( CNN ) It 's time to celebrate the person who brought you into this world .
Here 's how Mother 's Day came to be , and how it 's changed over time
Suffragist and writer Julia Ward Howe first suggested the idea of Mother 's Day in the United States in 1872 . Howe was a pacifist and saw the holiday as a chance to unite women and rally for peace . For several years , she held an annual Mother 's Day meeting in Boston .
However , West Virginia activist Anna Jarvis is credited with creating the holiday that is celebrated today .
In 1908 , Jarvis campaigned for a national observance of the holiday in honor of her mother , who was a community health advocate . Her mom had organized several Mother 's Day Work Clubs that addressed child rearing and public health issues , and Jarvis wanted to commemorate her and the work of all mothers .
However , Jarvis later became disillusioned by how floral and greeting card companies commercialized the holiday and said she regretted starting it .
It became an official US holiday in 1914 when President Woodrow Wilson proclaimed the second Sunday in May as a day of `` public expression of our love and reverence for the mothers of our country . ''
When the holiday first caught on , people celebrated by attending church and writing appreciative letters to their mothers .
Later , sending cards and giving presents and flowers were incorporated into the tradition .
This year , Mother 's Day spending is estimated to total $ 26.7 billion , the National Retail Federation said . People are expected to spend an average of $ 204.74 to celebrate their moms .
The pampering is probably well-deserved . Insure.com 's Mother 's Day Index , which assigns an annual salary to the work that moms do at home , was valued at $ 93,920 . That represents a 32 % increase over last year because of all the extra work moms have had to do during the coronavirus pandemic .
Moms can be the backbone of the household , cooking , fixing up the house and shopping for the family .
So on Sunday , it 's mom 's turn to be taken care of .