“ Make no mistake . An election that made people wait three hours to vote during a pandemic in Green Bay and Milwaukee was ridiculous , as the now-famous sign said . And it is ridiculous that Wisconsin is the first state in the union to be opened by court order — and not a unanimous order with clear legal precedent , but one based on the whims and political ideologies of just four Supreme Court justices… “ All four justices who overturned the governor ’ s power in a health emergency had campaigned against judicial activism . They proved to be against judicial activism until they were for it . They are against judges writing laws unless the special interests that put them up and backed them for office want them to write their own laws… In 1981 , as HIV and AIDS swept across the country , the Legislature gave the state Department of Health Services the power to issue emergency orders . If the Republicans who run the state Legislature don ’ t like those laws , they should rewrite them . ” Editorial Board , Milwaukee Journal Sentinel
“ The incident showed how this famously crucial state ’ s legal , political , and cultural differences tend to blend into a witch ’ s brew of polarization . If there are fresh coronavirus outbreaks in Trump Country precincts where support for business reopening is high , it could change that equation . For the time being , though , some Wisconsin citizens are getting buzzed on their inalienable right to risk illness and death. ” Ed Kilgore , New York Magazine
“ Wisconsin law gives the state Department of Health Services extraordinarily broad power — or , at least , it did until today — to confront a public health crisis . Among other things , the department may ‘ close schools and forbid public gatherings in schools , churches , and other places to control outbreaks and epidemics. ’ It may ‘ issue orders ... for the control and suppression of communicable diseases , ’ and these orders ‘ may be made applicable to the whole or any specified part of the state. ’ And , on top of all that , an additional provision permits the health department to ‘ authorize and implement all emergency measures necessary to control communicable diseases ’ … “ As [ Justice Brian Hagedorn ] notes in dissent , the majority opinion ‘ has failed to provide almost any guidance for what the relevant laws mean , and how our state is to govern through this crisis moving forward. ’ Wisconsin now has no stay-at-home order preventing the spread of coronavirus… And it is not at all clear which powers the state health department still has to fight the spread of a pandemic … [ Justice ] Roggensack ’ s opinion contains this extraordinary line : ‘ We do not define the precise scope of DHS authority under Wis. Stat . § 252.02 ( 3 ) , ( 4 ) and ( 6 ) because clearly Order 28 went too far. ’ ” Ian Millhiser , Vox
“ The Wisconsin Supreme Court decision is the legal manifestation of the anti-lockdown protests in several states , encouraged by President Donald Trump… The correct constitutional framework for evaluating government orders isn ’ t the made-up one that the Wisconsin court used . It ’ s the familiar principle that restrictions on liberty must serve a compelling government interest and must be narrowly tailored to achieving that interest . Fighting an ongoing pandemic is about as compelling as government interests get … “ Wisconsin law says , among other things , that DHS ‘ may authorize and implement all emergency measures necessary to control communicable diseases. ’ It says that DHS ‘ may promulgate and enforce rules or issue orders … for the control and suppression of communicable diseases. ’ This statutory language makes it crystal clear that DHS can issue emergency orders as well as rules crafted under the required , lengthy administrative process… “ For good measure , Wisconsin law also says that ‘ any rule or order may be made applicable to the whole or any specified part of the state. ’ That phrase pretty much rules out the majority ’ s position that an order magically turns into a rule when it applies statewide. ” Noah Feldman , Bloomberg
“ [ Health Secretary Andrea ] Palm could order infected individuals to quarantine . But she can ’ t on her own direct all non-essential businesses to shut down and people to stay home without providing citizens with de minimis procedural safeguards including notice and a hearing if legislators ask . Emergency rule-making also gives the Legislature a veto . While this process could take about two weeks , Ms. Palm had plenty of time before extending her March order through May…
“ Mr . Evers can still work with the Legislature to promulgate a less restrictive rule that takes into account local epidemic conditions , business hygiene and social-distancing measures . Wisconsin has been less affected by the coronavirus than some Midwest states with 507 currently hospitalized compared to 1,330 in Michigan , 1,381 in Indiana and 4,473 in Illinois . Most flare-ups have been in meatpacking plants and nursing homes . Wisconsinites can be trusted to protect themselves and fellow citizens . ”
“ Remember , the governor ’ s original executive order , declaring the public-health emergency and directing DHS to act as the lead agency for managing the pandemic , was not at issue in the case . Under Chapter 323 , such orders expire after 60 days unless extended by joint resolution of the legislature . Because the legislature did not pass , or even consider , such a joint resolution , the governor ’ s executive order expired in the second week of May ...
“ So how much authority does an unelected and unconfirmed DHS secretary have under Chapter 252 ? Is it constitutional for an unelected and unconfirmed secretary to essentially have limitless authority , with no legislative oversight , while the popularly elected governor can only issue an order that runs for 60 days ? …
“ The governor responded [ to the ruling ] by arguing that the Republican legislature now owns the ‘ chaos. ’ In fact , what will likely follow is an orderly emergency rule-making process whereby [ the Wisconsin Department of Health ] and the legislature will be forced to work in concert to establish legal guidelines for managing the reopening process… [ in the meantime ] much of the burden of providing clarity will likely fall on local units of government . Many will likely adopt a reasonable and balanced approach . But more important , as the dust settles following issuance of the order , it ’ s important that Wisconsinites continue to remain engaged . ”
“ While I ’ m gratified to see the courts ( any court , really ) exercising some level of restraint on executive authority during a time of crisis , the way this is being done leaves several unanswered questions . On the plus side , calling for the legislature to get involved in the process is a very hopeful sign . If you ’ re going to temporarily curtail the rights of your citizens regarding freedom of movement and assembly , a far better approach is to pass an actual law rather than having one person dictate the rules . But with that said , the court ’ s ruling clearly says that they are not trying to ‘ undermine the executive authority ’ of Governor Evers . Really ? It sounds as if that ’ s exactly what they are doing…
“ [ Moreover ] the executive order was described as a ‘ vast seizure of power ’ … [ but ] the door has been left open for virtually the same stay at home order to be put in place if the legislature goes along with it . If the Health Services Secretary ’ s order was so far out of bounds , how would the same directive suddenly become lawful , valid and enforceable if it received the rubber stamp of the legislature ? ”