President Trump has touted hydroxychloroquine a `` game-changer '' in the battle against COVID-19 . While there are n't sufficient clinical studies to prove its effectiveness yet , one Florida man says the anti-malaria drug saved his life .
`` OK ! I 'm here with my rider Di . We are coming home ! '' said Rio Giardinieri as he was leaving the hospital with his wife .
With his wife beside him , Giardinieri drove home late Tuesday night from a hospital in South Florida , calling his survival of COVID-19 nothing short of a miracle .
`` You go from what you feel is death 's bed to feeling great in 10 hours . To me , call it what you will , but to me , I 'd call it a miracle , '' he said .
GET YOUR FREE FACTSHEET : Coronavirus : What You Need to Know
The Florida-based businessman thinks he got infected with the coronavirus about two weeks ago while attending a conference in New York . Last Friday evening , after 9 days of running a high fever , severe cough , and body aches , doctors told the 52-year-old that there was nothing more they could do to help him . '' )
`` I did n't think I 'd see Saturday morning , so I made phone calls to family and friends to say my goodbyes , '' Giardinieri explained . `` I very much thought it was my last day on earth . ''
That evening a close friend of 43 years told him about hydroxychloroquine , the anti-malaria drug that 's had some success in treating COVID-19 patients overseas .
`` At that point , I had never even heard of the medicine for hydroxychloroquine , it was totally alien to me , '' Giardinieri said .
He consulted with an infectious disease doctor who told him there are sufficient clinical studies to prove hydroxychloroquine 's effectiveness in combating the virus .
`` My statement to him was simply : ' I do n't think I 'll be here in the morning , so I 'm willing to try anything , '' Giardinieri said .
Late Friday evening , doctors at Memorial Regional Hospital in South Florida started him on a course of hydroxychloroquine .
`` And then I woke up at 4:45 in the morning looking right at the clock and it dawned on me all of a sudden that I could breathe , '' he recalled . `` I was pretty amazed and I knew I did n't have a fever . I did n't feel it anymore . '' )
`` Made it out . Escaped from Alcatraz . Heading home to start my segregation , '' he said as he left the medical facility .
███ News spoke to Giardinieri on Wednesday afternoon as he started his quarantine .
`` I 'm not a scientist , I 'm not a doctor , I do n't have any scientific facts to back it up , I can only tell you that I went to sleep in major pain with a fever for nine days that would n't shake and when I woke up at 4:45 in the morning , I was feeling great . I mean to the point that I felt that I could have gone out on the boat , '' he said .
Infectious disease experts are trying an array of therapeutic options for fighting COVID-19 .
`` And what we are finding is that there 's a bunch of different medications , one of which is being the chloroquine that a lot of people have been talking about , that seems to have some effect on this virus and has been used in the past , '' said Dr. Frank Esper , a pediatric infectious disease specialist at Cleveland Clinic Children 's Hospital , told The 700 Club on Wednesday
In New York , the epicenter of America 's coronavirus outbreak , hospitals started clinical trials with hydroxychloroquine this week in combination with the commonly used Z-Pack .
`` We have secured 70,000 Hydroxychloroquine , 10,000 Zithromax from the federal government , '' said Gov . Andrew Cuomo ( D-NY ) . `` I want to thank the FDA for moving very expeditiously to get us this supply . ''