Karleigh Frisbie Brogan : Calling me a hero only makes you feel better
Simple economic concepts , such as supply and demand , certainly help explain these dynamics . These positions tend to require relatively few educational credentials or certifications . The skills necessary to work at a checkout counter or change sheets in a hospital tend to be easy to pick up and nontechnical . This means that the pool of eligible workers is large , and it ’ s easy for employers to hire and fire . You don ’ t face a high barrier to entry if you ’ re looking for a job as a line cook or a nanny . And replacing you is not hard , if you quit or get laid off .
Still , this fact does not in and of itself consign essential jobs to being bad jobs , labor experts stressed . No fundamental principle of economics requires burger flippers to make $ 7.25 an hour . “ The Econ 101 argument is that workers are paid on the marginal productivity of their labor , ” Darrick Hamilton , an economist and the executive director of the Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity at Ohio State University , said . But that is too simplistic .
American labor structures and workplace demographics also contribute to this phenomenon . Millions of essential employees , including many warehouse personnel , food-delivery drivers , and child-care workers , do not belong to unions . In fact , the country ’ s private-sector unionization rate is just 6.2 percent , down from roughly 30 percent in the late 1970s . According to data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development , 98 percent of Austrians , 92 percent of Icelanders , and 56 percent of Germans have the right to bargain collectively , compared with just over 10 percent of American workers . This means lower wages , fewer benefits , and weaker on-the-job protections for all American workers—given that unions raise the earnings of nonunion workers too—as well as higher profits for American firms .
The concentration of American business , as fewer and fewer , bigger and bigger companies eat up more revenue , has also made it harder for workers to wrest more money from their employers : Economists estimate that the country ’ s high levels of industry concentration account for something like 30 percent of the past 50 years of wage stagnation . Sandwich-making jobs come with non-compete clauses . Big-box stores dominate small-town commerce . That contributes to a “ general imbalance of power between employer and employee , ” Jed Kolko , the chief economist for the job-search site Indeed , said .
The American government itself does little to mediate the imbalance between employer and employee . It sets a low national minimum wage . It does not mandate that private firms offer employees paid sick leave , parental leave , or retirement-savings initiatives . It also gives employers significant leeway to quash unionization efforts . The country ’ s labor system is designed to allow low-wage , low-benefit jobs to proliferate .