As we slowly start to test the waters of reopening the country after months of pandemic shutdowns , we ’ re getting a much-needed taste — albeit in bite-sized portions — of life as we once knew it .
Restaurants , stores , salons and small and socially-distant gatherings are returning to our weekly routines , though once-mundane outings , like getting a haircut or grabbing a drink with friends , feel more exhilarating now than routine .
But one former hallmark of American life has yet to return : going to the movies .
Columnists In-depth political coverage , sports analysis , entertainment reviews and cultural commentary .
Remember “ the movies ” ? Craning your neck to take in the big screen , with the sounds of popcorn crunching , errant cell phones and muffled whispers in the background ; spending a month ’ s rent on nachos , boxed candy and a soda the size of a small safe ; answering your significant other ’ s annoying questions , like , “ Who ’ s that guy ? I thought he was with them ? ” ; loading a gaggle of sticky , sweaty , sugar-crashing kiddos into the car where they will definitely fall asleep just as you ’ re pulling into the driveway ?
But as many theaters prepare to reopen in July , the movies are facing some significant challenges . For one , production of new movies had stalled during COVID-19 , so fewer than usual are slated for release . For another , theaters — which were already hurting in an era of home streaming — are capping capacity at anywhere from 25 % to 50 % of usual numbers and will have to follow strict safety guidelines that may include forced mask-wearing and temperature-taking .
All those precautions might make theatergoers feel safer , a big ask already . But they also might get in the way of the real reason we pay all that money to leave our house and go to the movies — which is to feel like we ’ ve escaped reality for 90 minutes . That ’ s harder to do when the reality of an infectious disease greets you at the door , the concession stand , the restroom and the theater seat .
Hollywood , like the rest of us , has been disoriented by this pandemic . A cloying and hackneyed performance of “ Imagine ” was an odd — and roundly mocked — attempt at being creative and useful that flopped spectacularly on both fronts .
Now , more than ever , we need to escape the anxiety and gloom of the last few months , not wallow in it , and Hollywood should take this mandate seriously .
Not to pick on any one film in particular — some coming releases feel like they might have sounded good a few months ago , but now would send me spiraling into panic attacks and a padded cell .
There ’ s “ Unhinged , ” featuring Russell Crowe as a guy who snaps in a case of road rage and decides to terrorize the woman who wronged him . There ’ s “ Tenet , ” a spy thriller in which a mysterious organization is tasked with preventing World War III and a fate “ worse than Armageddon. ” Dave Franco ’ s directorial debut , “ The Rental , ” about a group of friends who rent a beach house , only to find they are being surveilled and hunted , is hardly the warmup I want for my family ’ s summer rental .
These films may all be terrific , but also the opposite of what I need from Hollywood right now . In good news , some others may be coming to the rescue .
How , for example , could a film “ billed as ‘ Gremlins ’ meets ‘ Straw Dogs ’ “ take you anywhere but very far from here ? “ The Little People , ” an Irish-directed horror flick , features a young couple who find themselves overrun by 2-foot-tall goblins living at the bottom of their rural Ireland garden . Yes , sign me up for that .
Don ’ t get me started on the rumors that Michael Keaton might be reprising his role of Batman in the new DC Comics movie “ The Flash. ” After two decades of dark and depressing Batmen , Keaton ’ s Bruce Wayne would be a terrific return to the campier classics of the ’ 80s and ’ 90s .
Despite the new realities of safely watching movies together , I have faith that Hollywood can heroically deliver another important kind of PPE that we all need : perfectly pure escapism .
S.E . Cupp is the host of “ S.E . Cupp Unfiltered ” on CNN .