Former Vice President Joe Biden speaks during a campaign event in Newton , Iowa , January 30 , 2020 . ( Carlos Barria/Reuters )
This election year has been rendered inert , frozen by COVID-19 and the presumed nomination of a mid 20th century white ethnic stereotype by the Democrats .
NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE I ’ ve started to wonder if my local election officials will point the laser thermometer at my head before I ’ m allowed into the voting booth this November , the way that germ bouncers at Singaporean restaurants test every patron before seating them .
Will anyone be disqualified from voting this way ? I doubt it . Because , for now , this is the lowest temperature election of my life .
It ’ s quite a contrast to the usual sort of presidential election . Every four years there has been a long , semi-coordinated mass panic , full of faked outrage and overeager umbrage-taking known as the presidential campaign . Each one in my life has been a larger waste of money and a more tiresome exercise of everyone ’ s vocal cords than the last .
This election year has been rendered inert , frozen by COVID-19 and the presumed nomination of a mid 20th-century white ethnic stereotype by the Democrats .
Trump sends out his insane tweets — to which we have all become habituated . And in response , I presume , a secret Red Team of Lucasfilm veterans hired by the Democratic National Committee programs an animation of former vice president Biden speaking from his basement . Cable news occasionally tries to make this an interesting election season . They ’ ve failed . I ’ m sure if you go looking for them , a number of sad people are spending tremendous amounts of mental energy trying to find something incriminating about Trump and Biden in Ukraine . My mother used to say : “ It takes all kinds . ”
It ’ s as if the coronavirus has taught the American people that we don ’ t even need the political process as an occasion for venting hatred at each other anymore . An opinion on masks or hydroxychloroquine will do the job just fine .
Before COVID , and when it seemed a Bernie Sanders or Elizabeth Warren nomination was a real possibility , I was mentally preparing for an even worse election season than 2016 . That summer featured something that veered close to a full-blown riot at the Chicago Trump rally . And the election aftermath led to actual murder sprees and attempted-murder sprees by men who became unglued in that fetid atmosphere .
To be honest , people I know connected to politics and political commentary were starting to think differently about their personal security in this environment , fearing that another round of this insanity would bring about more encounters with doorstep psychos or acid attacks .
But all of that is on hold for now . It ’ s as if once the immediate stakes of political decisions went up , our political culture immediately became less fraught . I don ’ t want to go back .
What do we get from our presidential elections anyway ? Bush ’ s thousand points of light , Trump ’ s corporate tax cut and the V chip . I seem to have lost mine . America ’ s immigration system is still the mess it ’ s been for two generations . American income taxation bounces between a Reagan–Clinton consensus . Despite being repeatedly attacked by Sunni fanatics , the United States is still elaborating on Jimmy Carter ’ s foreign policy of allying with them in the Middle East .
Ah , I almost forgot ! The presidential elections produce the philosopher kings who rule over us in what was once the American judicial branch . These are a necessary thing , as these courts are where Congress and the American people can defer the messy business of political compromise , and instead engage in the miserably high-stakes game of losing or winning outright and on principle .
At some point , this fact will reassert itself into our conscience , the political temperature will rise , and we will realize there is a difference between the old , verbally incontinent Trump and the old , verbally incompetent Biden . Then we can get back to screaming at each other until November . . . through our masks .