Figures go against Trump talk of restarting economy , as other countries tighten controls
US may become next centre of coronavirus pandemic , says WHO
The US could become the new centre of the global coronavirus pandemic , according to the World Health Organization , which said case numbers were rising quickly there even asDonald Trump talked of reopening the country for business .
“ We are now seeing a very large acceleration in cases in the US . So it does have that potential [ to become the centre of the pandemic ] , ” the WHO spokeswoman Margaret Harris said .
So far , 46,450 people in the US have become infected with the virus and there have been 593 deaths , according to the latest data from Johns Hopkins University .
In Spain , meanwhile , the numbers infected and tested rose from 33,089 to 39,673 on Tuesday , according to the health ministry , while the death toll rose from 2,182 to 2,696 .
Health workers accounted for nearly 14 % of Spain ’ s total reported cases as of Tuesday , up from 12 % the previous day , according to data presented by the health emergency chief , Fernando Simon .
Trump acknowledged that crucial healthcare supplies to protect frontline staff treating sick patients were becoming difficult to obtain .
In an early morning tweet , he said : “ The world market for face masks and ventilators is crazy . We are helping the states to get equipment , but it is not easy . ”
But while more US governors were urging people to stay at home , Trump appeared to play down the crisis on Monday night .
The president said he was considering ways to restart the economy in the coming weeks and wanted to avoid the pandemic becoming “ a long-lasting financial problem ” . It would not last as long as three or four months , he said .
“ Our country was not built to be shut down , ” Trump said . “ This is not a country that was built for this . ”
Trump ’ s senior advisers referred to current government restrictions as a “ 15-day challenge ” and pledged to revisit in a week ’ s time the need for sweeping measures to prevent the spread of the virus .
The top coronavirus response official in Italy , the country with the highest death toll , attributed two successive declines in the daily death rate to a national lockdown that appeared to be finally bearing fruit .
But Angelo Borrelli also noted that the real number of infections was probably 10 times higher than the official count . He also said the nation of 60 million was on course to overtake China ’ s total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in a week .
“ The measures we took two weeks ago are starting to have an effect , ” Borrelli said in an interview with La Repubblica . He said more data over the next few days will help understand “ if the growth curve is really flattening ” .
An estimated 1.7 billion people around the world have been ordered to remain at home as governments take extreme measures to protect their populations . Britain became the latest country to enter lockdown , after bans on movement came into force at midnight on Monday .
France entered a two-month “ state of health emergency ” on Tuesday that provides a legal framework for existing confinement and restrictive measures and allows the government to order further restrictions , including controlling the price of certain products and requisitioning people and property for the “ war ” effort .
In Germany , Angela Merkel ’ s cabinet presented a support package worth hundreds of billions of euros to cushion the impact of the crisis , in a departure from the country ’ s commitment to balance budgets . Under the rescue measures , about €50bn is to be earmarked for small businesses and self-employed workers , who are to receive direct grants of up to €15,000 over three months .
The Dutch government strengthened its containment measures , banning all public gatherings regardless of size until 1 June and empowering mayors to close beaches , parks , campsites and other public spaces if people are not respecting physical distancing rules .
Play Video 2:10 How do I know if I have coronavirus and what happens next ? – video explainer
South Africa reported more than 150 new cases , taking its tally to 554 , the highest in Africa , a day after it ordered a three-week lockdown .
Thailand ’ s leader said he would invoke sweeping emergency powers in the face of surging infections .
Egypt declared a curfew from 7pm to 6am for two weeks starting on Wednesday .
The Cameroonian Afro-jazz musician Manu Dibango died in Paris after catching coronavirus . Best known for his 1972 song Soul Makossa , the 86-year-old saxophonist is one of the first global stars to succumb to the disease .
Pakistan suspended six civil servants after they posed for a selfie with a coronavirus patient in a quarantine centre . The selfie – widely shared on social media – pictured a group of men around the apparent patient , several of them smiling broadly and none wearing face masks .
Meanwhile , tens of millions of people living in Hubei province , the centre of China ’ s outbreak , were told they would be able to resume travel from midnight ( 1600 GMT ) , except in the city of Wuhan .
China claims to have largely brought its outbreak under control , reporting only imported cases of the virus and few or no new domestic cases in recent days . However , the claims have been questioned by residents and analysts , who note that some hospitals are reportedly refusing to test for the virus , and that there are allegations of manipulated numbers and rumours of unreported cases .
Additional reporting by Kim Willsher in Paris , Jennifer Rankin in Brussels and Helen Davidson in Sydney