Bartender Katie McGranahan pours a beer at the Saint Arnold Brewing Company Friday , June 26 , 2020 , in Houston . Texas Gov . Greg Abbott announced Friday that he is shutting bars back down and scaling back restaurant capacity to 50 % , in response to the increasing number of COVID-19 cases in Texas . ( AP Photo/David J. Phillip )
Bartender Katie McGranahan pours a beer at the Saint Arnold Brewing Company Friday , June 26 , 2020 , in Houston . Texas Gov . Greg Abbott announced Friday that he is shutting bars back down and scaling back restaurant capacity to 50 % , in response to the increasing number of COVID-19 cases in Texas . ( AP Photo/David J. Phillip )
AUSTIN , Texas ( AP ) — Texas and Florida reversed course and clamped down on bars again Friday in the nation ’ s biggest retreat yet as the daily number of confirmed coronavirus infections in the U.S. surged to an all-time high of 40,000 .
Texas Gov . Greg Abbott ordered all bars closed , while Florida banned alcohol at such establishments . The two states joined the small but growing list of those that are either backtracking or putting any further reopenings of their economies on hold because of a comeback by the virus , mostly in the South and West .
Health experts have said a disturbingly large number of cases are being seen among young people who are going out again , often without wearing masks or observing other social-distancing rules .
“ It is clear that the rise in cases is largely driven by certain types of activities , including Texans congregating in bars , ” Abbott said .
Abbott had pursued up to now one of the most aggressive reopening schedules of any governor . The Republican not only resisted calls to order masks be worn but also refused until last week to let local governments take such measures .
“ The doctors told us at the time , and told anyone who would listen , this will be a disaster . And it has been , ” said Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins , a Democrat who is the county ’ s top official . “ Once again , the governor is slow to act . He is now being forced to do the things that we ’ ve been demanding that he do for the last month and a half . ”
Stocks fell sharply on Wall Street again over the surging case numbers . The Dow Jones Industrial Average shed 730 points , or nearly 3 % .
Texas reported more than 17,000 new cases in the past three days , with a record high of nearly 6,000 on Thursday . The second-largest state also sets records daily for hospitalizations , surpassing 5,000 coronavirus patients for the first time Friday .
In Florida , under GOP Gov . Ron DeSantis , the agency that regulates bars acted after the daily number of new confirmed cases neared 9,000 , almost doubling the record set just two days earlier .
Colleen Corbett , a 30-year-old bartender at two places in Tampa , said that she was disappointed and worried about being unemployed again but that the restrictions are the right move . Most customers were not wearing masks , she said .
“ It was like they forgot there was a pandemic or just stopped caring , ” Corbett said .
A number of the hardest-hit states , including Arizona and Arkansas , have Republican governors who have resisted mask-wearing requirements and have largely echoed President Donald Trump ’ s desire to reopen the economy quickly amid warnings the virus could come storming back .
The White House coronavirus task force , led by Vice President Mike Pence , held its first briefing in nearly two months , and Pence gave assurances that the U.S. is “ in a much better place ” than it was two months ago .
He said the country has more medical supplies on hand , a smaller share of patients are being hospitalized , and deaths are much lower than they were in the spring .
The count of new confirmed infections , provided by Johns Hopkins University , eclipsed the previous high of 36,400 , set on April 24 , during one of the deadliest stretches . Newly reported cases per day have risen on average about 60 percent over the past two weeks , according to an ███ analysis .
While the rise partly reflects expanded testing , experts say there is ample evidence the scourge is making a comeback , including rising deaths and hospitalizations in parts of the country and higher percentages of tests coming back positive for the virus .
At the task force briefing , Dr. Anthony Fauci , the nation ’ s top infectious-disease expert , urged people to mind their responsibility to others : “ A risk for you is not just isolated to you . ”
Deaths from the coronavirus in the U.S. are running at about 600 per day , down from a peak of around 2,200 in mid-April . Some experts have expressed doubt that deaths will return to that level , because of advances in treatment and prevention and because younger adults are more likely than older ones to survive .
The virus is blamed for about 125,000 deaths and nearly 2.5 million confirmed infections nationwide , by Johns Hopkins ’ count . But health officials believe the true number of infections is about 10 times higher . Worldwide , the virus has claimed close to a half-million lives .
Louisiana reported its second one-day spike of more than 1,300 cases his week . The increasing numbers led Democratic Gov . John Bel Edwards this week to suspend further easing of restrictions . Republican Gov . Doug Ducey did the same in Arizona , where cases are topping 3,000 a day and 85 % of hospital beds are occupied .
For the second time in a week , Tennessee reported its biggest one-day jump in confirmed infections , with more than 1,400 , but Republican Gov . Bill Lee has been reluctant to reinstate restrictions or call for a mask mandate .
In Texas , Abbott also scaled back restaurant capacity , shut down rafting operations and said any outdoor gatherings of more than 100 people will need approval from local officials .
DeSantis has been lifting restrictions more slowly than a task force recommended but has allowed theme parks to reopen , encouraged professional sports to come to Florida and pushed for the GOP convention to be held in the Sunshine State .
In a reversal of fortune , New York said it is offering equipment and other help to Arizona , Texas and Florida , noting that other states came to its aid when it was in the throes of the deadliest outbreak in the nation this spring .
“ We will never forget that graciousness , and we will repay it any way we can , ” Gov . Andrew Cuomo said .
Globally , another record daily increase in India pushed the caseload in the world ’ s second most populous nation toward half a million . And other countries with big populations like Indonesia , Pakistan and Mexico grappled with large numbers of infections and strained health care systems .