Shortly after landing back in the United States Wednesday morning on the heels of successful trip to India , President Trump announced he will hold a press conference this evening about the coronavirus .
Just landed . India was great , trip very successful . Heading to the White House . Meetings and calls scheduled today . @ CDCgov , @ SecAzar and all doing a great job with respect to Coronavirus ! Briefing this afternoon . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) February 26 , 2020
I will be having a News Conference at the White House , on this subject , today at 6:00 P.M. CDC representatives , and others , will be there . Thank you ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) February 26 , 2020
Yesterday the CDC noted that while there is currently no community spread of coronavirus , Americans should be prepared for disruption of everyday life when it arrives .
Now is the time for US businesses , hospitals , and communities to begin preparing for the possible spread of # COVID19 . CDC continues to work with business , education & healthcare sectors , encouraging employers to be prepared . Learn more : https : //t.co/OUYvMhdIaS . — CDC ( @ CDCgov ) February 25 , 2020
Overseas in China , where the pandemic started , nearly 1800 people have died . Iran has the second highest mortality rate with more than fifty people succumbing to the disease .
During a press conference at the State Department Tuesday , Secretary Mike Pompeo condemned China for the unnecessary spread of the virus due to communist government 's secrecy and censorship .
`` We want to applaud the brave reporters who are covering the spread of coronavirus from Wuhan itself . Expelling our journalists , exposes once again the [ Chinese ] government 's issue that led to SARS and now the coronavirus , namely censorship . It can have deadly consequences , '' Pompeo said . `` Had China permitted its own and foreign journalists and medical personnel to speak and investigate freely Chinese officials and other nations would have been far better prepared to address the challenge . Similarly , the United States is deeply concerned by information indicating the Iranian regime may have suppressed vital details about the outbreak in that country . As of yesterday afternoon Iran was second only to China in coronavirus deaths . ''