From The New York Times , I ’ m Michael Barbaro . This is “ The Daily. ” Today : As the pandemic quickly spreads across the U.S. , hundreds of hospitals are now confronting their first serious cases of the coronavirus . Susan Dominus on the lessons from the first confirmed case in New Jersey . It ’ s Monday , March 30 . Sue , tell me how you first heard about James Cai .
Well , a few weeks ago I heard about this young guy , a 32-year-old physician assistant , who was the very first patient in all of New Jersey to test positive for Covid-19 . And so I reached out to him while he was still at the hospital . And I was sort of wondering , would it possibly be OK , could you maybe find some time to talk ? And he said , sure , call me now . I ’ m in isolation , in other words , and I have time .
james cai Hello ? [ COUGHING ] susan dominus Are you there ? james cai Yes . [ COUGHING ] susan dominus OK .
james cai So my name is James Cai , and I ’ m a physician assistant .
And his mother and grandfather live in New Jersey , and so he spends quite a bit of time there as well .
james cai And I work as a primary care , urgent care and nursing home P.A .
He came to this country when he was about 16 from Shanghai . And he ’ s married and has a 20-month-old daughter , whom he adores .
susan dominus Why did you go into medicine in the first place ? Why were you drawn to medicine ? james cai Oh , because of my grandparents . They are doctors . My grandfather is an anesthesiologist in Shanghai . And when I was young , I always sick , so I always went to his hospital . So I had a good impression .
And as someone working in the medical field , was James expecting to interact with this epidemic , the coronavirus ? Was he maybe even thinking he would end up treating coronavirus patients ?
Well , he doesn ’ t work in a hospital . And because he works in private practice , I think he probably imagined he might be working remotely — with telemedicine .
james cai I actually heard about coronavirus many months ago when China had outbreak . But I always followed the disease .
But because of the family background and because he does work in medicine , when news of the coronavirus did start coming out of Wuhan , he definitely understood how quickly the virus could spread . And he definitely understood that the only way to guarantee that you could survive this was by not getting it in the first place .
james cai Around end of February , I started to pile up all the food , like canned foods , frozen vegetables , dumplings .
So soon after the coronavirus landed on the west coast , he and his family went to Costco and stocked up —
james cai Our family plan is to stay home for two months .
Right . So they were going to avoid any meaningful exposure to the virus ?
Yeah , if there was communal spread and it had become widespread , their plan was to shelter in place .
susan dominus So you weren ’ t sure at what point you would start doing that , but you felt you ’ d know when it was time ? james cai Yes .
But , you know , he ’ s stocking up at the end of February . You know , people in the U.S. were still flying all over the country . Kids were going to school . Bloomberg was in the race for president . People were planning vacations and weddings and all sorts of conferences and events . And the same was true of James . So like everybody else , he ’ s going about his life . And around this time , without really too much concern about his health , he went to a medical conference in Times Square .
james cai So I changed diaper for my daughter and gave her morning milk . And I kissed my wife and to go to conference .
On the fourth day of the conference , Monday , March 2 , he comes down with a cough . And he starts to realize he ’ s actually getting sick .
james cai I start to cough and a fever and tired .
So he leaves and texts his wife that he ’ s going to go to New Jersey , where his mom has a house . His mom ’ s away . And he doesn ’ t want to come home and get his wife and the baby sick .
james cai Because of my daughter , when I went home , she always hugged me and kissed me . And she will catch it .
And what ’ s running through his head at this moment ? Is he thinking , I have a bad cough ? I might have the flu ? Is coronavirus even on his mind ?
Not really . I mean , there had not been a single case in all of New Jersey . He thought he probably had the flu . By then , he was mostly feeling this bad cough . He had an elevated heart rate . His eyes were really runny . He had diarrhea . He was not feeling well at all . But he also was not alarmed . You know , he decided to go to one of those drop-in centers to get a flu test , because he wanted to be told he didn ’ t have the flu so he could go home . So the doctor gives him a strep test and a flu test . They discuss whether he should get a coronavirus test , in fact , but the doctor didn ’ t have one . So they moved on . And the results came back that although the strep and the flu tests were negative , his symptoms were consistent with something called a pulmonary embolism , which is a clot in your lung that can be fatal .
So this could potentially be even more serious than just a seasonal flu or —
james cai So after , I went direct to the Hackensack emergency room .
So the doctor sends him to the E.R . at the Hackensack University Medical Center , which is not far from that doctor ’ s office .
james cai And in the emergency room , they asked me questions . Asked me if I cough . I said , I do , I do have cough . I do have shortness of breath .
So as called for , the doctors do a CT scan . And after they do , they realize that , no , he does not have a pulmonary embolism . But that in fact , because of the symptoms he ’ s having and the way his lungs look in the scan —
james cai They see a ground glass nodules . So this can be coronavirus .
And how do the doctors at this hospital react to that ?
Well , at this point , they haven ’ t seen any coronavirus patients . So they don ’ t seem to him terribly alarmed . That said , they do put him in a tiny isolation room , a windowless room on the floor of the emergency room . That ’ s where he spends the night , texting his friends and his wife and getting increasingly unnerved and feeling quite ill .
james cai I was nervous . And at the same time , since I ’ m in the hospital , I ’ m going to check everything . Make sure I ’ m OK and then I go home .
So then on Tuesday , March 3 , which is the second day in the hospital —
james cai They decide to do a test on me . So the test takes about 24 hours or 48 hours .
— they do a Covid-19 test . And they tell him he ’ s going to have to wait a few days for the result , but he shouldn ’ t worry , he ’ s young and healthy . At the same time , he ’ s wildly Googling symptoms for Covid-19 and realizing that he has almost every one of them .
james cai I had maybe lied to myself , was like , trying to calm myself down . I don ’ t have the Covid-19 , I shouldn ’ t have it .
And so , it ’ s day three for James in the hospital . It ’ s Wednesday , March 4 . He ’ s still waiting for the results in his tiny little room with a TV . And —
archived recording ( newscaster 1 ) We we begin tonight with breaking news regarding the coronavirus . archived recording ( newscaster 2 ) Yeah , that virus arriving in the Garden State tonight . Governor Phil Murphy announcing the first presumptive positive case of the virus right here in New Jersey .
archived recording ( newscaster 2 ) A man in his thirties is hospitalized in Bergen County .
There ’ s a guy in his thirties in Bergen County , which is where he is , who ’ s tested positive for coronavirus . It ’ s the first case in New Jersey .
There ’ s even a tweet from the governor of New Jersey confirming it .
archived recording ( newscaster 2 ) — “ We take this situation very seriously and have been preparing for this for weeks . I urge residents to remain calm ” —
And it occurs to James , they really might be talking about him .
james cai And then I asked the doctor , saying , is this me ? And the doctor ’ s saying , no , your test is not back yet .
And of course , he hasn ’ t heard anything about the results of his test yet ?
susan dominus Wow . So you found out from the news from the governor of New Jersey ? james cai Yes . On TV . And I asked the doctor . The doctor say , the result is not back yet .
And then the next day , his doctors come to him and say , yes , you have tested positive . And he is the first person in New Jersey to have tested positive for Covid-19 .
Right . And perhaps the first person in the history of the universe to find out he has a disease , not from his doctor , but from TV news .
So he ’ s really scared . But the hospital is telling him that he really has nothing to worry about . He ’ s a 32-year-old guy . He ’ s got no preexisting conditions .
james cai Even Dr. [ INAUDIBLE ] was telling me , oh you ’ re so young . It ’ s like a flu .
james cai If it ’ s not because everybody is talking about corona , you can go home already .
You know , if it weren ’ t for all this attention about the coronavirus , you ’ d be home right now , just getting better in the comfort of your own bedroom .
In other words , it would probably just self-resolve in somebody of his health ?
james cai I mean , that day , I was so depressed .
I think he felt that as a medical professional , he actually — he knew that he was quite vulnerable , that nobody was invulnerable . And there was this disconnect between his own concerns and their own insistence that he was overly anxious .
It also dawns on him that he is the first person in this hospital to be treated for coronavirus .
james cai I feel like , I ’ m in real trouble . Why I come to this hospital ? Because I feel they don ’ t know how to treat this disease , and they don ’ t have deep understanding about this disease .
Nobody there has any experience . Nobody there can make good predictions . Nobody there has institutional knowledge about what happens when this goes wrong or something unexpected happens . He ’ s the first person , and that ’ s a very frightening position to be in .
We ’ ll be right back . So Sue , James is newly diagnosed . He ’ s in isolation at this hospital in Hackensack , New Jersey . He ’ s been there for about four days . Physically , how is he doing at this point ?
susan dominus When you first got the results of the positive test , on a scale of 1 to 10 , how bad did you feel physically ? 10 being the worst ? james cai I would say 10. susan dominus Wow .
james cai Getting worse . So my heart is compensating , beating very fast .
He definitely has that cough . And he also is having real trouble breathing .
james cai It ’ s like I ’ m in the water . susan dominus Tell me more about that . james cai It ’ s like , normally , we can just take very deep breaths in and out .
He describes it as that feeling when you ’ re underwater and you have to come up to gasp for breath , but you can ’ t quite get that oxygen that you want . And it ’ s very panicking feeling . It ’ s a very scary feeling .
james cai So my lung is not allowing me to take deep breaths .
And how is the hospital treating him now that he ’ s officially tested positive ?
They move him to a room with certain protections in place . And they ’ re keeping an eye on his numbers . And they ’ re giving him oxygen when he needs it . And he ’ s also keeping an eye on his numbers . And he ’ s worried , because he is not breathing well . And on Friday , March 6 , his fifth day in the hospital , he worries that he is desaturating to a dangerous level .
It means that when you desaturate below a certain level , your blood is not getting enough oxygen from your lungs for you to function in a normal , healthy way . And this is really concerning to him .
james cai You have pneumonia , it ’ s normal . Just use oxygen .
But he still has the sense that the hospital is telling him he ’ s overreacting , that he ’ s being too anxious . He ’ s going to recover just fine .
james cai I was confused . And also , I was worried , because I think I ’ m not getting enough care . And my oxygen level dropped , and they — they can not even see it .
And why do you think people in hospital are saying that ? And maybe more importantly , why are they thinking that ? Why are they insisting on being so calm about what it would mean to have an infection like this ?
I would have to guess that it ’ s because the widespread impression that people had was that young people were not going to be terribly affected by this virus , and that it was going to feel like a very , very bad flu . And that he was going to recover just fine , just like the statistics supposedly said he was going to .
susan dominus And did you actually feel yourself having difficulty breathing at that point ? james cai I just feel tightness . susan dominus Tightness in your chest ? james cai I feel like , a very scary — very scared . And I don ’ t know what to do next .
And James is all too aware that no one in that hospital has ever treated anyone with coronavirus . And he ’ s really worried about his symptoms , because he knows he ’ s feeling worse and worse every day .
james cai So I told my cousin , I told everybody , and they just start searching . .
So he starts reaching out to friends of his who are plugged into the Chinese medical community , including his best friend , who ’ s a physician — and whom he calls his cousin — and his boss . And they start making phone calls and trying to get information from experienced people who can maybe share what they ’ ve learned .
You know , there ’ s advice that he should get high doses of vitamin C , there ’ s some discussion of whether he should get a steroid treatment if things get worse .
They say that maybe he wants to look into antiviral medication . They tell him he shouldn ’ t wait too long before getting a second CT scan . But his doctors were really reluctant to do that .
They felt like they were giving him good care and that probably the results of the CT scan would not change that .
So James is more or less beginning to advise his own doctors on how to treat him , based on his research , based on his relationship with other medical professionals , which is pretty unusual .
Yes . Very unusual . And then the evening of the 7th , he starts desaturating to a level that really scares him . He ’ s concerned that if he desaturates to a certain degree , there could be no turning back . He ’ d have to be intubated , which definitely increases , you know , all of the risks of the illness . It would mean that a machine was going be doing all the breathing for him . It could lead to organ failure and in some cases , of course , death .
james cai And I mean , if I intubated at night , I probably would just die by myself alone , without seeing the loved ones .
And his friends — also , some of them see this real urgency to save his life . And you know , one of his friends said to me that he personally felt responsible for making sure that the doctors took James ’ s case as seriously as possible . Here he is . He ’ s the first health care worker in New Jersey also to come down with Covid-19 . If he didn ’ t make it , it was going to feel like the battle was over before it had even begun .
james cai You always live in fear that you ’ re never going to wake up . And also , in isolation . And nobody can see you . So it ’ s very miserable . If people die , think about it , people die and they can not see their loved ones . What — I mean , like , I feel like it ’ s very tough , right ? For somebody to die alone . susan dominus You were scared . I mean , you were probably too weak to really speak forcefully , but you were letting them know that you felt that your life was on the line at this point . james cai Yeah .
And we don ’ t exactly know why , but on the 8th , he did get that second CT scan .
It ’ s bad . He has pneumonia in both lungs . 30 to 40 percent of his lungs seem to be affected . That ’ s astonishing , that it would go from a small spot just a few days earlier to where it is now . And if he had gotten that bad in three days or four days since the last CT scan , how much worse was he going to be in another four days ? And now , James starts to worry that he really might not survive this .
james cai I was praying to everybody , to God , to Buddha , to everybody , saying , don ’ t let me die . When I know my oxygen levels keep desaturating , one of my requests is can I see my mother and my wife or my daughter for the last time ? It was that time , when my chest X-rays show so bad , and my oxygen level every day is dropping , and I would tell them that I have to be strong , but I don ’ t know how many days I can live . And the good thing is , after the CT , they listened . When she saw second CT , she was like , OK , we have to treat you .
I spoke to a doctor at the hospital who was part of the team overseeing his care . And he said they ’ d been looking at the whole clinical picture , had recognized that he was declining even before the CT scan . But from James ’ s point of view , everything changed after the scan . He feels like , now they ’ re taking this very seriously and they ’ re listening to him . They ’ re coming around to seeing just how serious it is . And also recognizing that , yes , even a young person can get very , very sick with coronavirus . And they ’ re willing to try something .
And at this stage , what is he asking them to do ?
james cai So then a doctor in China recommend a high-flow machine .
James wants a few different types of treatment . He ’ s been advised that the doctors should try providing him a more intensive form of oxygen therapy . And he wants to go on three experimental antiviral medications — Kaletra , chloroquine and remdesivir . And at this point , he and the doctors at Hackensack and all the other doctors he ’ s working with are pretty much all on the same page . He finally gets the main things he ’ s been asking for .
james cai And I think the next day , Dr. [ INAUDIBLE ] came in . He said , the medication ’ s here . We ’ re going to give it to you .
And finally , after more than a week in the hospital , James starts to turn around . He does start to feel better .
james cai So after the first day , my fever finally dropped . And my oxygen stopped dropping . I ’ m getting better and better every day . So that ’ s the whole thing .
And does he have a sense , do you have a sense , do his doctors have a sense of which of these treatments was responsible for that ?
Not really . I mean , it might have been any one of the drugs , or all of the drugs , or the oxygen , or some combination of that . Or he might have just gotten better on his own . We really don ’ t know .
susan dominus And so I asked you how you felt on a scale of 1 to 10 , 10 being the worst , when you first got the results of the test , and you said that you were a 10 . On a scale of 1 to 10 , how do you feel now ? james cai I would say now , maybe 3. susan dominus That ’ s pretty good . james cai Yeah , because I feel like all the symptoms have gone . I mean , I will be maybe no worry if tests come back negative . Then I know the virus is dead . Now , I don ’ t know if it is dead or not . susan dominus It ’ s now 10:37 , and I need you to get a good night ’ s sleep . So I ’ m going to call you in the morning and see how your oxygen level were . Is that OK ? james cai Yes . OK . Thank you . susan dominus All right . Thanks , James . Bye . Bye . james cai Good night . Bye-bye .
Sue , it feels — correct me if I ’ m wrong — like a big reason why James survived was because he was such an aggressive advocate for himself . And he had this network of expertise that he could tap into . He himself was a medical professional . And that that put him in a very strong position . But I wonder why the people around him in this hospital were not better prepared , given the stage of this pandemic when he arrived in Hackensack .
We don ’ t really know what saved his life , because these drugs are still in clinical trials . What we do know is that the entire story of coronavirus in this country is a story of lack of preparation . People did not believe that it simply was never going to be as bad here as it was in Wuhan or Milan . That is a universal story . It was hardly just these doctors at this hospital . I mean , part of it is that they are busy people . They are moving things really quickly . They are saving lives every day . In fact , we all know that they ’ re saving lives and putting their own lives on the line right now . But also , it is just hard to put yourself back in that moment — March 1 , March 2 or the end of February — and remember how unlikely we all still hoped and believed , against all evidence , that this wasn ’ t going to be devastating here the way it was elsewhere .
That said , to their credit , the doctors at this hospital were open-minded and they were flexible and they were nimble . And they were willing to try whatever they could that was safe when they realized that whatever they had been doing definitely was not working . And I know James feels really appreciative , ultimately . He sent out a tweet that expressed his gratitude for the hospital saving , as he sees it , his life .
Sue , what do you think the lesson of this story is , of James , his very unique situation in these early days of the pandemic in the United States , and of what happened to him at this hospital ?
One of the things that I ’ m hearing from doctors is that until you are in this moment and experiencing the onslaught of patients , it is very hard to imagine it . You can ’ t really know until you ’ re actually living it . And you know , every hospital in this country is likely to have its James . It ’ s going to have that first patient who comes in , who is really ill. They ’ re not exactly sure how to treat it . We still really don ’ t know how best to treat this virus . That is the hard , cold truth of it . There are some protocols that we hope will help , that are thought might help . But it ’ s unclear . It ’ s so new . And it ’ s going to be really hard for all those hospitals . And they ’ re going to have to make difficult choices . They ’ re going to have to make complicated ethical choices . They ’ re going to have to make decisions on the fly and build up their clinical experience . And it ’ s not going to be easy for any of them .
Sue , how is James doing at this point ? I don ’ t know when the last time it was that you spoke with him , but what did he tell you ?
He ’ s home . He is still in quarantine . So he still has not been able to see his wife or daughter . And his lungs are still recovering . It ’ s unclear just how fully they will recover . You know , it ’ s definitely a long road ahead of him . And at the same time , you know , he ’ s reading the news and he is feeling so lucky .
james cai Hello ? susan dominus Hi , James , it ’ s Sue . How are you doing ? james cai I ’ m good . susan dominus Are you actually in your own home ? james cai Yes . susan dominus How does it feel ? james cai It feels great . I ’ m going to sleep on my own bed . susan dominus Fantastic . james cai Once I ’ m out of the hospital , I feel like I ’ m alive . I feel like everything is so new to me . The grass , trees , cars , new people face , the sky . And then when I drive on the road , I appreciate every building , every people I see . I feel like it ’ s a second chance to live again , to be alive . susan dominus What is the first thing you ’ re going to say to your daughter and wife when you finally get to see them in person ? I know you ’ re quarantining for almost two more weeks now . james cai Yes . So when I see my daughter and my wife , I definitely will give them big hugs . Try to don ’ t let them go . I maybe will , like , have my daughter in my arms all the time . I will come home and spend every minute with my family . Appreciate every day , living . susan dominus All right . Good night . Have a great night ’ s sleep . Thanks , James . james cai Thank you . Thank you for checking in on me . susan dominus My pleasure . Bye . Goodbye . james cai Bye-bye .
We ’ ll be right back . Here ’ s what else you need to know today . In interviews on Sunday , members of the president ’ s coronavirus task force delivered dire warnings about the pandemic ’ s projected path in the United States .
archived recording ( dr. deborah birx ) No state , no metro area will be spared . And the sooner we react , and the sooner the states and the metro areas react and ensure that they put in full mitigation , at the same time understanding exactly what their hospitals need , then we ’ ll be able to move forward together and protect the most Americans .
Speaking to NBC News , Dr. Deborah Birx said that the White House was asking every state to prepare for the kind of outbreak now occurring in New York , where there are about 60,000 infections .
archived recording ( jake tapper ) Well , Dr. Birx said yesterday , as you know , that she doesn ’ t think any city will be spared from this virus . How many cases do you think the U.S. will reach ? archived recording ( dr. anthony fauci ) I mean , looking at what we ’ re seeing now , you know , I would say between 100 and 200,000 cases — excuse me , deaths . But I just don ’ t think that we really need to make a projection when it ’ s such a moving target .
On CNN , Dr. Anthony Fauci said that millions of Americans could eventually be infected , and that between 100,000 and 200,000 could die .
archived recording ( dr. anthony fauci ) What we do know , Jake , is that we ’ ve got a serious problem in New York . We have a serious problem in New Orleans . And we ’ re going to be developing serious problems in other areas .