House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on Thursday refuted the “ partisan wish list ” label lobbed at her $ 3 trillion coronavirus relief bill , saying it ’ s no different than other packages Congress has passed .
At a press conference , Mrs. Pelosi , California Democrat , argued that there was a double standard for Democrats , pointing out that the initial versions of the $ 2.2 trillion CARES Act and the emergency interim bill for small business loans were put out by the GOP .
Democrats objected to both of those early proposals and bipartisan packages were negotiated .
“ It ’ s no leader when the leader in the House , a Democrat , writes a bill , ” she said . “ So now we ’ re putting our offer on the table . We ’ re open to negotiations . ”
“ Wait a minute , it wasn ’ t partisan when they did it ? ” she added .
The massive Democrat-led package has received a wave of backlash from Republicans , and even a few moderate Democrats , for being an unserious attempt and more of a messaging bill .
“ This is not the time for partisan gamesmanship , this is the time to find common ground and deliver help where it is needed most , ” Rep. Kendra Horn , Oklahoma Democrat , tweeted . “ We must work with our Republican colleagues and leadership in the Senate to negotiate a targeted relief bill that is aimed squarely at the health and economic challenges we face . ”
“ I urge House leadership to put aside any desire to use this as a political opportunity and instead focus on getting results in a bipartisan , bicameral way . The American people need our help , ” she added .
Mrs. Pelosi argued that much of what is in the bill — “ well over 80 % ” — is something Congress has voted on before , such as state and local government , testing funding , and funding for government programs such as SNAP .
The bill provides over $ 800 billion for state and local governments — a major priority for Democrats left out of the last bill , but an area of suspicion for Republicans .
Additionally , the bill expands access to voting by mail , by saying states can ’ t impose additional requirements on otherwise eligible voters to cast an absentee ballot through the mail .
It also includes $ 175 billion for rent and mortgage subsidies and $ 25 billion in assistance for the struggling U.S. Post Office .
The bill eliminates for two years a $ 10,000 cap on the state and local tax deduction , a prized benefit for generally higher-income residents in blue , high-tax states .
The House is set to vote on the bill , dubbed the Heroes Act , as well as a historic temporary rules change to allow the chamber to vote by proxy and hold remote committee hearings .
Mrs. Pelosi slammed Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell for resisting another package .
“ He wants us to just pause . But families know that hunger doesn ’ t take a pause , ” she said . “ The hardship of it all … it just doesn ’ t take a pause . ”
Mrs. Pelosi said that she expects Republicans will eventually come up with their own offer .
Mr. McConnell , however , said his focus is on working on a package to implement liability protections for small business owners and health care providers .