President Trump responded Monday by announcing what the White House called a “ blueprint ” for increasing testing capacity . But it leaves the onus on states to develop their own plans and rapid-response programs . A White House document said the federal role would include “ strategic direction and technical assistance , ” as well as the ability to “ align laboratory testing supplies and capacity with existing and anticipated laboratory needs . ”
The federal government was described as the “ supplier of last resort . ”
Trump outlined the effort at a White House news conference where he was joined by some major retailers , who said they had ramped up the rate of testing and the production of medical supplies . They predicted that they would only accelerate in the month ahead , doubling their rate of testing and the number of sites that would be available to the public . The administration ’ s top testing official , meanwhile , promised that the United States would conduct at least 8 million tests a month by the end of May .
But a previous high-profile public-private initiative announced by the president in March — partnering with companies to open up scores of testing sites on their properties across the country — has been slow to materialize .
Trump insisted that the nation will have the necessary testing , but it was unclear how the plan would work .
“ Now there are big believers in testing , and then there are some governors that don ’ t feel as strongly about it at all , you understand , that they feel much differently about it , but we ’ re going with maximum testing because it ’ s something we ’ re very capable of doing but will be much more than doubled , ” he told reporters .
The president ’ s remarks came as U.S. deaths passed 55,000 and have not yet peaked , while confirmed cases neared 1 million . The United States remains the country with the most reported deaths worldwide during the pandemic .
Over the past week , the United States has been reporting an average of about 218,000 tests daily . That total is far lower than the nation ’ s potential testing capacity , reflecting shortages of testing kits and laboratory supplies . A slide presented during a White House briefing last week suggested that testing machines now present in state , private and commercial settings can process about 2.14 million tests per day .
Trump ’ s latest guidance comes three days after he signed legislation pumping $ 25 billion into testing and contact-tracing infrastructure — a sum that was included in the $ 484 billion bill at the behest of congressional Democrats , who objected to GOP plans to pass legislation that included only funding for small businesses .
But even that sum is inadequate to meet the challenge , several prominent health and economic experts said — among them former senior advisers to Trump and his predecessors .
In a letter sent to the top four congressional leaders , a bipartisan cadre of public health officials led by former Trump Food and Drug Administration commissioner Scott Gottlieb and Andy Slavitt , a onetime senior health official to President Barack Obama , warned that “ current testing capacity and accuracy must be improved . ”
The officials urged Congress to provide $ 46.5 billion in additional funding , with more than half of that earmarked for new payments to allow Americans to stay home from work and voluntarily self-isolate . And $ 12 billion is needed , they said , to hire 180,000 additional contact tracers across the country .
“ This is fundamental to our ability to begin to reopen our economy while continuing to safeguard American lives , ” they said , adding that stanching the pandemic “ will constitute the strongest possible stimulus to the U.S. economy . ”
Other prominent Republicans signing the letter were former Senate majority leader Bill Frist of Tennessee , a doctor , as well as former governor Mike Leavitt of Utah , a former Health and Human Services secretary , and Mark McClellan , who served as FDA commissioner under President George W. Bush .
Pressure is also mounting on Trump from the campaign trail . Presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden has called on Trump to strengthen the federal role in testing by , among other things , creating a “ Pandemic Testing Board ” modeled on the federal authority that directed defense production during World War II . On Monday , Biden called for Congress to create such a board if Trump won ’ t .
“ This isn ’ t rocket science . It just takes investment and execution — both of which have been gravely lacking , ” Biden said in a statement . “ Trump could make this happen . He hasn ’ t . Instead , he ’ s pushed sole responsibility to governors , while telling them to fly blind without the critical data we derive from testing . ”
Other experts say an even more aggressive effort is warranted . A recent Rockefeller Foundation report called for an initial goal of 3 million tests per week , ultimately reaching 30 million . About 5.4 million coronavirus tests have been conducted in the United States thus far , according to the Covid Tracking Project , which compiles figures from each state .
Paul Romer , a 2018 Nobel laureate in economics and former chief economist for the World Bank , said the federal government should test every American once every two weeks to reestablish national confidence and jump-start the economy — an effort he estimated at $ 100 billion , all told .
That cost , he said , pales in comparison to the amount of lost economic activity the pandemic has caused . Romer , an expert in economic modeling , estimates that the United States is losing at least $ 500 billion a month in domestic production ; other economists have suggested the figure is larger still .
“ Every month of delay makes the recovery slower — and take longer , ” Romer said .
On Capitol Hill , meanwhile , there are no immediate plans to revisit the testing issue in a bipartisan manner . With top congressional leaders at odds over priorities for the next coronavirus relief bill , it could be weeks or longer before talks coalesce .
The White House guidance released Monday did little to convince skeptical congressional Democrats that the administration had the issue in hand .
House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Frank Pallone Jr. ( D-N.J. ) questioned the White House ’ s testing blueprint as “ totally lacking in credibility ” given that previous rosy promises — such as those made during March briefings that included several business executives — did not materialize . And he continued to question Trump ’ s resistance to having the federal government take a more aggressive role .
“ It ’ s got to be something that ’ s mandated by the federal government and then implemented by the states based on the federal government ’ s plan with the money that allows for the testing , ” Pallone said . “ You can ’ t have a reliance that somehow the chain drugstores are going to set up these testing sites voluntarily through their drive-through pharmacies . That ’ s what they promised last time . And it never happened . And it won ’ t happen because it ’ s not based on a national plan , it ’ s not enforceable , and they ’ re not providing the funding for it . ”
Pallone said his committee was drafting legislation to mandate a national testing strategy that he hopes to include in the next relief bill .
Meanwhile , states have determined that finding testing sites is not the major bottleneck . Instead , it is obtaining the testing kits and laboratory supplies needed to process them .
In a news briefing on Monday , California Gov . Gavin Newsom ( D ) said the state , which is conducting about 20,000 tests a day , was expanding testing by opening up sites in inner cities and rural communities .
But he noted that even though the 80 new sites offered “ end-to-end ” services and had sufficient supplies , the state ’ s capacity to diagnose the coronavirus in its population remained constrained by shortages .
The federal government sent California 90,000 specialized nasal swabs needed for coronavirus tests last week , he said , and will send an additional 260,000 this week .
“ When that comes in , we ’ ll let you know , ” he said of the second shipment . “ We ’ ll still need multiples of that . By no stretch of the imagination is that enough . ”
Among the companies , Quest Diagnostics plans to increase the number of diagnostic tests it analyzes each day from 50,000 now to 100,000 by the end of May , and has reduced its turnaround time to between 24 and 48 hours . LabCorp will ramp up from 60,000 diagnostic tests a day and begin offering a take-at-home test to consumers across the country .
The Trump administration has been under pressure for weeks to codify the federal role in providing for more testing , and that has now translated into a congressional mandate . Under the bill Trump signed Friday , HHS Secretary Alex Azar has 30 days to report to Congress on a “ strategic testing plan ” — one that must include , among other things , a blueprint for increasing U.S. testing capacity , including the supplies needed to collect specimens and process them , and an outline of all federal resources available to states and local jurisdictions .
Early failures notwithstanding , the United States has boosted testing a great deal , even in the absence of a clear national strategy .
The country had conducted about 5.46 million tests as of Sunday , according to the Covid Tracking Project , which compiles the figures from individual states . It ’ s an enormous raw number of tests but appears significantly less impressive when considered in a per capita sense : The number is equivalent to about 1.7 percent of the U.S. population .
In contrast , another major economy that has been acclaimed for its coronavirus response , Germany , increased testing earlier than the United States did and as of April 21 had conducted 2.07 million tests , equivalent to 2.5 percent of the German population .
States and labs have cited multiple reasons for the U.S. lag . Inadequate swabs to take initial samples from the noses of people who might have been infected . Inadequate kits and reagents to withdraw viral RNA from those samples . Inadequate personal protective equipment for workers at the initial sampling stage and when processing the samples in machines .
In any case , there are clear indications that U.S. testing ability remains insufficient . Nationwide , the proportion of tests being returned positive is about 18 percent , or nearly 1 in 5 . That suggests to experts that there are still many undetected cases because of a shortage of tests — which also means there are many coronavirus carriers who are not in isolation and whose contacts are not being identified and traced .
Jeremy Konyndyk , a former Obama official who worked on disaster preparedness and is now a senior fellow at the Center for Global Development , said he thinks current testing is probably missing about 90 percent of cases , based on recent studies seeking to determine the prevalence of antibodies in New York City and elsewhere .
“ To have a chance of truly catching everyone or almost everyone through testing , to make testing universally available , we would need to ramp up about tenfold from where we are now , on the order of 2 to 3 million tests a day , ” he said .