The first hearing set to take place after the Senate returned from a coronavirus-induced hiatus is the Senate Intelligence Committee 's confirmation hearing for Rep. John Ratcliffe , R-Texas , President Trump 's nominee for the director of national intelligence position .
Ratcliffe is a member of the House Intelligence , Judiciary , and Ethics Committees . He was a staunch defender of Trump during the Russia investigation and was on the president 's advisory team during the impeachment proceedings earlier this year . Trump first considered him for the DNI position last year , but he withdrew his name last August fearing a rancorous , partisan confirmation process .
FIRST MAJOR SENATE HEARING SINCE CORONAVIRUS CLOSURES WILL BE FOR INTELLIGENCE NOMINEE RATCLIFFE
“ I made the decision to withdraw from consideration because , you know , if your political future comes down to the vote of 100 U.S. senators , and you start out day one down 47 to nothing because every Democrat is against you , my concern was there ’ s not a lot of margin for error there , ” Ratcliffe told Fox News at the time . “ I just decided I was better served in the position that I am , where I can ask difficult questions of people like the special counsel and [ former FBI Director ] Jim Comey under oath and shape the investigation that way . ”
Trump nominated Ratcliffe anyway in February . Richard Grenell , the U.S. ambassador to Germany , is the current acting DNI , the second to have that role after former DNI Dan Coats resignation last summer . Joseph Maguire was acting DNI until February .
Democrats ' opposition to Grenell could improve Ratcliffe 's chances of being confirmed now . Earlier this month , House Intelligence Committee Chairman Rep. Adam Schiff , D-Calif. , sent Grenell a letter demanding answers regarding organizational changes in his office , including President Trump 's recent termination of Intelligence Community Inspector General Michael Atkinson .
The DNI position was created after the Sept. 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks to oversee the U.S. intelligence community . The DNI serves on the president 's cabinet and acts as an adviser to the president , National Security Council , and Homeland Security Council for national security-related intelligence issues .
A former federal prosecutor , Ratcliffe often went on the attack during the Russia probe and its aftermath , grilling Special Counsel Robert Mueller himself over his decision to write in his report that he could not exonerate the president of obstruction of justice .
“ The special counsel ’ s job didn ’ t say you were to determine Trump ’ s innocence or to exonerate him , ” Ratcliffe said at a July hearing , adding that `` the bedrock principle of our justice system is a presumption of innocence—everyone is entitled to it , including a sitting president , and because of a presumption of innocence , a prosecutor never , ever needs to determine it . ''
Prior to joining Congress , Ratcliffe served as Chief of Anti-Terrorism and National Security for the Eastern District of Texas and Mayor of Heath , Texas .