Senate Democrats threatened Wednesday to derail Republicans ’ plans for a swift uncontested vote on more aid for small businesses shuttered by the coronavirus outbreak , demanding the proposal include extra money for hospitals , low-income communities and food stamps .
With the White House hoping to reopen at least parts of the economy by early May , House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer laid down markers for what congressional Democrats want in the next legislative response to the coronavirus pandemic .
In addition to the $ 250 billion proposed by the administration to replenish an emergency fund for small business loans and grants , Democrats would more than double the cost by adding $ 125 billion for financial institutions that serve low-income communities , $ 100 billion more for hospitals , $ 150 billion for state and local governments and a 15 % increase in food stamp benefits .
Mrs. Pelosi said Wednesday that Republicans rejected the Democrats ’ proposal .
“ They don ’ t want to do that , I don ’ t know why , ” she said on National Public Radio . “ The White House says they don ’ t support that , but we do . ”
President Trump said late Wednesday that he ’ s hopeful that Democrats will cooperate .
“ I think we have a pretty good understanding with the Democrats , ” he said at the daily White House coronavirus briefing . “ Hopefully it ’ s going to be bipartisan . We do not have time for partisan games . ”
If Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is able to secure passage of the GOP ’ s plan via voice vote or unanimous consent on Thursday — a tough task given Democrats ’ position — it will still need to pass the Democratic-controlled House .
“ The bill that they put forth will not get unanimous support in the House . It just won ’ t , ” Mrs. Pelosi said .
The Democrats could thwart Mr. McConnell ’ s move to approve more emergency aid to enable small businesses to keep their employees ; an objection by only one senator would stop the GOP ’ s effort . House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer , Maryland Democrat , told Politico that Mr. McConnell is “ playing chicken ” with Democrats by essentially daring them to object to the GOP plan .
Sen. John Cornyn , Texas Republican , said Democrats “ should drop their shameful threat to block this funding immediately . ”
“ Our small businesses desperately need help — now , ” Mr. Cornyn said .
Mr. McConnell ’ s office said he still planned to call for a voice vote , which would allow most senators to observe social distancing guidelines , avoiding travel and attendance in the Senate chamber .
Congress provided $ 350 billion for small business loans and grants in the $ 2.2 trillion rescue package that President Trump signed into law on March 27 . Under the Paycheck Protection Program , companies with 500 or fewer employees can obtain loans of up to $ 10 million to cover payroll for two months , plus some expenses . The payroll portion of the loan will be forgiven if employees keep their jobs .
But the depth of the economic shutdown has created greater-than-expected demand for the money , even as the Small Business Administration struggles to process applications and sign up more banks to take part .
“ We have 3,500 lenders up on the system with many more getting signed up every day , ” Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin said Wednesday on CNBC . “ I want to assure all small businesses out there : we will not run out of money . We hope they pass this [ bill ] tomorrow and Friday . And we want to assure everybody — if you don ’ t get a loan this week , you ’ ll get a loan next week or the following week . ”
The SBA said Wednesday it has processed more than 400,000 loans since Friday , and distributed more than $ 100 billion from the fund . Still , small business owners and lenders were reporting problems with processing applications , and banks refusing to participate or accepting applications only from current clients .
Sen. Marco Rubio , Florida Republican and chairman of the Senate Small Business Committee , said the problems are being reduced every day .
“ It ’ s had some significant glitches , ” he said in a Facebook video . “ What I ask is — don ’ t give in to despair , don ’ t give into the negativity . There are a lot of people working really hard to make this thing work . ”
In a conference call with House Democrats , Mr. Mnuchin also said direct payments of up to $ 1,200 for most Americans will start to go out next week from the IRS . Families who qualify also will receive $ 500 per child .
And Mr. Mnuchin said Treasury will likely announce rules this week for a “ Main Street Lending Facility ” through the Federal Reserve to provide emergency loans to medium-sized companies with more than 500 employees which don ’ t qualify for the PPP and can ’ t obtain credit through the Fed . Fed Chairman Jerome Powell could provide details during an online event Thursday .
Underscoring the urgency of the economic crisis , analysts were expecting the government ’ s report on weekly unemployment claims on Thursday to meet or exceed last week ’ s record 6.6 million . About 10 million workers have applied for jobless benefits in just two weeks since the pandemic closed many sectors of the economy .
Nearly one-third of renters didn ’ t pay their rent on time on April 1 , according to a report Wednesday by the National Multifamily Housing Council . And the Federal Reserve said in a new report that only one in five healthy small businesses had sufficient cash reserves to get through a two-month revenue loss without layoffs , cuts in operations or delayed payments .
Despite the hardships and uncertainty , stocks posted strong gains Wednesday for the second time in three days . The Dow Jones Industrial Average jumped 779 points , or 3.4 % , to close at 23,433 .
The S & P 500 also rose 3.4 % , and the Nasdaq Composite climbed 2.5 % . The major indexes were up nearly 8 % on Monday .
Mr. Trump is eager to recapture the economic boom that his policies had helped to create , including record low unemployment and the Dow topping 29,000 points just two months ago . He said Wednesday he wants to move on a second round of prosperty “ much sooner rather than later . ”
He and his advisers have been conferring with greater intensity in recent days on how to get the economy up and running again , and how quickly . They held a planning session in the Roosevelt Room , just off the Oval Office , late into the night on Tuesday .
The president said there are two basic proposals under consideration : opening up all regions of the country at once , or reopening in phases beginning with regions that haven ’ t been hard-hit by the virus .
Asked how he ’ ll decide , Mr. Trump said , “ We have to be on that downslide of that slope [ of new cases ] . We can do it in phases . Those meetings will start taking place fairly soon . ”
The president said he would “ rely very heavily ” on his medical experts .
White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow said this week that he hopes to reopen the economy within four to eight weeks , but cautioned that it depends on the course of coronavirus infections . The administration has extended social-distancing guidelines to limit the spread of the disease until the end of this month .
While that debate continues , Washington is eyeing at least two more rounds of disaster aid to help workers , businesses , states and communities in need of cash and medical supplies .
Mrs. Pelosi and Mr. Schumer said after Congress passes the “ interim emergency ” proposal for small businesses , lawmakers will move on to a bigger bill that would enlarge benefits in the recently approved $ 2.2 trillion economic rescue package that is just beginning to reach workers and companies . They said the next bill must provide “ transformational relief ” to the public .
New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo wrote to his state ’ s congressional delegation this week and said any successor to the most recent rescue package “ must include unrestricted fiscal support specifically to offset revenue losses . ”
He said his state is “ broke ” and that it ’ s facing revenue losses of $ 10 billion to $ 15 billion because of the pandemic .
“ There has been absolutely no help to offset it , ” he wrote . “ In the absence of significant federal assistance , the state has no option but to make reductions to critically needed state spending . ”
Mr. Cuomo also said he wanted to see a more generous federal Medicaid reimbursement that had been part of an earlier package .
Rep. Thomas Massie , who tried to force a roll call vote in the House on the $ 2.2 trillion rescue package , said Wednesday that Mrs. Pelosi should allow remote voting .
“ Once again , they ’ re recommending just let Nancy Pelosi pass it on her own , that we could all stay home , ” the Kentucky Republican said on Fox Business Network . “ And I ’ m saying , that ’ s not going to fly — doesn ’ t fly with the Constitution , doesn ’ t fly for accountability to the taxpayers . ”
Mrs. Pelosi and other Democratic leaders have consistently batted down talk of remote voting in the House , which would require a rules change .
“ Don ’ t blame me , ” Mr. Massie said . “ Ten days ago , I got blamed by everybody including the president for trying to delay the bill . I wasn ’ t trying to do that . I was just trying to get some accountability . ”