How many lives of young men and women should be sacrificed for entertainment — and for billions in profit ? That question can ’ t be ducked as the NCAA allows colleges to begin “ voluntary ” football practices , and other college teams begin to practice .
Colleges are desperate to open the full football season , a source of millions in profits for colleges and universities . Donald Trump , who pretends that COVID-19 is behind us , wants a return to normal , with stadiums filled with fans cheering their heroes . Players are eager to compete and to display their skills .
Only problem is that the coronavirus doesn ’ t care about profits or presidents , or about fans or coaches . It doesn ’ t follow polls , doesn ’ t care who wins the presidential election , and has no party . It is deadly and it ’ s still here , even spiking in more than 20 states .
Columnists In-depth political coverage , sports analysis , entertainment reviews and cultural commentary .
And now , it ’ s hitting football players hard . Thirty Louisiana State players are in quarantine , either testing positive for the virus or from being in contact with those who tested positive . Twenty-three Clemson football players have tested positive since workouts started on June 1 . Thirteen at Texas , 14 at Kansas State , and more at Alabama , Mississippi , Southern Florida , Auburn , Oklahoma State and others .
Houston and Kansas State have suspended voluntary workouts after a raft of positive tests .
Dr. Anthony Fauci , the United States ’ leading infectious disease expert , warns that football might not be possible now : ” Unless players are essentially in a bubble — insulated from the community and they are tested nearly every day — it would be very hard to see how football is able to be played this fall . ”
For Donald Trump , this is unacceptable . He wants to pretend that the pandemic has been conquered and wants praise for the self-proclaimed “ phenomenal job ” that he has done , even though the U.S. has suffered more victims than any other nation in the world . He sought to kickstart his re-election campaign with a rally in an enclosed arena in Tulsa , Oklahoma , site of one of the worst racial massacres in our history in 1921 . Yet , after boasting that a million people had sought tickets for the 19,000-seat arena , he spoke before an arena that was only one-third full . Even the Trumpsters thought twice about gathering in a closed arena to listen to hours of speeches in a crowd parading without masks .
Who will be responsible for the athletes whose lives will be at risk so fans can be entertained , and the universities can profit ? College presidents now make big salaries , but they should feel a greater responsibility to the young men and women who attend their schools . College coaches make millions at big-time programs , but they should protect the players that play for them . The NCAA should reconsider its decision to open practices now that the virus has spread so quickly .
In the end , sadly , it is likely that the players themselves will have to be the adults in the room .
At UCLA , 30 players petitioned the university for additional protections , seeking a Third-Party Health Official to review all safety measures and protocols to ensure the greatest protection possible . They wanted guarantees that players would not lose their scholarships or face retaliation if they chose not to return to the campus for the season this fall . They argued , sensibly , that they could not trust university or athletic department officials who had interests other than their lives and health at stake .
With demonstrations in support of the Black Lives movement continuing , it is time for players to speak out . Oklahoma State ’ s football coach , Mike Gundy , found that out when he wore a sweatshirt from OAN , the virulent right-wing cable network that has consistently mocked Black Lives Matter demonstrations . His Heisman Award candidate , running back Chuba Hubbard , called him out , leading to Gundy ’ s abject apology for what he claimed was an ignorant mistake .
Now players need to speak out about their own health and safety .
College football is a wonderful spectator sport , but it is not worth the lives of young American men . The same is true for other college sports . If college officials , college coaches and the NCAA are not prepared to act responsibly , the athletes themselves must take the lead . Their parents should support them . Thirty players testing positive in “ voluntary ” practices is 30 too many .
It is time to give greater weight to the pandemic experts than to the panicked administrators .