The resurgence of the coronavirus has thrust the pandemic back to the fore of our national consciousness . Living vs. making a living ? A false dichotomy . We don ’ t believe that these values to be mutually exclusive . Both are possible , both necessary . And we need each other to figure out how to make both happen .
The pandemic represents what folklore holds as the Chinese character for crisis : a “ dangerous opportunity. ” As supply-side economist Paul Romer first observed , “ a crisis is a terrible thing to waste. ” The surface tension between maintaining both physical and fiscal health points to a deeper underlying crisis . It offers a path out of both the surface and the deep crisis .
What deep crisis ? Prof. Daniel Dellaposta observed recently in the American Sociological Review , “ The structure of U.S. opinion has shifted in ways suggesting troubling implications for proponents of political and social pluralism. ” Only a threat of the complexity and magnitude of the pandemic is powerful enough to bring hereditary enemies , like us , together . One of us is the cofounder of MoveOn.org , the other the co-founder of TheCapitalistLeague.com .
I , Ralph , the conservative Republican , recognize my adversary Joan ’ s authentic compassion in holding that without a coordinated response , including government action , to flatten the curve she would have reasonable grounds to fear waves of infections that could overwhelm our medical personnel and capacity , intensifying both loss of life and economic devastation . This is a counsel of practical compassion . Not tyranny .
I , Joan , the progressive Democrat , recognize my adversary Ralph ’ s heartfelt concern that an overbearing , “ one-size-fits-all , ” quarantine can produce an unacceptable level of economic agony , especially among members of the working class . Not everyone has sufficient resources , nor is the government capable of indefinitely funding an economy many times larger than the resources it can responsibly command . This is a counsel of practical compassion . Not callousness .
Our survival appears at stake . Thus , to paraphrase a wise insight of second wave feminism : the political becomes personal . The political class now politically weaponizes everything . Democrats vilify Republicans as taking reckless life-and-death risks by premature openings . Republicans demonize Democrats for inflicting unwarranted and possibly catastrophic damage to our ability to subsist economically .
So let ’ s experiment with seeing one another as allies facing a mutual enemy , the novel coronavirus . Our respectively hated and feared political leaders really are not the primary enemy . ( Yes , assuredly we will slug that out Nov . )
The primary enemy is the virus . It confronted ( and confronts ) our leaders , left and right , with huge unknowns . Of course , people are entitled to their political opinions . That said , common humanity calls for us to tone down the contempt . “ Kill the ump ” style heckling is better suited to baseball than it is to a truly mortal threat .
Physical and fiscal health are not antithetical . To get both will require greater trust and trustworthiness in government , in media , in our communities and in what Ben Franklin , during the Constitutional Convention , called “ the virtue and spirit of the common people. ” And , yes , trust in the good faith in our political opponents .
That the left and right disagree is neither novel nor interesting . The interesting thing is that we represent proof-of-concept that both sides can show respect for one another and are willing to work together against a common foe .
So , are we going to keep politically weaponizing the pandemic ( as we have weaponized practically everything else ) ? We will remain passionate foes on many issues . The pandemic is fundamentally different . It is a common enemy and a mortal one .
There are judgment calls about priorities and what measures to take . That said , neither of us knows anyone who does not believe in the importance of protecting both lives and livelihoods . We must , and can , work together . American independence was predicated on the self-evident truth that foremost among our unalienable rights are both life and liberty . Governments are instituted to protect these rights . We demand both values be fully honored . This is not paradoxical .
We ’ ve gotten out of the habit of working together even where we agree . That is the deeper existential crisis the pandemic brings to light . That said , the pandemic is so epic that it compels cooperation . Knowing that we are on the “ same team , ” we can pull America out of the wreckage of lives and livelihood the pandemic has wrought .
Rediscovering that there are areas in which we can fruitfully cooperate , perhaps our cooperation in the face of the pandemic could transform the future of politics .
Joan Blades is a co-founder of MoveOn and Living Room Conversations . Ralph Benko is co-author of `` The Capitalist Manifesto , '' chairman and co-founder of The Capitalist League and founder of The Prosperity Caucus . He served as a deputy general counsel in the Reagan White House .