“ When Governor Baker loosened the restrictions , we began doing classes outside , ” said fitness instructor Rosemarie Simeone . ” We don ’ t have treadmills or bicycles for the cardio portion , but we have improvised — we run around the building . ”
The days of arriving early to snag the ideal treadmill are on hold because of the pandemic . But some people are waking up early to grab the best parking spot to participate in the studio ’ s outdoor workout classes .
Around 6:45 on a recent morning , several people began pulling into the parking lot outside of Tread Tabata in Beverly , a fitness studio known for high-intensity group classes that incorporate treadmill sprints , squat jumps , and upbeat music .
After lending out equipment such as weights and resistance bands to members — and with an outdoor stereo system that pumps Beyonce and Queen — Tread Tabata ’ s $ 15 parking lot classes are offering a sense of community while gyms across the state remain closed for indoor activities .
“ I ’ m all for outdoor classes , ” said Jackie Morin , 37 , after a class in the parking lot . “ It is what keeps me sane . I feel like I am more productive and have more patience [ with my kids ] when I am home . ”
As Massachusetts businesses gradually reopen , gyms and fitness centers have been forced to innovate . While they can ’ t reopen indoors until Phase 3 — which starts on Monday in Massachusetts , but a week later in Boston — many have been offering outdoor and virtual classes to engage their members . The outdoor sessions have been permitted in Phase 2 with certain safety guidelines : social distancing , limiting the number of people to 10 , prohibiting shared equipment , and having participants wear masks — although many gyms have not mandated the latter .
At 4:30 a.m. on a recent Thursday , employees at Fuel Training Studio in Newburyport began carrying stationary bikes outside for a newly created class called Patio Cycle . Participants can sign up for spin sessions held on the studio ’ s outdoor patio for an experience similar to the party-like vibe of an indoor class .
“ The classes fill up as soon as we put them up , ” co-owner Julie Bokat said . “ We moved our sound system outside , and our block is bouncing when the classes are on . ”
The studio asks cyclists to bring their own spin shoes and wear masks when entering and exiting the workout area .
In Boston , meanwhile , personal trainer Bron Volney created the 10 Foot Outdoor Bootcamp , inspired by coronavirus social distancing , where he spaces participants out with cones on Boston Common . Cindia Norton , the owner of Studio 143 , is holding yoga classes in her Scituate backyard , according to her website . And Tatyana Souza , the owner of Coolidge Yoga in Brookline and the South End , said she is trying to offer yoga classes outside , too , in Brookline parks .
But not everyone who can offer outdoor classes is doing so .
The November Project , a free program that holds outdoor fitness classes year-round , will wait to resume its sessions . Because of the state ’ s limit on large gatherings , outdoor classes can have no more than 10 people , including the instructor , and November Project workouts tend to draw larger crowds .
“ We wouldn ’ t want people to show up and then be like , sorry , you have to leave , ” said Emily Saul , co-leader of the Boston chapter .
For now , the Boston nonprofit is offering virtual classes three days a week , which draw roughly 50 participants per class . When its outdoor classes resume , certain behaviors from the pre-coronavirus era will be frowned upon , Saul said .
“ One of our favorites is partner push-ups , where you both do a push-up and high-five in the middle . . . We won ’ t be doing that , ” she said . “ But we will still be looking for ways to offer people that sense of connection . ”
Saul said November Project will also wait until face masks are no longer a requirement before hosting workouts . “ We are cognizant of the additional physiological stress that wearing a mask puts on your cardiovascular system , ” she said . “ We don ’ t want to add risk . ”
Under the state ’ s reopening guidelines , participants in outdoor workout classes must wear masks , even if they are socially distanced . However , the governor also issued an order on May 6 requiring masks or coverings in public places only if social distancing is not possible , and some gyms are following this protocol , instead .
At Tread Tabata , outdoor participants are spread out , and they are required to wear masks only if they go inside and use the studio ’ s bathroom . The studio asks guests to stay in their cars before classes begin , and there is no loitering afterward .
“ If they want to wear one , they can , but we keep well beyond 6 feet and [ there is ] no touching and no shared equipment , ” owner and founder Kathy Glabicky said . “ Any class I see outdoors , they are not wearing masks if they can keep 6 feet [ apart ] — it is all so confusing . ”
While outdoor classes are obviously weather-dependent , the gyms offering virtual and outdoor workouts say both types of classes are likely to become core parts of their business models .
At Trillfit , a fitness studio in Boston , chief executive Heather White is building a new business around the studio ’ s digital platform , after offering it for free for the past three months . She said more than 14,000 people have attended the online dance workouts , and the studio will begin outdoor classes .
“ We were able to pivot our programming to digital pretty quickly , ” she said . “ I redid our entire business plan , and we now have digital as 52 percent of our [ projected ] revenue . ”
Other owners agree the gym business has shifted for good .
“ When we get the ability to move inside , I think it is going to be so limited , and I think people are probably feeling better about being outside , ” Bokat said . “ It is hard to tell how people will feel about coming back inside . ”