White House 's Social Distancing Guidelines Will Be 'Fading Out , ' Trump Says
President Trump said the existing coronavirus social distancing guidelines that are set to expire with the end of April on Thursday will not be extended further , as more governors begin steps to lift restrictions and reopen their economies .
The administration said the existing social distancing recommendations are being incorporated by governors into their new future plans .
`` They 'll be fading out , because now the governors are doing it , '' Trump said .
During a White House meeting with Louisiana Gov . John Bel Edwards on Wednesday , Trump commended governors for taking steps to reopen their economies .
The original two-week guidelines that were extended 30 more days called for Americans to work from home , limit travel and avoid large gatherings .
Vice President Pence said the existing guidelines were being applied to the new guidance issued by the White House on how states can reopen safely .
`` Every state in America has embraced those guidelines at a minimum , or even done more , and now our focus is working with states , '' Pence said . `` The current guidelines , I think you can say , are very much incorporated in the guidance that we 're giving states to open up America again . ''
Two weeks ago , the White House released a three-phase plan that provides guidelines for when states might reopen .
The proposal is predicated on states having a downward trajectory of confirmed cases , and it involves states having the capacity to treat all hospitalized patients , test health care workers and trace contacts of those infected .
This comes as governors have struggled with the competing interests of reopening their economies and keeping their communities safe .
A handful of states have taken steps to relax their social distancing guidelines , including Alaska , Georgia and Tennessee .
Others , like North Carolina and Michigan , have extended their restrictions into May .
Though he once said he had `` total '' authority regarding when states could reopen , Trump says he is largely leaving those decisions to governors .
`` We 're doing it very carefully , '' Trump said . `` We learned a lot over the last couple of months . ''