The testing system for coronavirus in the US is currently failing , a top health official has admitted .
`` The system is not really geared to what we need right now ... let 's admit it , '' said Dr Anthony Fauci from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases .
Authorities in the US have come under fire for carrying out far fewer tests than many other affected countries .
There are currently more than 1,300 confirmed cases of the virus in the US .
President Donald Trump says the US has `` a tremendous testing set up where people coming in have to be tested '' . However , he has not given further details , and there has not been routine testing for the virus in the US .
In an interview with CNN on Thursday , Vice-President Mike Pence could not confirm how many Americans had been tested for the virus , saying he `` would leave that to the experts '' .
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , a total of at least 11,079 specimens have been tested since January . However , the number of people tested is likely to be lower , as patients typically provide at least two specimens for testing .
Furthermore , government officials say they do not know the number of people being tested , because some tests are being conducted by private hospitals and laboratories that have not been reporting in to the CDC .
The Atlantic , which is running a project to track the number of tests being conducted , estimates about 8,000 people have been tested . Meanwhile , lawmakers who went to a briefing with health officials told Politico that fewer than 10,000 Americans had been tested .
By contrast , South Korea has tested more than 210,000 people and is testing nearly 20,000 people every day , while in the UK , more than 29,700 people have been tested , and more than 1,000 tests are being carried out per day .
In neighbouring Canada , there are currently about 100 confirmed cases . About half of those are in Ontario , which has tested about 4,185 samples .
Dr Fauci acknowledged to a congressional hearing that the US faced particular difficulties with testing . `` The idea of anybody getting it [ testing ] easily , the way people in other countries are doing it , we 're not set up for that . I think it should be , but we 're not . ''
The US declined to use a test approved by the World Health Organization in January - instead , the CDC developed its own coronavirus test . However , there were manufacturing defects with the initial CDC tests which meant many of the results were inconclusive .
Lawmakers who attended Thursday 's health briefing said that there were also problems with the supply chain for testing kits , with stocks of cotton swabs and gloves running low .
And earlier this week , the director of the CDC told a congressional hearing : `` There 's not enough equipment , there 's not enough people , there 's not enough internal capacity . ''
`` The truth is ... we 've underinvested in the public health labs . ''
On Wednesday , President Donald Trump announced sweeping travel restrictions on 26 European countries - but was criticised by Democratic leaders Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer for not addressing the lack of sufficient coronavirus testing kits .
Republican lawmakers have also expressed frustration , with one senator , James Lankford saying : `` We 've got a long way to go to be able to get rapid , efficient testing . ''
Mr Lankford added that it was `` not accurate '' when President Trump said everyone in the US who wanted to get tested could get one .
Meanwhile , Senator Mitt Romney said it was `` very frustrating '' that the testing had been slow .
`` You ca n't get wipes for your countertop . You ca n't get alcohol ... and it 's very difficult to get tests . ''
By the time the coronavirus hit Seattle and turned the city into the centre of the US outbreak , it had already spread rapidly in countries like Italy and Iran .
Despite this , Seattle doctors told me , their hospital was n't ready for what was coming .
Dr Alex Adami of University of Washington Medical said : `` None of us were actually trained in how to deal with the precautions for this disease , or what to do in terms of screening or providing care for these patients . ''
Hospital workers and patients were exposed to the virus as a result , he said .
Another doctor at the hospital , who asked to remain anonymous , said that failing to prepare was `` foolish '' and may have exacerbated the spread .
Initially , the hospital said that broader training was not needed , arguing that having only a small group of doctors working with coronavirus patients would limit exposure .
Hospitals in Seattle have since updated their procedures , but Dr Adami feared the same mistakes could be repeated elsewhere in the US .
`` I want other hospitals in the US to look at this and say , 'what can we do better ? ' . I want people to look at this and learn the lesson that you have to be proactive and not reactive . ''