A society ’ s response to an epidemic , writes historian Frank Snowden in a new book on the topic , is a lens on the moral priorities of its leaders . Did they create a resilient community during more settled times ? Have they built up trust in institutions ? Epidemics reveal “ the moral relationships that we have toward each other , ” the Yale scholar told The New Yorker .
A current example of moral priorities in the United States is the number of companies promising to keep paying employees – even temporary wage-earners – despite the shock and disruption of the coronavirus outbreak . Congress could decide soon to mandate paid leave during the health crisis . Yet many corporate leaders are a step ahead in announcing no layoffs or furloughs , creating a sort of cordon sanitaire that protects jobs and eases fears .
At Microsoft , 4,500 hourly employees “ will continue to receive their regular wages even if their work hours are reduced , ” says company President Brad Smith . Similar commitments have been made by Google and other big firms . “ I encourage all of our peers to consider this as well , ” tweeted Chuck Robbins , chief executive of Cisco .
One practical reason to retain workers during the crisis is that , up to now , the task of finding new workers has been difficult . The U.S. economy is in its 11th year of expansion . The jobless rate is a low 3.5 % . Many companies are enjoying record profits . They can afford a temporary loss .
Yet another reason may be a trend among companies , made strong since the 2008 financial crisis , to better consider how they treat workers , customers , suppliers , local communities , and the natural environment . Such “ social responsibility ” toward stakeholders is often genuine . It can also prevent a high cost to a corporation ’ s reputation .
The promises of no layoffs during this crisis have become a signifier of ethical progress . Other signs are showing up . Citigroup is offering leniency to many debtors . Some health insurers are absorbing the cost of copays for customers . For many firms , belt-tightening will come in ways other than hits on the most vulnerable .
Worldwide , business has become the most trusted institution , taking the lead role in global governance , according to the latest Edelman survey . Based on 40 years of surveys for its “ trust meter , ” the communication firm finds the “ trust capital ” for businesses depends on three ethical drivers : integrity , dependability , and purpose .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ Business has leapt into the void left by populist and partisan government , ” states the 2020 report . “ It can no longer be business as usual , with an exclusive focus on shareholder returns. ” The survey finds 73 % of employees want the opportunity to change society . Nearly two-thirds of consumers make buying choices based on core beliefs .
Epidemics are not extinguished only by new medicines , quarantines , and improved health practices . Societies also need to have their moral priorities in place . Healing the economy with fear-reducing actions is as important as healing the sick .