`` It 's a war , '' says President Donald Trump of his efforts to contain the coronavirus pandemic , and likening his role to that of `` wartime president . ''
New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo welcomed the president 's claim to his commander in chief role in the crisis and his resolve , `` The president and I agreed yesterday . . . we 're fighting the same war — and this is a war . ''
Some measures already taken do call to mind actions in wartime .
Where Ford , Chrysler , GM and other great auto companies shifted production to jeeps , tanks and bombers in 1942 , U.S. auto factories have today been shut down to prevent the spread of the virus .
This month , millions of Americans will be added to unemployment rolls , and millions of senior citizens and elderly have already followed government directives to `` self-isolate '' or `` shelter in place . ''
There is talk of quarantines lasting not days or weeks , as Americans knew in the days of measles , mumps , chickenpox , scarlet fever and polio , but months .
While a new social solidarity and spirit of self-sacrifice seem to be manifesting themselves in this pandemic , can it endure ?
Is the country prepared for months , or years , of social isolation , if that is what is required to win this war ?
Consider . The Chinese government , whose word is admittedly suspect , claims to have achieved a deceleration in the daily number of new coronavirus infections . The South Koreans say they , too , have broken and reversed the momentum of the spread of the virus .
On March 3 , the number of new cases of the coronavirus reported across South Korea was 852 . On St. Patrick 's Day , March 17 , exactly two weeks later , the count was 85 new cases— a plunge of 90 % .
Exactly how far behind South Korea we are can not be known until more tens of thousands of Americans are tested , and we learn how many cases of the disease are out there undiscovered and unreported .
But whatever the success of Asian nations in containing the virus , are we politically and socially able to impose the same draconian measures ?
Ordering people to `` shelter in place '' in their own homes , not just for days or weeks but months — can this be done in a free society , as it can be done in the surveillance state of Communist China ?
Can mayors and governors of beach towns along the East Coast from Maine to Miami , and the Gulf Coast from Florida to Texas , keep tens of millions from gathering on beaches this summer ?
Last week , we saw college kids cavorting on Florida 's beaches , despite warnings that any one among them infected with COVID-19 could transmit it to the rest , leading to grave illness and , in some cases , death .
Moreover , they could become carriers of the disease to parents and siblings .
They did not seem to care . As Prohibition proved , Americans are a rule-breaking people .
Scores of thousands are injured in auto accidents and thousands killed each year from driving under the influence of alcohol — despite tough laws against drunk driving .
Since the 1960s , laws against the use of marijuana , cocaine , heroin , fentanyl , have not halted the rampant ingestion of illegal narcotics and dangerous drugs .
We are endlessly admonished that climate change poses an existential threat to the planet .
But have the elites who profess to believe this given up flying in private jets ?
Have Americans given up their SUVs or ceased to heat their homes with oil and gas ?
Are parents going to be able to confine to their homes children whose lives are built around friends on playgrounds ? Is the crowd on Martha 's Vineyard going to give up socializing to prevent the spread of the coronavirus ?
In the 1960s , we were told that the correlation between cigarette smoking and lung cancer , emphysema and heart disease , is absolute . Yet 34 million Americans continue to risk shortening their lives by smoking .
Seniors and elderly , among whom the mortality rate from the coronavirus is the highest —15 % of those over 80 in one estimate — may shelter in place for months .
But if , in diverse cities , minority communities come out for block parties in summer , are we going to have the police march them back into their homes ?
A prediction : The longer the orders to shelter in place and self-isolate remain in force , the greater the probability they will begin to be ignored and people will take the risks to end their isolation and be with friends .
Will Americans suffer in social isolation , inside their own homes for months , while a state-induced Great Depression washes over the land ?
Patrick Buchanan has been an adviser to three presidents , a two-time candidate for the Republican presidential nomination , and the nominee for the Reform Party in 2000 . He was also a founding member of `` The McLaughlin Group , '' which began on NBC , and CNN 's `` Capital Gang '' and `` Crossfire . '' His latest book is : `` The Greatest Comeback : How Richard Nixon Rose From Defeat to Create the New Majority . '' For more of his reports , Go Here Now .