Despite a New York state mandate that companies allow as many employees as possible to work from home , the Montefiore Medical Center , an academic hospital located in the Bronx , is continuing to have `` nonessential '' workers at the Rose F. Kennedy Children 's Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center ( CERC ) come into the office , much to the concern of the employees themselves .
Once there , many of the hospital workers , which include developmental pediatricians , psychologists , social workers , and language and occupational therapists , simply connect with patients on the phone or through Skype and other video-conferencing services , because their patients have been told to avoid in-person sessions with them .
`` People are so frightened and really angry , '' said one employee , who requested anonymity because they feared repercussions at their job . `` It 's dangerous . There have been tons of COVID-19 cases everywhere at this point , especially in New York , and there 's a real lack of transparency here . We do n't really know what we 're walking into , even though there are constant reassurances that we 're safe . It does n't feel that way . ''
CERC informed its employees as recently as March 11 that they were considered part of a `` nonessential medical service , '' according to internal emails reviewed by ███ . ( CERC , one of the many clinics associated with Montefiore , focuses on helping kids with language disorders , behavioral problems , and other disabilities . )
Nevertheless , CERC continued to demand these clinicians go to the office and work at full capacity until March 30 , two weeks after Mayor Bill de Blasio closed down the New York City school system . Now , employees are instead forced to commute a few times per week , as opposed to every day . The employee ███ spoke to estimated that this likely affects as many as 150 people .
The employee worried that they and others could potentially contract the coronavirus or spread it to others , when they simply did n't need to be leaving their homes to do their jobs .
`` It 's absurd , '' the employee said . `` Therapists are trying to figure out how to deliver therapy virtually all over the world . I understand it 's difficult—I do—but other hospitals are doing that more effectively . We do n't need to be here physically . '' ( Other New York hospitals , like the Mount Sinai Health System and NYU Langone Medical Center , appear to have been developing work-at-home measures for nonessential employees for close to a month . Montefiore did not respond to multiple requests for comment . )
CERC has asserted in emails that Montefiore is `` on top of things '' and appropriately responding to the global pandemic . But the center did n't require its staff to wear masks at work until just last week , according to the employee , and it appeared to react slowly overall to the coronavirus outbreak .
It took until March 23 for the administration at CERC to announce in an email that Montefiore would allow the clinic to operate at `` a reduced workforce by 50 % , '' which permitted `` all staff [ to ] work from home for a portion of each week . '' CERC has since taken further precautions , such as temperature checks of employees , and has advised people to wash their hands , avoid touching their faces , and stand at least six feet away from one another , according to an email . ( The employee said that it was unclear whether Montefiore or CERC itself was implementing these changes . )
Regardless , nonessential hospital workers are still being asked to travel to work and operate on a staggered schedule—either two or three days out of the work week . There , they isolate themselves in their offices , phones and computers in hand .
`` Really , it 's as if I do n't know who is making decisions about my work or life right now , '' the employee said . `` It 's so mysterious how these choices are even being made . ''