Monday on FNC ’ s “ Fox & Friends , ” House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy ( R-CA ) criticized his Democrat colleagues for using the pandemic to promote socialist governance in the United States and highlight Democrat priorities in the HEROES Act as examples .
“ I ’ m not crazy about it , ” he said . “ Democrats are not crazy about it . Democrats talked about this bill going nowhere . And it ’ s really sickening that the Democrats are using this opportunity to enforce their socialism . Remember , what is this bill that they just passed on Friday ? Well , it ’ s about pot , it ’ s about prisoners , it ’ s about politicizing election law , prioritizing illegal immigrants and pensions . These are all things that are socialist wish lists that they ’ ve been trying to pass long before COVID ever came to this land . And that ’ s exactly what they ’ re trying to do , knowing that it will not go anywhere . ”
“ They ’ re just using this as an opportunity to restructure government , ” McCarthy continued . “ And I ’ m not just saying that . That ’ s what Democrats say . Joe Biden said it the other day . Their whip said it , Clyburn . It goes beyond AOC . It ’ s now throughout the entire Democrat socialist base of what they want to utilize this opportunity to because when we wanted to help small businesses with their loans , Nancy Pelosi went to the freezer to stop it . ”
McCarthy pointed to all of the items not related to coronavirus in the Democrat-controlled House of Representatives effort , which he said was being used to give House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D-CA ) more power .
“ What I ’ m finding is , all the things that the Democrats advocated for , the reasons why Speaker Pelosi held up the CARES bill that dealt with unemployment , gave the small businesses the loans , was able to give the state and the hospitals money , she held it up because she wanted to change election law , ” McCarthy said . “ She wanted to focus on cannabis . She wanted to focus about pensions . Well , we were able to keep that out . Yes , she got more money for the Kennedy Center . ”
“ But now when the Democrats crafted their own bill , the focus was on those items , those socialism items that they wanted to bring up , ” he continued . “ Nothing about COVID . That is a waste of money . Three trillion dollars that never went through one committee . This was only written in Pelosi ’ s office . And they knew it wasn ’ t going anywhere . You talk to Democrats . They didn ’ t like it . They didn ’ t want it . And it ’ s the only reason she brought us back and to change the election law on how the House will work because the House is essential . We should be working . You have businesses across America that want to open again , and she keeps it closed to keep her — to give her more power . ”