Trump lashed out at another inspector general on Monday , over a report that described in vivid terms the equipment shortages that U.S. hospitals are facing . Medical workers , it said , were “ trying to make their own disinfectant from in-house chemicals , running low on toilet paper and food , and trying to source face masks from nail salons. ” Trump declared that the report ’ s conclusions , which were drawn from direct interviews with health-care professionals at “ 323 hospitals across 46 States ” and territories currently attempting to contain the outbreak , were “ just wrong ” and called the report “ another fake dossier . ”
The target of the president ’ s purge of independent watchdogs is clear : those officials who put the public interest above their loyalty to Donald Trump . Officials who uphold their duty to the American people , or even give the slightest impression of doing so , will find their careers in danger . They exist not , as their jobs have previously been understood , to provide the public with vital information about the functioning of the government , but to conceal inconvenient facts and exalt the divine foresight of the president . If the truth does not glorify the leader , it must be changed or suppressed . Even more important , where the law conflicts with his will , the law must be disregarded—and those who are unwilling to do so are not fit to serve .
The president and the institutional GOP are executing parallel , complementary campaigns : Trump is attempting to undermine the rule of law for personal and political gain ; keeping him in office is crucial to the Republican Party ’ s larger goal of locking its opponents out of power by narrowing , restricting , or altering the franchise to insulate the party from a changing electorate .
The president ’ s goals are venal and petty ; the GOP ’ s long-term objectives are far more ambitious . Trump is simply a convenient vehicle for the latter , a figure whose prejudice channels the Republican base ’ s moral instinct that those unlike them have a lesser claim on American citizenship , and that democracy would be more genuine without their influence . Americans hoping to change the direction of the country will have to battle a plague and fight for the freedom to choose their own leaders at the same time .
Senate Republicans , who might conceivably restrain Trump ’ s undemocratic impulses , have been muted . As long as Trump maintains his support among the GOP rank and file , the president may defy the rule of law as he likes , without meaningful protest . Checking Trump could interfere with the conservative capture of the federal judiciary , which is vitally important to the Republican Party ’ s plans for long-term domination .
The disgraceful episode in Wisconsin illustrates the convergence of these parallel efforts . The state held its primary yesterday , after Democratic efforts to delay the election until June because of the pandemic were unsuccessful . At stake is a seat on the conservative-dominated state supreme court ; the winner will cast the deciding vote in a case that could disenfranchise up to 200,000 voters in the state . Although the state had already extended the deadline for receiving absentee ballots to April 13 , Democrats sought to extend the deadline for postmarking those ballots as well , arguing that because of the large volume of requests for absentee ballots , some voters would not receive theirs in time .