“ You may have just that one patient with the coronavirus that come into your facility , and you don ’ t know . I can go to work today , wind up feeding them . And then find out two hours later , ‘ Oh , they have that virus. ’ And I ’ ve already been exposed . Nursing Assistants , CNA ’ s , we ’ re the closest ones , we ’ re the front line. ” The work of nursing assistants has always been difficult and low paying . But add coronavirus , and it ’ s become dangerous . TV announcers : “ Across the country , nursing homes are especially vulnerable — ” “ One elder care facility , where 19 residents have died — ” “ In Palo Alto — ” “ In the New Orleans area — ” “ In DuPage County — ” “ In Sacramento County. ” “ Covid-19 spreading through our most vulnerable population. ” We met up with caregivers from nursing homes in Northern California . They attend to the kind of patients who are most likely to die if they get the virus . “ So can you do your job without touching people , or without — ” “ It ’ s impossible . Everything is touch. ” “ Bathing . Feeding. ” “ Assist them to the restroom. ” “ Brushing their teeth. ” “ Turning. ” “ It ’ s almost like a holding and cleaning at the same time. ” “ Helping nurses with wound care. ” “ Cleaning their ears , tying their shoes. ” “ We do everything. ” “ Well , you could be feeding that patient or you could be doing something and the patient starts coughing . It ’ s too late to turn around , you already done got crap all over you . You know , you just run to the bathroom , wash your face or whatever . And then go about your day . Social distance ? Can ’ t do it . It ’ s impossible. ” If this video were filmed at a different time , you ’ d be seeing footage of these workers with their patients . But nursing homes are closed to visitors right now to protect the people inside . Actually everything you ’ re seeing here we filmed from afar , following recommendations to slow the spread of Covid-19 . But these caregivers can ’ t maintain that kind of distance in their work . And now , shortages of protective gear like masks are putting them at risk , not just for getting the virus but for spreading it . “ If you want to speak , press star 6. ” “ We ’ re running out of supplies of masks in our building . And trying to take care of these patients without us also getting sick is worrisome. ” “ We ’ re rationing right now , masks , protective gear . But it ’ s like , what happens if we run out ? It scares me. ” “ They gave us the N95 mask , and told us to maintain it . If the elastic comes off by accident or something , staple and reuse it. ” “ So you ’ re actually cleaning the N95 masks in between uses ? ” “ Yeah , with — with alcohol. ” “ You like wipe off the outside of it or how do you do that ? ” “ The outside , the inside and just let it air dry , and put it back in a Ziploc bag for the next day. ” “ A lot of people in this field , we have families . So you don ’ t want to take nothing home . My granddaughter , she ’ s special needs . So she has a low immune system . When she was born , she was really sick . So we ’ ve been cautious ever since she ’ s been born. ” “ I am very concerned of taking it home . My mom , she ’ s diabetic , and my dad also just beat cancer in the thyroid . I have asthma . So if I were to get Covid , It would affect my lungs . And how am I going to pay my bills ? Because it ’ s paycheck to paycheck , what I ’ m doing. ” The pay for this work is low : In the U.S. , the median salary is less than $ 30,000 a year . As a result , many nursing assistants work multiple jobs . And as they move between facilities , so can disease . “ Usually when I finish the first job , I go right to the second job . I work 16 hours , that ’ s not including driving time . And I ’ m not the only one — majority of my co-workers , they work two jobs. ” “ I work home health care too , on top of taking care of my mom and my grandmother . I ’ m kind of worried because you don ’ t see the virus because they ’ re droplets , and you don ’ t know who ’ s coughing or sneezing on you . Even though I do try to sanitize , like along the way , going to my next client . But sometimes it ’ s just not enough I think . But who else is going to take care of them ? ”