A nurse works at a drive-thru coronavirus testing site at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset , N.Y. , May 6 , 2020 . ( Brendan McDermid/Reuters )
As coronavirus cases spike across Florida , dozens of hospitals in the state have announced that their intensive-care units are at capacity and many more warn that they are dangerously low on beds to handle the influx of new virus patients .
At least 56 Florida ICUs have run out of beds for coronavirus patients , and 35 more have said their bed availability has dropped to 10 percent or lower . The news comes as Florida recorded more than 7,300 new coronavirus cases , 380 new coronavirus hospitalizations , and 63 more deaths from the infection .
Despite the rising number of cases , Florida governor Ron DeSantis said Tuesday that the death rate in his state has begun to taper off , noting that most of the new cases are younger patients .
“ We are prepared for this , ” DeSantis said . “ In places like Miami , you ’ re seeing increased traffic in the hospitals , but it ’ s interesting , I was down there today , and they said that they ’ re actually seeing fewer hospitalizations from people in nursing homes , which is obviously a good sign because that ’ s where the No.1 risk of mortality is . ”
Several other states have seen their coronavirus cases surge in recent weeks after they reopened large swaths of their economies . Georgia passed 100,000 positive coronavirus cases on Tuesday , making it the ninth state to reach that number . The same day , California recorded a record daily increase of more than 10,200 new coronavirus cases , as well as a record 6,000 hospitalized patients . Some Texas counties have also warned that their hospital ICUs will run out of beds over the next two weeks .
Dr. Anthony Fauci , chief medical adviser for the Trump administration ’ s coronavirus task force , noted on Tuesday that the death rate from the virus has decreased , but warned against “ false complacency ” as the pathogen continues to spread .
“ It ’ s a false narrative to take comfort in a lower rate of death , ” Fauci said . “ There ’ s so many other things that are very dangerous and bad about this virus , don ’ t get yourself into false complacency . ”
“ The death rate is lower , I admit that . Because people in general , who are young or healthier . But that doesn ’ t mean that you could not get seriously ill , ” he added .
The U.S. has recorded more than three million positive cases of coronavirus , and 131,200 people in the country have died after being infected .