Scores of Russia ’ s business and political elite have been given early access to an experimental vaccine against Covid-19 , according to people familiar with the effort , as the country races to be among the first to develop an inoculation .
Top executives at companies including aluminum giant United Co. Rusal , as well as billionaire tycoons and government officials began getting shots developed by the state-run Gamaleya Institute in Moscow as early as April , the people said . They declined to be identified as the information isn ’ t public .
The Gamaleya vaccine , financed by the state-run Russian Direct Investment Fund and backed by the Defense Ministry , last week completed a phase 1 trial involving military personnel . The institute hasn ’ t published results for the study , which involved about 40 people , but has begun the next stage of testing with a larger group .
Gamaleya ’ s press office couldn ’ t be reached immediately for comment . Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov , who recovered from Covid-19 after being hospitalized with the virus in May , said he doesn ’ t know the names of anyone who ’ s received the institute ’ s vaccine .
Asked on a conference call with reporters on Monday if President Vladimir Putin had taken it , Peskov said : “ It probably wouldn ’ t be a good idea to use an uncertified vaccine on the head of state , ” adding that he wasn ’ t aware of other officials trying it .
Peskov ’ s comments followed a Health Ministry statement that said only participants in Gamaleya ’ s trials are currently eligible for the jabs .
While the new shots are “ safe ” because they ’ re based on proven vaccines for other diseases , their effectiveness has yet to be determined , according to Sergei Netesov , a former executive at Vector , a state-run virology center in Novosibirsk , Siberia , that ’ s also working on an inoculation .
“ Those who take it do so at their own risk , ” Netesov said .
Russia has reported more than 750,000 cases of Covid-19 , the fourth-largest total in the world , and Gamaleya ’ s program is on a faster track than many developers in the West . RDIF chief Kirill Dmitriev said last week phase 3 trials will start Aug. 3 and include thousands of people in Russia , Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates , with the vaccine distributed nationally as early as September . Western researchers typically run phase 3 trials for months to better understand safety and effectiveness .
Gamaleya ’ s candidate is a so-called viral vector vaccine based on human adenovirus — a common cold virus — fused with the spike protein of SARS CoV-2 to stimulate an immune response . It is similar to a vaccine being developed by China ’ s CanSino Biologics , which is already in phase 2 trials with plans for more in Canada .
Canada was among the countries -- along with the U.S. and U.K. -- that last week accused Russian government-backed hackers of trying to steal secrets of their Covid-19 vaccine research . Russian officials deny the allegations .
The program under which well-connected Russians have been given the chance to volunteer for doses of the experimental vaccine is legal but kept under wraps to avoid a crush of potential participants , according to a researcher familiar with the effort . He said several hundred people have been involved . Bloomberg confirmed dozens who have had the shots but none would allow their names to be published .
It ’ s not clear how participants are selected and they aren ’ t part of the official studies , though they are monitored and their results logged by the institute . Patients usually get the shots -- two are needed to produce an immune response that
Gamaleya says will last for about two years -- at a Moscow clinic connected to the institute . Participants aren ’ t charged a fee and sign releases confirming they know the risks involved .
Dmitriev of the RDIF said he and his family had taken the shots and noted that a significant number of other volunteers have also been given the opportunity . He declined to provide further details . The Gamaleya Institute said it vaccinated its director , as well as the team working on the trial , when it started . In May , state-controlled Sberbank recruited volunteers among employees to take the jabs .
One senior executive who ’ s been inoculated said he experienced no side effects . He said the health risks are worth being able to resume normal life , both personal and professional . Other takers reported experiencing fevers and muscle aches after getting the shots .
Several managers in the Moscow offices of Rusal , which relies on Gamaleya ’ s Ebola vaccine to maintain operations in the West African country of Guinea , have already taken the institute ’ s Covid-19 shots , people familiar with the matter said . Fertilizer maker PhosAgro PJSC is among the corporations who ’ ve been invited to follow suit , other people said . Spokespeople for Rusal and Phosagro declined to comment .
Some executives at major companies said they turned down the offer on health concerns . One tycoon said he decided against participating after his doctor told him it would take at least a year to assess the new vaccine ’ s risks .
Initial results from CanSino ’ s trial showed its adenovirus-based vaccine had a diminished effect in some people who had a pre-existing immunity to that pathogen . RDIF ’ s Dmitriev said researchers in Russia are testing two different types of adenovirus vectors in order to reduce the chances of pre-existing immunity reducing the cocktail ’ s effectiveness .
Gamaleya chief Alexander Ginzbur said he wasn ’ t aware of any government officials or business leaders taking his institute ’ s vaccine , according to Interfax .