Arkansas , which like much of the South dodged the worst of the pandemic in the spring and did not have a stay-at-home order , has seen cases nearly double over the past three weeks as more businesses reopened . No community has been harder hit than Latino and Marshallese workers in the northwest part of the state .
“ We were not prepared to handle this pandemic at all , but we were especially unprepared to protect these minority groups , ” said Greg Leding , a Democratic state senator who represents the area .
Latinos make up about 8 percent of the state ’ s population , but a fourth of coronavirus cases . Marshallese and other Pacific Islanders make up less than a half a percent of the population — and 7 percent of cases .
Mireya Reith , executive director of the immigrant advocacy group Arkansas United hopes the recent deployment of a CDC team to investigate disparities will mark a turning point . Inadequate testing and outreach to Arkansans of color early on , combined with a high proportion of essential workers unable to stay at home , fueled the spread .
“ We weren ’ t counted . Data wasn ’ t collected . There was no information available in other languages , ” she said . The outbreak , she added , “ was preventable . ”
The Arkansas health department confirmed that just five of its roughly 200 contact tracers speak Spanish and only one speaks Marshallese — though they will soon hire hundreds more tracers , some bilingual . Additionally , phone alerts that went out as part of contact tracing were all in English until a Spanish option was added June 6 . There are still no alerts in Marshallese , isolating a population that migrated here in large part after U.S. nuclear tests left their homeland awash in radiation . The five-person CDC team dispatched to the state plans to share its findings soon on how to mitigate spread `` specifically within the Hispanic and Marshallese populations , ” the state ’ s health department told ███ .
Melisa Laelan , executive director of the Arkansas Coalition of Marshallese , surveyed nearly 1,000 Marshallese households and found that more than 80 percent had a family member designated an essential worker . More than half had a family member with diabetes , obesity or high blood pressure , conditions that increase their risk of death from Covid-19 . Adding to their vulnerability , Marshallese were cut off from Medicaid during the 1990s .
“ I had to leave Facebook because I couldn ’ t bear it anymore to see that we were losing so many important community members , '' Laelan said .
In Florida , where Trump is set to visit Friday for a briefing on drug trafficking , cases have surpassed 220,000 . Coronavirus deaths in heavily Latino counties in Florida are occurring at twice the rate of other counties . In Texas , which Vice President Mike Pence visited last week , deaths in disproportionately Latino counties are occurring at 1.2 times the rate of other counties , according to an amFar analysis .
Two public hospitals in Houston that serve majority-minority , largely uninsured populations feel the racial disparity acutely . Nearly two-thirds of the coronavirus patients in the intensive care unit at Ben Taub and Lyndon B. Johnson hospitals are Latinos , said Dr. Esmaeil Porsa , CEO of Harris County Health System . Most counties talk about an infection curve ; Porsa said Harris County ’ s is a “ straight line up . ”
Cases are hitting record levels in some Democratic-led states too , notably California . But the different political sensibility didn ’ t shield people of color .
Los Angeles County is a big , racially mixed area . In the mostly white Santa Monica Mountains , cases per 100,000 rose sixfold from mid April to the end of June . But the rate of infection was even higher in majority Black and Latino cities , according to an analysis by Advancement Project California for ███ .
In San Jose Hills , where Latinos account for roughly 85 percent of the population , the number of cases per 100,000 was 143 times greater than it was during the second week of April . In Willowbrook , one of the communities in L.A. County with the highest percentage of Black residents , the rate of infections per 100,000 was 22 times greater in the third week of June than in early April .
As cases surged across the South and Southwest in June , the response from state leaders was slow and inconsistent , some local and public health officials said . Republican governors have largely mirrored Trump ’ s response , declining to mandate masks or imposing and extending stay-at-home orders .
Some governors , despite earlier resistance , have paused or reversed reopening certain businesses in recent weeks , including those in Alabama , Arkansas , Arizona and Florida .
In Texas , Gov . Greg Abbott , after opposing mask mandates and even banning cities from enforcing such rules , changed his mind as hospitals reached capacity . He issued a statewide mask mandate , and expressed regret for reopening bars .
`` It 's really been inconsistent messaging that has made things complicated , if not dangerous , '' said Harris County Commissioner Adrian Garcia .
In that county , Latinos make up more than 60 percent of the cases — and 40 percent of the county 's population , said Harris County Judge Lina Hidalgo .
“ I ’ ve said : ‘ Wear your MAGA mask , ’ ” Hidalgo , a Democrat , added . `` This is not about politics . ''
In Alabama , “ our state leaders have taken their cues from national leaders , ” said Montgomery Mayor Steven Reed , who added that in June , 70 percent of new cases in Montgomery County were among Black people . He instituted a citywide mask mandate in mid-June , although Republican Gov . Kay Ivey hasn ’ t done so statewide .
In Arizona , Gov . Doug Ducey ’ s decision in late May to allow the state ’ s stay-at-home order to expire may have disproportionately hurt minorities — predominantly Native American and Hispanic populations saw a case rate 40 percent higher than the rest of the state .
“ Our analysis strongly suggests that Arizona ’ s premature reopenings worsened racial disparities in the state , with Native Americans feeling the brunt , ” said Sgaier of Surgo Foundation .
A spokesman for Ducey ’ s office said his administration has `` continued to enhance the [ state 's ] guidance , including enforcement and mitigation efforts , '' adding that it emphasized getting resources to the hardest-hit communities , including the Navajo Nation and minority neighborhoods in Phoenix .
As early as April , the virus ’ onslaught on African Americans in Michigan , New York and Wisconsin led public health experts to warn of what could be in store for minority communities . By mid June , cases among Latinos — who disproportionately work in essential services like agriculture , meatpacking and hospitality — started to skyrocket across the country .
“ All Covid did was accelerate the inequities that we already know , ” said Martha Moore-Monroy , a public health lecturer at the University of Arizona , whose work focuses on improving health in underserved communities . “ People can ’ t ignore it anymore . ”
Daniel Dawes , director of the Satcher Health Leadership Institute at Morehouse School of Medicine , is crafting a national plan to address the uneven impact of coronavirus on minorities — trying to change a pattern of inequality that has been a hallmark of other public health crises .
The three-year initiative , which has a $ 40 million grant from the federal Department of Health and Human Services and includes a network of national and local health organizations , will start in the South . It will gather research and aid Black communities in Georgia , address outbreaks among incarcerated populations in Louisiana , and improve health and information dissemination in Navajo Nation and among migrant workers in Texas . By Year Two , Dawes hopes to focus on vaccine education and access .
In the meantime , local officials are getting creative . In Georgia — where Black people make up a third of the population but nearly half the Covid deaths — DeKalb County chief executive Michael Thurmond realized he needed a better messenger for young people .
“ They ’ re not listening to an old guy like me , ” said Thurmond , who asked rapper Killer Mike to cut a PSA for Black radio stations . He did the same with a Spanish-language ad for Latino radio stations , featuring local DJs and radio personalities .
In Arizona , educating and testing rural populations remains a lonely battle , said Amanda Aguirre , president and CEO of the Regional Center for Border Health . The nonprofit health provider makes up roughly 80 percent of the coronavirus testing in majority-Latino Yuma County . As infections have quickly increased , Aguirre said , they ’ re seeing more children and pregnant women affected .
“ I do n't know whether we can stop it at this point , ” she said . “ This whole epidemic has brought us to our knees . ”