Get breaking news alerts and special reports . The news and stories that matter , delivered weekday mornings .
Kimberly Guilfoyle , a senior Trump campaign official and Donald Trump Jr. ’ s girlfriend , tested positive for coronavirus while in South Dakota on Friday , the chief of staff for the Trump Victory Finance Committee confirmed Friday .
Trump Jr. , the eldest son of President Donald Trump , tested negative , Sergio Gor said .
`` After testing positive , Kimberly was immediately isolated to limit any exposure . She ’ s doing well , and will be retested to ensure the diagnosis is correct since she ’ s asymptomatic but as a precaution will cancel all upcoming events , '' he said .
While Trump Jr. tested negative , as a precaution he `` is also self isolating and is canceling all public events . '' he added .
Neither Trump Jr. nor Guilfoyle traveled with the president on Air Force One as the president went to Mount Rushmore for a July 4th weekend celebration that was held Friday , Gor said .
They both planned to attend but never made it to the site . Requests for comment from Guilfoyle and Trump Jr. were not immediately returned Friday night .
Guilfoyle is expected to drive back to the East Coast to avoid interactions with other people , two people familiar with the matter said .
Let our news meet your inbox . The news and stories that matters , delivered weekday mornings . This site is protected by recaptcha
The White House says Trump is tested for the coronavirus daily .
The New York Times first reported that Guilfoyle tested positive .
The development occurred on a day in which there were more than 53,000 new cases of COVID-19 reported across the United States , according to NBC News counts .
Guilfoyle , who is Trump Victory Finance Committee chair , spoke at Trump 's June 20 rally in Tulsa , Oklahoma , and in the introductory program ahead of Trump 's remarks in Phoenix , Arizona , on June 23 .
It is unknown when or where she was exposed to the coronavirus that causes the disease COVID-19 .
While the site of exposure is not known , since the Tulsa rally multiple people who attended have tested positive for the virus , including a journalist and at least two members of the campaign 's advance team .
In addition , six campaign staffers tested positive hours before the rally but were not present at the event .
On Thursday it was announced that former presidential candidate Herman Cain , who attended the Tulsa rally , tested positive for COVID-19 .
He received the positive result on Monday , and on Wednesday he developed symptoms serious enough that he required hospitalization , a statement posted to his Twitter account said .
Cain , 74 , did not need a respirator and was awake and alert at an Atlanta area hospital , the statement said .
It is not known when Cain was exposed to or contracted the illness .
Good morning ! @ RobertLaurie here with good news . We just received a message from HC . His oxygen levels are improving , he 's had no complications from the meds , & he ’ s in no pain .
We 're grateful to God and for your prayers . Keep them coming ! We 're confident Herman will back soon ! — Herman Cain ( @ THEHermanCain ) July 3 , 2020
Trump 's campaign said in a statement Thursday that Trump did not meet with Cain at the Tulsa rally .
There have been more than 2.7 million cases of COVID-19 in the United States , with more than 130,000 deaths linked to the disease , according to NBC News ' count .
Cases have been rising in a number of states , and 19 states have either rolled back or paused reopening plans due to the illness .