The numbers are not ambiguous . From a peak of 7,581 new cases across the country on March 31 , and with a death toll now just below 30,000—at one point the world ’ s fourth highest—there were just 526 new cases on June 13 , the day we masked ourselves and took the train back to Paris . The caseload continues to be small and manageable .
America , however , is an utter disaster . Texas , Florida , and Arizona are the newest hubs of contagion , having apparently learned nothing from the other countries and states that previously experienced surges in cases . I stared at my phone in disbelief when the musician Rosanne Cash wrote on Twitter that her daughter had been called a “ liberal pussy ! ” in Nashville for wearing a mask to buy groceries .
That insult succinctly conveys the crux of the problem . American leadership has politicized the pandemic instead of trying to fight it . I see no preparedness , no coordinated top-down leadership of the sort we ’ ve enjoyed in Europe . I see only empty posturing , the sad spectacle of the president refusing to wear a mask , just to own the libs . What an astonishing self-inflicted wound .
On June 26 , a day when the U.S. notched some 45,000 new cases—how ’ s that for “ American carnage ” ? —the European Union announced that it would loosen some travel restrictions but extend its ban on visitors from the United States and other hot-spot nations . On Tuesday , it confirmed that remarkable and deeply humiliating decision , a clear message that in pandemic management , the EU believes that the United States is no better than Russia and Brazil—autocrat-run public-health disasters—and that American tourists would pose a dire threat to the hard-won stability our lockdown has earned us . So much for the myth that the American political system and way of life are a model for the world .
We didn ’ t stay long in the city . Although the chance of contagion in Paris is minimal , the thought of unnecessary risk unnerved me , and so we left again for another round of self-imposed confinement . But this was a choice . I think of my mother and father trapped in New Jersey , in their 70s and 80s , respectively , and at the mercy of a society that is failing extravagantly to protect them . And it is failing to protect them not from some omnipotent enemy—as we believed in March and perhaps even as late as April—but from a tough and dangerous foe that many other societies have wrestled into submission .
I think of my father , whom I realize I may not see this calendar year or possibly even the next , and I picture him housebound indefinitely , unable to experience a pleasure so anodyne as bookstore browsing . I think of my mother , who is missing her grandchildren ’ s birthdays and watching them grow tall through FaceTime , and I imagine her leaving the house at dawn to arrive at the grocery store during its early hours for seniors . I am infuriated . I am also reminded once again of the degree to which so many other countries deliver what is , in real terms , a palpably higher quality of life by any number of self-evident measures .