Susan Rice , a national security adviser during the Obama administration , claims President Donald Trump is responsible for American deaths during the coronavirus outbreak .
Speaking with the Washington Post 's Jonathan Capehart on the `` Cape Up '' podcast , Rice said Trump 's `` incompetence '' has cost `` tens of thousands of American lives . ''
`` He has demonstrated utter lack of leadership , utter incompetence . And he 's been profoundly dishonest about the nature of the threat to the American people by downplaying it , by dismissing it , by comparing it to the flu , '' Rice said .
`` He has misled the American people to such an extent that lives have been lost in the process , '' she continued . `` Whether that 's because he did n't care or he was trying to downplay the problem and buoy his electoral prospects mistakenly , or whether it was to buck up the markets , or because he does n't care , I do n't know what it was .
`` I just know that he has cost tens of thousands of American lives , '' Rice declared .
Specifically , Rice alleged the Trump administration ignored pandemic preparedness , while , of course , claiming the Obama administration prioritized such readiness as `` a top national security priority . ''
In fact , the Obama administration significantly depleted the national stockpile of medical equipment containing N95 respirator masks and other personal protection equipment that has now become vital in the face of COVID-19 .
Fact-checking this claim about the Obama administration , USA Today reported :
We rate this claim TRUE because it is supported by our research . There is no indication that the Obama administration took significant steps to replenish the supply of N95 masks in the Strategic National Stockpile after it was depleted from repeated crises . Calls for action came from experts at the time concerned for the country 's ability to respond to future serious pandemics . Such recommendations were , for whatever reason , not heeded .
Meanwhile , Rice also bashed Trump for not taking action soon enough .
She claimed that Trump should have began `` moving immediately from very early January to do the things that we know we have to do . ''
But that was not possible considering the World Health Organization was disseminating Chinese propaganda that COVID-19 was not transmittable from human-to-human contact . In fact , the WHO did not declare coronavirus a pandemic until March — at least two months after the disease began spreading around the world .
And when Trump did act — placing travel restrictions on travel to China and mandating a 14-day quarantine for people returning from the Chinese providence from which COVID-19 originated — WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom bashed the moved as not `` evidence-based . ''
`` The Trump administration 's quarantine and travel ban in response to the Wuhan coronavirus could undercut international efforts to fight the outbreak by antagonizing Chinese leaders , as well as stigmatizing people of Asian descent , according to a growing chorus of public health experts and lawmakers , '' Politico declared on Feb. 4 .