And feeling like he had no idea what was coming next .
On that first visit in April you could feel Thoreau there . You could not help thinking of his circumstances 175 years ago when he decamped to this place , and how strangely those circumstances echo our own . You could picture Thoreau in his Home Depot shed , grappling with isolation , being sheltered on a circumscribed parcel of earth .
In two days at Walden , here is some of what I found : an empty parking lot , and then one so full it was blocked . Kayakers , picnickers , swimmers in both wet suits and bikinis . Walkers in masks . Fishermen in waders . And a woman who emerged from the water to tell me of having visited Walden more than 500 times .
I took a day trip – two of them , actually . Two visits to Walden Pond , in Concord , Massachusetts , an hour from our quarantined home . Where better , I thought , to explore the idea of isolation . It ’ s what Thoreau did ( albeit for nearly 800 days , not 80 ) .
“ A man must generally get away some hundreds or thousands of miles from home before he can be said to begin his travels , ” wrote Henry David Thoreau . “ Why not begin his travels at home ? ”
Thoreau , I think , might have understood our collective predicament . Or so it seems on this dank April day in a spring that meteorologists are calling New England ’ s coldest ever . I am in Concord , Massachusetts , standing in front of a replica of the hut where Henry David Thoreau undertook his version of self-isolation at Walden Pond . I peer at it like I expect it to speak .
Have you seen it ? It really is small . Ten feet by 15 feet – the size of a lawnmower shed you could buy at a hardware store . One room , one door , two windows , a fireplace . ( In building a dwelling , Thoreau would later write in “ Walden , ” “ Consider first how slight a shelter is absolutely necessary. ” ) Inside , behind the locked entry but visible through the window : a cot , a three-legged desk , two wooden chairs , and on this day the anachronism of a day-glo sandwich board urging people not to forget the visitor center 100 yards away .
The hut , like the visitor center , is beside the parking lot at what is now Walden Pond State Reservation . The park is officially “ closed to aid in the prevention of the spread of COVID-19. ” Yet here and there a few people wander in the chill – having come for the trails ( still accessible , though now routed in one-way loops ) , or maybe just to escape the house . Occasionally they glance at the tiny hut , which , even though a replica , somehow looks genuine – antique and careworn and moss-eaten . You can imagine Thoreau huddled inside it , sheltering in place with no plumbing but the pond , no heat but burning wood , no light but candles . Not to mention zero Wi-Fi and definitely too few bars for FaceTime .
Thoreau moved into his hut on July 4 , 1845 . He lived there alone for two years , two months , and two days . Nine years later he published “ Walden , ” describing what he ’ d done . And nearly two centuries on , people come here to see where he ’ d done it .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Monitor writer Michael Hopkins peers through the window of a replica of Thoreau ’ s cabin , which isn ’ t much bigger than a garden shed .
As it happens , I wasn ’ t supposed to be here . Back in January , in times B.C . ( before coronavirus ) this was planned as a different kind of travel story : the Monitor ’ s Memorial Day kickoff of summer vacation season . The plan was to fly to Washington , D.C. , buy bike-share passes , and crisscross the National Mall to document the scenes at the monuments – the great gatherings of every kind of human that belittle our differences and exalt our community . Fractious times ? Sure . But not in these places . Not while reading Abraham Lincoln ’ s carved words opposite his enormous hand on his enormous knee . Not while watching Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. emerge indomitable from a stone .
But of course things changed , and there would be no flights or hotels or runabout bicycles handed from one unsanitized tourist to another . So what would there be – for this story , for this summer , for all of us ?
Day trips , it turns out . Or so say the zeitgeist pollsters and travel forecasters . We ’ re all going to take short trips – in our cars , near our homes , with our lunches packed and our face coverings in our pockets . And I figured : I should go on one , too .
So I took a day trip – two of them , actually . Two visits to Walden Pond , in Concord , an hour from our quarantined home . Where better , I thought , to explore the idea of isolation . It ’ s what Thoreau did ( albeit for nearly 800 days , not 80 ) . Thoreau was the original social distancer , though his isolation , unlike ours , was not forced .
In two days at Walden , here is some of what I found : winter , and then summer , though just 12 days apart . An empty parking lot , and then one so full it was blocked . Kayakers , picnickers , swimmers in both wet suits and bikinis . Walkers in masks . Fishermen in waders . And a woman who emerged from the water to tell me of having visited Walden more than 500 times .
Between those Walden visits I read “ Walden ” itself . ( Reread it , if you count high school , which I shouldn ’ t . ) And tangentially I tumbled down the rabbit hole of never-ending debate over Thoreau ’ s cultural reputation and literary standing . ( Was Thoreau a hypocrite ? Was Thoreau a fraud ? Was Thoreau , in the characterization offered by a 2015 New Yorker headline , “ Pond Scum ” ? )
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Two men in a canoe head out to fish on the 65-acre lake . You can swim , boat , fish , and hike at Walden . In winter , people cross-country ski and ice skate .
So my day trips bloomed into something more , which is maybe what we should wish from our day trips if they ’ re all we have . It ’ s what Thoreau would have wanted .
On that first visit in April you could feel Thoreau there . You could not help thinking of his circumstances 175 years ago when he decamped to this place , and how strangely those circumstances echo our own . You could picture Thoreau in his Home Depot shed , grappling with isolation , being sheltered on a circumscribed parcel of earth .
And feeling like he had no idea what was coming next .
“ A man must generally get away some hundreds or thousands of miles from home before he can be said to begin his travels , ” wrote Thoreau . “ Why not begin his travels at home ? Would he have to go far or look very closely to discover novelties ? ”
Why not , indeed ? But before we return to Walden ( the pond ) or even “ Walden ” ( the book ) , what about the pandemic-prompted travel question that led to this adventure in the first place – will Americans even go on vacation this summer ?
Not as intended , they won ’ t . Already , 66 % of Americans have canceled their summer vacation plans , leaving unclear the matter of whether they ’ ll substitute different ones , according to MMGY Global , a travel industry marketing firm . MMGY identifies three factors affecting consumer willingness to travel : perception of safety , economic factors , and isolation orders .
“ As many of us continue to lead lives sheltered in place , the simplest of travel activities seem fantastical , ” says Katie Briscoe , MMGY ’ s president . “ When will travelers feel safe to step on a plane ? When will hotels welcome guests again ? ”
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Three boys build a sandcastle on the beach at Walden Pond .
Not for a while , according to a Harris poll . A majority of Americans say they ’ ll wait at least seven months before they ’ ll fly on a plane , and four months before they ’ ll stay in a hotel , which for most of the country essentially wipes out overnight travel for the entire summer . Some 58 % of travelers say that restaurants will be off their itineraries until July or later . As for cruises , 57 % say they won ’ t get on a ship for “ a year or longer , ” and 23 % say they ’ ll “ never ” take another cruise again .
“ People just feel safer controlling their own experience , ” says Ms. Briscoe . “ Whether that be in their car , around friends and family , or just back in trusted and familiar places , this represents the beginning of travel recovery . ”
There are some exceptions to the general travel collapse that illustrate what the analysts describe . At the same time that two-thirds of people have scuttled their vacation plans and canceled the flights and hotel rooms that go with them , campground operators are being swamped with reservations . Warren Meyer , owner of Recreation Resource Management , runs 150 campgrounds and day-use recreation sites on public parks and land across the United States . “ Those of us two or three hours away [ from travelers ’ homes ] are going to be mobbed this summer , ” he predicts . Reservations at RRM-run sites are running 20 % ahead of their 2019 rates . “ We ’ re going to be full everywhere , all the time . ”
“ People are not scared of camping , ” he says . You travel in your own car ; you sleep in your own shelter ; you keep your distance while cooking your own dinner in the ventilated outdoors . Plus , in times of uncertainty , it becomes increasingly attractive , he says , to pay $ 25 to camp under the red rocks in Sedona , Arizona , instead of $ 400 to stay in a lodge at Yellowstone .
Mr. Meyer has seen this kind of dynamic before . During the Great Recession , campsite occupancy never fell . The cheap travel option thrived . Similarly , after 9/11 , in the summer of 2002 when people still didn ’ t want to fly , “ we had a record camping year , ” he notes .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff A family wearing face masks enjoys the pond on a sunny spring day .
Still , RRM has to weather the lockdown if it ’ s going to flourish in the summer . Before some states began to ease restrictions in May , 143 of the company ’ s 150 facilities were shuttered . And RRM , like every business , has a breaking point – Mr. Meyer says the company will be in big trouble if it doesn ’ t open by Memorial Day .
Of course , only 14 % of Americans camp . Whereas almost everyone , say the analysts , will day trip .
But where to ? To do what ? No one knows how long many attractions , such as museums and theme parks , will remain closed or limited . A currently invaluable benefit of day trips is “ flexibility , ” William Schaffner , a health policy expert at Vanderbilt University in Nashville , Tennessee , told AFAR Magazine . “ Social distancing in a variety of forms is going to be with us for a long time . ”
It ’ s easy enough to maintain distance , though , if you drive Chicago ’ s suburbs with a map of Frank Lloyd Wright houses in your lap , or exit Miami for a day of snorkeling in nearby Bahia Honda State Park in the Florida Keys .
In sum : Think “ hyperlocal. ” That ’ s the buzzword of the moment among travel industry insiders . We ’ ll be staying near , not going far . Maybe we ’ ll be discovering about our own backyards what Dorothy went to Oz and back to figure out . Except no balloons – we ’ ll be driving . According to MMGY Chief Executive Officer Clayton Reid , “ 2020 could well become the year of the car ” – a likelihood abetted by gas prices that are now lower in 20 states than at any time in U.S. history ( inflation adjusted ) .
“ I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately . ”
So begins perhaps the most iconic line among Thoreau ’ s many . But the reality of it wasn ’ t that simple – nor anywhere near that iconic .
The Thoreau who went to Walden was far from the prophet he ’ s often made out to be . He was mostly just a young man at loose ends – 27 years old , no attachments , few prospects , little idea of his path . He had gone to New York chasing a writer ’ s life and returned to Concord homesick and unsuccessful . He had started a school with his brother , John , only to lose both the school and , far worse , his brother , when John died of complications from cutting his finger . In the spring of 1845 Thoreau could have been the sad second cousin in a Jane Austen novel . He was hungry for something . His prospects of finding it were slim . If he decided to go live in the woods , there was no one to stop him .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Visitors have left cairns by Thoreau ’ s original cabin site in the Walden woods .
None of which makes his “ experiment ” in deliberate living less brave or ambitious . When you go to Walden , that ’ s part of what you sense . You walk the rolling , rocky ground around the pond and climb the small slope to where the tiny cabin was , and you can ’ t help but think of the New England winter , and the cold , and the snow . You think of the fire he burned incessantly , and the wood he chopped to feed it . You think of the food he laid up and the vermin that ate it . You think of how hard it must have been , for all his claims about his leisure .
It ’ s easy to get “ Walden ” wrong . I know I did , before reading it again . Somewhere along the line we stopped letting the experience breathe and turned it into a few quotes handed down on tablets .
“ If a man does not keep pace with his companions , perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer . ”
You can see them on posters on Google , just two clicks away . They sound like a man who brooks no dissent , is unwavering , who never entertains doubt . But Thoreau was full of doubt , and he let his mind waver – a lot .
He both hated work and exalted it , was both an introvert and an extrovert . On the one hand , he said , “ I never found the companion that was so companionable as solitude. ” On the other , he decreed , “ I think that I love society as much as most , and am ready enough to fasten myself like a bloodsucker for the time to any full-blooded man that comes in my way . I am naturally no hermit. ” Every idea he encountered , he tried on , desperate to feel each one as tangibly as a stone in a hand .
We too often mistake “ Walden ” as a book about finding : finding the path , finding the truth , finding the way . But it ’ s not . It ’ s a book about searching .
It is on my second trip to Walden , on a May day suddenly gleaming and warm , that I meet Christina Davis . She comes out of the pond , after wading in Thoreau ’ s cove .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff “ Now that ’ s a sentence . It ’ s a poem , that sentence . It ’ s perfect , ” says Christina Davis , a museum curator who has visited Walden Pond some 500 times , on the line posted at the site of Henry David Thoreau ’ s cabin explaining why he moved to the woods .
“ Aren ’ t you cold ? ” someone asks her . She isn ’ t . You get used to it , she says . She swims here every year on May 1 . She ’ s been coming since 1996 and now has been here more than 500 times .
We sit down to talk . What kind of person visits a site 500 times ? Ms. Davis doesn ’ t mind trying to explain – emphasis on “ try , ” she says , since she ’ s not fully sure herself . She is a poet , author , and curator of the Woodberry Poetry Room at Harvard University ’ s Lamont Library . But in 1996 , she ’ d just finished three years of graduate study at Oxford University and discovered she needed to come home to America . “ Turned out I was more American than I ’ d thought , ” she says . “ I needed to reacquaint myself. ” She was living in New York then , and at loose ends . One day she ventured north by train to Boston and then Concord , and then by foot two miles from the station to the pond . A pilgrimage . She ’ s never stopped making them . “ You have your pilgrimages , don ’ t you ? ” she says .
Over the years she ’ s done most of the things you can do at Walden . She ’ s sat on rocks and written poems with her ankles in the water . She ’ s ice skated . She ’ s made friends . “ All while you feel a personal relationship with this person called Henry . ”
She shyly quotes something she has written : “ It is with this I have formed a family . ”
As shadows grow , we walk on pine needles up the path to the original site of Thoreau ’ s hut . Ms. Davis stops , points at the brown wooden sign . “ Now that ’ s a sentence , ” she says . “ It ’ s a poem , that sentence . It ’ s perfect . ”
Her awe causes me to look again – better yet , causes me to forget the quote books and commencement speeches that have dulled the line to me . Here it is , Thoreau in full : “ I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately , to front only the essential facts of life , and see if I could not learn what it had to teach , and not , when I came to die , discover that I had not lived . ”
After Ms. Davis leaves , I linger for a moment on the ground where the hut had been , marked now by granite posts and chains around the periphery . The afternoon is ending , and no one is here . There are only the sounds of shouts far across the water and now and then the echoed thunk of an oar on a boat hull .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Writer Michael Hopkins surveys the surroundings at the original site of Henry David Thoreau ’ s one-room cabin , which was 10 feet by 15 feet , in Walden woods .
As I write this , lockdowns are being lifted on various timetables in various places . Of course unlike Thoreau ’ s isolation , ours has involved lamps , not candles ; bathrooms , not pits . We have had the internet and Zoom and Netflix . But right now it can feel like we know as little about what comes next as Thoreau did when he made his experiment .
Soon , as summer unspools , we ’ ll all travel again – just not as far as we ’ d planned . We ’ ll think hyperlocal . We ’ ll forget our overstuffed vacation itineraries of old and dial down the pressure . We ’ ll day trip .
Maybe , as I did on my outing , you ’ ll reacquaint yourself with your local Thoreau , or that nearby wonder that turns out no less wonderful for its modesty , or someplace you ’ ve seen plenty but never really looked at . If you ’ re fortunate , you ’ ll meet your Christina Davis . You ’ ll go slower , you ’ ll expect less , you ’ ll discover unimagined things precisely because you didn ’ t think you had to .
“ Would [ we ] have to go far or look very closely to discover novelties ? ” Thoreau asked . At Walden , beside a common New England pond in an ordinary New England woods , one doesn ’ t think so . One thinks we can make discoveries in our own backyards for a very long time .
And as we do , maybe we ’ ll find our way back to the place all our quarantines and social distancing have made us hungriest for . Maybe we ’ ll be able to say about ourselves what Thoreau was finally able to say in “ Walden . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ At present I am a sojourner in civilized life again . ”