The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) may urge Americans to cover their faces in public to protect themselves and others amid the coronavirus pandemic , The Washington Post is reporting .
The recommendation , if approved , would call for Americans to use cloth coverings instead of surgical and N95 masks , which have been in short supply at hospitals and medical facilities across the country , the Post noted , adding that the coverings could potentially lower the risk of an infected person transmitting the virus .
Talks are still ongoing , an anonymous federal official confirmed to the newspaper .
A second official said that the recommendation could help “ flatten the curve ” of the virus 's spread .
The CDC does not currently recommend that healthy people wear masks or coverings over their face , instead recommending that everyone engage in social distancing and stand at least six feet apart .
President Trump Donald John TrumpPelosi eyes end of April to bring a fourth coronavirus relief bill to the floor NBA to contribute 1 million surgical masks to NY essential workers Private equity firm with ties to Kushner asks Trump administration to relax rules on loan program : report MORE , asked Monday at the daily White House briefing if everyone should wear nonmedical masks , told reporters that the option is `` certainly something we could discuss ” and that “ it could be something like that for a limited period of time . ”
Former Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb recommended the change as the lead author of a pandemic response plan published Sunday by the American Enterprise Institute . The report says that “ everyone , including people without symptoms , should be encouraged to wear nonmedical fabric face masks while in public . ”
During an interview with CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation ” on Sunday , he said people should consider wearing a cotton mask , adding : “ We should be putting out guidelines from the CDC on how you can develop a mask on your own . ”
However , some worry that a mask could become contaminated and not be properly cleaned or disposed of , leading to transmission of the coronavirus , the Post reported .
Ilhem Messaoudi , a University of California at Irvine epidemiologist , told the newspaper that the virus is spread through heavy respiratory droplets .
“ Given the shortage of PPE available to our healthcare workforce , it is irresponsible for anyone to suggest that we should all don masks , reducing the supply for nurses and physicians who do not have the luxury of treating symptomatic , very sick patients from 6 feet away , ” Messaoudi said .
“ Homemade masks theoretically could offer some protection if the materials and fit were optimized , but this is uncertain , ” Jeffrey Duchin , a top health official in Seattle and King County , Wash. , told the Post . “ It ’ s also possible that mask-wearing might increase the risk for infection if other recommendations ( like hand washing and distancing ) are less likely to be followed or if the mask is contaminated and touched . ”
“ Well-designed homemade or commercially manufactured masks for the public that did not draw on the supply needed by healthcare workers could potentially provide some protection , ” he added .