Depression-era levels of mass unemployment would be bound to bring social and political upheavals . But if governments recognize that this is a global problem , says the International Labor Organization , and work together to solve it rather than put their domestic interests first , they might be able to avert the worst .
Even if the world finds its way out of the COVID-19 crisis reasonably soon , it is not certain that these workers in the “ informal economy ” will be able to quickly find jobs during the slump that most observers are predicting .
But around the world , 50 times more people than that have lost their jobs and have no unemployment benefit to fall back on . They are the 1.6 billion workers on the margins of the economy – migrant workers , gig workers , and service industry staff who make up half the world ’ s workforce . They are in immediate danger of losing their livelihood and finding it precariously hard to make ends meet , according to a report last week from the International Labor Organization .
The coronavirus pandemic has wreaked economic havoc , shuttering businesses and destroying jobs across the globe . In the United States alone , over 30 million people have applied for unemployment benefits in recent weeks .
Even amid the torrent of statistics surrounding the COVID-19 crisis , it stands out . And while it ’ s received only scant media attention , it matters . A lot . Because it highlights a critical and truly global challenge almost sure to outlast the pandemic itself .
That 1.6 billion is the number of people on the margins of the world economy , from migrant workers to those employed in the gig economy , who are in immediate danger of losing their livelihoods . They make up half the world ’ s workforce and it is far from certain that their jobs will reappear even when the crisis is over .
Hundreds of millions of jobs have been put on hold by coronavirus shutdowns around the world . That ’ s been especially true in countries already hit by the pandemic . But other areas , like Africa and much of South America , are suffering from the international economic fallout and are likely to face heightened job losses if the pandemic strikes harder there .
In the United States , more than 30 million people , over 15 % of the workforce , have applied for unemployment benefits in recent weeks . In Western Europe , joblessness is also increasing . Only government wage-support subsidies have staved off a U.S.-scale spike , by keeping idle or furloughed workers notionally employed . In China , official statistics have reported only a slight uptick in unemployment . But that figure excludes a migrant workforce of nearly 300 million people .
That ’ s where the 1.6 billion figure comes in . Released last week by the International Labor Organization , it covers the so-called informal economy – whether migrant , agricultural , or shift workers in the developing world , or the gig workers and service-industry staff increasingly predominant in wealthier economies . The ILO found that COVID-19 had left almost all 2 billion of them finding it precariously hard to make ends meet .
The immediate challenge for governments essentially involves budgeting , or printing , more money : for multitrillion-dollar stimulus programs like those in the U.S. , or salary-support schemes favored in Europe and elsewhere . And there is every likelihood that the sums needed for such schemes will grow further .
But that may turn out to be the easy part . An even tougher challenge lies ahead .
The best-case scenario envisages a fairly early exit from COVID-19 , through a combination of treatment or inoculation advances and a staged reboot of the world economy . It ’ s a hope shared on all continents , by governments democratic and authoritarian . A number of U.S. states , as well as COVID-affected countries in Europe and Asia , are now tentatively beginning to reopen for business .
But there ’ s a key question , even in a best-case scenario : How many of the jobs lost to COVID-19 will be lost for good , or at least for a long time after the economic reopenings ? That question is particularly acute in the service economy – restaurants , leisure businesses , small retail shops – and for the ILO ’ s 1.6 billion strugglers in the informal economy worldwide .
Much will depend on the longer-term effects of the blow COVID-19 has dealt to the world economy , through major slowdowns in the world ’ s two leading economies , the U.S. and China , and huge disruptions to international trade .
Two very different examples : Across Asia , millions work in garment and other factories that have thrived largely on exports to Europe . Many were suddenly made jobless by COVID-19 shutdowns . The question now will be whether , or how quickly , demand for their products will rebound in a post-pandemic world economy .
In Europe itself , Greece has so far confounded predictions by avoiding the kind of mass outbreaks that have claimed tens of thousands of lives in Italy , France , and Britain . But the tourism sector is critical to Greece ’ s economy , employing a fifth of the workforce . The country can only hope not just that airlines and airports reopen , but that the tourists recover a pre-pandemic appetite for air travel .
Yet beyond the economic imponderables , long-term mass joblessness – possibly on the scale of the Great Depression in the 1930s – could pose major social and political challenges .
Work , especially for those living payday to payday , is essential to economic survival . But it ’ s also central to people ’ s identity , their sense of self-definition , even self-worth . The human cost of the Great Depression – a period that , like many of great suffering , also produced great insights and works of art – is perhaps chronicled nowhere as searingly as in the pages of John Steinbeck ’ s “ Grapes of Wrath . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
While work can form a core part of a person ’ s identity , worklessness can depress and embitter . A more recent example – the political fallout from the 2008 world financial crisis – is a reminder that one result can be a growth in the kind of anger and resentment on which populist strongmen often feed .
The good news , or so organizations like the ILO are emphasizing , is that the employment crisis caused by COVID-19 is not limited to one country or region . Their hope is that , rather than focus only on the domestic imperative of getting each national economy back on its feet , governments will take shared , international action to address the needs of the “ 1.6 billion ” in a post-pandemic world .