The federal government is in the process of deploying 90 % of its stockpiled medical equipment to fight the coronavirus pandemic , Health and Human Services spokesperson Katie McKeogh told ███ Wednesday night .
Why it matters : These shipments are n't enough to meet current demands from states , who are bracing for staggered surges in hospital resource demand through May .
Driving the news : The House Oversight Committee published data on Wednesday showing what supplies the stockpile has sent to states so far — including 11 million N95 masks and over 7,000 ventilators , primarily to New York and other hot spots .
HHS announced its first contracts for ventilator production under the Defense Production Act on Wednesday .
its first contracts for ventilator production under the Defense Production Act on Wednesday . The agency says 30,000 ventilators built by General Motors will be delivered to the national stockpile by the end of August , and 43,000 ventilators from Philips will be delivered by the end of December .
built by General Motors will be delivered to the national stockpile by the end of August , and 43,000 ventilators from Philips will be delivered by the end of December . 2,500 of the ventilators from Philips are expected to be delivered to the stockpile by the end of May , and 6,132 from GM are expected to reach the stockpile by June 1 .
from Philips are expected to be delivered to the stockpile by the end of May , and 6,132 from GM are expected to reach the stockpile by June 1 . 10 % of the national stockpile will not be deployed and will instead be reserved `` for critical needs of frontline healthcare workers serving in federal response efforts , '' McKeogh said .
Flashback : America 's hospitals , doctors and nurses said in March there would `` not be enough medical supplies , including ventilators , to respond to the projected COVID-­19 outbreak '' without the intervention of the Defense Production Act — even with the use of the national stockpile .
Trump administration officials anonymously sounded the alarm in early April that America 's emergency stockpile of personal protective equipment was running dangerously low .
What they 're saying : `` Now that the national stockpile has been depleted of critical equipment , it appears that the Administration is leaving states to fend for themselves , to scour the open market for these scarce supplies , and to compete with each other and federal agencies in a chaotic , free-for-all bidding war , '' House Oversight Chair Carolyn Maloney ( D-N.Y. ) said in a press release on Wednesday .