Michigan Gov . Gretchen Whitmer acknowledged Tuesday that her husband dropped her name while requesting to get their boat in the water ahead of the Memorial Day weekend , though claimed her husband ’ s comments were a “ failed attempt at humor . ”
Whitmer ’ s comments came after her office initially pushed back against the story , saying they ’ re “ not going to make it a practice of addressing every rumor that is spread online. ” A Michigan GOP state senator also said her office had originally `` adamantly denied '' the claim that Whitmer 's husband tried to use her position to convince a dock company to quickly get the family 's boat on the water amid the coronavirus lockdowns .
However , during a press conference , Whitmer essentially confirmed the reported conversation happened , even though she claimed the comments were made in jest .
MICHIGAN POL ALLEGES WHITMER TRIED TO COVER UP HUSBAND ALLEGEDLY INVOKING HER OFFICE FOR FAVOR FROM MARINA
“ My husband made a failed attempt at humor last week when checking in with a small business that helps with our boat and dock up north , '' Whitmer said at a press conference Tuesday . “ Knowing it wouldn ’ t make a difference , he jokingly asked if being married to me might move him up in the queue . Obviously with the motorized boating prohibition in our early days of COVID-19 , he thought it might get a laugh . It didn ’ t . ”
Whitmer further sought to distance herself from her husband 's remarks : “ To be honest , I wasn ’ t laughing either when it was relayed to me . Because I knew how it would be perceived . He regrets it . I wish it wouldn ’ t have happened . And that ’ s really all we have to say about it , '' she continued .
Whitmer , who recently confirmed she 's been in talks with presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden campaign about being chosen as his running mate , famously imposed one of the strictest lockdowns in the country , sparking frequent protests . What 's more , she 's told people not living in Northern Michigan , the only region in the state where the lockdown has been lifted , to stay away from vacation spots there during the holiday weekend .
But in Facebook posts by NorthShore Dock LLC , its owner , Tad Dowker , described a request from Whitmer ’ s husband , Marc Mallory .
`` This morning , I was out working when the office called me , there was a gentleman on hold who wanted his boat in the water before the weekend , '' Dowker posted , The Detroit News reported . `` Being Memorial weekend and the fact that we started working three weeks late means there is no chance this is going to happen . ''
He continued , `` Our office personnel had explained this to the man and he replied , ' I am the husband to the governor , will this make a difference ? ' '' The docking company later noted that Mallory respectfully accepted that the accommodation would not be possible .
Whitmer spokeswoman Tiffany Brown refused to comment on the matter on Monday , saying the administration would n't address `` every rumor that is spread online . ''
She said in a statement : “ Our practice is not to discuss the governor ’ s or her family ’ s personal calendar/schedules . And we ’ re not going to make it a practice of addressing every rumor that is spread online . There ’ s been a lot of wild misinformation spreading online attacking the governor and her family , and the threats of violence against her personally are downright dangerous . ”
Last Monday , Whitmer announced restrictions would be lifted in some regions of Northern Michigan , but urged those who did n't live in the region to stay away . `` If you do n't live in these regions ... think long and hard before you take a trip into them , '' she said . `` A small spike could put the hospital system in dire straits pretty quickly . That 's precisely why we 're asking everyone to continue doing their part . Do n't descend on [ waterfront ] Traverse City from all regions of the state . ''
The vacation property Whitmer and her husband have owned is about 25 minutes from Traverse City , according to The Detroit News , but the family permanently resides in Lansing , over 150 miles away .
After calling out Whitmer over the weekend , Michigan GOP state Sen. Tom Barrett claimed Tuesday Whitmer and her staff `` duped '' him `` into a cover-up '' after the governor 's office `` adamantly denied '' the story .
Barrett said that he composed a Facebook post blowing the whistle on the situation on Friday after checking into the veracity of the story shared by Dowker .
But late Friday night , Barrett says , a representative from the governor 's office called the Michigan Senate Majority Leader 's office to pressure him into taking down the post -- saying that the story was incorrect .
`` I had posted this thing and had about 500 shares already on Facebook in a few hours , '' Barrett said . Then the governor 's office contacted Michigan Senate Majority Leader Mike Shirkey , a Republican , to reach out to Barrett to remove the post about Whitmer 's husband .
`` They were specifically requesting ... that my posts be taken down because they were insisting that was n't true , '' Barrett told Fox News . `` They insisted that it was a fabricated story . ''
MICHIGAN GOV CAUGHT IN MEMORIAL DAY CONTROVERSY OVER HUSBAND 'S REPORTED BOAT REQUEST
Republican Michigan state Rep. Matt Hall , the chairman of the state 's House Oversight Committee , told Fox News Monday that the Whitmer boat issue is not a top priority for his committee . Hall said that he is more focused on Whitmer 's `` bungled '' disaster declaration with the Trump administration , and other apparent missteps in her response to the coronavirus pandemic .
`` I would say it 's not a top priority for me because it 's still kind of in the beginning phases , '' Hall said . `` And what I 'm really focused on is , number one , the unemployment issue in Michigan . ''
State Rep. Triston Cole , the GOP lawmaker whose district includes the boat storage facility and Whitmer ’ s cottage , said there ’ s a lot of frustration in northern Michigan because stay-home orders have meant marina facilities have a huge backlog of getting boats out of storage . Some families are worried they may not get their boats in the water at all this summer and for the governor ’ s husband to allegedly try to pull rank has added to the frustration , Cole said .
“ The line is absolutely exponentially long because of…his wife , ” Cole told Fox News , citing the stay-home orders that didn ’ t allow for marina facilities to prepare for the summer rush . “ I wish that the governor or the governor 's husband would just issue an apology and clear this up . And we can continue to move forward reopening our state … Oftentimes the cover-up is by far worse than what actually happened . ”