Bejon Misra responded quickly to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi 's appeal in March for donations to a new fund to strengthen the country 's fight against the coronavirus .
The next day , the 69-year-old retired management professor made a donation . `` It was a generous contribution because Modi is the face of it , '' Misra said .
Such trust in Modi is common in India , the prime minister enjoying a very high approval rating , despite coronavirus infections spiking in recent weeks .
India on Tuesday recorded more than 28,000 cases for the second consecutive day , taking the tally to 906,752 , according to the country 's health ministry . More than 23,000 people have died from COVID-19 .
So when the Prime Minister 's Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations Fund , or PM CARES , was launched days after India started a countrywide virus lockdown in March , donations began pouring in and have not stopped .
Retirees like Misra , industrialists , Bollywood stars and foreign companies have all pitched in . But the fund , now valued at more than $ 1bn , has run into controversy over issues of transparency and accountability .
The Associated Press requested a list of donors and payments from Modi 's office under the Right to Information Law , which entitles citizens to access information from India 's often opaque bureaucracy . The request was denied .
Modi 's office , which manages PM CARES , has refused to disclose the information [ File : Narendramodi.in via AP ]
Modi 's office , which manages PM CARES , has refused to disclose the information , arguing that even though it is administered by the Indian government , the fund is not a public authority and therefore is not subject to right-to-information laws .
As a result , there is little transparency about the money the fund is receiving and spending in the middle of India 's still-raging virus outbreak .
`` It 's not a state secret , and the government must answer the questions that are being raised , '' said Saket Gokhale , an independent activist who was one of the first to question the fund . `` They are stonewalling . ''
Surender Singh Hooda , a lawyer at India 's top court , filed a petition on June 5 , arguing that the fund 's website must display details of the money received and how it is used .
The Delhi high court told Hooda to withdraw his petition and contact Modi 's office first , as required by law .
`` The money has been collected under the name of the prime minister , and millions of ordinary citizens have donated to it . The least we expect is some transparency , '' Hooda said .
Modi is the fund 's chairman , while the powerful Home Minister Amit Shah , as well as the ministers of defence and finance sit on its board .
But unlike other government-administered funds , this is not audited by India 's Comptroller and Auditor General .
Instead , Modi appointed a private business consulting firm , SARC & Associates , to audit the fund 12 days after it donated $ 212,665 to it .
Sunil Kumar Gupta , head of SARC & Associates , has been a vocal supporter of Modi 's Bharatiya Janata Party , appearing in photographs with Modi and top party leaders at various events .
Gupta also wrote a book in 2018 about `` Make in India '' , Modi 's project to increase manufacturing and domestic consumption of Indian-made products .
`` On what merit was this private company , which is so close to Modi 's party , given the job to audit the fund ? '' asked Gokhale . `` It 's shady , and the activities are very suspect . ''
Modi 's party colleagues have repeatedly denied any wrongdoing by the fund . Party spokesperson Nalin Kohli said it was `` transparent '' and was helping India fight the virus .
Activists argue that the fund 's website must display details of the money received and how it is used [ File : Rajanish Kakade/AP Photo ]
After Modi 's office said it had spent $ 26m from the fund to buy 50,000 ventilators , two top hospitals in Mumbai and New Delhi described shortcomings in the products and concluded they were prone to failure .
The main opposition Congress party called the ventilator purchase a scam .
About $ 13m from the fund was allocated for impoverished migrant workers , millions of whom were stranded without work or transportation home during the two-month countrywide lockdown . Many say the allocation came too late .
Modi 's party said the $ 13m was given to state governments to provide food , shelter , medical treatment and transportation for the migrants .
Former Finance Minister Palaniappan Chidambaram , a Congress party member , was critical that the money did not directly `` go to the hands of the migrant workers '' .
Others see the fund as a thinly veiled marketing device for the prime minister .
`` It looks like Modi wants to put a stamp of his own on everything , '' said Aseem Katyal , an independent activist who has been demanding transparency from Modi 's office .