With growing and necessary isolation , economic uncertainty and looming deaths that make us feel dread and anxiety for our loved ones and ourselves , these are harder times than many of us have faced in our lives .
I know something about fear and uncertainty . A bullet to the head one sunny morning in Arizona almost a decade ago left me first fighting for my life and then fighting to build my life anew . But in experiencing the worst — and in facing fear , the unknown , pain , and the deep desire to move forward — I have learned a lot about resiliency and what it takes to endure . I want to share what I ’ ve learned in my journey in the hopes that it may help others find their way forward , too :
►Have faith in first responders , doctors and nurses . From the moment the medics arrived to lift me off the pavement where I ’ d been shot , to the time I still spend with therapists , working on my speech and use of my right arm and leg , the dedication , fearlessness and talent of medical professionals has been a gift and my guiding light . There were days when pain and frustration made it hard to carry on , but their professionalism never waned , and I never stopped following their lead . We need them now , and they need us .
Share your coronavirus story : Contact ███ Opinion 's hotline to share your experiences and leave messages for front-line workers and others .
►Listen to experts and find solutions . Because of the progress my medical team has helped me make over the years , I ’ ve gotten to take on a new role as an advocate for gun violence prevention . I ’ ve learned the value of putting facts over ideology , of finding creative solutions . I ’ ve sat with Republicans and Democrats and know that when lives are at stake , they can find ways to move forward , together . We need our leaders to respect scientists and public health experts more than ever and to act on their best ideas .
►Rely on each other . In my darkest days , my friends filled my hospital room with pictures of beautiful vistas and my favorite places — reminding me of the world outside I aspired to rejoin . Jimmy Hatch , a dear friend and retired Navy SEAL Special Warfare Operator , exemplifies for me the healing power of these connections . After he was grievously injured in combat , I spent time with him at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center . After I was shot , he came to my hospital bed . We talked about rehabilitation and recovery , pain and determination . Three years later , he joined me as we jumped out of an airplane into the skies over my beloved Arizona .
►Turn to service . Service can take so many forms . Check in on elderly neighbors or those needing a little attention ( from a safe distance of course ! ) . Make a donation to a food bank or an emergency fund . Send a text to a friend who is ill , or caring for someone , or simply struggling to be home alone . Each gesture , however small , is a stitch in the quilt that keeps our communities connected .
There ’ s a quote attributed to Maya Angelou that I ’ ve thought about a lot over these years . “ I can be changed by what happens to me , but I refuse to be reduced by it. ” These are hard days . They will get harder . We will lose far too many lives . Some of us will be physically weak . Some will be mourning loved ones . Some will be fighting back from economic insecurity .
It is staggering to contemplate . But as one who has been , metaphorically and literally , brought to my very knees by a shocking blow , I know the power of insisting on our own strength , our own potential . And I know the power of Americans standing together — not just to endure this , but to emerge from it stronger .
In the days after almost being killed , I lay in a hospital room not fully conscious , relying on a ventilator to breathe , as so many are at this moment . My husband Mark Kelly tells me that when he held my hand , my fingers found his wedding ring , touching it and twisting it again and again . My memories are hazy , but I think I was trying to send Mark a message of hope . I think I was trying to focus not on the pain and challenge that were to follow , but on the connection between us .
Our connections to each other bring strength , hope and resilience . It is my hope for my fellow Americans and all humanity that we find our strength and our belief that we can get through this and rebuild , together .
Gabrielle Giffords is a former congresswoman from Arizona and co-founder of Giffords : Courage to Fight Gun Violence . She survived an assassination attempt in January 2011 that took the lives of six people .