The 45,000-member National Guard Association and some state officials told POLITICO that they suspect the Trump administration timed its orders to limit the deployment to 89 days — one short of the number that would qualify the earliest participants for certain education and retirement benefits .
Guard members must serve for 20 years to qualify for a pension at age 60 . But for every 90 days serving during a federal emergency , Guard members can move up that retirement by three months . Ninety days of service also qualifies members for 40 percent off the tuition at a public college or university .
Because the National Guard members have to self-quarantine for two weeks before returning to civilian life to ensure they don ’ t spread the virus after serving on the front lines , states could lose their services in early June .
Trump ’ s original order calling up Guard members to help with the coronavirus crisis had been scheduled to expire on May 31 . With the deadline approaching , Colorado ’ s entire congressional delegation — Republicans and Democrats alike — wrote to the president asking for an extension until the end of the year . Senators from New Hampshire , Connecticut , West Virginia and Illinois sought an extension through the fall . And several officials , including Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley and Illinois Gov . J.B. Pritzker , have written letters asking for an extension until at least June 30 .
Instead , the White House issued an unusual 24-day extension that terminates the deployment mid-week .
“ It seemed kind of weird to me , ” said retired Brig . Gen. J. Roy Robinson , president of the National Guard Association , the advocacy group for Guard members . “ It ’ s a Wednesday . And it also coincides with 89 days of deployment for any soldiers who went on federal status at the beginning . I was getting all kind of calls about it and I said , ‘ It ’ s probably just a coincidence. ’ But in the back of my mind , I know better . They ’ re screwing the National Guard members out of the status they should have . ”
The White House did not respond to multiple requests for comment .
The National Guard ’ s Hall countered that the 90-day threshold is cumulative , meaning members could qualify for both early retirement and GI Bill education benefits on their next federal deployment .
“ If someone ’ s new in the Guard , they won ’ t be able to make that 90 days in one shot , ” Hall acknowledged . “ But if two months from now they ’ re called up for a hurricane or flood , they can make it then . The goal here is not to hurt Guardsmen . ”
Nonetheless , federal deployments are relatively rare , and the practical impact of a June 24 cutoff would be to prevent many Guard members from claiming potentially valuable benefits , the National Guard Association said .
Meanwhile , as the national death count climbs toward 100,000 , many states are depending on Guard members to help enact testing programs , deep-clean public facilities and perform the kind of contact tracing of people exposed to the virus that ’ s necessary to help states reopen — and say those needs will not go away anytime soon .