But of course , there was no multilateral response . The Trump administration has poisoned American relationships with almost every historical U.S. ally , to the point where it ’ s a question whether these relationships can still meaningfully be described as alliances at all . Secretary of State Mike Pompeo conceives of leadership as barking orders at other countries , and then complaining on Fox News when his orders are disregarded . The American approach to the coronavirus has been nearly as dishonest and selfish as China ’ s own . Trump-led America is not even trying to cooperate with former partners ; by now , it ’ s doubtful that the former partners would trust an offer of cooperation if it were extended .
Trump and his media partners at Fox News have recently pivoted from denying the crisis to blaming it on China . They want Americans to call the coronavirus the “ Chinese virus. ” Their motive is obvious : to shift blame from a negligent president onto sinister foreigners . ( Trump and Fox ’ s preference for “ Chinese virus ” over “ China virus ” subtly shifts the blame from the state of China to Chinese people , including people of Chinese descent living in the United States . )
At any given moment , the world is either moving forward to cooperation , trade , and peace , or regressing toward protectionism , isolation , and conflict . We have experienced cooperation and know its benefits . We have experienced isolationism and have suffered its miseries . The circumstances may change . The choice does not . Let ’ s choose wisely .
Let ’ s also face facts . To convert our choices into reality , we must take into account the adverse truths revealed by the present crisis .
Here are three of them : The paranoia and secretiveness of the rulers of China horribly worsened the pandemic , and the Western world 's dependence on China for medical supplies made Western countries more vulnerable to the pandemic when it escaped China .
Adam Serwer : Trump is inciting a coronavirus culture war to save himself
The Trump administration wants to exploit the first of these facts as a political excuse for its own indifference and incompetence . It hopes to use the second as a justification for its inward turn and its selfish economic policies .
Trump ’ s bad use of facts does not , however , alter the facts . They are facts—and if you want to build a better world than Trump intends for you , you must yourself account for those facts in your plans .
So we must face the first of these facts . The West can not change China . China is too big , and too strong . The West should wish those Chinese people , including many in Hong Kong , who seek a freer future for China , well . But as they wish them well , Western countries need to keep in mind that the present Chinese state is not like the former Soviet Union . It is not as aggressive , not as expansionary , and not as ideological . The Chinese state is more dangerous for the harm it incubates inside itself than for the harm it schemes against others . China ’ s currency manipulations and predatory trade policies were adopted to protect the state from its own people ; they are only incidentally harmful to others . The same is true of China ’ s pandemic cover-up : That was an act of regime self-preservation . The harm to the rest of the world was collateral damage , not a malign plot .