`` Unfortunately , I was not surprised by the [ numbers ] '' Heather Marcoux , senior editor at Motherly tells ███ Make It . Since releasing their first State of Motherhood report in 2018 , Marcoux says she 's seen the data on how mothers have felt increasingly unsupported by society due to demands at work and at home .
In fact , 74 % of U.S. mothers say they feel mentally worse since the pandemic began , according to a survey by motherhood lifestyle brand Motherly . The report , which gathered responses from more than 3,000 millennial moms between March 9 and April 23 , found that 97 % of moms between the ages of 24 and 39 say they feel burned out at least some of the time , with the pandemic only making things worse .
Balancing the demands of motherhood has never been easy . And , with Covid-19 forcing many women to be an employee , parent and teacher all at once , many working moms are having a hard time keeping it all together .
`` It was n't surprising to me that when the pandemic took away what little societal support these mothers do have , that they would feel mentally worse , '' she adds , referring to the thousands of school and daycare closures across the country .
According to the survey results , 30 % of full-time working moms say their primary cause of stress is child care , followed by worries around the mental health and well-being of family members .
Mary Beth Ferrante , co-founder and CEO of WRK/360 , a platform designed to attract and retain the talent of working parents , says she knows firsthand how the responsibilities of balancing it all have been magnified due to the pandemic . During the first month of working from home , she says both she and her husband traded off child-care responsibilities during the day , taking shifts of working for two hours and then watching their 2-year-old toddler for two hours . But , she says , even with the support of her spouse , she felt overwhelmed by the demands of being a full-time worker and child-care provider .
`` We ultimately decided for my mother-in-law to start coming over for a few hours in the morning every day , and that was a game changer for us , '' she says . `` We were able to have time where we could actually have some focused work without distraction . ''
For moms who do n't have the option of outside support , finding time to focus solely on work can be a challenge even when the pandemic is over . That 's why , Ferrante emphasizes , the remote work culture of today could be a benefit for moms in the future as more employers open up to long-term work-from-home options . According to the survey , nearly 60 % of working moms say they hope to see more workplace flexibility either for themselves or for their partner after this crisis is over .
Marcoux , who is working from home alongside her 4-year-old son and husband , says that in addition to flexibility , she hopes more employers will have discussions around paid parental leave and on-site child care so that more dads also can have the option of taking time off to care for their child . When all of these benefits are combined , she says , `` it creates a winning situation for everyone and reduces the outside burden on moms . ''
Check out : 13 ways the coronavirus pandemic could forever change the way we work
Do n't miss : Why long-term flexible work options could be a game changer for women