Weeks later , the Sunshine State has emerged as a coronavirus epicenter . Nearly 1 out of every 100 residents is infected with the virus , hospital intensive care units are full or filling up , and big-name visitors who chose Florida for their first post-isolation events are now mired in questions and controversies about safety .
Amid escalating infections , Florida , once held up by President Trump as a model for how to manage the novel coronavirus , is faring poorly . Residents worry the situation will get much worse . Florida is now one of a handful of states whose spiking numbers are driving a major resurgence of the virus in the United States , which is approaching 3 million cases .
Gov . Ron DeSantis ( R ) has downplayed the growing outbreak in Florida , saying expanded testing is responsible for more positive results and emphasizing that many new infections are among younger people less likely to experience the worst effects of the virus .
On Tuesday there were 213,794 cases of the coronavirus in Florida , according to ███ data . The state has tallied a record number of cases over the past week , averaging 8,766 a day , according to Post data .
In a sign of intensifying trouble , 52 intensive care units across more than a third of the state ’ s counties had reached capacity by Tuesday , according to data released by the state ’ s Agency for Health Care Administration . Another 17 hospitals had also run out of regular beds . The state has “ abundant capacity , ” DeSantis said at a news conference Tuesday .
Some nurses at Good Samaritan Medical Center in West Palm Beach have been working 18 hours instead of the usual 12 because of overnight staffing shortages , according to a nurse who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of jeopardizing her job . Patients are being treated in an open area cordoned off by curtains that is typically used for quick medical consultations , she said .
Ryan Lieber , a spokesman for the hospital , denied employees were being asked to work 18-hour shifts , adding in a statement , “ Patients are being treated in areas of the hospital which are considered appropriate for their care , and respectful of their privacy at all times . ”
Florida Education Commissioner Richard Corcoran late Monday ordered that the state ’ s schools open for in-person instruction next month , igniting fears that a new round of classroom interactions would lead to a new round of infections .
“ We want to proceed with caution , but unfortunately the governor continues to deny the science , ” said Fedrick Ingram , president of the Florida Education Association . “ The trend over the last 30 days has been astronomical . We ’ re in regression , we ’ re going backward . In terms of the amount of cases , we are literally going backward as a state . ”
Hospital leaders , lawmakers , physicians , epidemiologists , advocates and others familiar with the state ’ s response said a false sense of security set in when grim predictions about the virus ’ s spread in Florida did not come to pass in March and April . DeSantis declared victory , attending a laudatory news conference at the White House with President Trump . The editor of National Review wrote an editorial titled “ Where does Ron DeSantis go to get his apology ? ”
But observers maintain the state then failed to prepare for a surge of the virus , which struck as residents were seeking refuge in air-conditioned indoor spaces , where the virus is believed to be most easily transmitted .
Sports leagues that opted to restart their seasons in Florida will now play in a state that is in worse shape than when the pandemic began . Many teams are already in the state , and they face a growing number of critics who believe they should cancel games .
The Republican National Convention , scheduled to take place in Jacksonville next month , faces similar questions about safety . In June , the Republican National Committee announced that it would move its convention from a worried Charlotte to a welcoming Jacksonville . But as cases mount in the city , worries have crept in .
“ My concern has grown since a week ago . It has gotten worse , ” said Tommy Hazouri , the Democratic president of the city council and a former Jacksonville mayor . Hazouri was initially supportive of his city ’ s effort to secure the convention .
“ It is time to accept reality , and no one can be in denial about what is going on , ” he said . “ At some point our council and the leaders in this community have to draw a line in the sand on where we need to be going . ”
Several hundred doctors have signed a petition that says the convention needs stronger safety measures . Nancy Staats , a retired anesthesiologist who lives in the Jacksonville area , said she hoped a few dozen doctors would sign the petition she helped circulate . Within three days , nearly 500 had added their names .
“ We ’ re really focused on the health and well-being of the citizens of our city and state now . That ’ s still six or seven weeks off and we ’ re still climbing scarily , rapidly , ” Staats said . “ This is about people ’ s lives , including the attendees of this event . ”
NBA and Major League Soccer teams have already landed in Orlando , hoping they play in a coronavirus-free bubble .
A day before resuming summer tournaments , FC Dallas was sent home after a coach and 10 players tested positive for the coronavirus at the same Disney sports complex that will host the NBA later this month . Nashville SC ’ s first game Wednesday was postponed after five players tested positive for the virus and four tests were inconclusive .
“ I am excited to play , ” D.C. United midfielder Julian Gressel said . “ I ’ m not excited about the part that obviously puts us at risk . ”
At a Fortune magazine virtual forum Tuesday , NBA Commissioner Adam Silver acknowledged that Florida ’ s situation has significantly deteriorated in recent weeks .
“ On paper and dealing with our experts , this should work , ” he said . “ But we shall see . I ’ m confident — based on the positive cases we ’ re seeing from our players and the general public around the country — that it will be safer on this campus than off this campus . ”
Still , numerous NBA stars have expressed deep concern about the health situation in Florida . More than a dozen players have decided to sit out the restart for various reasons .
Disney World has announced it would begin to allow visitors back into the Magic Kingdom this week . Disneyland in Anaheim , Calif. , said it would remain closed .
The Actors ’ Equity Association , a union that represents more than 700 Disney World stage managers and actors , has locked horns with the amusement park , saying it has failed to provide a coronavirus testing plan that would help prevent performers from passing the coronavirus onto others .
“ You certainly can ’ t wave Mickey ’ s magic wand and say that Florida isn ’ t a central hot spot right now , ” said Kate Shindle , the union ’ s president . “ Personally , as the president of the organization that is fighting for the safety of these performers , I ’ m mystified by the fact that Disney is attempting to open the park right now . ”
The new , high-profile risks threaten to compound problems Florida has faced from the beginning of the pandemic .
There has been a rise in cases affecting older Floridians as well as those living in nursing homes and other long-term care facilities , said Jeff Johnson , Florida director of AARP .
“ I don ’ t see how that doesn ’ t mushroom at some point , ” he said , noting that staff at the facilities live in communities still grappling with the virus , sometimes working second or third jobs that involve interactions with people of diverse age groups .
Testing sites across the state are seeing shortages , and the wait time for results is now as long as 10 days , said U.S. Rep. Ted Deutch , a Democrat representing a swath of the coast stretching from Broward County to Palm Beach County . The problems stem , he said , from the apparent failure to produce a testing plan as required by Congress , or at least to unveil any of its details . He has been asking for details , he said , but has been rebuffed by the state health department , whose deadline was extended from June 15 to Friday . The health department did not respond to requests for comment .
There were also acute shortages of the antiviral drug remdesivir in parts of the state , causing Democratic members of Florida ’ s congressional delegation to send a letter Tuesday to Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar asking him to speed the shipment of emergency supplies .
“ Staff capacity is strained ; the number of available ICU beds are dwindling ; and we are running out of remdesivir . . . ” the lawmakers wrote , warning that “ people will die without replenished stock . ”
Amid the array of old and new concerns , teachers across Florida learned they would have to begin preparing their classrooms for an influx of students .
In Palm Beach County , first-grade teacher Cara Conlogue , who teaches at Coral Reef Elementary School west of Lake Worth Beach , said the messages coming from the state are frightening and confusing .
“ The science is going in one direction , and conditions are getting worse , and the politicians are going in the opposite direction , ” Conlogue said . “ I can ’ t wrap my head around it . If it wasn ’ t safe for us when there were 100 cases , how can it be safe for us when we have thousands and thousands of cases ? I don ’ t get that logic . ”
“ I ’ ve spoken with a lot of my teacher friends , and a lot of them don ’ t want to go back , ” she continued . “ We love our students , we miss them , and we love our jobs . But we don ’ t feel safe . ”