Trump Activates National Guard To 3 States Hit Hardest By Coronavirus
In a wide-ranging , digressive news conference Sunday evening , President Trump said he has activated the National Guard to assist New York , California and Washington , states that so far have been hit hardest by the coronavirus .
The Federal Emergency Management Agency will fund the deployment of the Guard , which Trump said will give states `` maximum flexibility to use the Guard against the virus without having to worry about costs and liability . And [ it frees ] up state resources to protect the health and safety of the people in their state . ''
Trump also said his administration is committed to providing the three states with mobile medical centers that offer thousands of hospital beds . Some hospitals are depleting their medical supply reserves as they deal with the virus .
Additional supplies , including N95 masks and gloves , will be delivered to California and New York in the next 48 hours , Trump said .
The president 's remarks came hours after New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo appealed to Trump to nationalize the effort to acquire protective medical supplies — including masks , gowns and gloves — that are increasingly scarce .
Cuomo said so many states are attempting to acquire a depleted supply that governors are outbidding one another for essential equipment and driving prices up .
`` I think the federal government should order factories to manufacture masks , gowns , ventilators , '' Cuomo said . `` The essential medical equipment , that 's going to make a difference between life and death . ''
Meanwhile Trump says the federal government is marshaling all of its resources to help ease the burden states are shouldering .
The USNS Mercy hospital ship , now based in San Diego , will move to Los Angeles to help free up space in hospitals overwhelmed by coronavirus patients .
The USNS Comfort , the Mercy 's counterpart , was set to head to New York Harbor to help alleviate virus-related hospital strain .
`` They are wartime ships . They 're meant for war , '' Trump said . `` These rooms are as good as anywhere in the nation . ''
The Sunday evening update from the task force came as a procedural vote on a massive but not-yet-finalized coronavirus relief package failed in the Senate , putting the measure 's prospects in limbo .
In his briefing , Trump said `` we 'll work with whoever we have to '' on a stimulus package to help an economy likely to be ravaged by the coronavirus .
He also said the U.S. was reaching out to North Korea , Iran and other countries to help them fight the coronavirus , and at one point digressed to complain about how often he is sued and to discuss the sacrifices he said he has made to run for president .
Vice President Pence said the White House 's coronavirus task force will update guidance on Monday for the nation 's law enforcement and others working on critical infrastructure .
On coronavirus testing , Pence said more than 250,000 Americans had received tests and results as of Sunday . He added : `` We should be caught up on the backlog in testing by the middle of the week . ''
Pence urged commercial labs to prioritize inpatient testing , with new guidance for the labs expected on Monday .
The White House has asked those without symptoms not to seek coronavirus tests . That 's because the very act of administering a test takes up medical resources that are in short supply .
But hours before the briefing , Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , became the first U.S. senator to announce he has tested positive for COVID-19 . Paul is asymptomatic and in quarantine and `` was tested out of an abundance of caution due to his extensive travel and events , '' according to his deputy chief of staff .
When asked on Sunday about the last time he had been in contact with Paul , Trump said it 's `` been a long time . ''
On Saturday night , the press secretary for Pence said he and his wife both tested negative for the virus , after a member of Pence 's staff had tested positive .
The global death toll from the virus has now surpassed 14,000 people , according to data from Johns Hopkins University . Within the U.S. , there were more than 33,000 cases as of Sunday night .