Sen. Rand Paul ( R-KY ) announced on Sunday that he has tested positive for coronavirus , which originated in China .
“ Senator Rand Paul has tested positive for COVID-19 , ” Paul ’ s staff wrote on Twitter . “ He is feeling fine and is in quarantine . He is asymptomatic and was tested out of an abundance of caution due to his extensive travel and events . He was not aware of any direct contact with any infected person . ”
“ He expects to be back in the Senate after his quarantine period ends and will continue to work for the people of Kentucky at this difficult time , ” Paul continued . “ Ten days ago , our D.C. office began operating remotely , hence virtually no staff has had contact with Senator Rand Paul . ”
He expects to be back in the Senate after his quarantine period ends and will continue to work for the people of Kentucky at this difficult time . Ten days ago , our D.C. office began operating remotely , hence virtually no staff has had contact with Senator Rand Paul . — Senator Rand Paul ( @ RandPaul ) March 22 , 2020
With the announcement , Paul becomes the first member of the U.S. Senate to test positive for the virus .
Last week , two members of the House of Representatives announced that they had contracted the virus .
Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-FL ) announced his diagnosis on Wednesday , writing : “ I want everyone to know that I am feeling much better . However , it is important that everyone take this extremely seriously and follow CDC guidelines in order to avoid getting sick and mitigate the spread of this virus . We must continue to work together to emerge stronger as a country during these trying times . ”
A statement from his office said , “ In an abundance of caution , after votes on Friday , March 13th , Congressman Mario Diaz-Balart decided to self-quarantine in Washington , D.C , and not return to South Florida because of his wife Tia ’ s pre-existing conditions that put her at exceptionally high risk . On Saturday evening , Congressman Diaz-Balart developed symptoms , including a fever and a headache . Just a short while ago , he was notified that he has tested positive for COVID-19 . While in quarantine Diaz-Balart has been working from his apartment in Washington , DC . ”
Rep. Ben McAdams ( D-UT ) made his announcement a couple of hours after Diaz-Balart , writing , “ On Saturday evening , after returning from Washington , D.C. , I developed mild cold-like symptoms . In consultation with my doctor on Sunday , I immediately isolated myself in my home . I have been conducting all meetings by telephone . My symptoms got worse and I developed a fever , dry cough and labored breathing and I remained self-quarantined . ”
“ On Tuesday , my doctor instructed my to get tested for COVID-19 and following his referral , I went to the local testing clinic for the test , ” McAdams continued . “ Today I learned that I tested positive . I am still working for Utahns and pursuing efforts to get Utahns the resources they need as I continue doing my job from home until I know it is safe to end my self-quarantine . I ’ m doing my part as all Americans are doing to contain the spread of the virus and mitigate the coronavirus outbreak . ”
McAdams concluded , “ I urge Utahns to take this seriously and follow the health recommendations we ’ re getting from the CDC and other health experts so that we can recover from this public health threat . ”