Jason Furman was a top economic adviser to President Barack Obama , serving as deputy director of the National Economics Council from 2009 to 2013 , and as chair of the Council of Economic Advisers from 2013 to 2017 . He played a key role in designing the administration ’ s response to the financial crisis and Great Recession . He ’ s now a professor at Harvard ’ s Kennedy School of Government .
I ’ ve spoken with Furman often over the years , and to put it bluntly , I ’ ve never heard him as alarmed as on Thursday . He believes the coronavirus could do more damage to the economy than the financial crisis did , and that policymakers aren ’ t even close to designing a large enough response . In addition , the virus is moving much faster than the financial crisis did , and the government officials who will need to respond to it are in danger of being infected by it .
A transcript of our conversation , lightly edited for length and clarity , follows .
Looking at the financial markets and economic data , how much does this feel like 2008 to you ?
At this point , this feels much worse than 2008 . Lehman Brothers was quite bad , but it was the culmination of a sequence of things that had happened over 14 months . This hit all at once .
There were a lot of people lucky and privileged enough that they didn ’ t reduce their spending in 2008 . But everyone is doing it now . I was in a restaurant yesterday , possibly for the last time for a while . I was in a taxi , possibly the last time for a while . There are entire industries I interact with where I ’ m realizing : “ This may be the last time I ’ m paying you for a while. ” That didn ’ t happen in 2008 . When you start to think about all of that , it just gives you a feeling for the enormity of this economically .
If two months from now we go back to normal , I think we ’ d be okay . If this lasts six months or longer — and I think that ’ s the more likely scenario — all of that just compounds . Even if you discover a cure in December , you still have people out of jobs , broken balance sheets , bankrupt companies that won ’ t be particularly eager to hire .
Financial crises are fundamentally about uncertainty . Markets think an asset costs this much , but they ’ re wrong , and chaos ensues . This feels much more tangible : People are getting sick , or are afraid of getting sick , and so they ’ re staying home , or they ’ re not allowed to come into work , or they ’ re losing their jobs because their customers are gone . How different is that in its economic effects ?
In a financial crisis , there are multiple equilibriums . if you can stop the panic by guaranteeing markets or injecting capital , you can even get the opposite as money floods back into the market . Here , there ’ s a deadly germ out there and you don ’ t want to go near it for your sake and your community ’ s sake . There ’ s only one equilibrium : It ’ s economic inactivity until the danger passes .
The 2007-2008 recession was about a collapse in consumer demand , which , in theory at least , you could solve by giving people more money so they could spend it and bring demand back up . I ’ ve heard economists argue that this is different : There ’ s a demand-side problem here , but it ’ s a supply-side shock where people can ’ t go to work to supply their labor , where businesses can ’ t supply their goods , where people won ’ t travel , and that ’ s harder to solve . Do you think the supply/demand distinction is useful ?
I don ’ t think so . The reason economists sometimes like to distinguish between them is if you try to solve a demand problem and it ’ s really a supply problem , you ’ ll run up against a capacity constraint and generate inflation . Right now , expected inflation has fallen to about 1 percent over the next decade . If this is completely a supply problem , demand-side measures won ’ t help , but they won ’ t have bad effects either . I ’ m not at all worried about inflation being too high . So the normal reason not to do demand-side policy doesn ’ t apply here .
So what would you do if you could design the response ?
Absolutely everything related to health — testing , hospital beds , ventilators , research . Anything anyone wants , spend the money on it .
Number two , I would do every targeted measure that we can think of . Do as much as possible using existing structures and previous laws . For paid leave , you need to invent something new because there is no structure there . But for almost everything else , you can use unemployment insurance , the SNAP program , Medicaid .
“ A week ago , I thought $ 1,000 per adult , $ 500 per child . Now I ’ d double or triple that . ”
Once you get through everything on health and everything targeted , you still have two problems : One is you potentially have tens of millions of people in great need who aren ’ t eligible for one of those programs . Second , the total amount , even if you max out on health and targeted , just isn ’ t as large as what could be helpful economically . So the third thing I ’ d do is get people cash .
My number one choice would be a flat amount per adult , half that per child . A week ago , I thought $ 1,000 per adult , $ 500 per child . Now I ’ d double or triple that . Get them the check within three months , or less . And make clear that if the economy is in bad shape at the end of the year we ’ ll do it again , and keep doing it .
My second choice would be something like Making Work Pay , which is similar to giving everybody a check , but the money dribbles out over time , so it ’ s not ideal . My distant third choice would be a payroll tax holiday . It ’ s a distant third because it gives a lot more money to high-income households and it doesn ’ t give anything to people who don ’ t get a paycheck , so I think we can do better than that . But I ’ d vote for it if it ’ s the only game in town .
You were part of the team that responded to the financial crisis in 2009 . What did you learn from that experience that policymakers should keep in mind now ?
First , just don ’ t be too finicky about clever design and targeting . It ’ s really hard to get that right and you ’ ll end up missing a lot of people that really need what you want . I saw this in all sorts of programs , of which housing was the most notorious example . And trying to design highly targeted programs will be much harder now because Congress is legislating at a much faster pace than in 2008 and 2009 .
Second , our Overton windows move much more slowly than events . People don ’ t remember , but in the fall of 2008 , people thought a $ 300-500 billion stimulus was almost unimaginably large . Now people look back at the $ 800 billion stimulus , which I still think was the most we could get from Congress at the time , and say it was too small . In some ways , that was a collective failure of imagination .
The third thing isn ’ t a lesson so much as something to grapple with : How much do you want to maximize your solution to the crisis at hand , and how much do you want to use it as an opportunity to make changes you ’ ve long wanted ? High-speed rail was meant to be a visionary program out of the Recovery Act ; I think it was mostly a failure . But some of the clean energy programs were much more successful . Right now , I ’ d err on the side of focusing on this threat , just given how much damage it could do to the country , but I certainly would be thrilled if the US permanently gets a paid leave system out of this .
And let me add one more thing : It ’ s not clear at what point Congress will stop even being able to function fully in terms of staff . And the Trump administration , at the best of times , isn ’ t the best implementer of government programs . You have to be really aware of the limits of what can be done right now .
One of the big questions in 2009 was how to size the stimulus . It was famously based on a calculation by Christina Romer and Jared Bernstein that used early economic data and ended up being way too optimistic . But right now we have much , much less economic data to go off of . So how would you tell Congress to think about the size of the package they need to pass ?
There are three levels of radical uncertainty here . One is the disease . The second is how the disease affects the economy . The third is how policy affects the economy . In the face of that , you need to ask : What ’ s the cost of doing too much and what ’ s the cost of doing too little ? I think it ’ s incredibly asymmetric , particularly when the real interest rate is negative : You can effectively give people $ 1,000 today at the inflation-adjusted cost of $ 900 a decade from now . So I ’ m not worried about doing too much .
Now , that doesn ’ t give you a number . It doesn ’ t tell you $ 500 billion or $ 5 trillion . Economies can absorb 2 or 3 percent of GDP a year in a normal downturn . Maybe in this one , you need even more . I don ’ t know .
We ’ ve been talking mostly about fiscal policy , but what should the Federal Reserve be doing ?
I think the Fed should be doing everything it can . It looks like they ’ ll cut interest rates to zero next week . They ’ re significantly expanding their balance sheet . I think there are some things progressives might get squeamish about , too . They need to do what ’ s called regulatory forbearance , which means they ’ re not worrying that much about the lending standards of banks .
One good thing is the banks came into this with a lot of capital — not as much as I ’ d like , but still a lot . That capital is there for a flood . This is a flood . They need to spend down that capital . Banks are super important because businesses are going to need more cash than they have on hand in the coming months . The way to get over that is lending . So the Fed has a super-important role in supporting that .
One last thing , and this is more political . You were coordinating economic policy on the Obama campaign in 2008 . The economy was in crisis , and you were running against the party that held the White House at the time . What advice do you have for whatever campaign ends up running against Donald Trump this year , as they navigate both being the opposition party but also trying to be responsible amidst a disaster ?
Obama was running against a president who was incredibly unpopular — and then something terrible happened in the economy . That unpopular president put forward the most unpopular economic legislation of my lifetime , TARP . Obama then had a choice : He could ’ ve pounded away at it , opposed it . But he didn ’ t .
I remember at the time being really frightened that I was working with him on supporting TARP , and that I might be involved in a colossal mistake and he would lose the election . John McCain was often more critical of it than he was . But Obama was incredibly consistent : He was talking to Paulson [ then the Treasury secretary ] , he was talking to [ then-Fed Chair Ben ] Bernanke . I did debate prep with him in Michigan , and he would take breaks from debate prep to call members of Congress and get them to vote for TARP . I remember a call with advisers who suggested leaking something about Hank Paulson , and he said , “ It ’ s hard enough for him to prevent a second Great Depression without us making it harder . ”
I don ’ t know if he did it just because he ’ s a responsible person or because he had a political instinct , but it was the exact right political decision . It was a dress rehearsal for the presidency , and people liked what they saw from him better than they liked what they saw from John McCain .