President Donald Trump and top U.S. health officials addressed the nation Wednesday evening as governments worldwide worked to combat the spread of the new coronavirus . Their comments came as the U.S. saw its first instance of infection in a person without relevant travel history or exposure to another patient known to have the virus .
With more than 81,300 cases worldwide and spreading rapidly beyond China to South Korea , Italy and Iran , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned Tuesday the virus would spread in the United States and cause `` severe '' disruptions across the country .
At a news conference the same day in India , President Donald Trump tried to tamp down concerns , saying the virus was `` very well under control in our country . '' The White House requested $ 2.5 billion in emergency funding this week to combat the outbreak , but congressional Democrats slammed the request as `` woefully insufficient . ''
Coronavirus updates every day : Get ███ 's Daily Briefing in your inbox
Here 's what the president said Wednesday evening , and what the facts are .
Minutes after Trump downplayed the risk of coronavirus spreading in the United States , California confirmed a new case that might be the nation ’ s first example of a non travel-related case of coronavirus .
`` There ’ s a chance that it could get worse , ” Trump said . “ There ’ s a chance that it could get fairly , substantially worse . But I don ’ t think it ’ s inevitable ... there ’ s a chance that it won ’ t spread . ''
Less than an hour later , the CDC confirmed the California case involving a person who did not travel to China and was not known to be exposed to another person there with the virus .
The CDC said it ’ s unknown how the person was exposed to COVID-19 , but the agency said it could be the first example of “ community spread , ” which means an unknown source of infection . The agency has not ruled out that the person was exposed to a traveler with the virus .
The first 14 cases confirmed in the United States included 12 travelers returning from China and two individuals who had close contact with those travelers . The California man is the 15th confirmed case , not counting infected passengers from Diamond Princess and others repatriated from Wuhan , China .
On Tuesday , the CDC warned that such community spread of the virus was inevitable and predicted “ severe ” disruptions in everyday life . The agency warned schools could be closed and mass gathering suspended .
Coronavirus , explained : Everything to know about Covid-19 , the deadly virus alarming the world
Trump compared the small number of COVID-19 cases in the U.S. to the number of flu cases this year and said , `` The flu in our country kills from 25,000 people to 69,000 people a year . That was shocking to me . ''
According to the CDC , there have been at least 29 million flu illnesses and 16,000 deaths from flu so far this season . The season is not yet over , but the number of estimated flu deaths so far this year is below the range that Trump cited .
The CDC reported annual flu deaths ranged from 12,000 to 61,000 since 2010 , slightly lower than figured the president cited .
More : Coronavirus is scary , but the flu is deadlier , more widespread
Trump again compared coronavirus to the flu and predicted a vaccine will soon be available . “ We ’ ll essentially have a flu shot for this in a fairly quick manner , ” he said .
Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , also spoke at the news conference and offered a more specific time frame for efforts to develop a coronavirus vaccine .
He said it will take about two months to determine whether a vaccine is safe through a small study in humans . That would be followed another six to eight months to conduct a larger , comprehensive medical study to gauge whether the vaccine works .
During a Feb. 17 meeting with ███ ’ s editorial board meeting , Fauci said it would take at least one year to 18 months to make a vaccine that is safe and effective and ready to distribute .
“ The solution to the containment of this current outbreak will not be a vaccine , ” Fauci said .
Still , Fauci said the vaccine will be important and would be useful if COVID-19 returns next year as a seasonal respiratory virus .
Several drugmakers are working to develop vaccines and other treatments to combat coronavirus . Gilead Sciences , a pharmaceutical company , is testing the antiviral drug remdesivir as a potential coronavirus treatment in several countries . The experimental drug was also used on a suburban Seattle man who became the nation ’ s first coronavirus patient .
“ Johns Hopkins ... they did a study , a comprehensive – the countries best and worst prepared for an epidemic – and the United States , we ’ re rated No . 1 , ” Trump said .
Trump was referring to the October 2019 Global Health Security Index by the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security and the Nuclear Threat Initiative , with research by The Economist Intelligence Unit . The report evaluated the health security capabilities of 195 countries .
While the U.S. ranked No.1 overall , the report found that not a single country in the world is fully prepared to handle an epidemic or pandemic .
The United States scored in the bottom tier of countries for access to health care “ owing to lack of governmentally guaranteed access to healthcare plus high out-of-pocket expenditures per capita , ” the report said .
The latest : First coronavirus patient with 'unknown origin ' in the US was n't tested for days
Vice President Mike Pence , tapped to oversee the Trump administration 's coronavirus response , cited his experience handling MERS in Indiana , where the first U.S. case was confirmed .
In May 2014 , CDC confirmed two cases of MERS , Middle East Respiratory Syndrome , in the United States – one in Indiana , the other to Florida . Both cases were health care providers who lived and worked in Saudi Arabia and traveled to the United States . Both were hospitalized in the U.S. and later discharged after fully recovering .
MERS , which originated in Saudi Arabia , resulted in 2,499 cases and 861 deaths worldwide , a fatality rate far higher than SARS or COVID-19 .
More Trump , coronavirus : Vice President Pence to lead Covid-19 response
Trump lauded Pence ’ s record on health care when he was governor of Indiana .
`` Everybody who knows anything about health care , they look at Indiana , '' he said . `` They ’ ve established a great health care ( in Indiana ) … a lot of other states have looked to . They wanted to change their health care systems . ''
In 2015 , Indiana implemented sweeping changes to the state ’ s Medicaid insurance program , requiring low-income adults to pay monthly premiums to maintain their health insurance coverage . The reforms were spearheaded by Pence and then-health policy consultant Seema Verma , who now oversees the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services .
Republican governors in states including Kentucky and Arizona , also sought federal approval for similar restrictions , arguing such incentives encouraged able-bodied adults to seek employment and helped curb unnecessary health spending . But critics said such restrictions were unnecessarily punitive and put vulnerable people at risk of losing their health coverage .
In October , facing a federal lawsuit challenging the state 's work requirement , Indiana said it would postpone eliminating Medicaid benefits for those who failed to meet the work requirement .
Also during Pence ’ s tenure , a small town in Indiana became the center of an HIV epidemic tied to people injecting drugs . In all , 235 people became infected , giving Austin , Indiana , an HIV infection rate rivaling nations in sub-Saharan Africa . The Pence administration was criticized for its slow response , and under pressure allowed a clean-needle exchange to slow new cases of HIV and hepatitis C infections , according to a study that appeared in The Lancet .
Indiana HIV outbreak : What to know about Austin 's struggles with drugs and HIV
Trump faced several questions from reporters about the stock market as U.S. stocks slumped for a fifth straight session on Wednesday . The President suggested the Democratic debates played a role in the fall .
“ I think it took a hit maybe for two reasons . I think they take a look at the people that you watched debating last night and they say if there ’ s even a possibility that can happen , I think it really takes a hit because of that . And it certainly took a hit because of this , ” Trump said , referencing the coronavirus outbreak .
Democrats held debates Feb. 19 and Feb. 25 . On Wednesday , the Dow Jones industrial average slumped 124 points to close at 26,957.59 , after shedding nearly 2,000 points following steep losses on Monday and Tuesday .
Financial managers have said investors are reacting to every positive or negative headline about the virus . Some companies , including United Airlines and Mastercard , have warned the outbreak of coronavirus could hurt their finances . Tech companies that rely on global sales and supply chains that could be stifled by the spreading outbreak were among the worst hit by sell-offs .