Many Americans in recent days have received emails directing them to start working remotely , or announcing that schools would be canceled for weeks in light of the coronavirus pandemic . Major events are also being called off with a domino-like effect , including Coachella and South by Southwest , March Madness and virtually all sports events , business conferences , even religious services across the country .
In many cases , the action is prophylactic — no one at work or school may be sick yet — though with each passing day , more of these decisions are being made in response to a community member testing positive for Covid-19 , or the risk that contact with large groups of people could exacerbate transmission of the virus .
The closures are a way to enforce social distancing , a crucially important public health intervention that can help stop coronavirus transmission by avoiding crowds and large gatherings such as weddings , concerts , conferences , sporting events , and mass transit . Best practice requires maintaining at least a six-foot distance between yourself and others .
You may have already come into contact with an infected person — the woman who rode the bike before you at SoulCycle , the kindly fellow who coughed while standing next to you in line at Costco , or someone who touched your mail as it made its way to your mailbox . ( At least one study estimates that about 25 percent of transmissions of coronavirus may have occurred in pre-symptomatic stages — meaning it may be spread by people who don ’ t yet know they have the virus . )
With Covid-19 , “ many people in the US will at some point , either this year or next , get exposed to this virus , ” the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ’ s immunization czar announced this month . Social distancing , health authorities argue , can dramatically slow the rate at which the infection is spreading , easing the burden on the health care system .
To that end , the CDC is now urging all gatherings of more than 50 people to stop for the next eight weeks . But how should social distancing affect your visits to the gym ? Your weekly manicure ? Play dates for your kids ? Your weekend reservation at the buzzy Michelin-starred omakase spot you ’ ve been dying to try ? Are those risky for an ostensibly healthy person like yourself ?
What do you , as a responsible , socially conscious human being , owe to your fellow men and women — particularly those who are sick , immunocompromised , and older ? Are you breaking the social contract by going to hot yoga ?
Or , by not going , are you overreacting and hurting the economy ?
███ spoke with six experts in public health , medicine , psychology , and bioethics for answers . ( Please remember that as the Covid-19 landscape transforms week by week , so , too , will the advice . )
I feel healthy . Why shouldn ’ t I get out a little bit to make this time pass easier ?
███ ’ s Kelsey Piper makes a strong argument for choosing to stay home as much as possible , inconvenient as it may seem , to help your fellow human . “ If you are young and healthy , you ought to take precautions because doing so can end up saving someone ’ s life , ” she writes .
Leah Lagos , a New York City-based psychologist and author of Heart , Breath , Mind , agrees . “ Now is the time to do something for your fellow community members , ” she says . Staying home as much as possible , even if you believe you aren ’ t infected , is the type of altruistic decision that , when performed en masse , has the potential to slow the infection rate , Lagos says .
Considering — and prioritizing — the welfare of strangers is difficult , she acknowledges , but it helps to think of them instead as someone else ’ s parent , grandparent , or child . “ It can be an interesting experiment in compassion for people we don ’ t know . ”
“ A lot of us might be relatively healthy and think we might be able to withstand the rigors of an infection , ” adds Jonathan Kimmelman , director of the Biomedical Ethics Unit at McGill University in Montreal , “ but there ’ s the concern about spreading it to vulnerable individuals , as well as the pressure this outbreak will place on our health care system . ”
Kimmelman invokes the idea of “ social solidarity , ” saying “ we have an ethical obligation to curtail activities , practice social distancing , and substitute activities with safer alternatives , ” like teleconferencing instead of in-person work meetings , or changing a first date from a wine bar to a walk outside .
If the messages are confusing , understand that “ there are different levels of social distancing ” in effect around the world , and that local health departments ’ recommendations vary currently depending on known cases , says Syra Madad , an NYC-based special pathogens specialist who was featured in Netflix ’ s docuseries Pandemic : How to Prevent an Outbreak . In Washington state ’ s King County , for example , the current recommendation is that “ social interaction is still vitally important to the mental health of young people , and it is still possible for families to have safe gatherings among children and parents. ” The county recommends , however , limiting indoor groups to 10 or fewer children and outdoor groups to 50 or fewer , and for residents to avoid parties , retail spaces , and movie theaters .
Still , Madad notes , “ It is better to operate under the pretense that there is transmission in your community already . There ’ s going to be disruption to daily life , but we want people to feel empowered by this . The decisions you make will ultimately affect the trajectory of this outbreak . ”
If I have to go out , how can I do it in the safest way possible — to protect myself as well as others ?
Kate Vergara , a public health and infectious disease specialist based in Chicago and New York City , has spent time fighting polio in Ethiopia and helping Ebola survivors in Sierra Leone ( without contracting either disease ) . In order to even begin to approach the ethics of social distancing , she says , we must have a firm grip on how the virus is spreading .
“ Covid-19 is not airborne , ” she says . “ It is transmitted through droplets — being coughed on , or touching something that someone coughed on , for example , and then touching your face and allowing that pathogen to get into your system through your eyes , nose , or mouth . ”
The CDC and the WHO recommend several basic measures to help prevent the spread of Covid-19 : Wash your hands often for at least 20 seconds .
Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue , then throw the tissue in the trash .
Contact a health worker if you have symptoms ; fever and a dry cough are most common .
touch your face . DON ’ T travel if you have a fever and cough .
travel if you have a fever and cough . DON ’ T wear a face mask if you are well . Guidance may change . Stay informed , and stay safe , with ███ ’ s guide to Covid-19 .
It ’ s important to practice good hygiene , like hand-washing — which protects not only you but others as well . When considering the ethics of spending time out and about , Vergara suggests reframing your view of hand-washing in the following way : “ Wash your hands before you go out to protect others , and wash them again after the activity to protect yourself. ” If you ’ re low-risk and itching to hit the gym , wash your hands first so you ’ re touching machines and weights with pristine hands ; that protects others . Then , after your workout , wash them again to scrub off anything you may have picked up . And wipe down your exercise equipment , or anything else you might have touched . The same goes for getting a haircut , visiting the ATM , and the like .
Should I feel guilty for wanting to go to the gym , or on a date ?
Between the relentless news alerts , social media memes , and gossipy texts , it ’ s easy to feel overwhelmed , anxious , and scared . We need self-care more than ever , says LaMar Hasbrouck , a public health physician and past medical epidemiologist with the CDC . “ It ’ s important during these times to hold fast to any sense of normalcy that you can . ”
But try to find prudent ways to do so . Hasbrouck now picks off-peak hours to exercise to minimize contact with others ; other options include walking , jogging , or biking outdoors . The more ventilated an area , the lower the risk of transmission , plus “ if you cough , nobody is around and the droplets just fall and hit the ground , ” he says . Better yet : breaking a sweat at home with help from an app or online video .
Grocery shopping will need to happen , but instead of going at noon on a Saturday when the place is sure to be packed , try going really early on a weekday morning . If it ’ s still possible , order online . And wipe down any deliveries , just to be safe .
Should I keep using grocery delivery services ... and ride-hailing companies … and restaurants ?
Hasbrouck encourages those who have access to services such as Postmates , Grubhub , Lyft , and Instacart to use them . “ It ’ s a good way to social distance , ” he says , noting that two main factors when it comes to Covid-19 transmission are closeness of contact and duration . “ The handoff is five seconds , you go inside and wash your hands . Or just have them leave it at your doorstep. ” ( Last week , Instacart introduced a “ Leave at My Door Delivery ” option . )
This poses some ethical questions , however : Having milk and bread delivered is convenient for you , minimizing your exposure to the virus . But what about the person doing your grocery shopping or picking up your Thai food ? Or the Uber driver ferrying you to your significant other ’ s apartment ? Is it right to ask them to assume the risk of being out and about ?
Yes , say both Hasbrouck and Vergara . However , contaminated hands pose a risk to drivers and riders , so be ultra-diligent about hand hygiene , washing or sanitizing hands before getting in the car and not touching your face at all . Cracking a window is a smart move for both you and the driver , as it promotes airflow .
As for restaurants , honor upcoming reservations or attend gatherings as necessary . Unlike norovirus or hepatitis A , “ food isn ’ t known to be a way of transmitting this or other respiratory viruses , ” says Benjamin Chapman , a professor and food safety extension specialist at North Carolina State University . “ You mainly need to be mindful about the surfaces you touch : menus , the table , condiments , things that other patrons might have used. ” But the choice to dine out may soon be very limited for many Americans : Governors of several states , including Illinois and Washington , this week ordered all restaurants and bars closed ; major cities such as New York and Los Angeles are following suit .
Chapman , who continues to dine out , says that while he might not know who touched that soy sauce bottle or pepper shaker before him , “ I do know I can break the pathway of transmission by using hand sanitizer or washing my hands. ” With social distancing in mind , opt for establishments where it ’ s easy to keep six to eight feet between yourself and other diners ( maybe save sitting at the packed bar for after the pandemic ends ) and feel free to be “ a public health nerd ” like Chapman and ask if they ’ re using Environmental Protection Agency-approved sanitizing products , which they should be .
Chapman notes that he lives in North Carolina , which is not currently a Covid-19 hot spot . “ I ’ d have a different response if I was in New Rochelle , New York , or Seattle , ” he says , two cities where the risk of transmission is greater due to higher numbers of community-acquired infections . In cities such as those , he would advocate taking advantage of the “ great infrastructure we have set up for home delivery of food . ”
Should I cancel play dates ? What are the rules for my kids ?
In Ireland , public health officials are encouraging a “ no parties , no playdates , no playground ” policy , per the Irish Times . Muireann Ní Chrónín , a consultant respiratory pediatrician at Cork University Hospital , told the paper : “ Children will get through this no problem . [ But ] remember with corona , children are vectors , not victims . In most epidemics , young children are the transmitters . ”
“ The risks of underreaction are so much more catastrophic than the risks of overreaction ”
Here in the US , school closures are smart , Vergara says . “ It ’ s a responsible practice for schools to shut down . That ’ s several hundred kids interacting in close quarters , and kids aren ’ t known for washing their hands very well. ” But that leaves millions of working parents frantic about career responsibilities , and unsure of whether it ’ s appropriate to schedule play dates or try to split child care duties with friends .
The experts interviewed for this story had differing opinions about whether play dates should continue in a pandemic . Vergara says that , if following healthy practices , small play dates are feasible , but before the kids come over , use disinfecting wipes to clean high-touch items like doorknobs , remote controls , and the table where they ’ ll be playing . Replace the hand towel in the bathroom with a fresh one , and when the visiting kiddos show up , everyone — your children included — should wash their hands thoroughly .
Lagos worries that play dates during school closures are essentially “ quasi-quarantines , defeating the purpose of social distancing. ” Kimmelman concurs , and though he says no one knows the exact right answer , “ we don ’ t know how things are going to unfold , and from my standpoint , the risks of underreaction are so much more catastrophic than the risks of overreaction . ”
Alyssa F. Westring and Stewart D. Friedman , co-authors of Parents Who Lead , writing in the Harvard Business Review , recommended finding inventive ways for children to play together virtually . “ While it may not be feasible to trade-off childcare responsibilities ( depending on quarantine restrictions ) , ” they wrote , “ consider other ways in which you can make things easier for one another — whether it ’ s sharing creative activities to keep the kids entertained or taking turns grocery shopping . … Be open to new ways of doing things . ”
The CDC has issued recommendations for travelers arriving from dozens of countries with widespread cases to stay home for 14 days . If someone at your work or school was definitely exposed , it ’ s also time to assess your own risk of exposure , and of spreading the coronavirus . “ If you say , ‘ Well , I know I ’ ve been mostly in my office , avoiding meetings and conference rooms , and I ’ ve been washing hands a lot , ’ you could probably go about your daily routine with some social distancing to protect yourself , not so much to avoid infecting others , ” Hasbrouck says .
But if you have a fever or receive new information — that it was John , in the cubicle next to you , who was exposed — “ you ’ re going to want to radically change your assessment. ” That likely means self-quarantining , because that ’ s “ the ethical decision and you don ’ t want to expose others . It ’ s a constant risk assessment , and it ’ s more of an art than a science . It ’ s about protecting yourself but also being socially responsible . ”
“ Look at the trajectory of what ’ s happening in Italy . We ’ re 11 days behind Italy , ” where a national lockdown that began March 10 has curtailed all travel and shuttered nearly all shops , schools , museums , movie theaters , and bars , says Madad . “ Measures like travel bans and quarantining entire localities — you may not see that here , ” she says . But we can undertake distancing measures ourselves . “ One of the things we ’ ve learned from the H1N1 pandemic is that if you educate people , they will listen . You have to give them the facts , and speak with one voice . ”
Leslie Goldman has a master ’ s degree in public health and is a health writer based in Chicago . She is frequent contributor of feature stories and essays to Prevention , Women ’ s Health , O : The Oprah Magazine , Real Simple Parents , and more .