After an April that some experts described as “ wasted , ” it looks like America is finally making some real progress on coronavirus testing in May .
Over the past couple of weeks , the United States has seen significant improvements not just with the raw number of Covid-19 tests but also with other metrics experts use to gauge the scope of the US ’ s coronavirus outbreak and its testing capacity .
During the week of May 5 , the US averaged nearly 300,000 new coronavirus tests a day , according to the Covid Tracking Project . That ’ s nearly double the roughly 150,000 daily tests performed in early April , although it still falls short of the number of new tests a day experts say is needed to fully control the outbreak — a number that ranges from 500,000 on the low end to tens of millions on the high end , depending on which plan you ’ re reading .
The US also saw a significant improvement in another key metric for coronavirus testing : the positive rate , or the percentage of tests that come back positive for Covid-19 . Generally , a higher positive rate suggests there ’ s not enough testing happening : It indicates only people with obvious symptoms are getting tested .
The US ’ s positive rate over the week of May 5 was nearly 8 percent — down from almost 21 percent the week of April 5 . Experts have said the positive rate should be no higher than 10 percent , but preferably much lower .
“ Daily [ Covid-19 ] testing continues to increase nationally while the positivity rate continues to decline , ” Scott Gottlieb , former head of the Food and Drug Administration , tweeted . “ These are hopeful signs that — at least in many parts of the nation — the epidemic is slowing . ”
This doesn ’ t , however , mean the whole country is ready to start reopening the economy just yet . Even the latest numbers , as promising as they are , fall short of what some experts have called for . And by other metrics , the US is still behind where it needs to be .
It ’ s also unclear if the gains will hold and continue . There were significant improvements in testing for much of March , only for those gains to stop in April . Future problems with testing could slow more increases .
But , at least for now , America has — finally — made some real progress .
Testing is crucial to controlling the coronavirus pandemic . Paired with contact tracing , testing lets officials track the scale of an outbreak , isolate the sick , quarantine those with whom the sick came in contact , and deploy community-wide efforts as necessary . Aggressive testing and tracing are how other countries , including South Korea and Germany , got their outbreaks under control , letting them start reopening in the past couple of weeks ( though even they have scaled back their reopenings after new spikes in Covid-19 cases ) .
That Covid-19 tests are increasing while the positive rate is falling indicates the US is now moving toward enough testing capacity to match the scope of its outbreak .
Some of the drop in the positive rate is likely the result of improvements in New York state , which had the worst Covid-19 outbreak in the US so far . New York state ’ s positive rate peaked above 50 percent in late March and early April , before falling to around 9 percent in the week of May 5 .
Even excluding New York , though , the US ’ s positive rate has also dropped : from around 17 percent in mid-April to nearly 8 percent the week of May 5 .
A majority of states now have coronavirus positive rates below 10 percent , which experts say is the acceptable maximum . Only 15 states and Washington , DC , had a positive rate above 10 percent during the week of May 5 .
The US is still far from where some other countries are on testing . According to Our World in Data , New Zealand , Taiwan , and South Korea — all places that have done a better job controlling their Covid-19 outbreaks — have positive test rates below 2 percent and even 1 percent .
“ ‘ Test , test , test ’ means numbers more in that low range , ” Natalie Dean , a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida , told me . She added , “ We need a lot more testing . ”
Much of the progress so far is despite a lack of federal leadership . Over much of April , testing numbers stagnated due to supply shortages for swabs , reagents , and other materials needed to collect samples and run coronavirus tests .
Experts have said that the federal government , led by President Donald Trump , should lead national efforts to boost testing . But Trump ’ s “ blueprint ” for testing explicitly leaves the problem to the states and private sector , saying the federal government will only act as a “ supplier of last resort . ”
Most states need more time before they can safely reopen
Despite the improvements , experts caution that the US shouldn ’ t rush to fully reopen its economy just yet .
The White House ’ s guidelines and experts ’ proposals lay out which standards states have to meet to reopen — letting each of them slowly reopen with a phased approach that unlocks parts of the economy bit by bit . For that phased reopening to begin , the proposals typically call for decreases in new Covid-19 cases for two weeks and enough testing to diagnose all of the sick and their contacts .
With testing , most states now fall below the 10 percent positive rate . But when it comes to reaching the positive rate seen in , say , South Korea or New Zealand , just six states — Alaska , Hawaii , Montana , Vermont , West Virginia , and Wyoming — have rates below 2 percent over the week of May 5 .
Testing also has to be paired with contact tracing , in which “ disease detectives ” track down who the infected came in contact with and get those contacts to quarantine . Experts have called for the US to hire between 100,000 to 300,000 contact tracers . Based on a tally kept by NPR , 44 states and Washington , DC , plan to hire about 66,000 contact tracers as of May 7 — almost two-thirds of the minimum .
With overall cases , the country as a whole has seen its daily new reported Covid-19 cases drop in May . But much of that decrease originated in Connecticut , New Jersey , and New York — the three states included in the New York City metro area , which suffered the worst outbreak . When those three states are excluded , the US has seen daily new Covid-19 cases at best start to drop only in recent days — far from the two weeks of decreases that experts recommend .
Some of the upward trend in Covid-19 cases outside Connecticut , New Jersey , and New York in recent weeks is likely due to increased testing . Even though fewer tests are coming back positive , doing many more tests can still mean finding many more cases than a state would otherwise .
Still , the numbers suggest it ’ s too early to declare victory . Based on data compiled by the New York Times , just 18 states have seen their daily new reported coronavirus cases drop in recent days — much less the two full weeks experts have called for . Seven states have seen their daily new cases increase , while the remaining 25 have seen theirs remain roughly flat .
Taken together , these figures suggest that the majority of states are not ready to start to reopen just yet . While America has made decent progress throughout May in confronting the challenge of this pandemic , there ’ s still a bit more work to be done .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .
Correction : The positive rate map originally had incorrect data for Utah and Virginia due to a bug in the map-making program . It ’ s been fixed .