Guests wear masks as required to attend the official reopening day of the Magic Kingdom at Walt Disney World on July 11 . | Joe Burbank/Orlando Sentinel via AP Florida Florida reports 15,000 new coronavirus cases , smashing national record The alarming figure puts the spotlight on a state that has become one of the biggest hot spots in the world .
Florida on Sunday reported more than 15,000 new coronavirus cases , smashing the daily record reported by any single state and once again putting an international spotlight on a place that does not have the virus under control .
The Florida Department of Health received 135,992 results from people who have never been tested before , and 15,299 of those tests came back positive for Covid-19 . The positivity rate of new infections was 11.25 percent , which is at least a two-week low and down significantly since the state ’ s record high of 18 percent reported on Wednesday . Still , public health experts express concern about positivity rates over 10 percent , a number Florida has not dipped below since June 23 .
In responding to the new numbers , Gov . Ron DeSantis ’ administration has continued its messaging strategy of putting them in a positive light , an approach that has increasingly drawn criticism as Florida has emerged as one of the biggest virus hot spots in the world .
“ Florida COVID positive cases decline for a third day in a row to 11.25 % despite a record 142,981 tests results returned in a single day , ” tweeted DeSantis ’ communications director , Helen Aguirre Ferré , using a figure that includes those who have been tested multiple times . “ Average age of those testing positive also decreased : 38 years old . ”
DeSantis has routinely turned to the median age of new positive cases to downplay the recent spike because , his administration says , younger people often show fewer symptoms and rarely require hospitalization , which means less of a strain on the state ’ s health care infrastructure . Left unacknowledged , however , is an increasing toll on state hospitals , especially those in South Florida , which is seeing the state ’ s biggest surge in new cases .
On Friday for the first time , the DeSantis administration released current hospitalization numbers , which showed 6,974 patients hospitalized with coronavirus as their primary diagnosis , a number that jumped to 7,507 on Sunday . For months , the administration refused to disclose the information , but relented after continued pressure by the Miami Herald and other media outlets .
DeSantis has cast the falling median age of those contracting the disease as a positive , but public health experts note that the spread in younger populations increases the likelihood of people in at-risk populations , like seniors , getting sick . There are also negative impacts on younger people who get sick , even if they don ’ t land in the hospital .
Young “ survivors are reporting significant remaining health issues ( fatigue , inability to return to normal levels of exercise ) and significant financial burden ( loss of work , medical costs ) , ” Jill Roberts of the University of South Florida College of Public Health told ███ in an email last week .
Ferré drew heat on Friday after using 93 new deaths in a tweet in an attempt to signal optimism about that day ’ s numbers . The death count was down from a record 120 the previous day , but her response was still seen as callous by many for using nearly 100 dead Floridians as positive messaging .
“ The fact that the governor ’ s office seems to think that 93 dead Floridians is an accomplishment is heartless and disturbing , ” Kayser Enneking , an anesthesiologist and Democrat running for a Gainesville-area Florida House seat , tweeted in response . “ Also , a 12.75 % positivity rate means we still have uncontrolled community spread . ”
The increased daily case counts and continued double-digit positivity rate comes as the issue of reopening Florida ’ s schools becomes the newest politicized coronavirus battlefield . Education Commissioner Richard Corcoran , a DeSantis appointee and former Republican speaker of the Florida House , issued an order last week telling school districts they must open classrooms for five days a week beginning next month . Corcoran must approve a district ’ s reopening plan before they can get their cut of state funding .
The demand to reopen the state ’ s schools coincided almost to the day with President Donald Trump ’ s beginning a forceful push to get the nation ’ s schools back open , an effort the administration is making as Trump ’ s poll numbers slump less than four months ahead of Election Day .
“ But the key is , ” Education Secretary Betsy DeVos told Fox News on Sunday , “ there has to be a posture of doing something , of action , of getting things going , putting a plan together for your specific school , for your specific district or for your classroom that ensures that kids are going to start learning against this fall . ”