New York Governor Andrew Cuomo speaks at a daily briefing at the State Capitol in Albany , N.Y. , April 29 , 2020 . ( Mike Segar/Reuters )
Andrew Cuomo the other day reminded me how much I miss people-watching . Early on in this quarantine season , you would see people describing the introvert ’ s paradise being ushered in . First of all , don ’ t make assumptions . Your favorite introvert may very well benefit from a check-in . And this introvert unexpectedly misses crowds — literally one of the last things I would have ever thought I had a fondness for .
But think for a moment — maybe this is your experience , too — what a day in New York City looks like . A midday walk from Mass at St. Patrick ’ s Cathedral to ███ ’ s offices only a few blocks away , off Fifth Avenue , brings constant encounters with all kinds of humanity . There are people carrying bags from stores that many of us wouldn ’ t even bother walking into , knowing there ’ s nothing we could afford . There are people rushing . There are counterterrorism police patrolling ( including in the church ) . There are tourists stopping in the middle of the street to take selfies . There is Tabby , about mid-walk , who always claims that squashed gluten-free fig bars are her favorite , when that ’ s all I have to offer from my purse . There are men delivering catering for breakfast ( lots of coffee ) or lunch . Whenever you make eye contact , it ’ s hard not to realize that this is a person with a biography , with concerns and dreams and sacrifices and joy and pain . Sometimes you can tell the pain is outweighing the joy . With others , the joy might be contagious , even just passing by . Of course , most people are somewhere else , under headphones or behind screens . Pope Francis has talked about the epidemic of anesthetization . We find something to numb us because we don ’ t know how to handle the drama of life otherwise . This is why one of the chief mistakes of this time is not considering religion essential . I ’ m not saying we should have St. Pat ’ s at full capacity , but let ’ s make a statement about who we are — people whose lives are gifts , creations of a Creator .
Maybe inadvertently , the governor of New York stumbled on all of this during a recent press conference about the slow reopening of things . He asked rhetorically , “ How much is a human life worth ? ” He continued , saying : “ That is the real discussion that no one is admitting , openly or freely . That we should . To me , I say the cost of a human life — a human life is priceless . Period . ”
Although we have stopped so much of our regular activity to protect vulnerable human life , what about the inconsistences ? We are learning about some grave mistakes involving nursing homes . And what about the abortion clinics that remain open ? What about the fact that Andrew Cuomo only last year expanded legal abortion in New York , lighting the Freedom Tower and the bridge he named after his own father in celebration ? Just last spring , he talked about his support for legalizing assisted suicide in the state . And even during these coronavirus times , New York State became a surrogacy state . While we all wish well to Anderson Cooper , a new father by surrogacy , a coalition of pro-lifers and liberal feminists opposed this move in the Empire State , pointing to the exploitation of women that legalized surrogacy can make mainstream .
The Sisters of Life have their home base in New York , and their existence is about giving people confidence that their lives are priceless , that every human life is priceless . Sometimes if we don ’ t believe it about ourselves , it ’ s going to be hard to protect it and defend it when times get especially difficult , never mind to walk with people . The way the Sisters of Life put it is that you were chosen for life by a Creator who loves you and created you in His image and likeness . You or I can ’ t convey the pricelessness of life to everyone in the world , but we can in our encounters . And we can insist on an end to the inconsistencies . It ’ s good that people conventionally want pro-lifers to be consistent , but how about “ pro-choicers , ” too ? How about an end to the euphemisms , for a start ?
During these quarantine times , the Sisters of Life continue to be approached by women , including from inside abortion clinics , who feel that they don ’ t have a choice , that the pressure in their life is too great to go through with their pregnancies . This is not health care or freedom they are experiencing , it is a miserable culture of death , at the very same time we are talking about life . Let ’ s start connecting some dots here , openly and freely . Thank you , Governor Cuomo , for getting the discussion going . New York has been dubbed the abortion capital of the world . Let ’ s make a change for life . Let ’ s give your words meaning and transformative power .