ORLANDO , Fla. — Florida has reported 37,439 positive coronavirus cases and 1,471 deaths , ranking it eighth in the U.S. for the number of confirmed cases despite being the nation ’ s third most populated state .
The case and death numbers point to something many may find surprising : Florida has not become as much of a hot spot as other states such as New York , California and Michigan .
The state has fewer cases per capita than other heavily impacted states , such as Louisiana . According to Johns Hopkins University , Florida has had a total of 176 cases per 100,000 people compared to Louisiana , which has had 644 per 100,000 people .
Most of the Sunshine State entered its first phase of reopening on Monday , with restaurants , retail stores and museums allowed to operate at no more 25 percent capacity with social distancing restrictions .
Gov . Ron DeSantis Ronald Dion DeSantisThe Hill 's Campaign Report : Biden 's virtual campaign swings through Florida ███ 's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - In reversal , Trump says he wo n't disband coronavirus task force Florida emerges as bright spot in COVID-19 fight MORE ( R ) , who took criticism last month for his initial reluctance to issue a statewide stay-at-home order , touted the progress his state has made in a press conference on Tuesday .
“ The fact of the matter is , Florida has met all the gating criteria to be into phase one , ” DeSantis said at a press briefing on Tuesday .
Experts say there are a variety of reasons , including individual willingness to self-quarantine , that could explain why the state appears to have avoided being hit harder by the virus .
The state ’ s most populated counties in South Florida , as well as Orange County , home to the greater Orlando area , were under stay-at-home orders prior to the governor ’ s statewide order issued on April 1 .
Early actions from local governments could have contributed to stopping the spread of the virus in the state , according to government and health officials .
“ We put a safer-at-home order quickly , and then tried our best to over-communicate that so that everyone understood the significance of it , ” Tampa Mayor Jane Castor ( D ) told ███ . “ Our community understood the level of personal responsibility and took it very seriously . ”
Miami-Dade County Mayor Carlos Gimenez ( R ) said DeSantis ’ s initial focus on South Florida played an early role in combating the spread .
“ He very wisely understood that the situation in southeast Florida was different than the rest of the state , ” Gimenez said . “ He ’ s been right on . He ’ s known that it ’ s a big , big state and that the orders can not be uniform throughout the state . ”
Florida has a large elderly population , which raised fears it could suffer from a high number of COVID-19 fatalities . Images of young people partying over spring break in the state compounded some fears .
But experts say many in the state appeared to take a diligent approach on their own to COVID-19 .
“ Many older people self-quarantined before being told to do so by the governor , ” said Laurence Barton , a crisis management and public safety professor at the University of Central Florida . “ That decision by an older population may have well saved , in my opinion , tens of thousands of lives . ”
Cindy Prins , a health care epidemiology professor at the University of Florida , said that coverage of Florida ’ s crowded beaches over spring break in March also likely drove a number of the state ’ s residents to self-quarantine in an effort to protect themselves .
“ People got some information about what we should be doing as opposed to what we were seeing , ” Prins said .
Other experts say they are perplexed by the coronavirus ’ s impact on Florida so far , citing luck as a potential factor .
“ Other aspects are just luck . It hasn ’ t gotten to some places yet , but it may still be on its way , ” said Roger Shapiro , associate professor of immunology and infectious diseases at Harvard University ’ s T.H . Chan School of Public Health .
He warned that Floridians should not get a false sense of security .
“ The virus is still on the move , and it can still travel to new places in the world , and it may still be finding inroads into some of the states and some of the countries that are so far less affected , ” he said .
Government officials and public health experts in the state have continued to urge caution , citing the possibility of a second wave in the latter half of the year .
“ I don ’ t think you need to totally take your foot off the pedal , ” said Panama City Mayor Greg Brudnicki said . “ People don ’ t need to get this false sense of security that we don ’ t need to do the social distancing and do the things we need to do . ”
Bay County , which includes Panama City , has only seen 76 positive coronavirus cases .
Experts also point to the importance of testing , which Florida officials say they are looking to improve across the state .
Johns Hopkins University ranked Florida 22nd in per capita testing , performing a total of 2,186 tests per 100,000 people as of Tuesday .
DeSantis announced new plans to expand testing in the state on Wednesday , permitting tests to be performed at pharmacies as well as the random checking of blood donations for antibodies that show whether someone has recovered from the virus .
The governor also introduced on Wednesday the state ’ s first mobile testing facility , through which 500 rapid tests , each lasting 45 minutes , would be processed a day . The tests are currently available at the Hard Rock Stadium site in Miami Gardens and will soon be available in Orlando and Jacksonville .
“ Obviously the hospitals need it , but then the next things are the nursing homes and the long-term care facilities because it can really be a game-changer and if applied properly can save lives , ” DeSantis said .