In a 363-40 vote early Saturday , the U.S. House of Representatives approved a coronavirus response package negotiated by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin .
All House Democrats supported the plan while 40 Republicans opposed it . Rep. Justin Amash , an independent from Michigan who is a former Republican , voted `` present . ''
Prior to the vote , which occurred shortly before 1 a.m . ET Saturday , House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy , R-Calif. , spoke to reporters about the deal that had been worked out , saying `` some things needed to be cleaned up . ''
President Trump said Friday night that he supported the package -- in an apparent effort to get skeptical House Republicans on board with the legislation .
`` I fully support H.R . 6201 : Families First CoronaVirus Response Act , which will be voted on in the House this evening , '' Trump tweeted . `` This Bill will follow my direction for free CoronaVirus tests , and paid sick leave for our impacted American workers ... ''
`` I encourage all Republicans and Democrats to come together and VOTE YES ! '' Trump later added . `` I will always put the health and well-being of Americans FIRST . Look forward to signing the final bill , ASAP ! ''
Pelosi intially informed colleagues of a deal with the Trump administration at around 6 p.m . ET Friday . “ We are proud to have reached an agreement with the administration to resolve outstanding challenges , and now will soon pass the Families First Coronavirus Response Act , ” the California Democrat said in a letter .
However , Fox News later learned that Mnuchin had not yet signed off on the pact .
Shortly before 8 p.m . ET , Mnuchin told Fox Business Network 's `` Lou Dobbs Tonight '' : `` We have an agreement that reflects what the president talked about in his speech the other [ Wednesday ] night . He 's very focused on making sure that we can deal with the coronavirus , that people who have to be home quarantined -- that hard-working Americans do n't lose their compensation because they have to be home quarantined .
`` Obviously we expect the bigger corporations to pick up these costs , '' Mnuchin added , `` and we also want to make sure that people can get free testing . The president wants lots of testing . One of the things the market responded very positively to was [ that ] the president has made just enormous progress with all these big companies coming in and saying that there 's testing . ''
The apparent problems caught Democrats by surprise : House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer , D-Md. , said “ we thought we had an agreement , ” adding : “ I want to vote tonight . ”
Fox News is told the major objection to the bill from House Republicans was extraneous matters House Democrats kept trying to include in the coronavirus package .
Shortly before 10 p.m. , Pelosi informed her Democratic caucus that the `` process has taken some time , '' adding that “ language incorporating the last details into the text is currently being written and should be completed soon . ”
Sources told Fox that if the measure passed the House with an overwhelming majority , the Senate would take it up next week .
Earlier Friday , President Trump declared a national emergency over the coronavirus outbreak and announced partnerships with major U.S. companies to expand testing capabilities .
“ This legislation is about testing , testing , testing , ” Pelosi said . “ To stop the spread of the virus , we have secured free coronavirus testing for everyone who needs a test , including the uninsured . We can not fight coronavirus effectively unless everyone in our country who needs to be tested can get their test free of charge . ”
According to Pelosi , the bill includes paid emergency leave with two weeks of paid sick leave and up to three months of paid family and medical leave . “ We have also secured enhanced unemployment insurance , a step that will extend protections to furloughed workers , ” she said .
Pelosi also said the bill will include nutrition security initiatives “ including SNAP , student meals , seniors ’ nutrition and food banks. ” The Democrat said “ 22 million children rely on free or reduced-price school meals for their food security ; we must ensure that they have food to eat . ”
She also said the bill will include increased federal funds for Medicaid to support local , state , tribal and territorial governments and health systems “ so that they have the resources necessary to combat this crisis . ”
The revisions to the Democratic bill happened after the GOP flagged “ major ” concerns about the sick leave legislation on Thursday .
McCarthy criticized the initial legislation for creating a paid sick leave program through the Social Security Administration that he said would take six months to set up and hamper the agency ’ s normal functioning of disbursing checks to senior citizens .
He also objected to forcing permanent paid sick leave `` for all businesses without exemptions and no sunsets , '' McCarthy said .
Late Friday , McCarthy told reporters the bill `` had some things which needed to be cleaned up . ''
`` This is a really good sign that shows bipartisanship , that we can overcome this virus , '' he said. `` ... It was very important to get this done before anybody departed . ''
Trump had pressed for a payroll tax holiday to give some economic relief to Americans , but Pelosi has not included that in this bill , though she 's signaled more legislation could be needed as the scope and hurt of the pandemic is fully realized .