More than a third of U.S. states reported record highs in average new Covid-19 cases as deaths across the U.S. gradually rise , according to a ███ analysis of data compiled by Johns Hopkins University . Across the U.S. , 19 states saw new cases reach daily records on Sunday , based on an average over the previous seven days , according to the data . That includes Texas , Georgia and Florida , the last of which reported a shattering 15,300 new cases on Sunday . ███ uses a seven-day trailing average to smooth out spikes in data reporting to identify where cases are rising and falling . The United States was one of two countries that accounted for about half of the new daily coronavirus cases reported across the globe , the World Health Organization said Monday . The U.S. and Brazil reported 111,319 new Covid-19 cases on Sunday . `` Let me be blunt , too many countries are headed in the wrong direction , '' WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said at a news conference from the agency 's Geneva headquarters .
Meanwhile , the number of coronavirus-related deaths is on the rise in a handful of states , including Texas , Florida and Arizona . Covid-19 deaths in the U.S. have declined or remained relatively stable for weeks , even though cases have more than doubled since mid-May . After peaking at an average of more than 2,000 deaths per day just three months ago , primarily driven by New York and New Jersey , fatalities in the U.S. have been slowly declining — falling to an average of less than 600 fatalities a day from June 23 through July 8 . But the daily death toll appears to be on the rise again in the U.S. , epidemiologists say . As of Sunday , the U.S. is averaging just over 700 new deaths a day .
Arizona has reported an average of about 59 new coronavirus-related deaths per day over the past seven days as of Sunday , up more than 78 % compared with a week ago , according to ███ 's analysis of data compiled by Hopkins . Coronavirus-related deaths in Texas surged 140 % from last week to an average of about 82 deaths per day over the past seven days as of Sunday , according to ███ 's analysis of data compiled by Hopkins .