COVID-19 is known to be transmitted mainly by respiratory droplets . This is the reasoning behind physical distancing , since it ’ s hard for those droplets to travel more than a few feet . But scientists are debating whether very small droplets— small enough to float through the air— are common enough and infectious enough to be a serious risk .
The nature of a brand-new virus is that messages about how to prevent becoming infected with it have to go out to the public before we have all the information . It may take years to fully understand how the virus most commonly spreads . We do not yet know for sure whether tiny aerosol droplets can spread the coronavirus , but the New York Times reports that over 200 scientists are writing a letter to the World Health Organization urging them to consider changing their recommendations to account for transmission via these smaller droplets . ( These droplets don ’ t meet the WHO ’ s definition of an “ airborne ” disease like measles , which can hang in the air for hours , but the scientists argue that the difference is still important . )
If it ’ s true that small floating droplets are a significant source of transmission , that doesn ’ t mean that everything we know is wrong . It just means certain things are even more important than we realized .
H ere ’ s what would change if we could confirm that small droplets are an important source of transmission :
If the coronavirus is airborne , d istancing may protect us less than we thought it did . Staying six feet away from somebody means only that we are avoiding those larger respiratory droplets that come from breathing and coughing .
I f the smaller droplets can travel and infect people , that means that standing just outside that six-foot radius may still put you at risk . To repeat , this is a change in emphasis , not a complete reversal . Nobody ever said that the six-foot rule was a guarantee . But it may be that the rule provides less protection than we thought .
Outdoors , fresh air circulates and those tiny droplets can float away on the breeze . Indoors , they hang in the air without an obvious escape route .
Ventilating indoor spaces should help . That means opening windows or running an air circulation system , ideally with a filter . But if aerosols are a significant source of transmission , the bigger take-home message would be that indoor spaces may be inherently risky . Aerosols could be the reason gatherings with singing and shouting , like church services , may be so problematic .
We already know that medical masks protect better than cloth masks , and N95s protect better than procedure masks with ear loops .
If the virus is transmitted through those tiny droplets , cloth and procedure masks are doing even less than we thought . In that case , we should possibly all be wearing N95s . Unfortunately , supplies are still low . The recommendation to wear “ cloth face coverings ” ( and surgical masks , when available ) is based partly on the need to free up those N95s for healthcare workers . That ’ s still a problem— but the shortage becomes an even bigger problem if it turns out that our homemade masks aren ’ t working as well as we thought .