( CNN ) Anger over shelter-in-place orders boiled over , with protesters ignoring social distancing guidelines and packing state capitols and streets .
`` Jesus is my vaccine , '' said one message on a tractor as it drove past the crowded statehouse in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , on Monday .
`` Jesus is my vaccine '' is one of the more colorful messages here . pic.twitter.com/vw5qolIlHC
Across the country , more protests have popped up in both red and blue states . And they have backing from powerful conservative allies in Washington DC , including FreedomWorks , a major conservative group closely associated with the Tea Party , and Stephen Moore , an economist who President Donald Trump tapped as a member of his economic reopening council .
`` Our goal is to make these protests as safe as possible and as effective as possible , '' Moore told CNN . `` The whole idea of civil disobedience in a protest is to persuade people ( that ) what you 're doing is speaking up for a cause , you know , that people will feel is just and right . ''
Moore said he and other conservatives advising the protesters have recommended that people follow health officials ' recommendations -- like staying 6 feet apart from others and wearing masks -- while protesting some of those very guidelines .
Adam Brandon , president of FreedomWorks , said a `` tipping point '' for the activist community was the spate of reports that the Trump administration could use cell phone data to track the spread of coronavirus
`` All of a sudden this is going from a pandemic to an Orwellian nightmare , '' Brandon said , noting how many people in his network reacted similarly to the news about data tracking .
Car horns blared in the streets of Annapolis , where members of the group Reopen Maryland said the closures of businesses have been financially devastating .
`` We do n't think that there 's any reason we ca n't protect the elderly and the vulnerable from this virus and still get our small businesses back up to work , '' Paul Brockman told CNN affiliate WBAL
A protester in Maryland says she 's worried about her future if businesses do n't reopen soon .
In Indianapolis , protester Andy Lyons said he understands the health risks . But he wants the government to back off .
`` If I get sick , then I am going to bear the consequences of my getting sick , '' Lyons told CNN affiliate WTHR . `` If anybody else gets sick , they bear the consequences of their free choice without government coercion to do so . That 's what this is about . ''
Protest along Meridian in front of Governor 's residence demanding Gov Holcomb end stay-at-home order # WTHR pic.twitter.com/lQ01qz0Pyd — Mary Milz ( @ MaryWTHR ) April 18 , 2020
Gubernatorial candidate Tim Eyman speaks during a rally to protest Washinton state 's stay-at-home order at the Capitol building Sunday in Olympia .
Maryland Gov . Larry Hogan said he understands `` the frustration among the people that want to get things open right away . I 'm frustrated also . ''
`` We 're doing everything we possibly can to reopen in a safe manner , '' the Republican governor told CNN 's `` State of the Union '' on Sunday . `` But I do n't think it 's helpful to encourage demonstrations and encourage people to go against the President 's own policy . ''
It 's too early to reopen , according to White House guidelines
In Maryland and Indiana , some protesters wore hats or waved flags that supported President Trump .
Among the guidelines for `` Opening Up America Again , '' states should n't start to reopen until they have a downward trajectory of documented cases in a 14-day period or a downward trajectory of positive tests as a percent of total tests in a 14-day period .
Hogan , the chairman of the National Governors sAssociation , said states such as his own have n't met those White House guidelines yet .
Three Southern governors , though , are ready to slowly reopen their states . The governors of Georgia , Tennessee and South Carolina said Monday they 'd start the process of reopening businesses in their respective states this week or at the latest next Monday .
`` I realize how important this virus is , but now we 're getting to the point where we 're shutting too much stuff down , '' protester Tom Hughey , who said he has a small business , told CNN affiliate WILX
The Michigan Nurses Association called the protest `` irresponsible , '' saying it `` sends exactly the opposite message that nurses and healthcare professionals are trying to get across : we are begging people , please stay home . ''
Whitmer told CNN 's `` State of the Union '' on Sunday that her state is definitely not ready to reopen .
`` Michigan , right now , has the third highest death count in the country '' from coronavirus , Whitmer said .
`` No one 's more anxious to re-engage our economy than I am . But I want to do it in a way that really does save life . ... That means that we can avoid a second wave . Because as tough as this is , it would be devastating to have a second wave . ''
Health officials have warned additional waves of coronavirus are virtually inevitable . But `` it 's up to us how big those other waves will be , '' epidemiologist Dr. Larry Brilliant said .
He cautioned against repeating mistakes from the Spanish flu pandemic that killed 675,000 Americans . Back then , epidemiologists say , people let up on social distancing too early -- leading to a second wave of infections that was deadlier than the first .
Some Facebook posts promoting protests were taken down because such events would violate statewide shelter-in-place rules , Facebook spokesman Andy Stone said Monday .
Facebook removed those posts after discussing with officials in California , New Jersey and Nebraska .
Stone said Facebook is reaching out to several other state governments on whether anti-quarantine protests are also banned under their social distancing orders .
`` Unless government prohibits the event during this time , we allow it to be organized on Facebook , '' Stone said . `` For this same reason , events that defy government 's guidance on social distancing are n't allowed on Facebook . ''