ATLANTA – Hair salons were booked up with clients . Barbers had a flow of customers in the chair . And at least one gym saw more than 40 people before noon .
While many business remained closed in Georgia on Friday , others reopened for the first time in nearly one month .
Gov . Brian Kemp announced this week that gyms , tattoo parlors , hair and nail salons , massage therapists and other businesses could reopen , after being forced to close amid the coronavirus pandemic . In-person religious services can also resume this weekend , and restaurants and theaters can reopen Monday .
Some salon and barbershop owners said Friday there was no shortage of clients eager to support their businesses .
Tim Timmons , owner of Salon Gloss in Woodstock , said his salon is booked for the next two weeks . By noon Friday , his hairstylists had served nine clients .
Timmons said after announcing that he would reopen `` the phones started ringing nonstop '' with customers . Many were new clients who needed an appointment because their regular salon didn ’ t reopen .
`` I guess there ’ s a need out there and people are brave enough to put themselves out there , '' Timmons said .
Good Look Barber Shop in Marietta was also busy . By 11 a.m. , owner Y ’ Kheyo Underwood said his barbers had serviced at least 20 clients .
Underwood said he was busier than expected but welcomed the business because he needs the money .
`` I think people who aren ’ t in our position , do the most criticizing , '' Underwood said Friday . `` The people who are at home and still getting paid by their companies . If you are in my position , with a small business , you know the only way of getting income is by opening up your establishment . ''
Taneshala Futch Hall , owner of a dance and training studio in Savannah , said that she had about 20 people registered for her three group classes Friday evening . She said that her clients had been texting her since Kemp ’ s announcement , asking her to reopen the studio .
`` It felt like something I needed to do . Exercise betters your health and betters you mentally , '' she said . `` I ’ m trying to keep a positive outtake on what ’ s going on , keeping people motivated and giving them something to look forward to . ''
Futch Hall said she ’ s planning to limit her class sizes so that participants can social distance . She ’ s also providing gloves and giving clients their own personal mats .
At BodyPlex Fitness , there were about 43 check-ins at the Grayson gym and about 15-20 at the Milledgeville location Friday morning , owner Mike Martino said . Martino said he considered the turnout to be slow , `` as we expected . ''
Atlanta restaurant owner Emily Chan , who has decided not to reopen yet , said her neighborhood was quiet Friday . As she drove the five miles through a main downtown stretch from her home to the farmer 's market , businesses remained dark , she said .
`` It was the same crickets , '' Chan said . `` I was very careful about paying attention to our business to see if any were open . I did not see one . ''
As businesses reopened to customers , critics — including Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms — continued to urge Georgians to stay home .
`` The numbers speak for themselves , '' Bottoms said in an Instagram post Friday . `` PLEASE STAY HOME . ''
Bottoms ’ post included a table that showed Georgia with 22,147 COVID-19 cases and 892 deaths as of noon Friday .
Black religious and civil rights leaders are also pleading for black residents to stay home and not reopen their businesses and churches .
Black Americans are dying of coronavirus at higher rates than people of other races in some major cities .
Prominent black leaders , including the Rev . Al Sharpton , NAACP president Derrick Johnson and National Urban League president Marc Morial , said in a joint statement that black families should continue to work remotely if possible and attend virtual church services from home .
`` The actions of these governors , which demonstrate reckless disregard for the health and life of Black residents , compel us to speak out and take action to protect ourselves , '' the leaders said . `` As faith leaders and civil rights leaders , we work every day on behalf of the needs of our families and communities . We regard this pandemic as a grave threat to the health and life of our people , and as a threat to the integrity and vitality of the communities we are privileged to serve . ''
Danny Blackmon was already struggling to keep his southwest Georgia office equipment businesses afloat when the coronavirus outbreak hit . Then , at the end of March , a tornado destroyed his home and farm . Last week , he laid off his two employees .
`` I honestly can ’ t tell you that my business will survive right now , '' the Georgetown-Quitman County resident said . `` I 'm paying bills , and there 's no income coming in . How long can I do that ? ''
Blackmon , who serves as chairman of the Southwest Georgia Regional Development Commission , supports Kemp 's decision to reopen parts of the state 's economy Friday . If offices do n't reopen , Blackmon ca n't sell his printers and copiers .
`` At some point , you have got to make a move . Is there risk we take ? Absolutely there is . But we risk even more when we lose ground with the economy , '' he said .
Other merchants and officials praised the reopening , saying closures would cripple the state 's economy and shut down many small businesses . In the past month , the Georgia Department of Labor has processed more than 1 million unemployment claims , more than the combined total for the previous three years , the department said Thursday .
Carlene Nelson , who owns a salon in Evans said she decided to `` play it safe . '' Nelson will not open until Monday , when the co-owner of the Retreat Spa & Salon is more confident her employees and customers will be safe from spreading COVID-19 .
`` We want to make sure all our cleaning supplies and face shields are in place , '' said Nelson , who is splitting her staff of 10 stylists into alternating shifts of five to reduce the number of people in the building . `` We ’ ll be taking everyone 's temperatures and asking questions about if they have had any symptoms or have been around anyone who has . ''
The spa side of the business , which does massages and facials , will not open until a later date , she said . On the salon side , technicians will do pedicures but not manicures .
For Tiffany Terranova , owner of RAW Bronzing Studio , an organic spray-tanning salon with four locations in Atlanta , this week would have been the busiest of the year . The business has brought in $ 577 this month through online retail , but Terranova owes $ 25,000 in expenses for April . She does n't plan to reopen anytime soon .
`` It just doesn ’ t make sense to risk dying over a spray-tan . We ’ re the most nonessential of businesses . And the fact that Kemp is rolling out this opening so soon , it just doesn ’ t make any sense , '' she said . `` We ’ ve kind of taken it for granted that our hospitals aren ’ t overrun at this point . ''
Terranova started her business 10 years ago out of her house . She , her husband and sister have 13 employees , whom they laid off so the employees could apply for unemployment . Now that salons are allowed to reopen , Terranova said she 's concerned about remaining eligible for unemployment .
`` Small businesses don ’ t have enough money in reserve to experiment – to try to reopen and then go back to a shelter-in-place , '' she said . `` It feels like we ’ re the guinea pigs for a long and unsafe experiment that is going to fail . ''
Terranova said she would be concerned about accidentally infecting her customers or contracting the disease herself . Terranova 's mother-in-law lives with her , and her sister 's fiancee has diabetes . `` We can not risk getting sick , '' she said .
Wlaa Weeks , owner of a private training studio in Atlanta , was similarly skeptical . `` It ’ s very high risk and low reward , '' Weeks said . `` I can not guarantee the wellness of our clientele . ''
Public health experts said Georgia is not conducting enough testing and contact tracing to reopen businesses .
`` Look , I understand that businesses are hurting , '' said Dr. Saad Omer , director of the Yale Institute for Global Health and a former 11-year Georgia resident . `` But the key is to safely open . These are people actually losing their lives . Have we all of a sudden decided that people losing lives is not a significant event ? ''
Georgia has not seen a 14-day downward trajectory in the rate of new cases , according to data from the state 's Department of Health . More than 22,000 people have tested positive for the virus in Georgia , and more than 80 have died , according to the department . About 101,000 tests have been conducted in the state of more than 10 million .
Omer was particularly critical of the governor 's decision to open salons and gyms . `` It ’ s as if someone took the list of the things that you should be careful about opening and then flipped it around , '' he said . `` It ’ s ironic that Georgia has perhaps the highest rate of public health experts per capita because of the CDC and , despite that , they ’ re implementing polices that are not supported by evidence . ''
Dr. Carlos del Rio , executive associate dean of Emory University School of Medicine , encouraged residents in a video briefing Thursday to exercise caution . `` This is not like we 're open for business . People will make their own decisions , '' he said . `` What we need to emphasize to people is to continue practicing social distancing . ''
Chan hand-painted the walls of her downtown Atlanta restaurant . A friend reupholstered used furniture . Family members cleaned out the kitchen fryers . In September , a lifelong dream came to fruition : Chan and her wife , Jen , opened for businesses .
`` We built it ourselves , and when it was finally filling , this happened . Now , every time I walk in my restaurant , there are takeout boxes sitting on the tables , and the chairs are flipped up . It ’ s incredibly soul-crushing , '' she said . `` There are days when you just go into the walk-in cooler and cry . ''
The Chans have a 2-year-old boy . Jen was furloughed from her other job at a restaurant group . Emily unsuccessfully submitted an application for Paycheck Protection Program support – seven times . But Chan said she 's not ready to reopen .
`` It ’ s just not worth it . You can ’ t feed people if they ’ re not here , '' said Chan , whose uncle died three days after testing positive for the coronavirus . `` We ’ re going to trust the CDC and the experts on this . I ’ m going to listen to my community and science . ''
Havird Usry , an Augusta restaurateur and board member of the Georgia Restaurant Association , is a Kemp supporter but said relaxing restrictions is `` premature . ''
Usry is concerned about fellow restaurant owners not taking the proper precautions to keep COVID-19 from spreading . `` It ’ s really in the owners ' hands to do the right things , and I just do n't think we 're ready for that , '' said Usry , who co-owns Fat Man 's Cafe and the Sno-Cap Drive-In .
Plans to reopen Georgia : Backlash from mayors , mixed support from businesses
In Savannah , Johno Morisano , owner of The Grey and The Grey Market , also has no plans to reopen either eatery to dine-in guests anytime soon , primarily because he said he doesn ’ t believe diners want to risk coronavirus exposure inside a restaurant . `` In order to run a restaurant , you need guests , '' Morisano said .
For Jen Jenkins , owner of Savannah ’ s popular Foxy Loxy Cafe , Kemp ’ s reopening order is another complicating factor after spending weeks adjusting operations to focus on takeout service – including installing plexiglass dividers at the counter – as well as shifting resources to participate in Savannah ’ s Meals for Medical organization .
`` All that I have gotten from my staff , and my own concern , is trepidation '' about potentially reopening dine-in service in the near future , Jenkins said .
The decision-making process for reopening is in flux at other Savannah eateries . On Tuesday , restaurant chain Carey Hilliard ’ s posted a `` staff update '' on its Facebook page announcing that its eatery would reopen dine-in service April 27 – but by Wednesday , the announcement had been edited .
`` We hope to open the Dining Room when safe , but Monday will NOT be the day , '' said the post by Carey Hilliard ’ s , directed to staff members . `` Thank you for all the constructive feedback . ''
Management at another popular Savannah eatery was even more direct . `` We ’ re good Kemp , thanks anyway , '' a post said Tuesday on the Bull Street Taco Facebook page .
For Georgia residents considering patronizing businesses Friday , del Rio suggested wearing personal protective equipment .
`` If I was going to go to a bowling alley today , I ’ d certainly be using a lot of hand sanitizer . I 'd be wearing a mask . And I ’ d social distance , '' del Rio said . `` Am I going to go bowling ? No . ''
Contributing : Damon Cline , The Augusta Chronicle ; Nick Robertson , Savannah Morning News
Follow Grace Hauck and Nicquel Terry Ellis on Twitter @ grace_hauck and @ NTerryEllis