There ’ s still no cure for the coronavirus , but dozens of drugs and treatments are being tested against it . And you ’ re not alone if you ’ ve gotten confused about which ones are mere possibilities and which are widely understood to be useful . The science changes day by day , and sometimes a drug will make headlines based on data that turns out not to be as reliable as it first looked .
This tracker from the New York Times aims to cut through some of the confusion . In contrast to STAT ’ s tracker , which follows each drug ’ s path through the regulatory process , this one evaluates the strength of the evidence for each drug and also for several non-pharmaceutical treatments .
Two treatments currently in wide use : ventilators , and the simple hack of placing patients face-down to relieve pressure on their lungs .
ventilators , and the simple hack of placing patients face-down to relieve pressure on their lungs . Two “ promising ” treatments : remdesivir , an antiviral ; and dexamethasone , a corticosteroid that acts against the immune system ( yes , it ’ s counterintuitive ) to reduce inflammation in severely ill patients .
remdesivir , an antiviral ; and dexamethasone , a corticosteroid that acts against the immune system ( yes , it ’ s counterintuitive ) to reduce inflammation in severely ill patients . Ten treatments with “ tentative or mixed ” evidence , including convalescent plasma ( from the blood of recovered patients ) and anticoagulants .
, including convalescent plasma ( from the blood of recovered patients ) and anticoagulants . Two treatments that are “ not promising ” : hydroxychloroquine
: Three treatments deemed “ pseudoscience or fraud ” : drinking or injecting bleach and disinfectants ultraviolet light used on the body flagged by the FDA as fraudulent
Each category should be read with a caveat . For example , the “ widely used ” treatments aren ’ t judged on the strength of the evidence , but on how common the treatment currently is . We hope those things are related , but they aren ’ t guaranteed to be .
The treatments with “ promising ” evidence are not necessarily the next wonder drugs . Sometimes they may only help a little ( reducing mortality rates slightly for severely ill patients , perhaps ) . The “ tentative or mixed evidence ” treatments may also end up being of limited usefulness if they ’ re successful .
And on the flip side , some of the “ not promising ” treatments may not have been tested enough or in the right conditions to determine their true usefulness . As we learn more about the virus and as more trials are done , expect treatments to move from category to category to keep up with the science .