People take advantage of a Duval County beach opening for physical activity amid coronavirus restrictions in Jacksonville , Fla. , April 18 , 2020 . Picture taken April 18 , 2020 . ( Sam Thomas/Reuters )
A sure sign of fanaticism is the inability to make distinctions , in this case between risky and non-risky activities , between places hard hit and places not .
The largest city in Florida partly reopened its beaches , and it became something of a national scandal . CNN ran a disapproving segment , and the hashtag # FloridaMorons trended on Twitter .
As the CNN report put it : “ The scene at Jacksonville Beach wasn ’ t one of caution in the middle of a worldwide pandemic . Crowds cheered and flooded the beach when police took the barriers down . People were seen swimming , biking , surfing , running and fishing . ”
None of these activities has been shown to be a vector for the spread of COVID-19 ; in fact , no outdoor activities have been shown to be dangerous at all . A recent study examined hundreds of outbreaks and traced only one to an outdoor environment .
Surfers and bikers are the least of our worries . Yet , there is a segment of American opinion that takes it as its responsibility to scold and shame anyone who dares go out and get a little fresh air .
Early on in the crisis , CNN anchors spent 20 minutes inveighing against people walking , running , biking , and Rollerblading along San Francisco ’ s Embarcadero . Noting that some people were holding hands , Jake Tapper called it “ enraging. ” Of course , random strangers don ’ t hold hands , but people who are likely in close proximity whether they are enjoying a stroll or not .
Despite there being no indication that outdoor spaces abet the spread of the disease , parks have been shut down throughout the United States , and the closures are at times enforced with rigor . No less than Tom Brady was chased from a closed Tampa Bay park after he was discovered working out , apparently alone . A father in Colorado was briefly detained by police for the alleged offense of playing T-ball with his 6-year-old daughter on a softball field .
A sure sign of fanaticism is the inability to make distinctions , in this instance between risky and non-risky activities and between places hard hit and places not . It ’ s one thing to hold a day-long , 100-person family reunion in a public park , quite another to jog through one . It ’ s one thing to begin opening up in New York City , where there have been more than 10,000 deaths , and another to begin opening in Montana , where there have been 14 .
Jacksonville , Fla. , is the seat of Duval County . With a population of nearly a million people , the county has had 17 COVID-19 deaths . It is hardly a hot spot .
At least some of the spleen would be taken out of the coronavirus debate if people acknowledged that we live in a vast continental country , with radically different ways of life from one end of it to another . Not only are not all states the same , not all counties within states are the same .
Anti-lockdown protests at the Michigan state capitol last week got a lot of attention ( and a lot of criticism for , yes , lack of social distancing because some protesters milled about on the capitol grounds ) . One argument of the demonstrators is that Michigan shouldn ’ t be uniformly locked down if conditions around the state aren ’ t uniform .
Sparsely populated Alcona County in northern Michigan has four cases and no deaths , according to the latest state data . Wayne County , encompassing the city of Detroit , has 6,677 cases and 597 deaths . One of these things is not like the other .
But such is the lockdown zealotry that any thought that these kinds of places should be treated differently is considered heresy sure to get people killed . It seems indisputable that the lockdowns have slowed the spread of the disease , but at an enormous economic cost . We are going to have to show some flexibility and be willing to adopt a patchwork approach to opening up around the country .
We can ’ t be beholden to public officials and commentators who , to paraphrase H. L. Mencken , have the haunting fear that someone , somewhere , may be Rollerblading .