Two NBA players , both members of the Utah Jazz , have now tested positive for coronavirus , and teammates have suggested to reporters that “ careless ” behavior in the locker room by the first player to get the virus was likely the reason his teammate is now sick .
“ Jazz star Donovan Mitchell has tested positive for the coronavirus , league sources tell ESPN , ” ESPN ’ s Adrian Wojnarowski reported Thursday morning . “ Jazz players privately say that Rudy Gobert had been careless in the locker room touching other players and their belongings . Now a Jazz teammate has tested positive . ”
Jazz star Donovan Mitchell has tested positive for the coronavirus , league sources tell ESPN . Jazz players privately say that Rudy Gobert had been careless in the locker room touching other players and their belongings . Now a Jazz teammate has tested positive . — Adrian Wojnarowski ( @ wojespn ) March 12 , 2020
“ Jazz players are privately saying that Gobert showed a cavalier attitude toward the virus with his teammates in the locker room , touching them and their belongings , ” ESPN reports . “ And at Monday ’ s media availability , Gobert was seen touching all the microphones and tape recorders at the end of his session with reporters . ”
So…here is Rudy touching all the mics following Mondays shoot around that has some people concerned… # TakeNote # utahjazz # CoronaVirus pic.twitter.com/dr4auECTr4 — Dave Fox ( @ Davefox2 ) March 12 , 2020
“ We are working closely with the CDC , Oklahoma and Utah state officials , and the NBA to monitor their health and determine the best path moving forward , ” the Jazz said in a statement confirming that Mitchell has tested positive for the virus .
Following Gobert ’ s positive test on Wednesday , the Jazz promptly postponed their game against the Oklahoma City Thunder , and the league recommended self-quarantine for all players who faced off against the Jazz over the last 10 days . During that period , the Jazz played Boston , Cleveland , Detroit , New York and Toronto .
Shortly after the decision , the NBA announced that it was suspending its season .
“ The NBA announced that a player on the Utah Jazz has preliminary tested positive for COVID-19 , ” the NBA said in a statement Wednesday night . “ The test result was reported shortly prior to the tip-off of tonight ’ s game between the Jazz and the Oklahoma City Thunder at Chesapeake Energy Arena . At that time , tonight ’ s game was canceled . The affected player was not in the arena . ”
“ The NBA is suspending game play following the conclusion of tonight ’ s schedule of games until further notice , ” the statement continued . “ The NBA will use this hiatus to determine next steps for moving forward in regard to the coronavirus pandemic . ”
Amid the reports on the Jazz coronavirus cases , the Toronto Raptors , one of the teams that played the Jazz over the last ten days , announced on Thursday that “ members of the team ’ s traveling party have been tested for coronavirus and that they are awaiting the results , ” ESPN reports .
The league ’ s decision to suspend the season followed the NBA and other professional leagues ’ attempts to protect players from potential exposure to the virus . In joint statement Monday night , the NBA , NHL , Major League Baseball and Major League Soccer announced new policies limiting contact with players .
“ After consultation with infectious disease and public health experts , and given the issues that can be associated with close contact in pre- and post-game settings , all team locker rooms and clubhouses will be open only to players and essential employees of teams and team facilities until further notice . Media access will be maintained in designated locations outside of the locker room and clubhouse setting , ” the statement read . “ These temporary changes will be effective beginning with [ Tuesday ’ s ] games and practices . We will continue to closely monitor this situation and take any further steps necessary to maintain a safe and welcoming environment . ”