WASHINGTON – Congressional Democrats called on Republicans on Tuesday to apologize for language about the coronavirus the Democratic lawmakers slammed as `` bigoted . ''
On Monday evening , the House minority leader , Rep. Kevin McCarthy , R-Calif. , shared the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 's page about the coronavirus , which has been named COVID-19 , referring to it as the `` Chinese coronavirus . ''
Condemnation came quickly from the Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus and House Democrats .
Rep. Grace Meng , D-N.Y. , who is the vice-chair of the Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus , replied to McCarthy in a tweet , immediately calling his statement `` hurtful , '' adding that Asian Americans were `` getting attacked bc of this exact type of rhetoric . ''
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi called the statement `` bigoted '' and called on McCarthy to delete the tweet and apologize .
More : Coronavirus updates : Suburban New York community to enact 'containment ' area , close schools
In a statement , the chair of the Congressional Asian Caucus , Rep. Judy Chu , D-Calif. , said `` insisting on identifying the virus by region , as Leader McCarthy and Rep. ( Paul ) Gosar have done , only creates fear and hostility . ''
Rep. Paul Gosar , R-Ariz. , self-quarantined himself two days ago after announcing he had come in contact with a person who had been diagnosed with the `` Wuhan Virus . ''
Rep. Joaquin Castro , D-Texas , the chair of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus , Rep. Karen Bass , D-Calif. , the chair of the Congressional Black Caucus , and Rep. Deb Haaland , D-N.M. , the co-chair of the Native American Caucus , all called on Gosar and McCarthy to apologize as well .
Tuesday evening , McCarthy responded to Democrats ' criticism in a tweet , writing , `` Democrats are trying to score political points by calling Republicans racist . ''
`` Coronavirus is a China-born disease—made worse by a Communist Party that rejected America 's help to contain it , '' he said , noting that some media outlets and Democrats had referred to the virus as a `` Chinese coronavirus . ''
Experts have advised against referring to the new coronavirus with a location-specific name . The World Health Organization issued guidance in 2015 calling on media outlets , scientists and national authorities to avoid naming infectious diseases for locations to avoid stigmatizing groups of people .
`` This may seem like a trivial issue to some , but disease names really do matter to the people who are directly affected . '' Dr. Keiji Fukuda , WHO assistant director general for health security , said at the time , citing how `` certain disease names provoke a backlash against members of particular religious or ethnic communities '' or have other serious consequences .
More : From 'great ' to 'blindsided ' : How Trump changed his coronavirus message amid fear , confusion in the White House
In response to a question from a Democratic lawmaker , CDC Director Robert Redfield said in testimony before a House appropriations panel Tuesday morning it was incorrect to describe the virus with a location ,
`` It 's absolutely wrong and inappropriate to call this the Chinese coronavirus – I assume you would agree with that , '' asked Rep. Lois Frankel , D-Fla. , to which Redfield replied `` yes , '' adding the virus had spread through Iran , Italy , and South Korea as well .