It ’ s becoming clearer by the day that the coronavirus crisis has completely upended the 2020 election .
I ’ m not talking about the politics , though that ’ s also been scrambled . I mean the process of getting to November – the conventions , the fundraising , the campaigning , and perhaps the logistics of voting itself .
Joe Biden made this clear on Tuesday when he cast doubt on whether the Democrats would hold their quadrennial convention in Milwaukee in July . All those people crammed into an arena , wearing Uncle Sam hats and cheering ?
“ It ’ s hard to envision that , ” Mr. Biden told Brian Williams of MSNBC .
It ’ s a bit easier to envision the Republican convention going on , since it isn ’ t scheduled until the last week in August , in Charlotte . And President Donald Trump does love the visual pop of a big raucous crowd .
But what about Mr. Trump ’ s rallies ? They ’ re the opposite of social distancing . It could be mid-summer before they seem like a good idea . Basic door-to-door campaigning for lower-level officials seems out of the question for now , too .
Enter Zoom . Virtual campaigning , with an on-screen candidate hosting a “ crowd ” gathered around laptops , may be the wave of the next few months . The Biden campaign has already converted some previously scheduled speeches into virtual events . Down-ballot candidates will certainly follow .
The technology is cheap and eliminates the wear and tear of travel . Virtual campaigning may persist in politics even after the pandemic ebbs .
“ You may be seeing how the future looks , ” GOP consultant Rick Wilson told NBC earlier this month .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
As for voting , that ’ s already been affected , as at least 14 states and Puerto Rico have postponed primaries . It ’ s quite possible that in coming months more states will allow more voters to opt for mail-in ballots . They might also lengthen or encourage early voting , allowing lines to spread out or shorten for an election whose turnout has long been projected to be possibly record-breaking .