Florida health officials have identified a troubling trend ; approximately 31 percent , or one-third , of children in Florida tested for COVID-19 yield positive results , according to the Sun Sentinel .
State data indicates that out of 54,022 Florida children tested , 31.1 percent have returned positive results on average . This is higher than the statewide positivity rate , which reads in at about 11 percent .
Aside from the staggering figure indicating the transmission of the virus , health experts fear it can cause potential lifelong damage in children . Alina Alonso , the health department director of Palm Beach County , reportedly told county commissioners on Tuesday that the long-term consequences of coronavirus in children are unknown .
Alonso described X-rays that reveal damage caused to human lungs by the coronavirus , even for people without severe symptoms .
“ They are seeing there is damage to the lungs in these asymptomatic children . ... We don ’ t know how that is going to manifest a year from now or two years from now , ” Alonso told reporters . “ Is that child going to have chronic pulmonary problems or not ? ”
FAUCI WARNS YOUNG PEOPLE THEY ARE NOT IMMUNE TO ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CORONAVIRUS
HERE ARE THE 6 WAYS THE CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC COULD END
Throughout the pandemic , children have largely been exempt from severe COVID-19 infections , despite the recently discovered pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome that occurred in a small number of children who were exposed to the virus . Similar to the inflammatory illness Kawasaki Disease , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) issued an alert and guidance page for children exhibiting symptoms .
“ We are learning something every day , ” said Jorge Perez , who co-founded Kidz Medical Services and operates pediatric offices throughout South Florida . “ We have to be knowledgeable about this and continue to monitor to see what effects it has in children . ”
This comes as states determine whether in-person education will resume in the fall . Outside of potentially hazardous consequences of a coronavirus infection to children , asymptomatic carriers pose a threat to teachers and other staff , who are demographically more likely to have a severe infection .
America is changing FASTER THAN EVER . Add Changing America to your Facebook and Twitter feeds to stay engaged on the latest news and smartest insights .
Local outlet WPTV reports that Gov . Ron DeSantis ( R ) will be meeting with the Florida Department of Education on Wednesday to outline how schools may proceed in the upcoming academic year .
Both DeSantis and other government officials , such as Florida Education Commissioner Richard Corcoran , said public school districts have to “ open brick and mortar schools at least five days per week for all students . ”
This plan has received pushback from teachers ’ unions , who believe that reopening too soon will risk the health of teachers , children and parents .
The American Academy of Pediatrics weighed in on the issue , issuing a statement along with the American Federation of Teachers ( AFT ) , National Education Association ( NEA ) and AASA , The School Superintendents Association .
“ Returning to school is important for the healthy development and well-being of children , but we must pursue re-opening in a way that is safe for all students , teachers and staff . Science should drive decision-making on safely reopening schools . Public health agencies must make recommendations based on evidence , not politics . We should leave it to health experts to tell us when the time is best to open up school buildings , and listen to educators and administrators to shape how we do it . ”
COUNTRIES LED BY WOMEN HAVE FARED BETTER AGAINST CORONAVIRUS . WHY ?
MORE THAN 8.7 MILLION CORONAVIRUS CASES WENT UNDETECTED IN MARCH
FAUCI PREDICTS ANOTHER CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK IN THE FALL WITH A 'VERY DIFFERENT ' OUTCOME
TEXAS REPORTS SINGLE-DAY HIGH IN CORONAVIRUS DEATHS TWO WEEKS AFTER REOPENING