The U.S. Food and Drug Administration recently granted an “ emergency use authorization ” of a blood test for antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 , the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19 . It is the first such test to receive approval for the U.S. market . And it comes at a time when health experts and leaders are embracing immunity as a potential end point to the pandemic . In Colorado , a company that makes a coronavirus antibody test has donated kits to the state ’ s San Miguel County so that everyone there can be tested if they want to . And in Italy , politicians want to use antibody status to determine which people will get “ back to work ” passes .
Several ambitious surveys to test for these antibodies have now been launched around the globe . The World Health Organization ’ s Solidarity II study will pool antibody data from more than half a dozen countries . In the U.S. , a collaborative multiyear project aims to provide a picture of nationwide antibody prevalence . Its first phase is already collecting samples from blood donors in six major urban areas , including New York City , Seattle and Minneapolis . And the effort will evolve into three national surveys of donors , supported by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and conducted this fall and in the fall of 2021 .
Unlike diagnostic tests , which are used to confirm the presence and sometimes load , or amount , of the virus , antibody tests help determine whether or not someone was previously infected—even if that person never showed symptoms . Widespread use of such assays could give scientists greater insight into how deadly the virus is and how widely it has spread throughout the population .
It is less clear what those antibody tests mean for real life , however , because immunity functions on a continuum . With some pathogens , such as the varicella-zoster virus ( which causes chicken pox ) , infection confers near-universal , long-lasting resistance . Natural infection with Clostridium tetani , the bacterium that causes tetanus , on the other hand , offers no protection—and even people getting vaccinated for it require regular booster shots . On the extreme end of this spectrum , individuals infected with HIV often have large amounts of antibodies that do nothing to prevent or clear the disease .
At this early stage of understanding the new coronavirus , it is unclear where COVID-19 falls on the immunity spectrum . Although most people with SARS-CoV-2 seem to produce antibodies , “ we simply don ’ t know yet what it takes to be effectively protected from this infection , ” says Dawn Bowdish , a professor of pathology and molecular medicine and Canada Research Chair in Aging and Immunity at McMaster University in Ontario . Researchers are scrambling to answer two questions : How long do SARS-CoV-2 antibodies stick around ? And do they protect against reinfection ?
Early on , some people—most notably U.K. Prime Minister Boris Johnson ( who has the virus and is currently in intensive care ) and his government ’ s scientific adviser Patrick Vallance—touted hopes that herd immunity could be an eventual means for ending the pandemic . And although it appears that recovered COVID-19 patients have antibodies for at least two weeks , long-term data are still lacking . So many scientists are looking to other coronaviruses for answers .
Immunity to seasonal coronaviruses ( such as those that cause common colds ) , for example , starts declining a couple of weeks after infection . And within a year , some people are vulnerable to reinfection . That observation is disconcerting when experts say it is unlikely we will have a vaccine for COVID-19 within 18 months . But studies of SARS-CoV—the virus that causes severe acute respiratory syndrome , or SARS , which shares a considerable amount of its genetic material with SARS-CoV-2—are more promising . Antibody testing shows SARS-CoV immunity peaks at around four months and offers protection for roughly two to three years . As Preeti Malani , chief health officer and a professor of medicine at the University of Michigan , said in a video interview with JAMA Editor in Chief Howard Bauchner , this period presents “ a pretty good time line for thinking about vaccines and therapeutics ” for COVID-19 .
Even if the antibodies stick around in the body , however , it is not yet certain that they will prevent future infection . What we want , Bowdish says , are neutralizing antibodies . These are the proteins that reduce and prevent infection by binding to the part of a virus that connects to and “ unlocks ” host cells . They are relatively easy to detect , and they are far easier for vaccine developers to generate than the alternative : the immune system ’ s T cells . In contrast , nonneutralizing antibodies still recognize parts of the pathogen , but they do not bind effectively and so do not prevent it from invading cells .
“ If humans naturally make neutralizing antibodies [ against SARS-CoV-2 ] , then all we have to do is figure out what [ sites they are ] binding on the virus and really target that one little piece of protein , and that ’ s our magic bullet , ” Bowdish says . For SARS-CoV-2 , that target site is most likely on the so-called receptor-binding domain of its spike glycoprotein—a protein attached to a sugar that the virus uses to enter cells . But , Bowdish says , this spot may present a challenge because human immune systems are not very good at making antibodies against sugar-coated substances .
Nevertheless , a few small studies of cells in laboratory dishes suggest that SARS-CoV-2 infection triggers the production of neutralizing antibodies . And animal studies indicate such antibodies do prevent reinfection , at least for a couple of weeks . Furthermore , because some antibodies seem to recognize and react to the spike proteins on multiple coronaviruses , including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV ( the virus that causes Middle East respiratory syndrome , or MERS ) , researchers can build on knowledge learned from previous outbreaks .
Research on real-life immunity to SARS-CoV-2 is in its preliminary stages , and uncertainties remain . One study found no correlation between viral load and antibody presence , leading the authors to question the antibodies ’ actual role in clearing the virus in humans . In addition , peer-reviewed research on SARS-CoV and preprint studies on SARS-CoV-2 report that some nonneutralizing coronavirus antibodies might trigger a harmful immune response upon reinfection with those pathogens or cross infection with other coronaviruses . Thus , while much of the emerging research is promising , Bowdish cautions against using antibody testing to drive policy until researchers know the proportion of COVID-19 survivors who are producing neutralizing antibodies .
In an ideal world , SARS-CoV-2 immunity would resemble that acquired by children who get chicken pox . Early research suggests we are in for a much more complex scenario but one that time and unprecedented global cooperation might be able to untangle . Eventually antibody tests could be the key to getting our lives and economies back on track . For now , they promise to give experts , officials and citizens a clearer picture of the pandemic .