Our decision making is bad enough when the disease is hypothetical . But when the disease is real — when we see actual death tolls climbing daily , as we do with the coronavirus — another factor besides our sensitivity to losses comes into play : fear .
The brain states we call emotions exist for one reason : to help us decide what to do next . They reflect our mind ’ s predictions for what ’ s likely to happen in the world and therefore serve as an efficient way to prepare us for it . But when the emotions we feel aren ’ t correctly calibrated for the threat or when we ’ re making judgments in domains where we have little knowledge or relevant information , our feelings become more likely to lead us astray .
Let me give you an example . In several experiments , my colleagues and I led people to feel sad or angry by having them read a magazine article that described either the impact of a natural disaster on a small town or the details of vehement anti-American protests abroad . Next , we asked them to estimate the frequencies of events that , if they occurred , would typically make people feel sad ( for example , the number of people who will have to euthanize a beloved pet this year ) or angry ( for example , the number of people who will be intentionally sold a “ lemon ” by a dishonest car dealer this year ) — estimates for which people wouldn ’ t already hold a knowledgeable answer .
Time and again , we found that when the emotion people felt matched the emotional overtones of a future event , their predictions for that event ’ s frequency increased . For instance , people who felt angry expected many more people to get swindled by a car dealer than did those who felt sad , even though the anger they felt had nothing to do with cars . Likewise , those who felt sad expected more people to have to euthanize their pets .
Fear works in a similar way . Using a nationally representative sample in the months following Sept. 11 , 2001 , the decision scientist Jennifer Lerner showed that feeling fear led people to believe that certain anxiety-provoking possibilities ( for example , a terrorist strike ) were more likely to occur .