The global coronavirus outbreak might accomplish something that myriad bad polls have n't : make Republicans fear losing the 2020 presidential election .
Until now , survey after survey has consistently shown President Trump losing to the Democrats in November . Like , to all of the Democrats . Yet Republicans have remained confident . They remember how the # FakePolls showed Trump losing to Hillary Clinton four years ago . More importantly , perhaps , GOPers have a deep faith that the strong economy will provide a powerful tailwind to Trump 's re-election campaign .
But the plunging stock market , badly spooked by the unpredictable spread and impact of the virus , is suggesting the tailwind might turn into a headwind — and that could mean a one-term Trump presidency . Wall Street banks are already cutting their economic growth forecasts for the first half of the year . Beyond that , they 're not so sure , an uncertainty reflected in wildly gyrating markets . Economic predictions about consumer demand and supply-chain disruptions are now also pandemic predictions . JPMorgan just trimmed its second-quarter projection for U.S. GDP growth by a quarter percent to 1.75 percent , but in a report to clients added that `` extensive domestic 'community spreading ' would prompt a larger downward revision . ''
Economic forecasts are always tricky business . Now , in addition to the usual mix of jobs numbers , consumer surveys , and corporate earnings reports , economists have to factor the spread of a virus whose transmissibility and lethality remains unclear . Economic consultancy Capital Economics concedes `` there is no way our models can incorporate the risk of a widespread coronavirus outbreak in the U.S. which , just like it appears to have done in China , would almost inevitably cause a recession . '' As it is , Moody 's Analytics predicts a 40 percent chance that the virus will grow into a global pandemic that would indeed push the United States and the rest of the global economy into a recession .
An election-year downturn is bad for any incumbent presidential party . There have been three presidential elections since 1960 where the election year saw a recession . The incumbent party lost all of them . One of political historian Allan Lichtman 's famous `` 13 Keys to the White House '' is that the U.S. economy is not in recession during the election campaign . But a downturn would be especially damaging for Trump , who has made a de facto bargain with voters : I may tweet lots of crazy stuff and engage in lots of dodgy behavior , but I wo n't screw up this long economic expansion . Hell , I may even do some things that help it , like tax cuts and deregulation . In a Washington Post-ABC News poll last month , 56 percent of respondents said they approved of the way Trump had approached economic issues . That mood would change dramatically with a recession even if voters do n't directly blame Trump 's handling of the virus outbreak for it , though they might . Trump 's rambling press conference earlier this week was no confidence builder and may be playing a role in Wall Street 's swoon .
Of course , the Trump White House remains bullish . On Monday , Trump tweeted , `` Stock Market starting to look very good to me ! '' And that 's been the consistent message coming from him and his advisers . Friday , National Economic Council Director Larry Kudlow told reporters , `` Our threat assessment is low and the economy is fundamentally sound . ''
But here 's what should really unnerve Republicans : Avoiding an outright recession may not be good enough to save the Trump presidency . Some election analysts blame Al Gore 's loss to George W. Bush in 2000 to a mild economic slowdown during the year . Even though economic growth overall was a sizzling 4.1 percent — the fourth consecutive year of 4 percent real GDP growth or higher — growth slipped to just 0.5 percent in the third quarter and 2.5 percent in the fourth . As one analysis put it , `` Our best guess , however , is that the slowdown was a major factor in Gore 's defeat… the long economic boom that arrived just a little too late to get George Bush re-elected in 1992 seems to have ended just in time to elect his son . ''
The falling stock market might also be more than just a harbinger of slower economic growth . It could be a cause of that slower growth . In a 2014 paper , UCLA economist Roger Farmer suggested that the sharp fall in the stock market in the autumn of 2008 provides `` a plausible causal explanation for the magnitude of the Great Recession . '' ( Farmer thinks the Federal Reserve should be able to buy stocks to support the economy . ) Barclays bank thinks there is a similar type of risk today , saying in a research note , `` The rapidity of the deterioration in financial markets has elements of a viral pandemic induced panic that , if left unchecked , could spread to business and consumer confidence that could ultimately lead to reductions in spending and hiring . '' Moreover , with the value of financial assets at record levels versus the size of the economy , the health of Wall Street and Main Street are as closely linked to each other as they have ever been . And to the Trump presidency , as well .
Expect Trump to push the Fed to cut interest rates ASAP and maybe Congress to supply fiscal stimulus . Also expect more efforts by Team Trump to talk up the market .
Want more essential commentary and analysis like this delivered straight to your inbox ? Sign up for The Week 's `` Today 's best articles '' newsletter here .