In just a few short weeks , millions of people in home isolation have mastered video conferencing . Out of curiosity , many have found innovative ways to bake or to learn a language . Out of necessity , parents are discovering how to home-school . Out of ingenuity , the religious faithful are creating new ways to worship .
With similar speed , Ford Motor Co. has learned how to make face shields for health workers . More doctors are doing medicine by phone . Dozens of companies are racing to invent new ways to develop a vaccine for COVID-19 . And in California , a charitable foundation has sponsored a global contest among 6,000 “ tech minds ” to innovate open-source solutions to the coronavirus crisis .
COVID-19 may be a disrupter of lives and traditions but , as in many crises , it is forcing people to be open to inspiration and to locate the source of creativity . In its global scope , the burst of improvisation could be historic . It will not only help people through the crisis , the fresh discoveries and the sudden embrace of imagination should spur an economic rebound , perhaps even more than government subsidies .
“ With imagination , we can do better than merely adapting to a new environment – we can thrive by shaping it , ” states an article in the latest Harvard Business Review . The authors , Martin Reeves and Jack Fuller , suggest people carve out time for reflection and search for needs in society that remain unmet . “ We need to open up rather than constrict the funnel for new ideas , ” they write .
Many people may simply desire a return to normalcy . Yet with so many problems exposed by this crisis , the search for solutions has taken on a purpose described well by Shakespeare : “ Sweet are the uses of adversity . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ Amid all the confusion and the fear , ” states a commentary from the think tank Rand , “ the power of individuals , organizations , and communities to think differently and to innovate shows what can be achieved when people are united by common , clear priorities and necessity . ”
The old ways found wanting are giving way to the new . The greatest victory over the virus may be a steep learning curve among billions of people on the origin of inspiration .