Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
People with Type 2 diabetes are at greater risk of a poor outcome if they become infected with the novel coronavirus -- and controlling blood sugar levels is especially key if they do , a new study revealed .
A study published in the journal Cell Metabolism provides evidence that those with Type 2 diabetes ( T2D ) who maintain control over their blood sugar level will fare much better than people with poorly controlled blood sugar .
`` We were surprised to see such favorable outcomes in [ the ] well-controlled blood glucose group among patients with COVID-19 and pre-existing Type 2 diabetes , '' senior study author Hongliang Li , at Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University , said in a statement .
Scientists examined a cohort of 7,336 COVID-19 patients with or without T2D from 19 hospitals in Hubei Province , China .
Their data showed that people admitted to the hospital with COVID-19 and T2D required more medical interventions . Despite these interventions , they also had significantly higher mortality -- 7.8 percent versus 2.7 percent -- as well as a greater incidence of multiple organ injury , according to the study .
EVEN AFTER CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC ENDS , 40 PERCENT OF AMERICANS PLAN TO AVOID PUBLIC SPACES : REPORT
However , those with well-controlled blood sugar who had COVID-19 were less likely to die than those whose blood glucose was poorly controlled . Meanwhile , those with well-managed T2D also received fewer medical interventions including supplemental oxygen and/or ventilation and had fewer health complications .
`` Considering that people with diabetes had much higher risk for death and various complications , and there are no specific drugs for COVID-19 , our findings indicate that controlling blood glucose well may act as an effective auxiliary approach to improve the prognosis of patients with COVID-19 and preexisting diabetes , '' the study found .
According to experts , risk factors for dying from COVID-19 include the prevalence of diabetes , obesity and hypertension . The virus has devastated African-American and Hispanic communities in several states .
“ The alarming COVID-19 mortality rate in America ’ s communities of color can be directly attributed to problems with health access and resources – the same issues which link these communities to disproportionately high rates of diabetes and related chronic diseases . Those with the fewest resources are the least likely to have access to quality health care , and COVID-19 testing is no exception , '' Tracey Brown , president and CEO of the American Diabetes Association , said in a statement to Fox News .
“ In order to tackle America ’ s systemic health inequity problem , we must meet those who are most at risk in their community . Greater accessibility and availability to COVID testing is critical in order to slow the rampant spread of COVID-19 in minority communities . When disadvantaged Americans ’ are forced by circumstance to delay testing , they risk dangerous health outcomes for themselves , their families and their communities , '' Brown explained .
COVID-19 COULD CAUSE LARGEST DROP IN CARBON EMISSIONS EVER , REPORT SAYS
Overall , researchers said their work offers a few core messages for those with diabetes : They should take extra precautions to avoid becoming infected with COVID-19 due to the higher risk of severe complications or dying after being infected , and those with diabetes should take extra care to keep their blood sugar under good control during the pandemic .