Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
EXCLUSIVE : There is increasing confidence that the COVID-19 outbreak likely originated in a Wuhan laboratory , though not as a bioweapon but as part of China 's attempt to demonstrate that its efforts to identify and combat viruses are equal to or greater than the capabilities of the United States , multiple sources who have been briefed on the details of early actions by China 's government and seen relevant materials tell Fox News .
This may be the `` costliest government cover-up of all time , '' one of the sources said .
The sources believe the initial transmission of the virus – a naturally occurring strain that was being studied there – was bat-to-human and that `` patient zero '' worked at the laboratory , then went into the population in Wuhan .
The “ increasing confidence ” comes from classified and open-source documents and evidence , the sources said . Fox News has requested to see the evidence directly . Sources emphasized -- as is often the case with intelligence -- that it ’ s not definitive and should not be characterized as such . Some inside the administration and the intelligence and epidemiological communities are more skeptical , and the investigation is continuing .
What all of the sources agree about is the extensive cover-up of data and information about COVID-19 orchestrated by the Chinese government .
Asked by Fox News ' John Roberts about the reporting , President Trump remarked at Wednesday 's coronavirus press briefing , `` More and more we 're hearing the story ... we are doing a very thorough examination of this horrible situation . ''
Documents detail early efforts by doctors at the lab and early efforts at containment . The Wuhan wet market initially identified as a possible point of origin never sold bats , and the sources tell Fox News that blaming the wet market was an effort by China to deflect blame from the laboratory , along with the country 's propaganda efforts targeting the U.S. and Italy .
U.S. Embassy officials warned in January 2018 about inadequate safety at the Wuhan Institute of Virology lab and passed on information about scientists conducting risky research on coronavirus from bats , The Washington Post reported Tuesday .
Responding to the report , Gen. Mark Milley , the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , said on Tuesday afternoon : `` It should be no surprise to you that we have taken a keen interest in that and we 've had a lot of intelligence take a hard look at that . I would just say at this point , it 's inconclusive , although the weight of evidence seems to indicate natural , but we do n't know for certain . ''
“ Even today , I see them withholding information and I think we need to do more to continue to press them to share , ” Secretary of Defense Mark Esper told “ America ’ s Newsroom '' on Wednesday , referring to China . Esper added that he would n't speak to `` intelligence reporting , '' but that `` most people believe it began naturally — it was organic , if you will . I think in due course , once we get through the pandemic we 're in right now , there 'll be time to look back and really ascertain what happened and make sure we have a better understanding so we can prevent this in the future . ''
Sources point to the structure of the virus , in saying the genome mapping specifically shows it was not genetically altered .
Speaking to `` The Story '' Wednesday evening , Secretary of State Mike Pompeo remarked : `` What we do know is we know that this virus originated in Wuhan , China . We know there is the Wuhan Institute of Virology just a handful of miles away from where the wet market was . There is still lots to learn . You should know that the United States government is working diligently to figure it out . ''
Concerning the State Department cables warning about the Wuhan laboratory , Pompeo said the installation `` contained highly contagious materials — we knew that , we knew that they were working on this program , many countries have programs like this . In countries that are open and transparent , they have the ability to control them and keep them safe , and they allow outside observers in to make sure all the processes and procedures are right . I only wish that that had happened in this place . ''
On Thursday , China 's foreign ministry pushed back on the suspicion that the virus escaped from the facility , by citing statements from the World Health Organization that there is no evidence the coronavirus came from a laboratory .
Americans were originally helping train the Chinese in a program called PREVENT well before the Chinese started working on this virus . The French government helped the Chinese set up the Wuhan lab .
China `` 100 percent '' suppressed data and changed data , the sources tell Fox News . Samples were destroyed , contaminated areas scrubbed , some early reports erased , and academic articles stifled .
STATE DEPT LEAKED CABLES RENEW THEORIES ON ORIGINS OF CORONAVIRUS
There were doctors and journalists who were `` disappeared '' warning of the spread of the virus and its contagious nature and human to human transmission . China moved quickly to shut down travel domestically from Wuhan to the rest of China , but did not stop international flights from Wuhan .
Additionally , the sources tell Fox News the World Health Organization ( WHO ) was complicit from the beginning in helping China cover its tracks .
Trump announced at the White House coronavirus news briefing in the Rose Garden on Tuesday that the United States will immediately halt all funding for the WHO , saying it had put `` political correctness over lifesaving measures . '' The United States is the WHO 's largest single donor , and the State Department had previously planned to provide the agency $ 893 million in the current two-year funding period .
Senior administrations separately tell Fox News the rollout of the president ’ s “ blueprint for reopening the U.S. economy ” will happen Thursday afternoon , first for governors and then briefed to the press .
Meanwhile , Trump 's own handling of the crisis has come into focus . On January 24 , for example , Trump tweeted in praise of China ’ s “ transparency '' on coronavirus .
Though they were not speaking for the president , the sources ventured an explanation , saying it was diplomatic talk to make the Chinese `` feel good '' . while the investigation was ongoing , with trade and other talks happening simultaneously .
In the six days after top Chinese officials secretly determined they likely were facing a pandemic from a new coronavirus , the city of Wuhan at the epicenter of the disease hosted a mass banquet for tens of thousands of people ; millions began traveling through for Lunar New Year celebrations .
President Xi Jinping warned the public on the seventh day , Jan. 20 . But by that time , more than 3,000 people had been infected during almost a week of public silence , according to internal documents obtained by The Associated Press and expert estimates based on retrospective infection data .
“ This is tremendous , ” said Zuo-Feng Zhang , an epidemiologist at the University of California , Los Angeles . “ If they took action six days earlier , there would have been much fewer patients and medical facilities would have been sufficient . We might have avoided the collapse of Wuhan ’ s medical system . ”