When Attorney General William Barr William Pelham BarrMcConnell 's Senate agenda for next week focuses on nominees and pandemic ███ 's Coronavirus Report : Madeleine Albright says Trump 's America First strategy is hurting US with a virus that knows no borders ; Fauci warns states against 'leapfrogging ' reopening guidelines Flynn documents are the 'smoking gun ' on Comey 's FBI MORE this week directed U.S. prosecutors to safeguard civil liberties amid state-level pandemic orders , he signaled Justice Department support for lockdown protesters by highlighting religious and economic rights .
In a two-page memo , the nation ’ s top cop gave the clearest indication yet of the kind of battles federal prosecutors are likely to focus on . In doing so , Barr suggested the Department of Justice ( DOJ ) might back church groups and those seeking a swifter economic reopening while staying on the sidelines of fights over new limits on abortion and voting access .
“ It ’ s extremely likely that the DOJ will play favorites , ” said Lindsay Wiley , a law professor at American University . “ I think it ’ s accurate to assume that DOJ will not intervene in a neutral way , but will instead intervene on behalf of plaintiffs asserting rights the administration favors . ”
Barr on Monday directed the nation 's 93 U.S. attorneys to “ be on the lookout ” for health restrictions that could be running afoul of constitutional rights and “ if necessary , take action to correct them . ”
“ We do not want to unduly interfere with the important efforts of state and local officials to protect the public , ” Barr wrote . “ But the Constitution is not suspended in times of crisis . ”
The Supreme Court has long held that constitutional rights can be lawfully restricted to some degree when emergency health orders are in place . But the line demarcating where one begins and the other ends is something of a legal gray area .
The attorney general ’ s memo specifically mentioned constitutional bars on discrimination against `` religious institutions and religious believers '' and `` disfavored speech , '' as well as prohibitions against `` undue interference with the national economy . ''
Barr 's marching orders to U.S. attorneys appeared to align closely with Trump administration agenda items , including the defense of the president ’ s evangelical Christian backers , as well as support for those desiring a more aggressive economic revival heading into the general election .
Legal experts say it 's not surprising that the DOJ 's priorities would overlap with those of the White House .
“ They ’ re picking and choosing where to intervene as a matter of prosecutorial discretion . That ’ s political , but it ’ s also ideological , and that ’ s one of the reasons elections matter , ” Wiley said . “ It ’ s not entirely illegitimate in my opinion . ”
Barr has emerged as a staunch defender of religious liberty since becoming Trump ’ s attorney general early last year . In recent months , as state and local governments have implemented social distancing policies for residents , Barr has repeatedly warned that health orders can not single out religious gatherings .
“ The United States Department of Justice will continue to ensure that religious freedom remains protected if any state or local government , in their response to COVID-19 , singles out , targets , or discriminates against any house of worship for special restrictions , ” Barr said last month .
In mid-April , the DOJ submitted a court filing on behalf of a Mississippi Baptist church that challenged a local health restriction in order to offer drive-in church services . The church ultimately prevailed when city officials in Greenville dropped the case .
Legal experts say such input from the DOJ , known officially as a `` statement of interest , '' can help persuade a judge that a government health directive goes too far .
As the pandemic stretches into another month , religious liberty has increasingly become a rallying cry for conservative Christians , who make up a key part of Trump ’ s base . Those constituents roundly criticized New Jersey Gov . Phil Murphy ( D ) last month for his decision to include churches and other houses of worship in the state 's strict social distancing guidelines .
During a tense interview with Tucker Carlson Tucker CarlsonBarr signals DOJ support for lockdown protesters The Memo : The surprising popularity of the Great Lockdown Hannity planning first book in ten years : 'Live Free or Die ' MORE on Fox News , Murphy was asked about constitutional protections after police broke up a rabbi 's funeral in early April at a synagogue in Ocean County , arresting 15 men .
`` That 's above my pay grade , Tucker , '' Murphy replied . `` I was n't thinking of the Bill of Rights when we did this . ''
Gary L. Bauer , the Trump-appointed commissioner of the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom , said he “ cringed ” when he saw Murphy ’ s interview . In an article for the Patriot Post this week , Bauer applauded Barr ’ s approach to balancing public health and civil liberties .
“ One example of what Barr is concerned about is how churches have been singled out for different treatment , ” Bauer wrote in response to the Barr memo . “ Why is it okay for people to gather at Walmart but not at church ? ”
Legal experts say Barr might continue to press that question in court .
“ Religious liberty is a place where the DOJ in the Trump administration has been bringing more and more affirmative litigation on behalf of church groups and other religious voices , ” said Glenn Cohen , a professor at Harvard Law School . “ I will be curious to see if this becomes more than a signal and if the 93 U.S. attorneys begin bringing more litigation . ”
As state and local governments weigh when to ease restrictions , Trump has sent mixed messages about how involved his administration will be . But some experts say Barr 's memo may have laid the legal groundwork to help the administration accelerate the process .
The White House last month unveiled guidelines for a phased reopening of the economy that seemed to give wide latitude to states , with Trump telling governors : “ You ’ re going to call your own shots . ”
But the following day , Trump sent a series of tweets that appeared to back protesters in Minnesota , Michigan and Virginia , three potential battleground states with Democratic governors where extended stay-at-home orders and other restrictions have sparked a small backlash .
According to Wiley , of American University , the language in Barr ’ s memo about protected speech and national economic freedom could signal the DOJ ’ s willingness to further intervene on protesters ’ behalf as legal challenges to health orders continue to mount .
“ If police engage in enforcement against the ‘ reopen ’ protesters but not against health worker counterprotesters , that could amount to impermissible discrimination against disfavored speech , ” she said .
Barr ’ s directive to prosecutors to monitor “ interference with the economy ” could give the DOJ other legal grounds to support a challenge to stay-at-home orders or restrictions on out-of-state visitors , Wiley added .
`` It will be important to watch these filings to see whether they take a stronger stance against stay-at-home orders and other restrictions , perhaps under pressure from the president , '' she said .