“ Few of the public health measures put in place around the country hit as close to home for people of faith as restrictions on when and how congregations can gather , ” says Dallas attorney Brad Nitschke . “ And the tension between the First Amendment ’ s protection of the free exercise of religion and recommendations of public health authorities is clearly top of mind for elected officials , as well . ”
More than 80 % of U.S. houses of worship have stopped meeting in person . Alabama , Texas , and Missouri , however , issued executive orders that include places of worship as “ essential ” services . Other states offer similar exemptions for religious gatherings .
“ We ’ ve got to understand when God is in control of our life , then we can rest in the fact that we know that God , ” said Pastor Darlene Bishop Driscoll during her March 29 sermon at an Ohio megachurch that continues to meet . “ OK , so they call us stupid . That ’ s OK . ”
In Florida last week , a sheriff arrested the pastor of a megachurch for violating a local shutdown order . Days later , the governor exempted houses of worship when he issued a statewide stay-at-home order .
It ’ s one of the most fraught questions for people of faith during the pandemic : Should we go to church ?
Rusty Reno has been a bit alarmed over the past few weeks as both civil and religious authorities began to restrict the number of people who can gather together to pray .
The Catholic theologian and conservative political thinker bristled when the New York archdiocese shut down most services over three weeks ago in response to the coronavirus crisis – even though Democratic Gov . Andrew Cuomo ’ s executive order stated that houses of worship were not ordered closed .
“ I mean , right now I ’ m looking out of my window at the construction project on a very tall apartment building , and it ’ s ongoing , ” says Mr. Reno , editor of First Things , a Manhattan-based journal published by the Institute on Religion and Public Life . “ So the trades in New York got an exemption for construction projects , the liquor stores are deemed essential services , the hookah stores are deemed essential services , ” he says .
“ So I still wish that the churches , the leaders of the church , had pressed for reasonable accommodations , ” continues Mr. Reno . Their concern , especially now , should be to sustain the spiritual health of those entrusted to their care , he says .
It ’ s been a refrain among a number of religious conservatives during the current contagion , but last week , after President Donald Trump warned Americans that “ hard days lie ahead ” and his administration issued sobering projections of COVID-19 ’ s impact , the nation ’ s stay-at-home landscape began to change in unexpected ways .
Carlos Barria/Reuters A person in a dog costume accompanies kids as they leave the Life Tabernacle megachurch after attending Sunday service challenging state orders against assembling in large groups to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in Baton Rouge , Louisiana , April 5 , 2020 .
Last Monday , the sheriff in Tampa , Florida , arrested the pastor of an Evangelical Protestant megachurch , charging him with unlawful assembly and violating the county ’ s emergency public health rules . On Wednesday , police in Lakewood , New Jersey , broke up a funeral for a Hasidic rabbi , charging 15 people with violating Democratic Gov . Phil Murphy ’ s executive order banning large gatherings .
“ This ban applies to everyone , ” said Ocean County Prosecutor Bradley Billhimer in a statement . “ To be blunt , ignoring the Governor ’ s Order places lives at risk – not just the lives of everyday citizens , but the lives of our brave men and women in law enforcement who are required to respond in order to break up these unlawful gatherings . ”
As more states began to issue versions of stay-at-home orders , responding to President Trump ’ s warning that the country would have “ a rough two weeks ” ahead , many have listed places of worship as essential services exempt from bans on public gatherings .
In Florida , Republican Gov . Ron DeSantis issued a new statewide order that listed “ essential activities ” including religious services , in effect superseding the local health rules behind the arrest of the Tampa pastor .
Last week , Alabama , Texas , and Missouri issued executive orders that include places of worship as essential services . Michigan , too , exempts places of religious worship from penalty , and Kansas exempts activities necessary to “ preserve constitutional or legal rights , ” including to “ perform or attend religious or faith-based services or activities ” and “ manufacture or sell firearms . ”
“ Few of the public health measures put in place around the country hit as close to home for people of faith as restrictions on when and how congregations can gather , ” says Dallas attorney Brad Nitschke , a partner with Jackson Walker . “ And the tension between the First Amendment ’ s protection of the free exercise of religion and recommendations of public health authorities is clearly top of mind for elected officials , as well . ”
The vast majority of the nation ’ s houses of worship , including most Catholic dioceses and Evangelical Protestant congregations , have already stopped meeting in person , according to a March survey by the American Enterprise Institute . Still , about 12 % of Americans who attend a church , temple , synagogue , or mosque say their congregations still continue to meet as before .
Public health officials , including the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , have urged communities of all kinds to avoid gathering in groups , in an effort to stem the spread of COVID-19 and alleviate the strain on the health care system .
Some of these congregations have downplayed such warnings , and many maintain a skepticism toward secular science and a deep suspicion of the encroaching power of government regulations . Some , too , express confidence in divine protection from what could be a moment of reckoning for the country .
Carlos Barria/Reuters Local residents leave Sunday service at the Life Tabernacle megachurch challenging state orders against assembling in large groups as the spread of coronavirus disease ( COVID-19 ) continues in Baton Rouge , Louisiana , April 5 , 2020 .
“ We ’ ve got to understand when God is in control of our life , then we can rest in the fact that we know that God , ” said Pastor Darlene Bishop Driscoll during her March 29 sermon at Solid Rock Church in Monroe , Ohio , a multiservice megachurch that has continued to meet . “ OK , so they call us stupid . That ’ s OK . ”
Later in the sermon she claimed the pandemic , in which 1.3 million people worldwide have been diagnosed , is God punishing the U.S. for legalizing abortion in the 1970s .
Earlier in the week a local health commissioner sent Solid Rock a letter noting the complaints from those in the surrounding community , many worried about the church ’ s large gatherings . Ohio , like other states , has also exempted places of worship from stay-at-home health directives .
“ Bringing together a large number of people during a pandemic increases the pace at which the virus spreads , overwhelming our hospital systems , and posing a significant risk to members within the congregation , ” the commissioner ’ s letter said , echoing the guidelines given by the Trump administration and the CDC .
In a statement , Solid Rock Church responded : “ As Christians we are charged by Jesus Christ to obey the laws of our land . Therefore , if the laws of our nation should ever change with respect to our First Amendment right to assemble , thereby restricting us from having our church doors open , we will willingly comply . ”
Such postures during the crisis could do lasting harm to the cause of religious freedom , long a central concern for many Republicans and religious conservatives , says Robin Fretwell Wilson , associate dean for public engagement and a professor at the University of Illinois College of Law .
As a legal issue , Professor Wilson cites Supreme Court precedent that permits certain restrictions of religious expressions so long as they are applied neutrally to everyone . Religious liberty does not mean “ every citizen can become a law unto himself , ” she says .
At the same time , Congress and dozens of states have also instituted Religious Freedom Restoration Acts , which demand authorities present both a compelling government interest for any religious restrictions , and if they do , these must be the least restrictive possible .
“ But at a time like this , in a crisis that affects all of us , religious people should have to cooperate with the program just like everybody else , ” says Professor Wilson , who has helped the Fairness For All initiative that works to bridge the divides between advocates of religious freedom and LGBTQ rights . “ Every religious person can not simply say , nope , not me . They could then be like a traveling bubble of contagion , like Typhoid Mary . ”
Mr. Reno at First Things , however , sees a deeper theological problem with the country ’ s virtual shutdown and is concerned that damaging changes could outlast the pandemic .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ It ’ s the modern conceit that we can control the time and the hour of death , ” Mr. Reno says . “ People are anguished by the reality of death , and my heart goes out to the health care workers who must face it . But we as moderns , we believe we have the technological ability to simply send it away , which of course is an impossible task . ”