An inexpensive coronavirus test that millions of Americans could use at a pharmacy , in a workplace or even at home could prove to be a vital asset in allowing people to return to jobs and school . Last week Deborah Birx , the White House ’ s coronavirus-response coordinator , called rapid antigen tests the “ breakthrough innovation ” that is needed to perform hundreds of millions of such assays a day . The remarks echoed her previous statements that antigen tests might be used to examine broad swaths of the public .
The technique often involves a technology—called a lateral flow assay—similar to that employed in home pregnancy tests . In the test , an antibody can bind to one of the spike proteins ( the antigens ) that cover the surface of the virus like the spines on a puffer fish . The tests are inexpensive to produce and simple to use , and they deliver results in minutes .
The goal is also to field a test that is just as accurate as the current standard , which uses polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) to process the virus ’ s genetic material and amplify it for detection . But major technical hurdles still remain . “ What you would want in terms of a breakthrough is that [ an antigen ] test is more sensitive , [ or less prone to false negatives ] , and easier to use than a PCR-based test . And that is not so easy to do , ” says Bettina Fries , chief of the infectious diseases division at Stony Brook Medicine . “ Normally , PCR-based tests are more sensitive . ”
The urgent need to conduct massive levels of testing means that any feasible technology is being considered . OraSure Technologies , a medical device company in Bethlehem , Pa. , received a $ 710,310 federal contract last month for an in-home assay that can potentially detect a coronavirus antigen in saliva in as little as 20 minutes . Stephen Tang , the company ’ s CEO , says such antigen tests are needed to screen millions of people per day . “ You can ’ t be dependent on the throughput of laboratories and the availability of medical and laboratory professionals , ” as PCR assays typically require , to conduct widespread testing , he says .
Because a PCR test makes thousands of copies of its target RNA , it is able to detect a virus at far lower concentrations , called the limit of detection , than antigen tests typically can . PCR ’ s limits of detection “ are on the order of a few hundred virus particles in a milliliter of transport liquid , ” says Geoffrey Baird , acting chair of laboratory medicine at the University of Washington ’ s School of Medicine .
In contrast , the sensitivities of rapid antigen tests have been mixed . A 2016 analysis of 116 such tests for the bacteria that cause strep throat , for example , found they had a sensitivity of 86 percent on average—turning in false negative results for 14 percent of people with strep . Antigen tests used to diagnose viral infections such as the flu are even less sensitive , often reporting a negative result when the virus is actually present . Their specificity , or ability to correctly avoid false positive results , is often much higher . They can exceed 95 percent , meaning less than 5 percent of people without infection would test positive .
Birx had said that antigen tests could be used as first-pass screening tools that would be confirmed with follow-up PCR assays . Otto Yang , an infectious disease researcher at the University of California , Los Angeles , is uncertain if that goal can be achieved . “ Generally , when you ’ re doing it that way , you aim for higher sensitivity and less specificity in your screening test , ” he says . “ It only makes sense if you ’ re trying to save money or reagents , and you don ’ t have the capacity [ to do PCR ] . The only potential benefit would be cost savings , but the loss of sensitivity is a big problem. ” The approach would make sense , Yang adds , only if the first-pass screening test was at least as sensitive as PCR in addition to being cheaper .
His view will by no means close the debate on the validity of antigen testing . Lee Gehrke , a microbiologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who co-founded E25Bio , another company developing a coronavirus antigen assay , balks at comparisons of such tests ’ accuracy with that of PCR . “ The use of the test needs to be tailored to the setting , ” he says . “ In back-to-work , back-to-school settings , repeated , regular testing is going to be needed . If the testing is repeated , I believe the rapid [ antigen ] test will pick [ the virus ] up . ”
Gehrke acknowledges that infected individuals can have viral proteins present at levels below the test ’ s limit of detection in the first few days of infection . He says those levels will increase as the infection progresses , however . “ It ’ s possible that at the very left end of that bell curve , there ’ s a time that PCR can detect [ the virus ] but the rapid antigen test doesn ’ t , ” Gehrke says . But if the goal of testing is to get people back to work , he adds , a test that has “ less than perfect ” sensitivity will be acceptable if it is also inexpensive .
Yang counters that antigen tests could find a place as a diagnostic tool , yet the results they provide may be unable to serve as a much needed early warning signal . “ If your goal is to detect somebody that has a virus that may be more contagious [ with a greater volume of the pathogen ] , then maybe that does make sense , ” he says . But if the objective of a periodic antigen test is to detect people early in infection , “ there will be less virus , and so sensitivity will be a big issue . ”
The acute need for this type of testing , however , will continue to provide momentum to this line of research . “ Rapid tests are going to miss people who are sick , but they are still very valuable , because they take just a few minutes to test somebody , ” says Gigi Gronvall , an immunologist at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security . “ If we ’ re able to scale up PCR , that will give you a more accurate , sensitive result . But there is some value at the point of care to having a screen like this . ”
Ultimately , these debates may be put to rest in a few years . “ Getting testing broadly is clearly something that we need to contain the epidemic . But all of this is a stopgap , ” says Karla Satchell , a microbiologist at the Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine . “ What we really need is a vaccine . ”