President Donald Trump 's eldest son , Donald Trump Jr. , accused Facebook of `` colluding with state governments to quash peoples free speech , '' calling its actions `` chilling & disturbing . '' Sen. Josh Hawley ( R-Mo . ) asked rhetorically of the company 's decision : `` Because free speech is now illegal America ? ''
`` Given Big Tech ’ s history of bias and censorship , I ’ m deeply concerned that they and government officials are partnering not to protect public health , but to shut down views with which they disagree , '' Sen. Ted Cruz ( R-Texas ) said in a statement Monday evening . `` Now , more than ever , companies like Facebook should focus on connecting people , not shutting down communities because they hold different views . ”
But Connecticut Democratic Sen. Richard Blumenthal praised the company ’ s move Monday night , tweeting : “ Powerful special interests are using astroturfing & dangerous tactics to undermine the fight against COVID-19 . Facebook is right to take a stand against harmful misinformation . ”
Protesters demonstrate against Washington state 's stay at home orders . | Elaine Thompson/AP Photo
Facebook initially indicated that it had removed the protest information at the request of states whose authorities said they violated restrictions on large public gatherings . The company later clarified that it sought guidance from states but ultimately made its own decision to take the posts down .
`` We reached out to state officials to understand the scope of their orders , not about removing specific protests on Facebook , '' the spokesperson said . `` We remove the posts when gatherings do not follow the health parameters established by the government and are therefore unlawful . ''
CEO Mark Zuckerberg offered a slightly different explanation in an interview with ABC News on Monday morning , suggesting that Facebook removes content that disputes social distancing practices and therefore poses a “ risk of imminent physical harm . ”
“ Certainly , someone saying that social distancing is not effective to help limit the spread of coronavirus , we do classify that as harmful misinformation and we take that down , ” Zuckerberg said after George Stephanopoulos asked him about Facebook ’ s role in facilitating the protests . “ At the same time , it 's important that people can debate policies . ”
This is just the latest free-speech flap to hit Facebook , which has also faced blowback for its policies on removing content ranging from misleading political ads to vaccine misinformation . And once again , the company faced criticism that it offers few clear yardsticks for what speech it allows on a platform that reaches more than 2 billion people worldwide .
“ Facebook , which controls a platform for the speech of billions , should not be censoring political speech online , ” said Vera Eidelman , a staff attorney at the American Civil Liberties Union 's Speech , Privacy and Technology Project , despite the public-health stakes at play on mass gatherings held during a pandemic . “ This is especially true now , when questions of when and how to reopen the country are among the central political questions , and online platforms are the main vehicle for expression . ''
David Greene , civil liberties director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation , argued that Facebook seemingly deciding to remove protests based on whether they violate state law provides an objective yardstick . Still , he said that without further clarity , `` it can be very difficult to judge the fairness of something and to make sure that it actually is being implemented in a way that doesn ’ t disadvantage certain groups or certain types of protests . ”
But preventing deaths during a pandemic offers Facebook a defensible rationale , contends Matthew Feeney , the director of the libertarian Cato Institute 's project on emerging technologies .
Feeney said that while Facebook and other social networks are n't bound by the First Amendment , they face a `` legitimacy issue '' when they decide to block or moderate certain types of content . That often causes them to `` punt '' by looking to state laws or non-government groups for rules they can enforce .
“ Content can be removed from these platforms for all sorts of reasons , and here we have a private company making a decision that they do n't want information that could potentially lead to the death and illness of more people to spread , '' Feeney said . `` I think that 's an understandable position . ''
Facebook , Google , Twitter and other social media companies have long denied that politics is a factor in their complex , and sometimes opaque , decisions about what content they will and will not allow . The companies have sought to make their process more transparent , with Facebook in particular announcing the creation of an independent board to review content moderation judgments .
But when it comes to content or advertising that is explicitly political , Facebook has at times concluded that inaction is the best action . When Twitter and Google imposed new restrictions on political advertising last year , for example , Facebook stuck to its policy of not fact-checking political ads or limiting their reach — in effect , allowing politicians to lie with impunity .
Zuckerberg laid out an aggressive approach to “ freedom of expression ” in a speech at Georgetown University last fall , though he acknowledged that `` free expression has never been absolute . ''
Zuckerberg cited social and civil rights activists over the centuries , from Frederick Douglass to Martin Luther King Jr. to the Iraq War opponents of the early 2000s , as examples that inspired his stance — saying free speech and protests have enabled progress no matter how disquieting they felt at the time . But in recent years , Zuckerberg said , people have expanded what they consider to be dangerous speech .
`` Some hold the view that since the stakes are so high , they can no longer trust their fellow citizens with the power to communicate and decide what to believe for themselves , '' Zuckerberg said in October . `` I personally believe this is more dangerous for democracy over the long term than almost any speech . ''
Still , he said the company would make exceptions when speech can cause adverse effects such as discrimination , harassment and — a standard that is relevant today — physical harm .
To be fair , the anti-lockdown protests became political before Facebook took action . For days , rallies across state capitals have brought together self-proclaimed dissidents — many carrying pro-Trump signs and forgoing protective equipment like masks — calling for an end to the health restrictions .