The biotech company Moderna on Monday reported “ positive ” data on its potential coronavirus vaccine from an early clinical trial , raising hopes about the effort .
The company said early data from a phase one clinical trial showed that people given the potential vaccine generated an immune response similar to that in people who had recovered from the disease .
The levels of neutralizing antibodies were “ at or above ” the levels seen in blood samples from people who have recovered from the coronavirus , Moderna said in a statement .
Still , that early result is only from the first eight participants in the trial .
“ These interim Phase 1 data , while early , demonstrate that vaccination with mRNA-1273 elicits an immune response of the magnitude caused by natural infection starting with a dose as low as 25 [ micrograms ] , ” Tal Zaks , chief medical officer at Moderna , said in a statement .
“ These data substantiate our belief that mRNA-1273 has the potential to prevent COVID-19 disease and advance our ability to select a dose for pivotal trials , ” he added , referring to the potential vaccine .
The company also said the vaccine was “ generally safe and well tolerated. ” All side-effects , including redness in one participant around the injection site , have so far been “ transient and self-resolving , ” the company noted , adding that no “ serious ” side-effects have been reported .
Additionally , the potential vaccine was successful in preventing the virus from replicating in mice ’ s lungs in another study , Moderna said .
The company , which is working with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , led by Anthony Fauci Anthony FauciCelebs including Julia Roberts , Hugh Jackman let health experts take over their social media to talk COVID-19 Trying to protect everyone , we exposed the most vulnerable to the virus Moderna CEO says coronavirus vaccine could be ready by end of year MORE , is about to begin a phase two trial and said it hopes to begin a phase three trial in July .
“ We are investing to scale up manufacturing so we can maximize the number of doses we can produce to help protect as many people as we can from SARS-CoV-2 , ” said the company ’ s CEO , Stéphane Bancel .