The first U.S. case of the new coronavirus that 's killed at least six people and caused illness in multiple countries has been confirmed in Washington state .
The latest : In an effort to stem the spread of the deadly virus in America , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is rolling out a `` funneling '' of flights directly or indirectly from Wuhan , China , to five specific airports where screenings will be done , adding Chicago and Atlanta to prior designated screening airports .
Details : The U.S. resident had visited Wuhan and arrived in Seattle on Jan. 15 via an indirect flight to Seattle-Tacoma International Airport . After falling ill with pneumonia symptoms on Jan. 19 and seeing news reports , he admitted himself into Providence Regional Medical Center , where he was isolated . He is doing well now .
The patient reports he had not visited the Wuhan seafood market implicated in the origination of the 2019-nCoV infection and was not knowingly in contact with anyone who was ill .
People he 's had contact with recently are being traced now and will be monitored , the CDC says .
The World Health Organization confirms cases in Wuhan , Beijing , Shanghai and Shenzhen , as well as Taiwan , Japan , Thailand and South Korea . China suggested travel restrictions for anyone ill and confirmed nearly 300 patients Tuesday night , although the Imperial College London issued a Jan. 17 report estimating the number of people in Wuhan who likely had an onset of symptoms by Jan. 12 may be closer to 1,723 people .
Why it matters : `` This is a rapidly evolving situation and obviously very fluid , '' Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , told ███ Tuesday morning . `` The situation is evolving — literally as every hour goes by , new cases emerge . ''
`` The key issue is how easily and sustainably the virus can spread . We do n't completely have that nailed down yet , '' said Nancy Messonnier , director of the CDC 's National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases , at a press conference .
While Chinese health officials initially stated the virus did not appear to transmit easily between people , they confirmed Monday that it does transmit human-to-human .
What they 're saying : Tom Inglesby , director of Johns Hopkins ' Center for Health Security , says the CDC and Chinese health officials appear to be taking `` sensible '' precautions for `` this part of the outbreak . ''
Control measures are being implemented to limit the spread of the infection , while collaboration between countries is improving the understanding of the actual virus , Inglesby tells ███ . The more data that can be gathered , the better health officials will understand the scope and severity of the outbreak .
There 's always a tricky line between preventing the spread of disease — which may or may not cause severe illness — and devastating industries or even economies with decisions to halt travel or trade , he says .
For instance , he says , `` If things get more complicated in the world , and there are changes to flight patterns [ long term ] , we may need a systematically planned collaboration between the public and private sectors . ''
Background : Coronaviruses are zoonotic , which means they can transmit from animal to human , and then have the ability to evolve so they can transmit between humans . They range in severity from causing the common cold to deadly diseases like SARS and MERS .
What 's next : The WHO is holding an emergency committee meeting Wednesday in Geneva to determine whether the outbreak `` constitutes a public health emergency of international concern , and what recommendations should be made to manage it . ''
Meanwhile , Fauci says the National Institutes of Health has started working on a vaccine targeting this particular coronavirus , which he hopes will be ready for a Phase 1 clinical trial in three months or so .