From the living room window of her Brooklyn apartment , Alix Monteleone watched the team of workers assemble the morgue in stages over the weekend . First , they parked the refrigerated trailer along the curb , a white box about the size of a large shipping container . Then , they built a wooden ramp to allow hospital staff to wheel the bodies inside . Finally , on Monday , the workers erected a wall of panels , thin and white , to stop passersby from staring or getting too close to the dead .
After that , the gawkers mostly went away . But Monteleone , a 28-year-old event planner from Long Island , kept up her vigil from the third-floor window .
“ I spend my entire day like this , ” she says , propping her elbows onto the back of her couch and looking out toward the Wyckoff Heights Medical Center , the hospital across the street . “ I still can ’ t believe what I ’ m seeing . ”
Workers build shelves for a makeshift morgue outside Wyckoff Heights Medical Center in Brooklyn , New York , on March 30 , as seen from an apartment building across the street . Benjamin Norman for TIME
The deployment of temporary morgues across the city—known to emergency planners as Body Collection Points , or BCPs—marks a new phase of the COVID-19 pandemic for New Yorkers , whose city has rapidly become the global center of the crisis . By late Monday , the state ’ s death toll had surpassed 1,200 , with more than 66,000 confirmed infections . More than 900 of the deaths were in New York City .
Until now , it had been largely possible for residents to shut out the worst of this calamity , retreat into their homes and only go out for short trips around the neighborhood , all without confronting anything more grim than empty streets and people wearing face masks .
The arrival of the morgues and makeshift hospitals—which have been installed in public spaces—has thrust the pandemic into full view as it envelops the nation ’ s largest city , making this escapism difficult . Anyone strolling through Central Park could observe a field hospital erected on the lawns to alleviate the patient load at hospitals like Wyckoff Heights . Another pop-up hospital has been set up at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan , and on Monday , the Navy ship Comfort docked in New York to take on more patients .
Marc Kozlow , 33 , and Alix Monteleone , 28 , look out their window toward Wyckoff Heights Medical Center on March 30 . In one weekend , after a temporary morgue was erected outside , they counted more than a dozen bodies . `` I want to know , '' Monteleone says , referencing the temporary morgue parked nearby . `` I want to know the body count . '' Benjamin Norman for TIME
The largest temporary morgue in New York City occupies a tent set up over the weekend outside Bellevue Hospital in Manhattan . “ We have them at public and private hospitals throughout the boroughs , ” says Aja Worthy-Davis , a spokesperson for the office of the chief medical examiner , the city agency responsible for caring for the dead . At least four had been set up as of Monday , she said : two in Brooklyn , one in Queens , and one in Manhattan . “ We expect to start utilizing the large tent in Bellevue soon . ”
Keep up to date with our daily coronavirus newsletter by clicking here .
Ramon Rodriguez , the President and CEO of the Wyckoff Heights hospital , says it was not his decision to deploy the refrigerated truck , but he is thankful that the office of the medical examiner was able to provide it to his facility , whose morgue can only house nine bodies at a time . “ Over the last three weeks we have filled that morgue many times over , ” he says of the hospital ’ s usual morgue space .
The bodies in the refrigerated truck are being picked up by funeral homes for burial as quickly as possible , adds Rodriguez . Given the distress this process was likely to cause local residents , placing the truck on a public street was not an easy decision , he says . But the hospital had no other viable place to put the trailer , which is 53 feet long .
“ We want to be respectful and kind both to the people who have left this earth and those who live across the street , ” says Rodriguez . And the need for extra privacy is why the hospital put an enclosure around the wooden ramp leading to the trailer .
Under the New York City medical examiner ’ s protocols for a pandemic , the deployment of temporary morgues becomes necessary when the death toll tops 200 per day , overwhelming the capacity of hospitals to store bodies safely . New York City passed that threshold last week , triggering a new “ mobilization level ” in the city—the third level on a scale of six—according to a copy of the chief medical examiner ’ s pandemic “ surge plan ” for handling the dead , which Worthy-Davis shared with TIME .
Drafted in 2008 to prepare for a devastating flu pandemic , the plan envisions far more dramatic measures of “ mass fatality management ” if the virus continues to spread . Officials at Rikers Island , the city ’ s main jail , could put inmates to work burying some of the dead in the city-run public cemetery on Hart Island , the plan states . Under the current level of mobilization , the city must also draw up contracts with cemeteries that can accommodate temporary mass graves , which the plan describes in jarring detail : “ Ten bodies in caskets are placed lengthwise in a long narrow section in the ground . ”
Workers transport a casket-sized box near the morgue set up outside Wyckoff Heights Medical Center in Brooklyn on March 30 . Benjamin Norman for TIME
By comparison , the installation of temporary morgues would seem like a measure New Yorkers could stomach . But it has been enough to unsettle the neighbors of the Wyckoff Heights hospital . Before the refrigerated trailer arrived on Friday , Monteleone and her fiance , Marc Kozlow , had gotten used to the routines of confinement and boredom that come with social distancing . They took turns walking their dog Hank around the neighborhood . She had tried doing needlepoint to pass the time . He had started baking sourdough in the kitchen .
But by Saturday , when they saw the first bodies taken on gurneys from the hospital and carried into the trailer , their hopes for riding out the pandemic at home began to dim . “ If a nuclear reactor is exploding near you , you don ’ t stay near the hot zone , ” says Kozlow , 33 . “ You get out . ”
Although they understood from news reports that the hospital across the street was quickly filling with COVID-19 patients last week , the reality only sank in after they began to see the bodies , some of them zipped into bags , others wrapped in what appeared to be white bed sheets . They counted more than a dozen over the weekend .
Monteleone keeps insisting they stay . “ This is my home , ” she says in the living room of their one-bedroom apartment . “ The only semblance of control I have in my life right now is staying in my home . So we just need to adjust . We need to close the blinds . ”
But within a few minutes she was back at the window . “ I want to know , ” she says . “ I want to know the body count . ”
The Coronavirus Brief . Everything you need to know about the global spread of COVID-19 Please enter a valid email address . Sign Up Now Check the box if you do not wish to receive promotional offers via email from TIME . You can unsubscribe at any time . By signing up you are agreeing to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy Thank you ! For your security , we 've sent a confirmation email to the address you entered . Click the link to confirm your subscription and begin receiving our newsletters . If you do n't get the confirmation within 10 minutes , please check your spam folder .