For months that question was used as a weapon against supporters of Medicare for All . Now , it is on everyone ’ s mind as they worry about the costs of the testing and treatment for the coronavirus . The virus is highly contagious . We need everyone with symptoms to get tested and all with the virus to get treatment . If anyone hesitates because they fear they can ’ t afford the cost , they put the rest of us at risk .
No one should be worried about the costs of treatment .
Columnists In-depth political coverage , sports analysis , entertainment reviews and cultural commentary .
Those costs , however , are going to be staggering , particularly if the fears of the administration ’ s leading expert , Dr. Anthony Fauci , are realized and a million or more may become infected with the disease . Hospitalization and treatment will cost hundreds of billions . The average cost of hospitalization for pneumonia patients is about $ 20,000 , but many coronavirus patients tend to need to stay on ventilators longer and fight off more complications than pneumonia patients .
Across the country , Americans are terrified at the potential costs if they get sick . Twenty-seven million Americans have no health insurance at all . Four in 10 working Americans have a high-deductible plan that forces them to pay thousands of dollars out of pocket before they get benefit from the premiums taken out of their paychecks each week .
A 2009 Harvard Medical School study estimated that every year an estimated 45,000 people in the U.S. die because of lack of health care coverage . Many suffer because they put off necessary treatment because they can ’ t afford it . Now , as Rep. Ro Khanna , D-Cal. , put it , “ The reality is , there are a lot of people that are thinking , ‘ I don ’ t want a couple thousand-dollar bill to get tested or get treated . ’ ”
The rescue bill just passed by Congress covers the costs of testing . Trump promised that any cost of treatment also would be covered , but the insurance lobby immediately corrected him . Since then , under immense pressure , Cigna and Humana have joined CVS Aetna insurance in agreeing to waive patient cost-sharing on treatment for those insured .
Hopefully , this will reassure people enough that they won ’ t avoid getting tested and treated , posing the threat to all . But this won ’ t be charity . Some health-care analysts think the insurance industry could benefit from the pandemic because people generally are putting off visits to doctors and hospitals as much as possible .
In any case , insurers admit that if the costs soar they will factor it into the cost of plans next year . As Peter Lee , the head of Covered California , an independent state agency , noted , insurers are likely to seek rates next year that are double their additional costs from the virus . If costs go up 20 percent , rates could jump as much as 40 percent . That could mean , Lee warned “ that many of the 170 million Americans in the commercial market may lose their coverage and go without needed care . ”
The insurers will sustain their profits ; it ’ s the patients who will suffer .
The government is investing billions of dollars to develop a vaccine for the virus , and to develop other drugs that can help treat it . Yet , because the government turns over any drug developed to the private pharmaceutical companies , Health Secretary Alex Azar — a former lobbyist for the drug companies — said he couldn ’ t guarantee that the treatments would be affordable . Already , as the Intercept reported , bankers are goading drug companies to prepare to raise prices to benefit from the expected demand .
The U.S. spends about twice as much per capita for its patchwork health-care system than most industrialized countries . Why were we caught with such shortages of masks , ventilators or hospital beds ?
A central reason is that about $ 500 billion of what we spend on health care each year doesn ’ t go to health care . It is wasted on costly bureaucracies needed to bill the maze of private insurers or track down patients for their co-pays . It goes to hundreds of billions in profits for insurance companies and drug companies . It goes to excessive CEO salaries rising to $ 80 million or so a year .
In the end , the federal government will and should step up to cover the costs of all testing and treatment for the pandemic . It will have to reimburse states to cover soaring Medicaid and hospital costs . It will pay for developing the necessary drugs . It will pay for the costs of covering seniors under Medicare . It will pay for the costs incurred by those without insurance or with employer-based insurance . Yet , in part because of this , the insurance companies and drug companies will keep racking up record profits .
At this point , the overriding imperative is that every person in the U.S. understand that they should get the testing and treatment they need . All should be reassured that their costs will be covered . Congress went part of the way with the last rescue package . It should finish the job , preferably by having Medicare pay for all the costs directly .
But we shouldn ’ t be satisfied with single-payer coverage just during a massive pandemic . This crisis exposes dramatically the foolishness of pretending that health care is a private marketplace . Health care is a human right . This pandemic gives ample evidence of why we need to move to a Medicare for All system where high-quality health care is guaranteed to all .