( CNN ) At Archie Moore 's Bar and Restaurant in Milford , Connecticut , it was a beautiful Wednesday , and the patio was a full as it could be .
Tables at the restaurant were 6 feet apart . There were single-use paper menus . Arrows told patrons which way to go in . Everyone needed a mask -- and if you did n't have one , the restaurant would give you one .
These are the new rules , put in place by Connecticut officials as the state joined others across the US in beginning its gradual reopening .
People still are n't allowed to dine inside , but this first little freedom made some locals happy .
One man told CNN he felt this was long overdue .
`` I understand the caution and everybody wants to be safe but sometimes some things are being taken to the extreme , '' he told CNN 's Brynn Gingras . `` And they just have to understand people ( who are ) trapped inside , they ca n't take it anymore . They 've got to get back out . ''
Now , as states start to roll back restrictions put in place during stay-at-home orders , the question remains : When will people feel safe to go out , and what are the risks ?
With only a handful of states showing significant improvement in infection rates , some experts caution it could be too soon .
As of Wednesday afternoon , at least 18 states had registered an upward trend in average daily cases -- a rise of at least 10 % -- over the previous seven days , according to an analysis of Johns Hopkins University data .
Only 17 states ' average daily cases dropped more than 10 % , while the rest were level or near level , the data showed .
More than 1.55 million people in the United States have tested positive for the virus and at least 93,406 have died , according to Johns Hopkins University .
`` The only thing that was keeping this very contagious virus in check was each of us keeping that physical distance , '' former Baltimore Health Commissioner Dr. Leana Wen said Tuesday . `` If we 're going to let people go to work and reopen , we are going to be introducing risk of some kind . The key is what are the steps we can take to reduce that risk as much as possible ? ''
States have moved at different paces as governors balance reopening their economies with keeping residents safe . Some states , including Georgia and Texas , rolled out aggressive reopening plans , while others have taken a more measured approach .
Alaska 's and Iowa 's governors said their states are ready to reopen most businesses Friday .
In Alaska , that means all businesses , houses of worship , libraries , museums and sporting activities can resume at 8 a.m. , Gov . Mike Dunleavy 's office said . Alaska has the fewest cases of all 50 states , has reported only single-digit new cases since mid-April and boasted no new cases Monday .
Alaskans are still encouraged to take precautions , such as distancing and wearing masks in crowds , and visitation will remain limited to prisons and senior centers , the governor 's office said .
Iowa Gov . Kim Reynolds intends to allow movie theaters , zoos , aquariums , museums and wedding venues reopen Friday , she said . Swimming pools will be allowed to open for laps and lessons as well . Bars can reopen May 28 , and school-sponsored activities , such as sports , can resume June 1 , she said .
Iowa tallied 212 new cases Tuesday , marking its third straight day of declining Covid-19 positives , according to state data . Its total cases have been on the decline for a week , the data shows .
Indiana , too , plans to move ahead with opening a large swath of its economy Friday , but with numerous restrictions , including : limiting social gatherings to 100 people , limiting dining rooms to 50 % capacity and stores to 75 % capacity , and omitting contact games , such as football and lacrosse , from the list of sports allowed to resume .
`` We 're still telling you to be overly cautious about surrounding yourself in an environment that could put you at risk , '' Gov . Eric Holcomb said .
New York , California and Pennsylvania are among states that are allowing locales reporting declines in new cases to reopen as other areas remain closed .
Many cities also remain under stay-at-home orders . In Baltimore , gatherings of more than 10 people are still prohibited and retail stores remain closed
In New York City , officials report some positive indicators , though the number of people admitted to hospitals with suspected cases of Covid-19 ticked up slightly Monday , from 57 in a day to 63 .
`` It 's a good day . We want to have great days , though , '' Mayor Bill de Blasio said , also sharing the positive news that the city had enough personal protection equipment to last through May and will begin working on building a surplus of PPE and ventilators .
Last month , the White House issued guidance to help states plan for reopening , but the measures were not mandatory and governors were left to make their own decisions .
Experts have warned that lifting restrictions prematurely may mean thousands more Americans will die in a second spike in cases .
The responsibility lies with individuals to adhere to guidelines , practice safe social distancing and adopt habits to keep themselves and loved ones safe .
Almost two-thirds of a record number of new case reports in the past 24 hours came from just four countries , including the United States , the World Health Organization said Wednesday .
Tedros Adhanom-Ghebreyesus , director-general of the WHO , said there were 106,000 cases reported in 24 hours , the most in one day since the pandemic began last year .
`` We still have a long way to go in this pandemic , '' Tedros said .
Brazil , India , Russia , and the United States had two-thirds of the new cases reported , WHO infectious disease epidemiologist Maria Van Kerkhove wrote in an email to CNN .
According to the US Census Bureau , the four are among the 10 top most populous countries in the world -- Brazil , No . 7 ; India , No . 2 ; Russia , No . 9 and US , No . 3 .
Because there are delays in reporting , the number does not mean 106,000 people were infected , tested or counted in the past 24 hours , but that the results were compiled by the WHO in that time .