Senator Dianne Feinstein ( D-CA ) vowed Thursday to push individual states toward adopting a mask mandate by introducing a legislative amendment in the Senate to prohibit states without mask requirements from receiving federal coronavirus relief in the next round of funding .
“ Research shows that masks reduce transmission of the coronavirus , ” said the California senator . “ CDC Director Redfield said this surge in COVID-19 cases could end within two months if we adopt ‘ universal masking. ’ Businesses like Walmart , Kohl ’ s , and Kroger now require masks . And countries that are successfully controlling this virus require masks . So why doesn ’ t the United States have a national mask mandate ? ’
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-KY ) told reporters on Wednesday that the Senate will work toward another round of coronavirus relief , and it will contain a “ heavy emphasis ” on education , an endeavor he admitted would be costly , reports NBC News .
This pandemic relief legislation , it would seem , would be the vehicle to which Feinstein might attach a mask-mandate amendment .
“ The situation is getting worse daily . Several states including California , Alabama , and Montana already require masks in public . This should be universal , ” said Feinstein . “ My hope has been that other governors would show the leadership to institute their own mask mandates , but so far that hasn ’ t happened . It ’ s time for Congress to step in . This is a matter of life or death , and partisan politics shouldn ’ t play a role . ”
Wearing masks in public should be mandatory . When the Senate takes up the next coronavirus economic relief bill later this month , I intend to offer an amendment to prohibit sending funds to states that haven ’ t adopted a statewide mask requirement . https : //t.co/DvwiVr02Vo pic.twitter.com/2uqFyNAUL4 — Senator Dianne Feinstein ( @ SenFeinstein ) July 16 , 2020
Last month , presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden told KDKA-2 that he would be willing to enforce a national mask mandate through executive order should he be elected president in November .
“ The one thing we do know is these masks make a gigantic difference . I would insist that everybody out in public be wearing that mask . Anyone to reopen would have to make sure that they walked into a business that had masks , ” said Biden .
Throughout the country , countless local and state government have vocally pushed for the adoption of face coverings — some on a mandatory basis , and others through encouraging voluntary participation .
For example , Alabama Governor Kay Ivey ( R ) announced a mandatory mask order on Wednesday , but acknowledged that it would be “ hard to enforce , ” and as such was asking for the public to “ practice personal responsibility . ”
Ivey declined to impose new restrictions as recently as June 30 , when she said a statewide mask order would be “ next to impossible ” to enforce . Violating the new order can result in a fine of $ 500 and jail time , Ivey said , although she stressed that protecting residents , not imposing penalties , is the goal .
In the neighboring state of Mississippi , Governor Tate Reeves ( R ) has been ardently advocating for masks while declining to create a sweeping mandate that would affect everyone in the state . In a popular Twitter thread earlier this week , Reeves said that “ despite mixed messages at the beginning , it seems like masks are the best bet . ”
███ is one of America ’ s fastest-growing conservative media companies and counter-cultural outlets for news , opinion , and entertainment . Get inside access to ███ by becoming a member .