On Tuesday , Vice President Mike Pence announced that the Trump administration was able to get major insurance companies to agree to waive copays on coronavirus testing .
“ I ’ m pleased to report that as you requested , Mr. President , that all the insurance companies here , either today , or before today , have agreed to waive all copays on coronavirus testing , and extend coverage for coronavirus treatment in all of their benefit plans , ” Pence announced during a meeting with President Donald Trump and insurance CEOs , according to The Hill .
The VP , who was tasked last week to help lead the effort in combating the coronavirus , added that insurance companies also agreed to avoid any “ surprise billing ” by making prices for coronavirus-related treatments available to patients up front .
The health insurance companies that attended the meeting , and are seemingly onboard with waiving such copays , include UnitedHealth Group , Anthem , Cigna , Humana , Aetna and the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association , The Hill reported .
According to Pence , the companies represent nearly 240 million Americans .
The coronavirus has infected more than 700 people in over 30 states and killed nearly 30 people , the Johns Hopkins University tracker estimates , The Washington Times noted Tuesday .
During a press conference Monday , Pence said that there will be more people who test positive for the virus in coming days as testing increases throughout the nation . The vice president emphasized that the “ vast majority ” of people who contract the virus will fully recover and those at greatest risk are the elderly .
The vice president encouraged Americans to visit Coronavirus.gov to understand the risks , learn about necessary precautions , and get updates about the virus .
According to the site , which has been updated periodically , coronavirus , or COVID-19 , developments will likely include “ more instances of community spread . ”
“ It ’ s likely that at some point , widespread transmission of COVID-19 in the United States will occur , ” the site states . “ Widespread transmission of COVID-19 would translate into large numbers of people needing medical care at the same time . Schools , childcare centers , and workplaces , may experience more absenteeism . Mass gatherings may be sparsely attended or postponed . ”
“ Public health and healthcare systems may become overloaded , with elevated rates of hospitalizations and deaths , ” coronavirus.gov noted . “ Other critical infrastructure , such as law enforcement , emergency medical services , and sectors of the transportation industry may also be affected . Healthcare providers and hospitals may be overwhelmed . ”
“ At this time , there is no vaccine to protect against COVID-19 and no medications approved to treat it . Nonpharmaceutical interventions would be the most important response strategy , ” the site added .
The “ nonpharmaceutical interventions ” section hyperlinks to recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , which includes the following :
Washing hands with soap and water or using hand sanitizer when soap and water is not available .
Staying home if you have been exposed to a family or household member who is sick .
Covering your nose and mouth with a mask or cloth if you are sick and around people or at a mass gathering in a community where the pandemic is already occurring .