Last week , the Trump administration cited a Korean War-era law to justify banning exports of protective masks made in the United States , while ordering American companies that produce such wares overseas to redirect orders to their home market . One American company , 3M , said halting planned shipments of masks overseas would imperil health workers in Canada and Latin America . On Monday , 3M said it struck a compromise with the government that will send some masks to the United States and some overseas .
In recent weeks , Turkey , Ukraine , Thailand , Taiwan , Indonesia , Bangladesh , Pakistan , South Africa and Ecuador have all banned the export of protective masks . France and Germany imposed bans on masks and other protective gear , lifting them only after the European Union barred exports outside the bloc . India banned exports of respirators and disinfectants .
Britain has prohibited exports of hydroxychloroquine , an anti-malarial drug now being tested for potential benefits against the virus . Hungary has banned exports of the raw material for that drug and medicines that contain it .
“ The export bans are not helpful , ” said Mariangela Simao , assistant director general for medicines and health products at the World Health Organization in Geneva . “ It can disrupt supply chains of some products that are actually needed everywhere . ”
President Trump has been especially aggressive in securing an American stockpile of hydroxychloroquine , disregarding the counsel of federal scientists who have warned that testing remains minimal , with scant evidence of benefits .
India is the world ’ s largest producer of hydroxychloroquine . Last month , the government banned exports of the drug , though it stipulated that shipments could continue under limited circumstances .
“ In this situation , each country has to take care of itself , ” said Satish Kumar , an adjunct professor at the International Institute of Health Management Research in New Delhi . “ If we are not able to take care of our population , it will be a very critical situation . ”