On Saturday , the first federal inmate tested positive for coronavirus in a Brooklyn , New York , facility . Prison staff in Pennsylvania , Michigan , New York and Washington state have tested positive for the virus , forcing inmate quarantines . The media has dramatized the risk to those caught on a cruise ship or in a nursing home where the virus begins to spread . But surely those most at risk are the 2.2 million Americans locked up on any one day in prisons and jails across the country .
“ We ’ re all headed for some dire consequences , ” warned Daniel Vasquez , the former warden of San Quentin and Soledad state prisons in California . The prisoners , he noted , are “ in such close quarters — some double and triple-celled — it ’ s going to be impossible to stop it from spreading . ”
This peril is immediate and pressing . There are 2.2 million Americans locked up at any one time , but over 11 million go through prison or jail gates in any one year .
Most of those in jail have not been convicted or sentenced ; they are languishing awaiting trial , many of them unable to afford bail .
The Center for Disease Control and Prevention has called on Americans to practice “ social distancing , ” staying six feet away from one another , even as more and more states issue stay at home orders . But prisoners literally are locked down . In overcrowded prisons and jails , they can not practice social distancing , and they can not stay at home . In jails and prisons , the incarcerated share bathrooms , laundry and eating areas . In many , the toilet tank doubles as the sink for hand washing . Those bunked in the same cell — as many as four — share toilets and sinks . Circulation is almost always poor
The coronavirus is particularly lethal for the elderly and for those with a pre-existing health condition . Again , the incarcerated are disproportionately at risk .
Of the quarter of a million locked up in 122 different federal facilities , over 100,000 are over 60 . Disproportionately poor and people of color , over 40 percent suffer from chronic health conditions .
Moreover , once caught , the danger goes far beyond other inmates . Those cycling through jails come into contact with guards and prison officials , judges and courtroom officials , police and when they return to their homes , families and neighbors . It is time to reduce those at risk dramatically . Across the world , efforts are being made to reduce prison populations . Even Iran , denounced as a brutal dictatorship , has released 54,000 inmates temporarily in the face of the virus .
Some states have already begun to take some action in response to the threat . In California and New York , officials have begun to review cases seeking to release those who pose no threat to society . Many jails like those in Arizona require inmates to pay co-pays to see a doctor and fees to purchase medical supplies . Many jails ban hand sanitizers because of their alcoholic content . All that must change .
I wrote to President Donald Trump calling his attention to this crisis and urging federal action . He called me back to discuss the issue and promised that he would refer this to his leading aid , Jared Kushner , who played a major role in ushering into law the First Step Act , which took the first steps toward reducing our excessive incarceration levels .
We should act now to ensure that incarceration does not turn into a death sentence for them .