Florida surpassed 300,000 confirmed cases of the coronavirus on Wednesday , according to data collected by Johns Hopkins University . The state has seen a surge of infections in recent weeks and now sits behind only California and New York in the number of confirmed cases it 's reported .
Health officials reported an additional 10,181 new confirmed cases Wednesday . Florida took more than three months to reach 100,000 coronavirus cases but then took just two weeks to jump from 100,000 to 200,000 .
Florida Governor Ron DeSantis in a news conference Wednesday said the state is doing roughly 90,000 tests per day but said the results were taking too long to process .
`` One thing that I think is clear is that we need to get these testing results back in a timely fashion , '' DeSantis said . The governor said the state would be shifting business away from commercial labs that have not been able to return test results in 48 hours , as originally agreed upon when testing was expanded in the beginning of May .
Contact-tracers have also said delays in testing results are making their jobs more difficult .
Florida also reported an additional 112 deaths on Wednesday . This was the third time in the past seven days it has reported more than 100 deaths , according to CBS Miami . More than 4,500 people have died in the state due to COVID-19 .
Florida 's emergency management director compared the state 's response to a hurricane , but one complicated by politics . `` When a Category 5 hits , nobody argues whether it was whether it was a Category 5 , and in this disaster , we are arguing over everything , '' Jared Moskowitz told ███ .
DeSantis said additional medical personnel have been sent to Miami-Dade County , which is facing some of the highest infection rates in the state . Although the county 's ICU beds are at capacity , the governor said the hospitals in the county still have plenty of other space that can be utilized for coronavirus patients , but added the real issue is a lack of healthcare workers .
The governor also announced the state will be introducing lanes at testing sites specifically for those exhibiting COVID-19 symptoms . People who use those lanes will administer the swabs themselves and their test results will be expedited , DeSantis said .