Months after Congress created the Paycheck Protection Program ( PPP ) in an attempt to support small businesses during the Covid-19 pandemic , people are still confused , and even angry , over the ambitious , unprecedented experiment .
Take what happened with Mark Fisher Fitness ( MFF ) , an LGBTQ-friendly boutique fitness studio based in New York . Because it got a PPP loan in April , it was able to rehire the 28 employees it laid off in March as the coronavirus crisis set in and its locations shuttered . But for the loan to be forgivable , MFF had to spend the money in two months , mostly on payroll .
“ It did give us the ability to retain the whole staff for a period of eight weeks and keep that sense of community and of continuing our grand unicorn experiment to bring health and hotness to the masses , ” said Andrew Cole , chief people officer at MFF .
But the reprieve the PPP loan offered didn ’ t last long . Even though MFF has pivoted to online classes for the foreseeable future , it ’ s once again had to lay off most of its staff and is closing one of its two locations permanently .
Still , compared to other small businesses that applied for PPP , it was lucky to get a loan at all . Many small business owners — particularly minority-owned businesses — say they were denied loans for even a few thousand dollars , while larger enterprises like the Los Angeles Lakers and Shake Shack were awarded millions in loans . ( Facing public backlash , several of these larger businesses eventually returned the money . ) Others say the loan amounts they received were too small to help at all . And a lack of transparency with the program has fueled misconceptions about what PPP was supposed to accomplish in the first place .
The controversy surrounding the PPP , which supports businesses with 500 employees or fewer , has a lot to do with a disconnect between the program ’ s design and how Americans think about business . The real goal of the PPP was to keep American workers on payroll , not to simply keep small businesses going . And so the majority of the money was disbursed to businesses with more employees , rather than to tiny ones with small staffs . That ’ s why a program widely perceived as being meant to boost the United States ’ most vulnerable small businesses ended up prioritizing businesses that aren ’ t actually that small .
As the program nears a close — the last day for applications was extended from June 30 to August 8 — and it ’ s unclear whether there will be another round of loans , Recode examined the successes and failures of the PPP , as well as why the program ended up being so controversial .
The good , the bad , and the ugly of focusing on payrolls
In May , the progressive pollster Data for Progress conducted a poll on behalf of Recode in an effort to gauge public perception of the PPP and how Americans feel about it . It surveyed 1,235 likely voters online .
The poll revealed some dissonance in how Americans think about small business and who is and isn ’ t deserving of help . When asked whether all businesses should get help to keep workers paid , 70 percent of respondents said yes . But then when asked whether support should be capped at businesses with 500 employees , 76 percent said yes . And when asked about whether the Los Angeles Lakers NBA team , which got a loan and then returned it after public outcry , should have given the money back , 75 percent said it was the right thing to do .
When asked what the goal of federal assistance to businesses should be , 58 percent of respondents said it should be to keep workers paid , while 24 percent said it should be to keep businesses afloat — and that explains , at least partly , why the program has attracted controversy . It hasn ’ t been possible for many businesses to accomplish both of these goals at the same time , so they didn ’ t get what they needed to truly survive the pandemic , especially sole proprietorships or ones with just a few employees . Yes , covering paychecks is important . So is paying utilities and rent .
“ The design was to help companies fund their payroll . One can step back and say , ‘ gosh , is that the design we wanted to have ? ’ ” said Michael Minnis , an accounting professor at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business . “ It wasn ’ t called the small business protection program or the microbusiness protection program . Companies in the 100 to 500 employee range have more payroll dollars than companies in the under 100 employees range . That ’ s just math . ”
Related Government loans meant to bail out small businesses could become a financial burden themselves
According to a June report from the Small Business Administration ( SBA ) , the average PPP loan size is $ 107,000 , and the administration claims the program has supported 51 million jobs and as much as 84 percent of all people employed by small businesses .
All of this adds some nuance to the controversies about big companies that got loans . If the point of the PPP loans is to keep people employed , then what does it matter how many total employees a loan-receiving company has ?
Minnis pointed out that in criticizing bigger companies for getting loans , it ’ s important to recognize the counterfactual . What if , after the Lakers returned the money , they immediately laid off all their concession workers ? ( This hasn ’ t actually happened . ) Or take the case of car retailer AutoNation . The company furloughed 7,000 workers in early April . It applied to the program and received a $ 77 million loan , which it said it would use to rehire those workers . But amid controversy , it wound up returning the loan .
The focus on payrolls has caused other wrinkles as well .
At the outset of the program , businesses had to spend 75 percent of loans on payroll within eight weeks in order for it to be forgivable . Amid feedback from the business community that they have other expenses and that the crisis is lasting more than eight weeks , Congress changed the parameters of the loans in mid-June to require 60 percent be spent on payroll over a period of 24 weeks .
But for many businesses , it was too little , too late . “ The problem is these businesses are in week six or seven of their loan , so they ’ ve already used 80 percent of the money that was available , and they were paying people who weren ’ t working for them , ” said Daniel Rafeedie , CEO of payroll company PaySteady .
That ’ s what happened with Mark Fisher Fitness . “ I ’ m extremely happy for other small businesses that have the ability to let that money last longer , but it did sting a little bit , ” Cole said .
And just because a business got a loan doesn ’ t mean it was enough , even to cover its payroll . Emilie Aries , the founder of Denver-based training services company Bossed Up , had only her salary on her 2019 payroll , which was used to calculate her PPP loan amount . It didn ’ t take into consideration the two new employees she ’ d hired this year , so she only got $ 9,000 . “ I feel like we fell through a loophole , ” she said . “ I hired my employees on January 1 and March 1 , and the whole point of this program is to protect employees , right ? It did not do that for me . ”
She wound up taking a 50 percent pay cut and using her existing line of credit with the bank to take out another loan to stay afloat . “ We were able to pivot successfully , ” she said , “ but I still have $ 15,000 in debt I wouldn ’ t have . ”
For some businesses , even if PPP only offered a small loan , it still helped keep their businesses going . Caleb Benoit , who runs Connect Roasters , a small coffee company in Illinois , had a relatively easy time getting a PPP loan from his small local bank . He only got $ 2,500 , and while that doesn ’ t make a huge difference in his ability to stay afloat , he considers it a helpful boost while he rejiggered his business . “ The truth is , we ’ re okay financially ; we ’ re going to make it , ” he said . “ We ’ re still small and pretty lean , we don ’ t have a lot of overhead , so we ’ re better suited to weather the storm . ”
The problem with sticking to market-based solutions is that the market is kind of broken
The PPP was designed to work within the current US economic system — one that is already imbalanced and stacks the odds against smaller competitors and minorities . And so the PPP has replicated those same flaws .
KB Brown runs Wolfpack Promotionals , one of only two Black-owned printing shops in Minnesota . He estimates business has dropped by more than 90 percent since the onset of the pandemic , and he ’ s had to lay off all of his employees , so now only he and his wife are running the Minneapolis-based business . The only requests they ’ re getting are George Floyd-related shirts , but he feels strange about commercializing someone else ’ s pain and prefers not to do them . “ We don ’ t do the profiting off of other people ’ s misery and death thing , ” he said .
Brown has been trying for months to get an $ 8,000 PPP loan , first applying through Wells Fargo and then with Square . He hasn ’ t had any luck . “ It ’ s bullshit , ” he said . “ I don ’ t think the loans are exactly designed for minorities . ”
His assessment isn ’ t wrong : The majority of small businesses owned by people of color have been shut out of the loans altogether , and some of those who received them got less than they asked for . This is especially concerning because four out of every 10 Black-owned small businesses in the US aren ’ t expected to survive the current crisis . The pandemic has already hit Black and brown communities in the US the hardest , in terms of both health and financial impacts .
“ This is a program that relies on financial institutions as intermediaries , ” said Ashley Harrington , federal advocacy director at the Center for Responsible Lending . “ That poses a problem for business owners of color , given the history of financial exclusion by the financial mainstream in this country . ”
People of color have , throughout America ’ s history , been shut out of financial systems and put at an economic disadvantage — which means the PPP ’ s design renders this outcome almost inevitable .
“ This is a program that relies on financial institutions as intermediaries . That poses a problem for business owners of color , given the history of financial exclusion by the financial mainstream in this country ”
Many banks approving PPP loans accepted applications only from existing customers as a default . That left out many minority-owned businesses , which often have weak relationships with banks as a result of years of systemic exclusion .
Moreover , because banks can collect bigger fees for bigger loans , that further incentivized bigger businesses to be prioritized over smaller ones . And the processes for getting the loan and for having it forgiven are complicated . Sole proprietorships ( businesses owned and run by one person ) , independent contractors , and tiny businesses with just a handful of employees are low on resources to begin with . They don ’ t have a team of accountants and human resources personnel to help them navigate the paperwork .
“ Reflexively , we rely on market mechanisms to solve problems , ” said Felicia Wong , president and CEO of progressive think tank the Roosevelt Institute , in an interview earlier this year about PPP . “ We chose this way to do this that is market-driven and market-mediated , and it ’ s hugely problematic . ”
The government could have set up a system to give money directly to workers or to businesses . Instead , it put financial institutions in the mix , and they brought with them the flaws and biases of the private market .
The $ 500 billion question that might never be fully answered
Beyond the controversies about who did and didn ’ t get loans and how the program was implemented , there ’ s another problem with it : a lack of transparency . A total of $ 521 billion in loans was given out through the PPP , and we might never know where all the money ended up .
The federal government initially resisted calls for more transparency into who ’ s receiving PPP loans , saying that the information is “ proprietary ” and “ confidential. ” After intense public pressure , the government relented and released information in July on nearly 700,000 PPP loans of $ 150,000 or higher . Among the recipients : businesses connected to President Donald Trump ’ s son-in-law , Jared Kushner , and Kanye West ’ s fashion brand , Yeezy .
“ Reflexively , we rely on market mechanisms to solve problems . We chose this way to do this that is market-driven and market-mediated , and it ’ s hugely problematic ”
As the Washington Post notes , the data release is just 15 percent of all of the loans issued and leaves out the majority of sole proprietorships and independent contractors . And the data released was riddled with errors — some businesses listed as receiving loans hadn ’ t actually gotten them , and some amounts were incorrectly reported .
“ The fact that we are not getting the same level of transparency for the … program is that much more problematic given the Small Business Administration knows how to do this and lenders know how to do this , ” Harrington said .
And so going forward , lawmakers , think tanks , and academics are going to be working with incomplete information as they assess how the program worked and where the money wound up . A recent tracker developed to collect data on the US ’ s Covid-19 economic response paints an initial picture that isn ’ t particularly positive . It found the PPP didn ’ t have a “ meaningful effect ” on unemployment at small businesses at least through mid-May .
Other plans to support small businesses have formed in Congress that their proponents say would be better approaches than the PPP . House Democrats are leaning into proposals that expand the program to more businesses , get rid of banks as intermediaries , and turn loans into grants . Whether there ’ s an appetite for such a program from Republicans in the Senate is an open question , as is what else should be done to help businesses . Politico reports that Congress is hesitant to give out future aid without tighter restrictions , given the uproar over the program .
“ We really need to think beyond this . This one-size-fits-all approach does not work for all businesses , and because we know that — what other relief is needed ? ” Harrington said . “ What other programs should be created to provide direct grants from the federal government to businesses ? ”
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .