Exponential growth isn ’ t the only tricky part of epidemiological models . These models also need to use parameters to plug into the variables in the equations . But where should those parameters come from ? Model-makers have to work with the data they have , yet a novel virus , such as the one that causes COVID-19 , has a lot of unknowns .
For example , the Imperial College model uses numbers from Wuhan , China , along with some early data from Italy . This is a reasonable choice , as those are the pandemic ’ s largest epicenters . But many of these data are not yet settled , and many questions remain . What ’ s the attack rate—the number of people who get infected within an exposed group , like a household ? Do people who recover have immunity ? How widespread are asymptomatic cases , and how infectious are they ? Are there super-spreaders—people who seemingly infect everyone they breathe near—as there were with SARS , and how prevalent are they ? What are the false positive and false negative rates of our tests ? And so on , and on and on .
To make models work , epidemiologists also have to estimate the impact of interventions like social isolation . But here , too , the limited data we have are imperfect , perhaps censored , perhaps inapplicable . For example , China underwent a period in which the government yanked infected patients and even their healthy close contacts from their homes , and sent them into special quarantine wards . That seems to have dramatically cut down infections within a household and within the city . Relatively few infected people in the United States or the United Kingdom have been similarly quarantined . In general , the lockdown in China was much more severe . Planes are still taking off from New York , New Jersey , and everywhere else , even as we speak of “ social isolation. ” And more complications remain . We aren ’ t even sure we can trust China ’ s numbers . Italy ’ s health statistics are likely more trustworthy , but its culture of furbizia—or flouting the rules , part of the country ’ s charm as well as its dysfunction—increases the difficulty of knowing how applicable its outcomes are to our projections .
Read : The four possible timelines for life returning to normal
A model ’ s robustness depends on how often it gets tried out and tweaked based on data and its performance . For example , many models predicting presidential elections are based on data from presidential elections since 1972 . That ’ s all the elections we have polling data for , but it ’ s only 12 elections , and prior to 2016 , only two happened in the era of Facebook . So when Donald Trump , the candidate that was projected to be less likely to win the presidency in 2016 , won anyway , did that mean that our models with TV-era parameters don ’ t work anymore ? Or is it merely that a less likely but possible outcome happened ? ( If you ’ re flipping a coin , you ’ ll get four heads in a row about one every 16 tries , meaning that you can ’ t know if the coin is loaded just because something seemingly unusual happens ) . With this novel coronavirus , there are a lot of things we don ’ t know because we ’ ve never tested our models , and we have no way to do so .