I don ’ t know if you heard , but according to the head of the International Energy Agency ( IEA ) , we only have six months left to prevent total climate change disaster .
“ This year is the last time we have , if we are not to see a carbon rebound , ” IEA executive director Fatih Birol told the Guardian on Thursday in an article with the headline : “ World has six months to avert climate crisis , says energy expert . ”
Birol continued : “ If emissions rebound , it is very difficult to see how they will be brought down in future . This is why we are urging governments to have sustainable recovery packages . ”
I ’ m old enough to remember when we still had 12 years left to save the planet just two years ago . That dire prediction was just as laughable as what Birol is saying today . The scientific “ consensus ” we used to hear so much about doesn ’ t support this alarmist claim at all .
What ’ s really going on is that Birol is using his cachet as a prominent “ expert ” to push bogus claims to further his political agenda . Those goals also rather conveniently align with the wishes of Democrats and the liberal media .
We ’ ve recently seen a lot of this type of weaponizing of science for political purposes . A couple weeks ago , we learned of one of the most egregious examples of this to date .
Late last month , one of the world ’ s most prestigious medical journals , the Lancet , published a huge study purporting to find that the decades-old anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine increased the risk of death in COVID patients .
To sum it all up , this observational study of 96,000 patients around the world found that treating COVID patients with hydroxychloroquine increased their risk of death by 34 percent , and there was a 137 percent increased risk for heart arrhythmias .
Since President Trump came out as supportive of using hydroxychloroquine to treat the coronavirus , the liberal media quickly pounced . The study ’ s release also conveniently came after the Lancet put out a shockingly unusual editorial statement opposing Trump ’ s reelection .
“ Americans must put a president in the White House come January , 2021 , who will understand that public health should not be guided by partisan politics , ” the journal editorial board wrote .
All the pieces were in place for the media and medical establishment to set a new narrative — hydroxychloroquine kills ! And President Trump is responsible for those deaths .
SUPERCUT : The media fearmongered over the now retracted study from the Lancet that showed Hydroxychloroquine was dangerous to covid patients . pic.twitter.com/myKihDkYbj — Greg Price ( @ greg_price11 ) June 4 , 2020
Amid all the alarm , the World Health Organization and National Institutes of Health temporarily halted clinical trials into hydroxychloroquine . The hype also made it harder for doctors and researchers to recruit volunteers for hydroxy studies .
Given the real world consequences , we have to ask , did anyone in the media or medical community really take the time to read the Lancet ’ s new bombshell study ?
Thankfully , curious reporters at the Guardian ( yes , the same Guardian that published the climate drivel I mentioned earlier ) did take the time to read it and found what they called “ glaring errors ” in the study ’ s data on Australia .
But that wasn ’ t all — the Guardian found more problems with the data , and then they raised serious questions about the U.S.-based company that provided it .
The Guardian reported : “ [ T ] he US-based company Surgisphere , whose handful of employees appear to include a science fiction writer and an adult-content model … has so far failed to adequately explain its data or methodology . ”
After Surgisphere ’ s CEO refused to hand over his data to independent investigators , the Lancet , to its credit , withdrew the study . Lancet editor Richard Horton called these revelations “ a shocking example of research misconduct in the middle of a global health emergency . ”
What ’ s really shocking is that the Lancet ’ s crack team of peer-reviewers missed all of this ! Hydroxychloroquine was approved by the FDA decades ago , and has a long record of safety . Doctors around the world are also using the drug to treat thousands of COVID patients , mostly reporting positive results .
One has to wonder if the journal ’ s clear political bias and contempt for President Trump played a role . And if it did , will they and the media lackeys who peddled this study apologize to the patients who may have been denied this potentially life-saving drug ?
Unfortunately , the scientific misconduct didn ’ t end there . After months of telling us the science demanded strict lockdown policies , which meant no large gatherings of any kind were safe , the scientific consensus all of the sudden shifted from pro-social distancing to pro-social justice .
“ White supremacy is a lethal public health issue that predates and contributes to COVID-19 , ” over 1,200 experts wrote in an open letter released in the wake of the protesting , rioting and looting sparked by the tragic death of George Floyd , an African American man , while in the custody of police .
“ Protests against systemic racism , which fosters the disproportionate burden of COVID-19 on Black communities and also perpetuates police violence , must be supported , ” the letter continued .
Apparently , racism is the real public health crisis and the “ science ” demands that people march ( or loot or riot ) in support of the Black Lives Matter movement and its radical leftist political goals , which include defunding the police .
Somehow those types of protests are scientifically sound , but according to those same scientists , protesting the crushing lockdown policies of blue state governors is not just dangerous , but evil !
“ Those actions not only oppose public health interventions , but are also rooted in white nationalism and run contrary to respect for Black lives , ” they wrote .
All this was interesting given the heavy focus in the media on the coronaviruses ’ disproportionate impact on minorities , particularly African Americans . Of course , this too was chalked up to racism .
Most notably , the media and the medical class completely dismiss any concerns that weeks of mass protesting in the streets — with many people crowded together and many not wearing masks — will cause a spike in COVID cases .
Meanwhile , these same experts have no problem helping the media hype the rise in coronavirus cases in Trump country . It was also quite amusing to watch the liberal media trip over itself condemning planned Trump campaign rallies as dangerous .
MEDIA HYPOCRISY ALERT : The liberal media praises the thousands of protesters for gathering , but thinks it ’ s dangerous for President @ realDonaldTrump to do the same . pic.twitter.com/mx1l0MZC7p — NewsBusters ( @ newsbusters ) June 18 , 2020
Is it any wonder why American ’ s trust in the media has plummeted over the last few years ? And the scientists , doctors and health experts will soon suffer the same fate if they continue skewing the science for partisan and ideological reasons .
Doctor Anthony Fauci , who ’ s on the White House COVID task force , lamented the lost faith in science , but he doesn ’ t blame the scientists , he blames the American people .
“ One of the problems we face in the United States is that unfortunately , there is a combination of an anti-science bias … they just don ’ t believe science and they don ’ t believe authority , ” Fauci said in a Department of health and Human Services podcast .
“ When they see someone up in the White House , which has an air of authority to it , who ’ s talking about science , that there are some people who just don ’ t believe that — and that ’ s unfortunate because , you know , science is truth , ” Fauci added .
Is it the “ truth ” that white supremacy is a public health crisis ? Well , scientists said it , so according to Fauci , it must be . And going back to my first point , should we really be worried that we only have six months left to prevent catastrophic global warming ? We ’ re told that ’ s what the “ science ” says , and as we know , science is the truth .
People understand that science is a process and as we learn more it can change , but that ’ s not what we ’ ve seen play out over the past few weeks . Instead we ’ ve seen the experts and media figures we ’ re supposed to trust invoke the word “ science ” to further their political ends — actual facts and evidence be damned .