The left urges Trump to use the DPA to organize production and distribution of medical supplies .
“ Many companies are already trying to rise to the occasion… [ But ] relying on business alone isn ’ t enough to address shortfalls… First , a private company is either going to sell to whoever placed their order first or to the highest bidder . It ’ s therefore possible that the places in America that most need masks , for example , may not get them in time because a mask-making company has other orders to fill first…
“ The second flaw in Trump ’ s argument has to do with [ sourcing ] materials… For example , a fabric company may typically sell most of its product to a dress-making company , but the cloth could be better used for masks right now . In that case , the federal government would pay the fabric company for the materials and then give them to a mask-making company so it can continue to make even more of them… [ The issue ] isn ’ t that companies are sitting on their hands . Problems arise in making the product and then delivering it to where it ’ s most needed in a time of crisis . Only the federal government coordinating the response has the insight and resources to help with that . ”
“ There has been a worldwide scramble for masks , ventilators , test kits and other medical equipment . Companies that make these products sell to whichever buyer orders first ; they generally don ’ t worry about priorities , or whether the items are resold or hoarded . Under the Defense Production Act , the federal government can , like a traffic cop , direct that inventories be allocated where they are needed most urgently… In emergencies and wartime , businesses don ’ t know how much of a given product may be needed or for how long . A ventilator maker might know that fighting covid-19 will require , say , 500,000 machines but fear that the need could last only three months or that demand might be filled by Chinese imports . Would that company invest millions in an expanded plant ? Probably not . That ’ s where the DPA helps : The government can commit to buy the whole needed supply at a price that makes the investment worthwhile . ”
Some argue that “ The US needs to be looking at all appropriate tools to get newly unemployed people into manufacturing masks and gloves . That probably means some mix of DPA edicts , direct subsidies for production , and guarantees that the government will purchase any ‘ excess ’ supplies if the crisis ends up ending sooner than expected . But beyond medical equipment , we are looking at a reasonably extended period of time in which people should be consuming more soap , hand sanitizer , disinfecting sprays and wipes… And that means we ’ ll need more personnel and industrial capacity to make them… Rather than it being necessary to completely fix the health situation before the US can heal the economy , mobilizing idled workers should be part of how to get the health situation under control . ”
Critics , however , posit that “ War powers are notoriously difficult to contain once unleashed… Witness the fact that the post-9/11 Authorization for Use of Military Force remains in effect nearly 19 years later… Instead of bending wartime statutes to domestic use or activating emergency statutes laced throughout the federal code , Congress could have identified the specific powers Mr. Trump needed to deal with this crisis and conferred them on a temporary and renewable basis… It is difficult to make room for constitutional considerations while a pandemic is sweeping the nation and overwhelming health systems . But this is when those considerations matter most . ”