███ is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power . Sign up to receive our biggest stories as soon as they ’ re published .
It was the day after April rent was officially due — April 6 — and Kevin Maddox was officially late . The week before , he had lost both of his jobs within a few days of each other . Both were at food-service warehouses . “ My job is to get the food to the restaurants , and if no one ’ s going to the restaurants , then I ’ m out of a job , ” Maddox said . So he filed for unemployment and now stood outside his small rental row house just beyond the Baltimore city line watching his young daughter as she rode around in her plastic car .
His spirits were relatively high , all things considered . Both employers told him they ’ d take him back , as soon as things opened back up . That maybe helped explain why he still wore the cap from one of the warehouses : Maines Paper & Food Service Inc .
“ This is tough , ” he said . “ It ’ s tough . But I ’ m hoping it ’ ll be over in a month . They say it ’ s supposed to be over in a month . ”
More than a month later , it is not over . And there have been few better places to track the economic unraveling and social stress of the pandemic lockdowns than the large housing complex where Maddox lives , Dutch Village , and a handful of other complexes in the Baltimore area owned by the same company . That ’ s partly because these complexes are home to exactly the sort of workers who have been most affected by the crisis : both those whose jobs are likeliest to have been eliminated — casino workers , food-service workers , hotel housekeepers — and those whose jobs are likeliest to have been plunged into at-risk overdrive — Amazon warehouse workers , delivery drivers , nursing home aides , cleaners .
Here , there is nary a telecommuting professional to be found . Here , there is no escaping the upheaval . The need in the complexes is so great that one of them , Cove Village , has become a main distribution spot for free food from the Baltimore County school department : Every Monday through Thursday , a truck arrives at Cove Village and parks on Driftwood Court from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m . Families line up for a breakfast , lunch and snack , with an extra set given out on Thursday to tide kids over on Friday .
There is another reason to track the upheaval in these complexes . It happens that they are owned by the company led until not long ago by the person now tasked with overseeing the federal government ’ s response to the crisis : Jared Kushner , son-in-law of President Donald Trump . The Kushner Companies , in which Jared still holds a large financial stake , has come under scrutiny in recent years for its litigious pursuit of tenants who allegedly owed back rent or broke leases , and for the poor conditions of many of the units . It was even the subject of a Netflix television documentary that aired just as the lockdowns first went into effect .
But the pandemic has now thrust Kushnerville , which consists of nine complexes in inner-suburban Baltimore County , some with as many as 1,000 units each , into unfamiliar territory . For years , tenants have learned to dread the aggressive tactics of their landlord : late-payment notices and court summons slapped on their doors , late fees and “ court costs ” and attorney fees added to bills , and , in some cases , even threats of jail time . Disclosure of those tactics led to a class-action lawsuit and a lawsuit by the state attorney general . The Kushner entities have denied wrongdoing . ( A judge this year denied the plaintiffs ’ bid to form a class , which is on appeal ; the attorney general ’ s suit is ongoing . )
Jared Kushner ’ s company has come under scrutiny for its aggressive tactics . ( Chris Lee/VII Mentor Program )
Now , though , that whole apparatus of intimidation has been disabled by the temporary ban on evictions . Without that final stage of the process for forcing payment , the rest of the apparatus has fallen away . There are , for the time being , no late fees , no “ court costs , ” no summonses on doors . And even without that threat , many tenants are managing to make their rent , for now , thanks partly to enhanced unemployment benefits and the cash payments in the CARES Act .
Instead , everyone is waiting for the next phase , when the safety-net payments ebb , when the evictions resume and when the jobs do or do not come back , while contending with the eternal problems at Kushnerville : maintenance breakdowns , mice infestations and water leaks . And bringing this waiting into particularly stark relief here is the fact that whatever comes next — the strength of the nation ’ s recovery — will depend partly on what can be accomplished by Jared Kushner himself , in his new role , 40 miles down the road .
The same week as Kevin Maddox was watching his daughter play outside , another young man was out walking at another Kushner-owned complex 15 miles to the east , Whispering Woods . The man , who did not want his name used , was heading to the unit where he lives with his fiancée and their child , from the one where her mother and father live , up the block . Both units were late on April rent . His fiancée ’ s father was supposed to go back to work on a crew that repaves city roads , but then the pandemic came and shut the work down . He and his fiancée , meanwhile , both had to give up their jobs in the food-service department of a nursing home 20 miles away . The local bus system was cut back so far that they couldn ’ t get there anymore , and the day care for their child had also shut down .
They had received the same form letter from the Kushner Companies ’ property management arm , Westminster Management , that other tenants in the complexes had gotten . It stated that rent was still due on the 5th of every month , but that there would be no late fees for the time being . The company , which declined to comment ( or to respond to a list of tenant complaints cited in this article ) , would also no longer charge an extra fee for paying rent online .
A welcoming sign at another Baltimore-area Kushner complex . ( J.M . Giordano for ███ )
The young man regarded the promised leniency warily . “ They act like they care about us so much , but they really don ’ t , ” he said . “ They still want the money. ” Not that he had any particular animus against the complex ’ s owner . He did not even know who that was . “ Who Jared Kushner ? ” he said .
Nearby , Steve Williams was walking his dog . He and his wife , who had lived there for two years , had also been unable to pay on time because he hadn ’ t been working after having a couple of heart attacks and her hours working as a file clerk had just been cut way back as a result of the pandemic . He had also gotten the letters promising leniency from the management office and was also wary of how much stock to put in them , given management ’ s record . “ I ’ ve been a renter for 20 years , and I ’ ve never seen anything like that , ” he said . “ I ’ ve never seen someone get put out so fast as around here . Thirty days , and you ’ re gone. ” With evictions on hold for the time being , though , he was more worried about an immediate concern : bedbugs . They had been getting worse of late , he said .
The more time one spent at the complexes , the more it seemed as if every other person you talked to had lost their job or had their hours greatly reduced . And that was representative of broader trends . The Wall Street Journal reported that nearly 40 % of households earning less than $ 40,000 a year — a category that many in Kushnerville fall into — experienced at least one job loss in March , double the rate in households earning between $ 40,000 and $ 100,000 and triple that of those earning more than $ 100,000 .
A temporary hold on evictions has left residents of Whispering Woods waiting for what comes next . ( J.M . Giordano for ███ )
A few at Kushnerville that week were feeling more secure . Siera Ford was moving mattresses into her family ’ s new unit at another Kushner-owned complex , Harbor Point Estates . She was moving into a new unit because a ceiling pipe had burst at her family ’ s former unit at Harbor Point , destroying many of their belongings . This was the second time this had happened in their five years there , but , she said , at least the managers moved fairly quickly to get them into a new unit . “ They do accommodate , ” she said .
Ford had already paid her April rent and was confident of being able to pay on time in future months , as well , given her in-demand work as a delivery driver . “ My job is secure , ” she said . “ I ’ m Amazon . ”
For one Kushnerville family , the bar on evictions had not come in time , and their plight would only worsen as the economic downturn accelerated . Jennifer and Bob Scrimger had been living at Whispering Woods since 2015 with four children . She worked as a waitress at Chili ’ s and he did freelance computer-repair work . As time went on , they said , they started having more maintenance problems in their unit , especially water leaks , mold and mice . Troubles came to a head late last summer and fall , when water , apparently from the outdoor HVAC unit , began flowing into the downstairs , ruining the carpet and threatening the furniture . The Scrimgers put the furniture outside to protect it and management threatened to fine them for doing so . The mold worsened throughout the house , as did the mice , who were getting in through a hole under the kitchen sink .
All the troubles started taking a toll on Jennifer ’ s mental health . She started having panic attacks and stuttering , something she ’ d never done before , and she wondered whether the conditions in the house had a role in her getting bacterial infections on her feet . Her performance at Chili ’ s started to decline ; she had always ranked high in the customer ratings , which were posted on a big board for all to see , but she now fell to second from last . She eventually contacted a Baltimore County inspection officer , who produced a list of needed repairs for Westminster Management , among them repairing a hole in the living room ceiling , replacing the water-damaged kitchen cabinet , remediating mold in a bedroom and addressing the mice infestation .
But by that point , the company had already begun eviction proceedings . The Scrimgers had been paying their rent — $ 917 , plus about $ 50 in monthly water fees — but the eviction letter from the company ’ s law firm accused them of violating their lease by not letting a workman into the house , for not keeping the house in “ neat , clean , good and sanitary condition , ” and for having people in the house who weren ’ t on the lease . Jennifer Scrimger disputed the first claim . She took great offense at the second . “ They kept telling me it was my dirt , ” she said . “ I can ’ t make black dirt form on the ceiling . I don ’ t have that capability. ” And she said that management had full documentation on which kids lived in the house . More likely , she said , the family was being punished for complaining about the house ’ s problems .
Regardless , on Jan. 15 the Scrimgers were out for good , trailed by a nearly $ 2,000 bill of repair charges that Westminster said they owed . And for lack of alternative solutions , they settled on a less-than-ideal fallback : moving in with Bob ’ s ex-girlfriend , the mother of three of his children , in her trailer in a mobile-home park near Whispering Woods , hard by the Washington-New York Amtrak line . They paid the ex-girlfriend , who works the early-morning shift at a convenience store , $ 800 per month to have them . It was a very crowded fit : four kids and four adults , including the ex-girlfriend ’ s infirm and elderly father . The Scrimgers had talked about saving up to buy their own trailer in the mobile-home park , since this arrangement was clearly not sustainable . “ It ’ s a double-wide , but yeah , it is tight , ” Bob said .
And then came the shutdowns , which put the home-buying dreams on hold . On March 15 , Jennifer worked her last shift at Chili ’ s , which switched to takeout only . Bob ’ s computer-repair work grew scarce . Jennifer filed for unemployment benefits , but Maryland ’ s online application system buckled under the heavy demand . To try to get through , Jennifer would call on the phone , early on Sunday mornings . Their $ 1,200-per-person CARES Act payment never arrived , they said ; $ 1,450 was claimed to cover Bob ’ s child-support debts for another child , and the rest became hung up in bureaucratic limbo .
Scrimger and her children and stepchildren at the mobile home they are now living in . ( J.M . Giordano for ███ )
Meanwhile , Whispering Woods still remains very present in the family ’ s life . They are in close touch with their friends there , and Jennifer still keeps the binders in which she had kept all of her many communications with Westminster Management and the county inspector , to defend herself against a Kushner claim for the alleged back charges or perhaps provide evidence for her own legal claim against the company .
One evening in mid-April , they sat out in front of the trailer , as Jennifer flipped through the binders . Her daughter , Lilly , who has since turned 5 , came outside to ask what she was doing , and she told her she was talking about their house .
As millions of Americans lost their jobs , Kushnerville residents struggled with the state ’ s overwhelmed unemployment benefits website . ( J.M . Giordano for ███ )
Two weeks later , on April 29 , Jared Kushner praised the Trump administration ’ s response to the pandemic as a “ great success story ” on “ Fox and Friends. ” “ The federal government rose to the challenge and this is a great success story and I think that that ’ s really what needs to be told , ” he said . Kushner predicted a swift economic comeback . “ May will be a transition month . ... I think you will see by June , a lot of the country should be back to normal , and the hope is that by July the country is really rocking again , ” he said .
The next day , April would conclude with more than 20 million lost jobs and the worst unemployment rate since the Great Depression . The day before that interview , the country had topped 1 million in confirmed coronavirus cases .
On April 28 , another tenant stood outside her unit at Whispering Woods worrying how she was going to make May rent in a few days . The tenant , a woman in her 30s who also didn ’ t want her name used , had seen her hours at a medical billing company cut in half . She was one of the many to suffer from the ills of the health care industry , which despite the surge in demand for COVID-19 treatment was seeing virtually all of its other business fall away . “ They can ’ t fire me , because they still need me , but they can ’ t afford me , so we ’ re stuck , ” she said . Her Honda Civic had recently been repossessed , so to get to the office she took Ubers or caught rides with friends . She had started applying for a second job : Walmart , Amazon , Domino ’ s . She , too , had gotten the leniency letters , but she was worried how long that would last . “ We don ’ t got a voice here , ” she said . “ It ’ s Trump ’ s son-in-law that takes care of everything , so no matter you do , you ’ re going to get to get beat out in court . ”
A resident at one complex talks about being pressured for rent , even during the pandemic . ( J.M . Giordano for ███ )
There were some signs that the company ’ s forbearance was wearing thin . A few days earlier , a management-office employee had marched down to the home of the asphalt-crew worker to ask when they were going to pay their $ 1,200 April rent . His wife told the management employee that they were paying it week by week , a few hundred dollars at a time , just like they always did , even though doing so had incurred late fees before the crisis . And , as she later recounted , she demanded to know what would come after the eviction ban was lifted . “ When I give you all this money , are you going to turn around and put me out ? ’ That ’ s what I asked her . ‘ When all of this lifts up , are you going to be trying to put people out ? ’ If you ’ re going to hound us like that , you don ’ t want us here . ”
The management office had also been clashing with Alejandra Polanco , 44 , who had decided to move out after eight years in the complex because she was tired of all the leaks and other maintenance troubles in her unit . After she had informed them of her plan to leave , she said , the management office had retroactively charged her $ 200 more rent for each of the three past months , saying that her prior year ’ s lease had expired . It was tough for her to make the extra payments , since the seafood restaurant she worked at was now takeout only , but she was planning on paying them . “ I don ’ t want to hurt my credit , ” she said .
Also scrambling for their next rent payment , $ 950 , were the two young men who now lived in the Scrimgers ’ former unit . They had been in the same job-training class at Goodwill the year before . One , Corey Demery , 27 , had stayed on for a job there , driving a forklift at $ 11 per hour , but had lost the job as result of the crisis . The other , Delvonte Warren , 26 , had a job tryout just before the crisis hit at a Floor & Décor warehouse , but nothing came of it . He was thinking of getting a job at Taco Bell . His girlfriend , who also lived with them , was due with their first child in two months . “ It ’ s a hard time for it to happen , ” he said .
Around the country , the vast majority of tenants in complexes like Kushnerville were managing to get their April rent paid as the month neared its close . The National Multifamily Housing Council reported that as of April 26 , 91.5 % of renters in professionally managed buildings had made at least partial payments of that month ’ s rent , down only slightly from 95.6 % in the same month the year before . The CARES cash and unemployment benefits , which the federal government had enhanced by $ 600 per week , had served their purpose , at least for those who had made it through the balky application system for the latter .
It was hard to see , though , how the rent-payment rates would hold up in months to come . For many residents of Kushnerville , the CARES money was already out the door . The enhanced unemployment benefits were due to expire at the end of July . And in Maryland , the bar on eviction was due to be lifted once the governor declared an end to the coronavirus state of emergency . ( There is also a separate federal ban on evictions in buildings backed by federally financed mortgages , which applies to many Kushner complexes . That ban lasts until July 25 . )
Among those left grappling with the new eviction calculus as the calendar rolled into May was Shayla Milton . She had given birth to her second child a few weeks earlier , was on maternity leave from her job at one of the two big local Amazon warehouses and was trying to decide whether to go back when the leave ended in a few weeks . Her husband worked for Amazon , too , at the other warehouse , but he had stopped going to work because he was so worried about the risk of catching the coronavirus — there had been several cases at his warehouse . Amazon had for a while allowed workers to skip work without penalty , but that policy had ended May 1 . Milton had , while on maternity leave , started driving for Uber and was considering sticking with that for now . It seemed somehow easier to control her exposure to the coronavirus there , with the windows open and constant sanitizing of her car , than in the high-pressure whirlwind of the warehouse .
Looking around her , Milton wondered what would become of her neighbors after the crisis passed . “ Once that eviction ban is lifted , ” she said , “ I really think they ’ re going to kick everyone out that hasn ’ t been paying their rent . ”
But she and her family were soon going to move out of Kushnerville , she hoped , to buy a small house . She had gotten tired of the water leaking through the roof and the constant mice . “ We ’ re supposed to leave in a few months , ” Milton said . “ I can ’ t wait . ”
Even a moment that should have offered hope , or at least a respite — the first full day of a partial relaxation of local stay-at-home orders on May 16 — only brought horror in Kushnerville . Police responding to a nuisance call in Cove Village after a cook-out shot and killed a 29-year-old local man with a gun . ( The police portrayed it as self-defense ; one witness told The Baltimore Sun the man had dropped the gun and fled . )
Two days later , there were still traces of the violence along the curb : disposable medical gloves and plastic wrappers for defibrillator electrodes and bandages . Bullet holes were visible in one door frame .
Deja Byrd , who works in a warehouse for the spice manufacturer McCormick ’ s , heard the shooting that night but thought at first that it was firecrackers . When she learned later what had in fact happened , she was not entirely surprised . “ Their patience is wearing thin , ” she said . Did she mean the patience of the police or residents ? “ Everyone , ” she said .