There was supposed to be a peak . But the stark turning point , when the number of daily COVID-19 cases in the U.S. finally crested and began descending sharply , never happened . Instead , America spent much of April on a disquieting plateau , with every day bringing about 30,000 new cases and about 2,000 new deaths . The graphs were more mesa than Matterhorn—flat-topped , not sharp-peaked . Only this month has the slope started gently heading downward . This pattern exists because different states have experienced the coronavirus pandemic in very different ways . In the most severely pummeled places , like New York and New Jersey , COVID-19 is waning . In Texas and North Carolina , it is still taking off . In Oregon and South Carolina , it is holding steady . These trends average into a national plateau , but each state ’ s pattern is distinct . Currently , Hawaii ’ s looks like a child ’ s drawing of a mountain . Minnesota ’ s looks like the tip of a hockey stick . Maine ’ s looks like a ( two-humped ) camel . The U.S. is dealing with a patchwork pandemic .
What ’ s happening is not one crisis , but many interconnected ones . As we shall see , it will be harder to come to terms with such a crisis . It will be harder to bring it to heel . And it will be harder to grapple with the historical legacies that have shaped today ’ s patchwork . I . The Patchwork Experience A patchwork pandemic is psychologically perilous . The measures that most successfully contain the virus—testing people , tracing any contacts they might have infected , isolating them from others—all depend on “ how engaged and invested the population is , ” says Justin Lessler , an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins . “ If you have all the resources in the world and an antagonistic relationship with the people , you ’ ll fail. ” Testing matters only if people agree to get tested . Tracing succeeds only if people pick up the phone . And if those fail , the measure of last resort—social distancing—works only if people agree to sacrifice some personal freedom for the good of others . Such collective actions are aided by collective experiences . What happens when that experience unravels ? “ We had a strong sense of shared purpose when everything first hit , ” says Danielle Allen , a political scientist at Harvard . But that communal mindset may dissipate as the virus strikes one community and spares another , and as some people hit the beaches while others are stuck at home . Patchworks of risk and response “ will make it really hard for the public to get a crisp understanding of what ’ s happening , ” Rivers says .
In one future scenario , the nation splinters . When national news diverges from local reality , “ suspicions about whether the epidemic was a hoax will find fertile ground in places with a more ambiguous experience of the disease , ” says Martha Lincoln , a medical anthropologist at San Francisco State University . Confused people will retreat to the comfort of preexisting ideologies . The White House ’ s baseless attempts to claim victory will further divide the already fragmented states of America . “ In the face of medical uncertainty , people make decisions by returning to their own groups , which are very polarized , ” says Elaine Hernandez , a sociologist at Indiana University Bloomington . “ They ’ ll want to avoid being stigmatized , so they ’ ll follow what people in their networks are doing [ even if ] they don ’ t really want to go out. ” Read : Why the coronavirus hits kids and adults so differently Prevention is physically rewarding in the long term , but not emotionally rewarding in the short term . People who stay home won ’ t feel a pleasant dopamine kick from their continued health . Those who flock together will feel hugs and sunshine . The former will be tempted to join the latter . The media could heighten that temptation by offering what Lincoln calls “ disparity in spectacle. ” Fringe exceptions like anti-lockdown protests and packed restaurants , she says , are more dramatic and telegenic than people responsibly staying at home , and so more likely to be covered . The risk is that rare acts of incaution will seem like normal behavior .
“ There ’ s a natural saturation point for images of health systems in crisis , ” Lincoln adds , and newly overwhelmed hospitals might be ignored in favor of fresher narratives . The local media are better positioned to pick up the nuances of a patchwork story , but of the counties that had reported cases of COVID-19 by early April , 37 percent had lost their local newspaper in the past 15 years . If the virus does indeed resurge and states need to shut down again , people may not comply , because they ’ ll be misinformed and distrustful . A second future is also possible . “ When this outbreak began in China , everyone said , Thank God it ’ s not here , ” Jha says . “ It moved to Western Europe and people said , They have government-run health care ; that won ’ t happen here . Then it hit New York and Seattle , and people said , It ’ s the coasts . At every moment , it ’ s more tempting to define the other who is suffering , as opposed to seeing the commonalities we all share. ” But as the virus spreads , Americans may run out of others to discriminate against . “ Crises are political only until they are personal , ” wrote the journalist Elaina Plott , in a piece about a Louisiana woman who convinced her conservative friends to take the coronavirus seriously after her own husband fell sick . Similarly , President Donald Trump ’ s claims that the virus will go away on its own will ring false to supporters who know someone fighting for breath .
There are signs that this is happening . While Trump ’ s popularity predictably surged during the crisis , his “ rally around the flag ” boost was a blip compared with the prolonged peaks of other leaders . Polls have also shown that pandemic partisanship is narrowing , with Democrats and Republicans more united in how seriously they view the threat . Beth Redbird , a sociologist at Northwestern University , has been surveying 200 people a day since mid-March , and “ 70 to 75 percent of people support most social-distancing measures , ” she says . “ Those are really large numbers in a society where 52 percent is often viewed as huge support . We rarely see that outside of authoritarian polling . Americans are by and large reading information in a very similar way. ” Economic indicators support this view . Even in conservative states , activity plummeted before leaders closed businesses , and hasn ’ t rebounded since restrictions were lifted . As such , Redbird doesn ’ t share the widely held fear that Americans have become inured to social distancing and will refuse to suffer through it again . The bigger risk , she says , is that demoralizing bouts of shutdowns and reopenings will nix any prospect of economic recovery . “ You only get to say Go out , trust me once , ” she says . “ They won ’ t believe you the second time. ” Both possible futures are confounded by three aspects of COVID-19 that make the pandemic hard to grasp , and that are amplified by the patchwork effect . First , the disease progresses slowly . It seems to take an average of four or five days , and a maximum of 14 , for an infected person to show symptoms . Those symptoms can take even longer to become severe enough for a hospital stay , and longer still to turn fatal . This means that new infections can take weeks to manifest in regional statistics . May ’ s declining cases are the result of April ’ s physical distancing , and the consequences of May ’ s reopenings won ’ t be felt until June at the earliest . This long gap between actions and their consequences makes it easy to learn the wrong lessons .
Read : Why some people get sicker than others Second , the pandemic is shaped by many factors . Social distancing matters , but so do testing capacity , population density , age structure , wealth , societal collectivism , and luck . Many countries that successfully controlled the coronavirus used masks ; New Zealand did not . Many had decisive leaders ; Hong Kong did not . It is easy to look at a patchwork and create just-so stories about why one place succumbed while another triumphed . But no single factor can explain differences across nations or regions . Third , the disease spreads unevenly . Some cases infect no one , and others infect many . In Washington State , a choir member infected 51 fellow singers during a few hours of rehearsal . In Ghana , a worker in a fish factory infected 533 colleagues . These “ super-spreader events , ” which are rare but pivotal , become especially important when cases dip . They mean that an untroubled region may continue that way for some time , but that once cases start growing , they can really grow . If a state reopens and sees no immediate spike in cases , is that because it was justified , because insufficient time has passed , because other things went right , or because unlucky super-spreader events haven ’ t yet happened ? In a patchwork , these questions will be asked millions of times over , and many answers will be wrong . The COVID-19 pandemic is not a hurricane or some other disaster that will come and go , signaling an obvious moment when recovery can begin . It is not like the epidemics of fiction , which get worse until , after some medical breakthrough , they get better . It is messier , patchier , and thus harder to predict , control , or understand . “ We ’ re in that zone that we don ’ t see movies made about , ” says Lindsay Wiley , a professor of public-health law at American University .
II . The Patchwork Response A patchwork was inevitable , especially when a pandemic unfolds over a nation as large as the U.S . But the White House has intensified it by devolving responsibility to the states . There is some sense to that . American public health works at a local level , delivered by more than 3,000 departments that serve specific cities , counties , tribes , and states . This decentralized system is a strength : An epidemiologist in rural Minnesota knows the needs and vulnerabilities of her community better than a federal official in Washington , D.C . But in a pandemic , the actions of 50 uncoordinated states will be less than the sum of their parts . Only the federal government has pockets deep enough to fund the extraordinary public-health effort now needed . Only it can coordinate the production of medical supplies to avoid local supply-chain choke points , and then ensure that said supplies are distributed according to need , rather than influence . Instead , Trump has repeatedly told governors to procure their own tests and medical supplies . Read : Trump is putting himself at risk for COVID-19 Michael Kilkenny of the Cabell-Huntington Health Department , in West Virginia , says his state found itself short on swabs , disinfectant , and protective equipment ; unable to compete in the global market ; and abandoned by the White House . “ It felt terrible , ” he says . “ We ’ ve been making homemade masks , or using bleach solutions . We had to fend for ourselves. ” While reporting on pandemics in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2018 , I heard health-care workers repeatedly joke that the 15th article of the country ’ s constitution is “ Débrouillez-vous ” —French for “ Figure it out yourself. ” It ’ s a droll resignation that when resources are scarce , the government won ’ t fix your problems , and it ’ s on you to make do . The U.S. , a country that ’ s more than 400 times wealthier , has seemingly adopted “ Débrouillez-vous ” as national policy .
Even health officials in well-off states aren ’ t comfortable with a situation in which preparedness has more to do with wealth and connections than need . “ We have everything we need , ” says Angela Dunn , the state epidemiologist for Utah , where Governor Gary Herbert moved quickly to buy and secure tests and supplies . “ But we did it in a very capitalistic way , and that ’ s not the best way to deal with a pandemic. ” States have tried to level the playing field on their own . Wyoming ended up with few cases but a glut of testing reagents , which it provided to Colorado and Utah when those states saw spikes , Dunn says . “ There ’ s a small barter system , but it ’ s not sustainable and it doesn ’ t work at scale , ” she says . “ I don ’ t know if Colorado is lacking supplies . If they have a huge spike , that ’ ll impact Utah . It ’ s in our interests to make sure everyone ’ s protected , and without federal coordination , that ’ s hard to do. ” In some cases , the federal government has actively undermined the states . Charlie Baker , the Republican governor of Massachusetts , tried to buy protective equipment , but was thrice outbid by the federal government ; he ended up using the New England Patriots ’ jet to fly 1.2 million masks over from China , many of which turned out to be faulty . When Larry Hogan , Maryland ’ s Republican governor , procured 500,000 tests from South Korea , he kept them guarded in an undisclosed location so they wouldn ’ t be seized by the feds . This is not federalism working as intended , where different tiers of government work together . Instead of devolving control to the states , the Trump administration has ceded the U.S. to the virus .
The U.S. now heads into summer only slightly more prepared to handle the pandemic that cost it so dearly in the spring . According to the COVID Tracking Project at ███ , the U.S. is now testing 366,000 people a day—a record high . But experts estimate that the country needs 500,000 to several million daily tests . Here , too , a patchwork is apparent . An analysis by NPR and Harvard ’ s Global Health Institute showed that in early May , only nine states were doing sufficient testing , and another 31 weren ’ t even halfway to their requisite threshold . “ I would have hoped for more , considering the cost of that time , ” says Natalie Dean , a statistician at the University of Florida . Stay-at-home orders were necessary but ruinous , economically and emotionally . Their purpose was to buy time for the country to catch its breath , steel its hospitals , and roll out a public-health plan capable of quashing the virus . Many such plans exist . Umpteen think tanks and academics have produced their own road maps for dialing society back up . These vary in their details , but are united in at least having some . By contrast , the Trump administration ’ s guidelines for “ opening up America again ” are so bereft of operational specifics that they ’ re like a cake recipe that simply reads , “ Make cake. ” The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention prepared a more detailed guide but was blocked from releasing it by the White House , according to an Associated Press report . The guidance it has released seems carefully worded to avoid the term guidelines , as if it ’ s “ trying to fly under the radar , ” Wiley says . “ The abdication of federal responsibility has left states with little choice but to ease the most disruptive physical-distancing measures without the testing data that would make us more confident that cases won ’ t rapidly surge. ” ( The CDC finally and quietly released a slightly abridged version of its fuller report on Tuesday . )
Read : There ’ s one big reason the U.S. economy can ’ t reopen The Trump administration “ isn ’ t known for consistency of messaging , so we ’ ll never put our full faith in that , ” says Kilkenny of West Virginia . “ We pretty much ran our own state here. ” At the time of this writing , only five states and the District of Columbia are still under some form of lockdown . A few , such as Alaska , Hawaii , and Montana , eased restrictions after their caseloads had fallen to low single digits . Idaho is reopening cautiously , despite being one of the less affected states . Georgia went all in on April 24 , reopening gyms , restaurants , theaters , salons , and bowling alleys at a point when it had five of the 10 counties with the highest COVID-19 death rates nationwide , and was testing just a fifth as many people as it needed to . By contrast , Utah revived businesses a week later , when it had more than enough tests for everyone with symptoms , all their contacts , high-risk groups , and even random slices of the populace . Still , Dunn , the state epidemiologist , is nervous . “ If we could stick it out for even a couple more months of stricter social distancing , it would do us a world of benefit , ” she says . “ There are embers everywhere , and they could ignite any moment. ” Some states never put their fires out at all : Texas , Alabama , Kansas , Arizona , Mississippi , North Carolina , Wisconsin , and others all reopened while cases were still rising .
Anne Applebaum : The rest of the world is laughing at Trump Legality aside , domestic-travel bans are of limited use . Even China ’ s extraordinary quarantine of Wuhan merely delayed the virus from reaching other parts of the mainland by three to five days . Much like social distancing , such measures only buy time . The better strategy is not to try and prevent the virus from traveling , but to build a public-health system nimble enough to catch it when it arrives . Don ’ t build one big wall ; instead , ready a thousand nets . In this , the U.S. is also behind . Prevented health threats are less visible than present ones , which means that successful public-health departments tragically make the case for their own diminishment . Since 2008 , underfunded local departments have lost more than 50,000 jobs . Even now , Cincinnati ’ s health department has furloughed 36 percent of its staff . “ How can you have a system that ’ s meant to be at the front line of the defense while it ’ s losing the staff it needs ? ” Alleyne asks . Some states are trying to make up for these losses by hiring battalions of contact tracers . These people will call every infected person , talk through their needs , ask for names of anyone they ’ ve had close or prolonged contact with in the past two days , and call those contacts , too . The process isn ’ t complicated , but it is laborious . Experts have estimated that the U.S. needs 100,000 to 300,000 contact tracers , and the nation has been slow to recruit them . Selena Simmons-Duffin of NPR reported that only North Dakota had recruited enough as of May 7 , although six more states and the District of Columbia were set to .
Things are improving , though . When Danielle Allen of Harvard canvassed several mayors in mid-April , they weren ’ t taking contact tracing seriously . When she spoke with them again in May , “ they were on top of it , ” she says . “ I was blown away by how much changed in three weeks. ” New York State alone is planning to hire 6,000 to 17,000 contact tracers , while California is aiming for 20,000 . “ This really is the best tool we have to manage the pandemic until we have a safe and effective vaccine , ” says Crystal Watson at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security . Will this system , combined with mask wearing and hand-washing , be enough to contain a patchwork pandemic ? Complicating matters , people with COVID-19 can spread the coronavirus before showing symptoms . And yet , that hasn ’ t fazed other countries . South Korea has been rightly praised for its success , and though one nightclub-goer recently sparked a surge of at least 168 cases , the country seems to have contained this new outbreak too . Basic public-health measures have similarly worked in countries as diverse as Iceland , Jordan , Singapore , Germany , and New Zealand . And they have suppressed epidemics of the past , from smallpox in the 19th century to Ebola in 2014 . “ Some silver bullet isn ’ t going to save us . We can save ourselves , ” says Gregg Gonsalves , an epidemiologist at Yale . “ We have very old-school tools that beat fucking smallpox . ”
These inequities will likely widen . Even before the pandemic , inequalities in poverty and access to health care “ were concentrated in southern parts of the country , and in states that are politically red , ” says Tiffany Joseph , a sociologist at Northeastern University . Not coincidentally , she says , those same states have tended to take social-distancing measures less seriously and reopen earlier . The price of those decisions will be disproportionately paid by black people . Adam Serwer : The coronavirus was an emergency until Trump found out who was dying Vulnerability to COVID-19 isn ’ t just about frequently discussed biological factors like being old ; it ’ s also about infrequently discussed social ones . If people don ’ t have health insurance , or can afford to live only in areas with poorly funded hospitals , they can not fight off the virus as those with more advantages can . If people work in poor-paying jobs that can ’ t be done remotely , have to commute by public transportation , or live in crowded homes , they can not protect themselves from infection as those with more privilege can . These social factors explain why the idea of “ cocooning ” vulnerable populations while the rest of society proceeds as normal is facile . That cocooning already exists , and it is a bug of the system , not a feature . Entire groups of people have been pushed to the fringes of society and jammed into potential hot zones . Of the 100 largest clusters of COVID-19 in the U.S. , nearly all have occurred in prisons , meatpacking plants , nursing homes , and psychiatric or developmental-care facilities . ( The only exceptions are a naval vessel and three power plants ; the infamous Grand Princess cruise is only No . 148 on the list . )
These places , along with homeless shelters and immigrant detention centers , are hubs for outbreaks that can easily spread to the surrounding communities . Prisons and nursing homes have staff and visitors who live in nearby towns . Large prisons , in particular , are usually situated in rural areas with small community hospitals that can be easily overrun by an outbreak . And many employees in nursing homes and meatpacking plants are immigrants who care for the nation ’ s elderly and process its steaks while also being cut off from health care by the Trump administration ’ s policies . They are both more likely to get sick , and less likely to get better . This point can not be overstated : The pandemic patchwork exists because the U.S. is a patchwork to its core . New outbreaks will continue to flare and fester unless the country makes a serious effort to protect its most vulnerable citizens , recognizing that their risk is the result of societal failures , not personal ones . “ People say you can ’ t fix the U.S. health system overnight , but if we ’ re not fixing these underlying problems , we won ’ t get out of this , ” says Sheila Davis of Partners in Health . “ We ’ ll just keep getting pop-ups. ” Leaders can specifically place testing sites in poor , black , and brown communities , rather than the rich , white areas where they tend to be concentrated . New York Governor Andrew Cuomo , for example , is turning 24 churches in low-income areas into testing centers , while Maryland Governor Larry Hogan placed a testing facility in the heart of the predominantly black Prince George ’ s County . Officials can remove people from risky environments : Leann Bertsch , who directs the North Dakota Department of Corrections , has argued that prisoners should be freed if they are over 50 , have serious illnesses , or are within two years of parole or release . A bipartisan group of 14 senators has made a similar call for decarceration .
Policies can also support people in protecting themselves . Essential workers earn low hourly wages and can not afford to miss a shift , even if they have symptoms . “ The only way to prevent them from going to work is to give them paid sick leave , ” Ray says . The same goes for a minimum living wage , hazard pay , universal health care , stipends for people who are self-isolating , debt moratoriums , rent freezes , food assistance , and services to connect people with existing support . The pandemic discourse has been dominated by medical countermeasures like antibody tests ( which are currently too unreliable ) , drugs ( which are not cure-alls ) , and vaccines ( which are almost certainly at least a year away ) . But social solutions like paid sick leave , which two in three low-wage workers do not have , can be implemented immediately . Imagine if the energy that went into debating the merits of hydroxychloroquine went into ensuring hazard pay , or if the president , instead of wondering out loud if disinfectant could be injected into the body , advocated for health care for all ? “ We have decades of social-science research that tells us these things work , ” says Courtney Boen , a sociologist at the University of Pennsylvania . “ It ’ s a question of political will , not scientific discovery. ” And while a vaccine will protect against only COVID-19 ( if people agree to take it at all ) , social interventions will protect against the countless diseases that may emerge in the future , along with chronic illnesses , maternal mortality , and other causes of poor health . “ This pandemic won ’ t be the last health crisis the U.S. faces , ” Boen says . “ If we want to be on better footing the next time , we want to reduce the things that put people at risk of being at risk. ” Of all the threats we know , the COVID-19 pandemic is most like a very rapid version of climate change—global in its scope , erratic in its unfolding , and unequal in its distribution . And like climate change , there is no easy fix . Our choices are to remake society or let it be remade , to smooth the patchworks old and new or let them fray even further .