The Food and Drug Administration has expanded the number of hand sanitizers to avoid because they may contain methanol , a toxic substance when absorbed through skin or ingested .
The FDA now lists on a chart 59 varieties of hand sanitizer that should be avoided , some which have already been recalled , and other products being recommended for recalls as they may contain the potentially fatal ingredient .
All of the products in the FDA 's latest methanol update appear to have been produced in Mexico .
The FDA says it has `` seen a sharp increase in hand sanitizer products that are labeled to contain ethanol ( also known as ethyl alcohol ) but that have tested positive for methanol contamination . ''
Save better , spend better : Money tips and advice delivered right to your inbox . Sign up here
In June , the FDA warned consumers not to use nine kinds of hand sanitizers because they may contain methanol , and added to the list in early July .
`` Methanol is not an acceptable active ingredient for hand sanitizers and must not be used due to its toxic effects , '' the FDA said , noting its investigation of methanol in certain hand sanitizers is ongoing .
Tax Day 2020 freebies ? : July free food events including 7-Eleven 's Free Slurpee Day have been canceled due to COVID-19
'Wearing a mask is not about fear ' : Retailer group urges governors to require everyone to wear a mask
Methanol is used industrially as a solvent , pesticide and alternative fuel source , according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Exposure to it can cause nausea , vomiting , headache , blurred vision , permanent blindness , seizures , coma , permanent damage to the nervous system and death .
The CDC says hand-washing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds is the best way to clean your hands , but when that 's not an option , the agency recommends using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60 % alcohol .
Children who accidentally ingest hand sanitizer and young people who drink hand sanitizer as an alcohol substitute are at an increased risk for methanol poisoning , the FDA said .
Hand sanitizer has been a popular product to combat the coronavirus since February , and many new types have entered the market after shortages of brands including Purell .
The FDA is advising consumers not to use the following hand sanitizers because tests found them to contain methanol or that they were `` purportedly made at the same facility as products in which FDA has tested and confirmed methanol contamination . '' The FDA also says to avoid sanitizers from the companies .
Find more information , including the product code where available on the FDA website .
4E Global 's Blumen Clear Advanced Hand Sanitizer with 70 % Alcohol
4E Global 's Blumen Advanced Instant Hand Sanitizer Clear Ethyl Alcohol 70 %
4E Global 's KLAR AND DANVER Instant Hand Sanitizer ( labeled with Greenbrier International Inc . )
4E Global 's MODESA Instant Hand Sanitizer Moisturizers and Vitamin E
4E Global 's BLUMEN Aloe Advanced Hand Sanitizer , with 70 Alcohol
4E Global 's Blumen Advanced Hand Sanitizer Lavender , with 70 % alcohol
4E Global 's Blumen Advanced Hand Sanitizer Aloe , with 70 % alcohol
4E Global 's Assured Instant Hand Sanitizer ( Vitamin E and Aloe )
4E Global 's Assured Instant Hand Sanitizer Vitamin E and Aloe
DDI Multinacional 's Earths Amenities Instant Unscented Hand Sanitizer with Aloe Vera Advanced
DDI Multinacional 's Vidanos Easy Cleaning Rentals Hand Sanitizer Agavespa Skincare
Soluciones Cosmeticas ’ Hand sanitizer ( labeled with Wet Look Janitorial and Gardening Corp . )
Yara Elena De La Garza Perez Nieto 's DAESI hand sanitizer
The following products have been recalled as of July 11 :