A federal plan to house cruise ship passengers who tested positive for the coronavirus at a facility in Alabama was met with a resounding no thanks by state officials who may have forced authorities to shelve the idea .
Globally , the death toll from the virus topped 2,600 on Sunday night , with more than 79,000 confirmed cases . The U.S. has 35 confirmed cases .
The plan called for the FEMA Center for Domestic Preparedness in Anniston to be used as a coronavirus quarantine center for some American passengers evacuated from the Diamond Princess cruise ship stuck in Japan . Most of the evacuees involved are housed now at military bases in Texas , Colorado and California .
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services had said the center was selected because of its `` unique facilities . '' Only patients with minor symptoms – or none at all – would go to Anniston under the plan . Any evacuees who become seriously ill would be taken to `` pre-identified '' hospitals , HHS said .
The plan drew a quick and negative response from the mayor , the governor and multiple Alabama congressmen .
`` The people of Alabama DO NOT want the coronavirus brought here , '' Rep. Bradley Byrne said on Twitter . `` I ’ m fighting to bring this to a full stop . Leave these people in the place they came to , don ’ t spread them around the US , and keep them OUT of Alabama . The risk is much too high . ''
Rep. Mike Rogers said he had spoken with President Donald Trump , who Rogers said agreed that the HHS plan was the `` wrong decision . ''
Gov . Kay Ivey said Sunday that the HHS announcement was `` inadvertently , and perhaps prematurely , sent . '' She said she learned through a series of conference calls that Anniston was being considered only as a backup plan and that no decision had been made to send anyone to Anniston .
Ivey said her state wants to assist fellow Americans but cited `` grave concerns '' over how Anniston was chosen .
`` First and foremost , my priority is to protect the people of Alabama , '' Ivey said in a statement . `` While locating these folks in Alabama is currently a backup plan , this is a serious issue and we need to be fully aware of the facts regarding the potential of housing them in Anniston . ''
Worldwide , South Korea went on its highest alert Sunday , reporting its sixth and seventh coronavirus deaths and announcing that cases have surpassed 760 . President Moon Jae-in raised the virus alert level to red , the highest in its four-tier system , for the first time in more than a decade . Schools that were supposed to open in a week will be delayed until March 9 .
Health Minister Park Neung-hoo said the next seven or 10 days will be crucial in combating the virus . `` The COVID-19 is spreading quickly , but it is limited within a specific region and group , '' Park said .
In China , President Xi Jinping pledged unrelenting efforts to control the outbreak that has killed more than 2,400 of his countrymen . `` The epidemic situation remains grim and complex , and it is now a most crucial moment to curb the spread , '' Xi told state media . More than 77,000 of the infection cases are in mainland China .
The silver lining : More than 24,000 of those patients have been confirmed as `` totally recovered . ''
President Hassan Rouhani issued a decree setting up a national committee for managing the epidemic , which has killed eight people in the country – the highest death toll outside China . Another 43 cases have been confirmed .
Cultural centers , schools and universities in 14 provinces were ordered closed , and Turkey closed its border with Iran . Sylvie Briand , director of global infectious hazard preparedness at the World Health Organization , expressed concern over the `` very rapid increase in a matter of a few days '' in the country .