Sioux tribes in the US state of South Dakota are refusing to remove coronavirus checkpoints they set up on roads which pass through their land .
South Dakota Governor Kristi Noem wrote to several tribal leaders last week saying the checkpoints were illegal .
But the Sioux say they are the only way of making sure the virus does not enter their reservations .
Their limited healthcare facilities would not be able to cope with an outbreak , they say .
At present , people are only allowed to enter the reservations for essential business if they have not travelled from a Covid-19 hotspot .
They must also complete a health questionnaire before doing so .
Ms Noem is threatening to take the two tribes - the Oglala Sioux and the Cheyenne River Sioux tribes - to federal court if they do not comply .
In a letter sent to their representatives on Friday , she demanded the checkpoints be removed .
`` The checkpoints on state and US highways are not legal , and if they do n't come down , the state will take the matter to federal court , as Governor Noem noted in her Friday letter , '' her senior adviser and policy director , Maggie Seidel , said in an email sent to the local Argus Leader newspaper on Sunday .
Tribes are meant to get permission from state authorities if they want to close or restrict travel inside their reservations .
The chairman of the Cheyenne River Sioux tribe , Harold Frazier , issued a statement in response to the governor on Friday , saying : `` We will not apologise for being an island of safety in a sea of uncertainty and death . ''
`` You continuing to interfere in our efforts to do what science and facts dictate seriously undermine our ability to protect everyone on the reservation , '' he added .
Oglala Sioux President Julian Bear Runner says Ms Noem 's decision `` threatened the sovereign interest of the Oglala people '' .
`` Due to the lack of judgment in planning of preventative measures in response to the current pandemic , Covid-19 , the Oglala Sioux Tribe has adopted reasonable and necessary measures to protect the health and safety of our tribal members and our other residents of the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation , '' he is quoted as saying by the Argus Leader .
Mr Frazier says the main purpose of the checkpoints is to monitor and try to track the virus . `` We want to ensure that people coming from 'hotspots ' or highly infected areas , we ask them to go around our land , '' he told CNN .
`` With the lack of resources we have medically , this is our best tool we have right now to try to prevent [ the spread of Covid-19 ] , '' he added .
He says the reservations are ill-equipped to deal with a coronavirus outbreak , with the nearest critical care facilities three hours away .
The Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe only operates an eight-bed facility on the reservation and no intensive care unit for the 12,000 people that live on the reservation , he adds .
South Dakota is one of a handful of US states which have not issued stay-at-home order to their residents .
There were 198 cases of Covid-19 among Native Americans in the state as of Sunday , according to state health department figures quoted by CNN . The state has more than 3,500 confirmed cases and at least 34 deaths , according to Johns Hopkins University .
The US has the highest number of virus deaths and cases in the world - but it also has one of the biggest populations , and widespread testing .