In a tense moment near the climax of the 2016 sci-fi film Arrival , Louise Banks ( Amy Adams ) tries to explain to a military commander why it ’ s not just the words they teach to their alien visitors that matter , but also the framing and grammar they use to teach those words .
“ Let ’ s say that I taught them chess instead of English , ” she says . “ Every conversation would be a game . Every idea expressed through opposition , victory , defeat . You see the problem ? If all I ever gave you was a hammer ... ”
“ Everything ’ s a nail , ” the commander says , suddenly catching on to her meaning . With Banks ’ s help , the US government has been trying to communicate with aliens , 12 groups of which have landed on Earth and are communicating with different governments . In China , linguists are attempting to teach the country ’ s alien visitors to communicate through mahjong , a game that involves tiles printed with characters , rather than the more complicated language of Mandarin .
But Banks says that a recent alien communication the Chinese interpreted as a threat may not have been a threat at all ; it ’ s simply that the paradigm , the metaphor , through which they ’ ve been learning to communicate has a built-in bias toward concepts like winning , opposition , defeat , and wielding weapons .
Arrival applies this idea to a sci-fi story , but the notion that language shapes the way we think isn ’ t science fiction — it ’ s a widely discussed linguistic theory . The American linguist Benjamin Whorf , working in the 1940s , is responsible for the theory ’ s modern incarnation . After studying the Hopi language , spoken by native Americans in parts of Arizona , he posited that they understood things that are part of everyone ’ s “ reality ” — for instance , the passage of time — in a fundamentally different way than Americans who speak English . ( In Arrival , Banks explicitly refers to the “ Sapir-Whorf hypothesis , ” the name for this theory . )
Banks is a fictional linguist , and Sapir-Whorf is a contested linguistic hypothesis , not a strictly rhetorical discussion topic . But I find the way she speaks about the chess “ language ” useful as a means of explaining something a little closer to home : the effects that the metaphors we use to talk about non-human threats — specifically pandemics — have on the way we as people confront those threats .
Why are we tempted to treat Covid-19 — the disease caused by the coronavirus — like a terrorist force , to not “ let the virus win ” ? Why do we talk about medical professionals as if they are soldiers on the front lines of a war , rather than scientists and practitioners studying and caring for the health of others ? Is it possible that saying “ we are at war ” prevents us from seeing all of the ways we can both end this pandemic and prepare for the next one ?
Are we framing our current struggle to save lives and find a cure as a deadly battle or game of chess , when it ’ s really something else ?
War is a common metaphor for a pandemic — regardless of time , geography , or political persuasion
On March 22 , nine days after he declared a national emergency , President Donald Trump spoke to reporters about the lens through which , after weeks of stalling , he had come to view the threat that the coronavirus poses to American citizens .
“ A number of people have said it , but — and I feel it , actually : I ’ m a wartime president , ” he said . “ This is a war . This is a war . A different kind of war than we ’ ve ever had . ”
He continued : “ And when you look at the economics of the war — in the past , we used to stimulate to get people jobs . Now we ’ re stimulating to protect people because we don ’ t want them to work , because we want them to stay away from each other . ”
There are plenty of reasons for a president to position themselves as a wartime president , particularly in an election year : Presidents often see an uptick in popularity and public support in times of crisis . Trump has worked hard to make sure he is seen , at least by his supporters , within that framework . America is in a “ historic battle to safeguard the lives of our citizens. ” We are at war , “ fighting the coronavirus on every possible front . ”
Going to war requires identifying the enemy , something Trump has never had much trouble doing . Since the coronavirus emerged , he has repeatedly taken aim at old standbys — the “ Opposition Party ( Lamestream Media ) ” and the Democrats — as well as a range of newer targets , from China ( and the “ Chinese virus ” ) to companies like 3M to governors begging for more medical supplies for their states to a more nebulous “ Invisible Enemy ” he ’ s begun referring to in tweets :
The Invisible Enemy will soon be in full retreat ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) April 10 , 2020
With the courage of our doctors and nurses , with the skill of our scientists and innovators , with the determination of the American People , and with the grace of God , WE WILL WIN THIS WAR , ” he tweeted on March 28 . “ When we achieve this victory , we will emerge stronger and more united than ever before ! ”
It ’ s plainly obvious that Trump isn ’ t the first person to use war as a metaphor for fighting a virus , nor is he the only leader to evoke war while speaking about efforts to save lives and find cures . The metaphor isn ’ t linked to a particular political party or persuasion , either : In his March 30 press briefing , Democratic New York Governor Andrew Cuomo , who has likened health care workers to “ troops , ” explicitly agreed with Trump :
In this situation , there are no red states , and there are no blue states , and there are no red casualties , and there are no blue casualties . It is red , white and blue . This virus doesn ’ t discriminate . It attacks everyone , and it attacks everywhere . The president said this is a war . I agree with that . This is a war . Then let ’ s act that way , and let ’ s act that way now . And let ’ s show a commonality in a mutuality and a unity that this country has not seen in decades , because the lord knows we need it today more than ever before .
Dr. Richard Hatchett , CEO of the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations and a former member of the George W. Bush and Barack Obama administrations , has also said that war is an appropriate analogy for fighting the coronavirus . And he comes from a position of knowledge : In 2005 and 2006 , Hatchett was the director for biodefense policy on the White House Homeland Security Council , and he was a principal author of the National Strategy for Pandemic Influenza Implementation Plan .
Using war as a metaphor for illness during a pandemic or global crisis is not just a contemporary occurrence . “ There is an ancient and cross-cultural tendency to frame disease in terms of war , ” Lisa Keranen told me . Keranen is an associate professor of communications at the University of Colorado Denver and a medical rhetorician who studies how we speak about viruses and other biological threats . She noted that some scholars have located centuries-old uses in China of defensive and martial language to talk about defending your health .
J. Blake Scott , a professor at the University of Central Florida who studies medical rhetoric and has focused on the AIDS crisis of the 1980s , agreed . “ There are lots of reasons why that metaphor took hold , ” Scott told me . In fact , he said , war as metaphor for fighting a pandemic has bubbled up across human history .
“ I think there are political reasons for that , ” he said . “ But more broadly , there are cultural reasons and historical patterns . Diseases accompany wars ; we use military resources to combat disease and pandemics . Wars are thought of as winnable ; you have winners and losers. ” He also said that at times , people with diseases like cancer and diabetes find that war metaphors are empowering and effective in increasing morale . “ That could maybe work collectively , too — there ’ s this communal mobilization , ” he added .
And though you can ’ t scare a virus the way you can frighten an enemy , we still use that metaphor because it makes sense to us intuitively . “ Even before we knew what a virus was , sickness is often cast as an invader to your system , something from outside , ” Keranen said .
This is a phenomenon that the writer Susan Sontag explored at length in her seminal 1978 essay “ Illness as Metaphor , ” which was collected in 1989 with her follow-up essay , “ AIDS and Its Metaphors. ” Sontag writes extensively of the war-like nature of metaphors used for cancer :
The controlling metaphors in descriptions of cancer are , in fact , drawn not from economics but from the language of warfare : every physician and every attentive patient is familiar with , if perhaps inured to , this military terminology . Thus , cancer cells do not simply multiply ; they are “ invasive. ” ( “ Malignant tumors invade even when they grow very slowly , ” as one textbook puts it . ) Cancer cells “ colonize ” from the original tumor to far sites in the body , first setting up tiny outposts ( “ micrometastases ” ) whose presence is assumed , though they can not be detected .
And that has a warping effect in the “ war on cancer , ” Sontag writes : “ The bromides of the American cancer establishment , tirelessly hailing the imminent victory over cancer ; the professional pessimism of a large number of cancer specialists , talking like battle-weary officers mired down in an interminable colonial war—these are twin distortions in this military rhetoric about cancer . ”
Yet metaphors are inescapable , no matter how apt , misleading , or simply inadequate they may be . They ’ re key to how humans to wrap their minds around phenomena they don ’ t totally understand . Sontag argued that we should try to resist metaphors for understanding illnesses ( including AIDS ) , but convincing people to stop using them is an uphill battle at best . Anything mysterious , frightening , or unknowable will inevitably be stuffed into a framework drawn from something we do understand .
Humans have understood war for all of human history . So it ’ s no big surprise that the war metaphor keeps cropping up . Metaphors like this “ might be comforting , or give us hope in some way , ” Scott told me . “ Or they might reinforce differences that make us feel like we can do something to be safer . ”
Can we do something to keep ourselves and others safe during this pandemic ? Sure . We can wash our hands . We can stay home as much as possible . We can donate money and sew face masks . We can promote and conduct scientific research , manufacture ventilators , care for the sick . We can pray , or engage in some other spiritual activity .
How will those actions aid our fight against the “ invisible enemy ” ? We don ’ t know yet . Right now , results are staggered and uncertain . But in the meantime , repeating the war metaphor could hinder what we ’ re trying to accomplish , both now and in the long term .
The usefulness of any metaphor is limited by default , since they use one concept to explain another that is not precisely the same . Language itself is full of metaphors , and we can never describe reality perfectly through language . Critics of the war metaphor argue that it is an attempt , unconscious or otherwise , to alter reality , to not see a viral threat for what it is . ( Even the idea of a “ viral ” threat has become metaphorical in the computer age , some critics have argued . )
During my conversation with Keranen , she listed many reasons why the war metaphor can shape our ideas about how we should fight a pandemic — what we should do , what we shouldn ’ t do , who is to blame , and what gets left out of the picture .
One problem is that the “ war ” metaphor can cause people to stigmatize those with the disease because they can ’ t “ fight it off. ” Sontag wrote of this stigma toward cancer patients , describing the shame and lack of openness about options for treatment in the 1970s because of the stigma . “ Even today , we talk about people whose immune systems are ‘ weaker ’ because they can ’ t fight off Covid-19 , ” Keranen said . “ There ’ s almost a smuggling of some implicit blame in there for someone who is a victim of a disease . ”
Framing Covid-19 or any viral outbreak as war can also influence the way we think about those who die . “ It can imply that deaths are collateral damage and might just need to happen so that we can ‘ fight on the front lines , ’ ” Keranen said . “ So if we ’ re prioritizing where ventilators are going to go , that means that they might go to New York and places that are seen as the battlefront , as compared to more rural areas . ”
The idea of lives as collateral damage has taken root among some of Trump ’ s supporters , who have suggested that his greatest enemies — and thus the group aligned with the virus — are Democrats , as well as those who take strict measures to limit activity in order to save lives :
Dennis Prager : `` That attitude that the only value is saving a life , that attitude leads to appeasement ... No one can die ? Then it 's not a war '' pic.twitter.com/jtMDtJBzYf — Jason Campbell ( @ JasonSCampbell ) March 24 , 2020
Furthermore , war metaphors are inherently biased toward power , aggression , and even paternalism . “ It makes our focus be on fighting and not on caring , ” Keranen says . “ It ’ s not that we ’ re not caring for people , ” but if we ’ re fixated on fighting an enemy , “ that might put us in a framework where we ’ re less thinking about support and care and broader networks that we need to put into place . ”
This mindset can draw focus away from scrutinizing broad preparedness and emphasizing its importance — perhaps counterintuitive , since governments exist in part to protect their citizens from enemies both within and beyond their borders . But using a war metaphor for a pandemic lets us minimize resulting deaths as inevitable , Keranen says . We were attacked , so deaths are “ casualties ” rather than unnecessary and preventable tragedies . “ It shifts our focus away from government preparedness to individual responsibility , ” she added . “ If we all just wash our hands and stay inside , then we can do our part in this ‘ battle . ’ ”
There ’ s a geographic component to war metaphors , too , Scott says . And that component can reshape how we think about collective versus individual responsibility , leading to a “ geography of blame ” — the attempt to assign fault for the pandemic to one region , like China , Europe , or New York City . He pointed to Florida as example , noting that Gov . Ron DeSantis refused to close beaches to spring breakers for weeks in March but required people returning to the state from New York , New Jersey , or Connecticut to self-quarantine for 14 days .
A war metaphor can also have dark consequences . “ If we look at history , during times of war , it ’ s often been the case that war is accompanied by abuses of medicine and the suspension of widespread ethical norms , ” Keranen said , citing Nazi use of medicine or other public health trials that have been conducted on prisoners and war resistors over the years . “ Especially now , we need to be on guard for this with the clinical trials and other product development that we ’ re undergoing , so that in our haste to ‘ fight ’ the disease with a military metaphor , we ’ re not giving away our fundamental ethical concepts and principles . ”
People are unlikely to stop using the pandemic-as-war metaphor anytime soon . But is there a better option to articulate what we ’ re facing , to illustrate the challenge of caring for the sick and finding a cure ?
There are certainly other metaphors . They ’ re imperfect , too . And yet , just thinking about them can help us see what we lose when we resort to and rely on the language of war .
Another possible metaphor for illness presents healing as a journey or a river , which can remind us of the passage of time and the connectedness of everyone who embarks on the same trek or follows the same path . It also emphasizes the need for preparedness , since journeys involve mapping out a route and rivers typically remain in their riverbeds , which means their route can be predicted . Certainly emergencies and the unexpected can happen , but there are some obstacles we can anticipate .
Scott also suggested a metaphor that centers on an orchestra or symphony — built on the idea that responding to a pandemic requires everyone involved to be equipped to play their part , for everyone to have a role . “ A lot of these metaphors blur distinctions between the self and the Other that war metaphors throw into relief , ” Scott said . They emphasize the need to coordinate response , rather than only look out for oneself , and “ they ’ re not focused just on causes ; they ’ re focused on responses and preparedness , ” he added .
Keranen explained that another problem with using the war metaphor for a pandemic is that it reduces the complexity of the problem and focuses us solely on “ beating ” the virus , without fully considering the factors that might have facilitated its proliferation — like deforestation and destroyed habitats that could contribute to future pandemics — or possible risk factors , such as poor air quality , that may make humans susceptible . “ It really masks that broader ecological picture , ” she said .
Indeed , everyone I spoke to while reporting this piece brought up the idea of ecology and microbiomes , not just as literal matters of concern with regard to the coronavirus but also as a strong metaphor for approaching the threat it poses to humans . Instead of thinking of this pandemic as a war — us versus them , humans versus invading virus — what if we reframed our thinking to imagine our goal as finding balance in not only the natural world , but in our social and cultural worlds as well ?
Their suggestions made me think about The Biggest Little Farm , a 2019 documentary about the owners of a biodynamic family farm in California . Over an eight-year period , they came to see new pests or problems on the farm as evidence that something was out of balance , not simply an enemy to attack and destroy .
Jodie Nicotra , an associate professor at the University of Idaho , praised the ecological metaphor as a strong one . Nicotra is writing a book on the rhetorics of microbiome science . “ In one of the Democratic debates , Bernie Sanders was asked how he would respond to the coronavirus situation , ” she told me . “ He started by talking about universal health care . Joe Biden was like , ‘ We ’ ll get the National Guard out and set up field hospitals , ’ and so on . There seemed to be more general praise for Biden ’ s approach . But I think more ecological , community-based thinking — basically , the opposite of whatever we do now — would have probably prevented a lot of these issues . ”
What an ecological metaphor offers that a war metaphor can ’ t provide — due to its dependence on drawing a line between winners and losers , between us and the enemy — is what Nicotra calls the “ invisible connections ” between things . “ You don ’ t see how vast economic inequality connects to a virus , but it does , ” she says . “ You don ’ t see the webs of regulations and laws , or the production of equipment . You have to see that all of this stuff is bound up together and train yourself to see these connections between things . ”
In truth , metaphors are inescapable . We ’ re going to keep using them because they give us a way to imagine the world . They are a kind of grammar our brains rely on to operate . But that grammar is limiting nonetheless .
We ’ re less limited in which metaphors we choose . And so , while the war metaphor may have some use , it would be wise for us to expand our thinking and the language we use to express it . There ’ s no reason we have to stick to just one metaphor , regardless of what certain politicians might prefer .
“ If we take as a premise that we , as a culture , acknowledge a distributed expertise or set of solutions for dealing with something like this , then that kind of opens it up , ” Scott told me . “ There are more groups , more people , more institutions to figure out responses . Those we thought of as experts at controlling risk haven ’ t always been all that successful . We need alternative ways of thinking in response to these things . ”
We also need to maintain a healthy sense of skepticism when we ’ re confronted with a particular metaphor every day . Is it the only way to address the issue at hand ? Are we flattening the problem in ways that benefit some people over others , or that lead us toward harmful conclusions ?
We can still use the language of chess , if it helps . But we shouldn ’ t ignore the vast array of human experience just begging to be tapped to help us more thoroughly understand what the problem is and how we might solve it — even in a pandemic .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .