Rectangles designed to help prevent the spread of the coronavirus by encouraging social distancing line a city-sanctioned homeless encampment at San Francisco 's Civic Center on Thursday , May 21 , 2020 . ( AP Photo/Noah Berger )
Rectangles designed to help prevent the spread of the coronavirus by encouraging social distancing line a city-sanctioned homeless encampment at San Francisco 's Civic Center on Thursday , May 21 , 2020 . ( AP Photo/Noah Berger )
SAN FRANCISCO ( AP ) — San Francisco is joining other U.S. cities in authorizing homeless tent encampments in response to the coronavirus pandemic , a move officials have long resisted but are now reluctantly embracing to safeguard homeless people .
About 80 tents are now neatly spaced out on a wide street near San Francisco City Hall as part of a “ safe sleeping village ” opened last week . The area between the city ’ s central library and its Asian Art Museum is fenced off to outsiders , monitored around the clock and provides meals , showers , clean water and trash pickup .
In announcing the encampment , and a second one to open in the famed Haight-Ashbury neighborhood , San Francisco ’ s mayor acknowledged that she didn ’ t want to approve tents , but having unregulated tents mushroom on sidewalks was neither safe nor fair .
“ So while in normal times I would say that we should focus on bringing people inside and not sanctioning tent encampments , we frankly do not have many other options right now , ” she said in a tweet last week .
Nicholas Woodward , 37 , is camping at the safe sleeping site , but he said he preferred sleeping in his tent before the city stepped in ; he finds the fencing belittling and the rules too controlling . His friend , Nathan Rice , 32 , said he ’ d much rather have a hotel room than a tent on a sidewalk , even if the city is providing clean water and food .
“ I hear it on the news , hear it from people here that they ’ re going to be getting us hotel rooms , ” he said . “ That ’ s what we want , you know , to be safe inside . ”
San Francisco has moved 1,300 homeless people into hotel rooms and RVs as part of a statewide program to shelter vulnerable people but the mayor has been criticized for moving too slowly . She has said she is not inclined to move all the city ’ s estimated 8,000 homeless into hotels , despite complaints from advocates who say overcrowded tents are a public health disaster .
San Francisco is just the latest city to authorize encampments as shelters across the country move to thin bed counts so homeless people , who are particularly susceptible to the virus due to poor health , have more room to keep apart .
Santa Rosa in Sonoma County welcomed people this week to its first managed encampment with roughly 70 blue tents . Portland , Oregon , has three homeless camps with city-provided sleeping bags and tents , and Maricopa County opened two parking lots to homeless campers in Phoenix .
San Francisco officials have historically frowned upon mini tent cities and routinely rounded up tents on city streets . But with an estimated 150,000 homeless people in California , most of them living out in the open , it ’ s impossible to stamp out the highly visible tents along highways and on crowded urban sidewalks .
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that officials not disturb tent encampments during the coronavirus pandemic unless people are given individual hotel rooms , as homeless advocates want to see . Those advocates say providing a safe space where people can get meals , use a toilet and avoid harassing passers-by is a reasonable option given the times .
“ The best , best option would be housing . The second-best option would be hotel rooms , but if you can ’ t do that and we ’ re going to have so many people outside then I think it makes sense ... to make those outside as safe as can be , ” said Dr. Margot Kushel , director of the Center for Vulnerable Populations at the University of California , San Francisco .
But Nan Roman , president and CEO of the National Alliance to End Homelessness , said the federal government is providing an astonishing amount of money to battle the pandemic and she hopes cities and counties use it to put people into empty hotels , motels and other unused places .
“ It ’ s almost like we ’ re giving ourselves permission that it ’ s OK that people will sleep outside , and once we ’ ve given ourselves that permission , it ’ s very difficult to get the initiative together to do otherwise , ” she said .
Still , government-sanctioned tent camps may be here to stay , at least until a coronavirus vaccine is distributed .
At the urging of San Francisco Supervisor Sandra Lee Fewer , the city ’ s parks and real estate departments are compiling an inventory of open spaces that might be suitable for tent camps . She said sidewalk space is a coveted commodity for retailers , given coronavirus restrictions , and the city ’ s strategy of adding more shelter beds doesn ’ t make sense with a contagious virus .
” It is just a new world that we ’ re living in , ” she said , “ and it ’ s going to have to be our new normal . ”