Coronavirus : Cruise Ship In Limbo Off California After A Former Passenger Died
The Grand Princess cruise ship is in limbo off the California coast after a former passenger became the state 's first known person to die from COVID-19 . Health workers say they will now test some current passengers to determine whether they have the respiratory virus .
`` We are going to be flying testing kits to the cruise ship , and we are going to be sending those quickly back to the state , '' Gov . Gavin Newsom said at a news conference late Wednesday . `` We 'll be able to test very quickly within just a few hours . ''
Eleven passengers and 10 crew members were showing symptoms of COVID-19 , the governor said , adding that the number `` may significantly understate '' the presence of the coronavirus on the cruise ship .
Newsom declared a state of emergency in California on Wednesday to help his state cope with its first COVID-19 death and more than 50 confirmed cases overall .
Officials believe the passenger who died , an elderly man , was exposed to the novel coronavirus during a trip from San Francisco to Mexico in the middle of February . Health officials are now tracking down thousands of people who were on the same trip and might have been exposed to the virus .
The man was on the ship from Feb. 11-21 . He had underlying health conditions and spent nearly a week at home before being hospitalized in California 's Placer County , health officials say . He was taken to the hospital by ambulance on Feb. 27 .
Another California resident who was on the same trip also has been found to be infected , Newsom said . That person is currently hospitalized in Sonoma County , as member station KQED reports .
The Grand Princess is carrying around 2,500 passengers and normally has some 1,150 crew members . The cruise line says only a small fraction of that number will be tested , with the remainder of the people on board told to monitor themselves for any possible symptoms of COVID-19 .
`` There are fewer than 100 guests and crew identified for testing , '' Princess Cruises says . The number includes passengers who were on the vessel for both the Mexico and Hawaii cruises , as well as people with influenza-like symptoms and `` guests currently under care for respiratory illness . ''
To carry out the tests , the California National Guard planned to use a helicopter to deliver kits to the Grand Princess on Thursday morning . The onboard medical team will then collect samples , which will be flown back to shore to be analyzed at a lab in Richmond , Calif .
In a letter that was sent to current passengers who were also on the earlier trip , Princess Cruises informed them , `` the CDC requires you to remain in your stateroom until you have been contacted and cleared by our medical staff . ''
The exact date and time for the ship 's arrival was `` to be determined , '' the company said .
The cruise line asked passengers to report any symptoms they might have had , such as a fever or a cough , that could indicate they have COVID-19 . The company emailed a similar message to people who were on the earlier voyage .
After the Grand Princess completed its Mexico trip , the ship left California for a cruise to Hawaii . It 's now returning from that voyage — and operator Princess Cruises canceled the ship 's scheduled call in Ensenada , Mexico , to bring it off the coast near San Francisco on Thursday .
`` We 've requested the arrival to be delayed '' to provide time for tests , Newsom said , `` because we have a number of passengers and crew members that have developed symptoms on this cruise ship . ''
As of midday Thursday , the Grand Princess was about 100 nautical miles from the coast as it headed toward San Francisco , according to the maritime tracking site Vessel Finder . The cruise ship wo n't be allowed to dock until the coronavirus testing is complete , officials said .
On Thursday , San Francisco announced its first two COVID-19 cases : a man in his 90s who is hospitalized in serious condition , and a woman in her 40s who is hospitalized in fair condition . Both were tested by the state department of public health on March 4 . They were likely infected through community transmission , as they have had no known contact with anyone who traveled to outbreak locations , the city says .
The Grand Princess is the second Princess Cruises ship to be identified with a potential cluster of coronavirus cases . Last month , the Diamond Princess was held in quarantine for weeks at the port in Yokohama , Japan .
Princess Cruises says it is canceling the Grand Princess ' next planned Hawaii cruise , which was to depart on Saturday .
About half of the people who were on the cruise to Mexico are California residents , Newsom said . Authorities are working to contact them and urge them to monitor themselves for potential COVID-19 symptoms .
California health agencies are currently monitoring at least 9,400 people in 49 counties who were potentially exposed to the coronavirus through air travel , Newsom said .
In addition to heightening the state 's response to the coronavirus outbreak , the governor 's emergency declaration forbids price gouging on products that are important in fighting viruses , such as hand sanitizer .
Those extra protections will remain in effect through Sept. 4 , according to the declaration – suggesting state officials believe the coronavirus could affect California for months to come . The order also waives the normal 30-day and 60-day expiration times for health and public emergencies that are declared at the local level .
The U.S. now has at least 99 domestic cases of coronavirus , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Thursday morning . That figure does n't include the 49 cases in which Americans were repatriated to the U.S. on evacuation flights from Japan and from Wuhan , China , where the novel coronavirus was first detected .