“ Acting officials are like substitute teachers . They might listen to the principal more , but they can ’ t control the students , ” according to Dr. Glassman .
But some of President Trump ’ s methods weaken his ability to get the executive branch to work his will , says Dr. Glassman . Vacant jobs can ’ t steer anybody . “ Acting ” officials are weaker than Senate-confirmed appointees .
It ’ s true that presidents deserve their own team , says Matt Glassman , a senior fellow at the Government Affairs Institute at Georgetown University . Political purges of the bureaucracy aren ’ t uncommon .
Three years into the Trump presidency , perceived loyalty to the president is perhaps the job qualification prized above all . Vacancies are numerous and inexperienced “ acting ” personnel common .
“ I think you ought to know that answer , ” Senator Kennedy said .
At a Senate hearing , Republican Sen. John Kennedy pressed acting Secretary of Homeland Security Chad Wolf for an estimate of the number of people who might be affected .
Early Tuesday President Trump tweeted , “ The coronavirus is very much under control in the U.S.A. ” Later in the day , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that Americans should begin preparing for possible outbreaks .
The coronavirus could become an unexpected stress test of President Donald Trump ’ s churning approach to executive management .
On Monday , acting Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Ken Cuccinelli took to Twitter to ask for help with some research .
Mr. Cuccinelli – the top member of President Donald Trump ’ s coronavirus task force – was having difficulty accessing an online map of the virus ’ s spread compiled by Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore . So he tweeted out a question : Was the map blocked for other people , too , or just him ?
In the end it appeared overwhelming traffic had temporarily crashed the Hopkins site . Hours later Mr. Cuccinelli tweeted he had access to the data . But for critics , the original question , from a top official with all the resources of the United States government at his fingertips , was itself a warning sign of the confusion and turmoil inherent in the Trump administration ’ s singular approach to bureaucratic staffing .
Three years into the Trump presidency , perceived loyalty to the president is perhaps the job qualification prized above all . Top White House and executive branch officials seem unsure of their status , vacancies are numerous , and inexperienced “ acting ” personnel are common .
Currently this approach is particularly visible in the area of national security . Almost all the positions created after Sept. 11 , 2001 , intended to help prevent another 9/11 , are now vacant or lack permanent appointees , points out Garrett Graff of Wired . That includes the director of national intelligence , the secretary of homeland security , the deputy secretary of homeland security , the director of the National Counterterrorism Center , and heads of border security agencies .
It ’ s true that presidents deserve their own team , says Matt Glassman , a senior fellow at the Government Affairs Institute at Georgetown University . Political purges of the bureaucracy aren ’ t uncommon .
But some of President Trump ’ s methods weaken his ability to get the executive branch to work his will , says Dr. Glassman , an expert on government leadership and personnel . Vacant jobs can ’ t steer anybody . “ Acting ” officials are weaker than Senate-confirmed appointees .
“ Acting officials are like substitute teachers . They might listen to the principal more , but they can ’ t control the students , ” according to Dr. Glassman .
The shuffle at the top of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence has brought administration staffing back into the spotlight . Earlier this month , President Trump removed one acting director of national intelligence , Joseph Maguire , and replaced him with another deemed more loyal , Richard Grenell .
The swap followed reports that an intelligence official had briefed the House Intelligence Committee on an assessment that Russia is working to influence the 2020 election , and in particular wants President Trump to be reelected . ( Later reports said that Russia backs Bernie Sanders for the Democratic nomination as well . )
Current acting Director of National Intelligence Grenell is serving concurrently as ambassador to Germany . Such dual hatting is not uncommon in the Trump administration . Acting Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Cuccinelli , after his appointment to the job last November , continued to serve as acting director of the U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services .
Meanwhile , Johnny McEntee , a former personal aide to President Trump who was fired by former chief of staff John Kelly over security clearance issues , has returned to the White House as head of the Presidential Personnel Office . Mr. McEntee ’ s assignment is to rid the administration of officials deemed disloyal and replace them with pro-Trump people , according to an Axios report .
Overall , the turnover for the “ A ” team of Cabinet officials and other top appointees in the first three years of the Trump administration has been 82 % , according to data compiled by the Brookings Institution ’ s Kathryn Dunn Tenpas . That is higher than the turnover experienced in the first four years of any presidency , back to and including that of Ronald Reagan .
Furthermore , that number reflects just departures from the president ’ s original team . Many jobs – chief of staff , press secretary – have seen multiple departures . According to Brookings data , 38 % of President Trump ’ s “ A ” team departures have undergone serial turnover .
The administration ’ s filling of top positions has improved since the president ’ s first year in office , when many remained vacant for months . A cumulative list compiled by The Washington Post says that of 743 key positions requiring Senate confirmation , 508 are now filled by confirmed personnel . One hundred seventy have no nominee .
In the American system of government as outlined under the Constitution , executive branch officials , including , and perhaps especially , Senate-confirmed top appointees , don ’ t report to the president alone , according to experts .
“ The basic idea is when you ’ re an appointed official in the federal government , particularly a Senate-confirmed one , you have multiple relationships , ” says Dr. Glassman of Georgetown University .
Above this layer of officials sits Congress . With their appropriations and oversight powers , and confirmation votes , lawmakers have a significant role to play in executive department activities . Effective Cabinet secretaries either know this from experience or learn it very quickly .
Below the officials sits the bureaucracy . Career workers know their subject better than any appointee can learn in a limited time in office . They know they can outlast and perhaps outmaneuver their big bosses .
Presidents can rail at the “ deep state ” all they want , but the fact is they can not directly control the executive branch as they would a family business that runs hotels and golf courses – or even as they would a big corporation . The essential point of the classic work on presidential power by the late political scientist Richard Neustadt is that presidents can rarely get things done on a sustained basis by command or unilateral action . They must persuade others to do what they want .
“ The most effective presidents ... are those who understand the sources of their bargaining power , and take steps to nurture those sources , ” writes Matthew Dickinson , a professor of political science at Middlebury College , in a recent post on his blog Presidential Power .
This is why “ acting ” officials are seldom as powerful as permanent ones . They are weak links in the chain of persuasion .
President Trump has said he likes to use “ acting ” tags because it keeps the people in question on their toes and eager to please him . But their other important relationships are flawed . They don ’ t have the implicit backing of Congress provided by confirmation . The rank and file know they could be gone at any moment , and that delay is thus even a blockade tool . This is why Dr. Glassman calls them “ substitute teachers . ”
Overuse of these temps is a sign of weakness , he says . “ If you ’ re really so powerful , how come you can ’ t get your own guy confirmed ? ”
For the Trump administration , the new coronavirus , now labeled COVID-19 , could become an unexpected stress test of the president ’ s churning approach to executive management .
Early Tuesday morning President Trump tweeted , “ The coronavirus is very much under control in the U.S.A. ” But later in the day , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said that Americans should begin preparing now for possible outbreaks .
At a Senate hearing , both Democratic and Republican lawmakers expressed skepticism that the administration is ready for such a crisis . Republican Sen. John Kennedy of Louisiana pressed acting Secretary of Homeland Security Chad Wolf for an estimate of the number of people who might be affected .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ I think you ought to know that answer , ” Senator Kennedy said .