From left , Tejmur , Naile , Layla and Emil Hacimuradov from Neuwied enjoy to feed sparrows as they have breakfast in a bakery at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin , Germany , Friday , May 15 , 2020 . After month of a nationwide lockdown restaurants are reopening in more German states on Friday . ( AP Photo/Michael Sohn )
From left , Tejmur , Naile , Layla and Emil Hacimuradov from Neuwied enjoy to feed sparrows as they have breakfast in a bakery at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin , Germany , Friday , May 15 , 2020 . After month of a nationwide lockdown restaurants are reopening in more German states on Friday . ( AP Photo/Michael Sohn )
BERLIN ( AP ) — Germany and several other European countries where the coronavirus spread has slowed were moving ahead Friday with relaxing border restrictions , while flare-ups in Mexico and elsewhere served as a reminder the pandemic is far from over .
Slovenia , which has been gradually easing strict lockdown measures , declared that the spread of the virus is now under control and that European Union residents could now enter from Austria , Italy and Hungary .
Germany , meantime , was preparing to open its border entirely with Luxembourg at midnight , and increase the number of crossings open from France , Switzerland and Austria . Travelers will still need to demonstrate a “ valid reason ” to enter Germany and there will be spot checks , but the goal is to restore free travel by June 15 .
Germany ’ s states have also agreed to drop a mandatory 14-day quarantine for travelers entering from the European Union and several other European countries , including Britain , said Armin Laschet , the governor of the western state of North Rhine-Westphalia .
“ Germany will only overcome the corona crisis if European freedom of movement for people , goods and services is fully restored , ” Laschet said .
Germany has seen more than 170,000 COVID-19 infections and nearly 8,000 deaths , but more than 150,000 people have recovered and the country has been seeing fewer than 1,000 new cases per day .
In northern Europe , Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania removed travel restrictions between the Baltic nations , which Estonian Prime Minister Juri Ratas called “ another step toward normal life . ”
Austria and Switzerland were also moving ahead with easing some border restrictions , and Austria reopened all cafes and restaurants .
“ I have been having breakfast at this café for about 100 years , ” said Helmut Gollner , a former literature professor who was one of the first guests Friday morning at Vienna ’ s Cafe Sperl . “ My wife always made great breakfast but it ’ s a different atmosphere here with the newspapers and so on . ”
Restaurants were reopening in more German states Friday as well , and the country was to resume professional soccer on Saturday after a two-month hiatus .
The Bundesliga plans five games with no fans present and other precautions , including the Ruhr derby between Borussia Dortmund and Schalke .
In Sydney , many cafes and restaurants opened again Friday as New South Wales , Australia ’ s most populous state , granted permission for them , as well as places of worship , to reopen with up to 10 people so long as distancing rules are in place .
Many Catholic churches across the state opened for private prayer , confession and small-scale Masses .
“ The celebration of Mass is the highest form of Catholic worship and to not be able to physically gather these past two months has been very difficult , ” Sydney ’ s Archbishop Anthony Fisher said in a statement .
In Japan , some schools , restaurants and other businesses started to reopen after the country lifted its national coronavirus emergency , while keeping in place restrictions in limited urban areas like Tokyo where risks remain .
As countries move ahead with relaxing restrictions , the head of the World Health Organization ’ s Europe office , Dr. Hans Kluge , warned that distancing guidance and other protective measures were more important than ever .
“ It ’ s very important to remind everyone that as long as there is no vaccine and effective treatment , there is no return to normal , ” he said on French radio Europe-1 .
“ This virus won ’ t simply disappear , so the personal behavior of each of us will determine the behavior of the virus . Governments have done a lot , and now the responsibility is on the people . ”
Worldwide , there have been more than 4.4 million coronavirus infections reported and 300,000 deaths , while nearly 1.6 million people have recovered according to a tally kept by Johns Hopkins University .
A first case was confirmed among the 1 million refugees from Myanmar living in dire , overcrowded conditions in southern Bangladesh . Another , a local person living in the Cox ’ s Bazaar district , also tested positive , refugee commissioner Mahbub Alam Takukder said .
Aid workers have been warning of the potential for a serious outbreak if the virus reaches the camps , and teams were activated to treat patients and trace , quarantine and test people they may have encountered .
Somalia ’ s official death toll hit 53 , but aid groups and authorities say that figure could be far too low in a country with one of the world ’ s weakest health systems , after three decades of civil war .
Ahead of Mexico ’ s plan to partially reopen key industries such as mining , construction and auto plants on May 18 , authorities sounded a note of concern as the country reported its largest one-day rise in coronavirus case numbers .
There were 2,409 new COVID-19 test confirmations Thursday , the first time that number has exceeded 2,000 in one day .
“ We are at the moment of the fastest growth in new cases , ” said Assistant Health Secretary Hugo López-Gatell . “ This is the most difficult moment . ”
Deaths have neared 4,500 and there were signs that hospital capacity was nearing its limit in Mexico City , the hardest-hit area . The Health Department reported that 73 % percent of the city ’ s general-care hospital beds were full ; the percentage was lower for intensive-care beds , but that was partly because of the expansion of improvised ICU units at hospitals and other venues .
In Brazil , news website G1 reported that 900 people in Rio de Janeiro were waiting for an intensive-care bed in one of the state ’ s overwhelmed units . President Jair Bolsonaro warned of looming “ chaos ” as he once again lambasted governors and mayors who introduced lockdowns in cities to limit spread of the new virus .
“ I ’ m sorry , many will die , but even more will if the economy continues to be destroyed by these measures , ” Bolsonaro told journalists in Brasilia on Thursday . “ These lockdowns , closing everything , is the path to failure . It will break Brazil . ”
Colombian President Ivan Duque has ordered all residents of the Amazonas Department , near the border with Brazil , to stay inside except to buy food or get medical care . Local hospitals are being overwhelmed as cases rise in a vulnerable part of the Amazon , home to many indigenous groups .
In the U.S. , the Grand Canyon National Park was reopening Friday to allow visitors in for day trips but not overnight .
As a number of regions in New York were to reopen , Gov . Andrew Cuomo urged local governments to keep a close eye on key metrics , and that people and businesses were complying with distancing rules .
Amid those and other reopenings , protests and debate persisted over how quickly to end shutdowns .
With more than 1.4 million infections and more than 85,000 deaths , the U.S. has the largest outbreak in the world by far .