Officials in New York ’ s Rockland County announced on Wednesday that they had issued subpoenas to eight people allegedly infected by the coronavirus for refusing to speak with contact tracers voluntarily .
“ The health of our county ” will not be “ compromised because of ignorance , stupidity , or obstinance , ” Ed Day , the county executive , told reporters .
“ Failure to comply will be costly : $ 2,000 per day , ” Patricia Rupert , the county ’ s health commissioner , added , referring to the subpoenas , according to the Hill .
Officials are using the subpoenas to compel the people to talk with the contact tracers about contracting the COVID-19 disease at a June 17 party in Clarkstown , located north of New York City , Rubert said .
She indicated that the eight people had declined interview requests to determine who else they were in contact with and prevent them from further spreading the virus .
In echoing frustrations expressed by health officials across the country , Rupert said the infected partygoers are not answering their phones or refusing to talk when contact tracers reach them .
“ Unfortunately , I am now forced by these circumstances to send subpoenas to the individuals who are required to cooperate with us , ” Rupert said .
Day claimed that his colleagues do not want to get anyone in trouble .
They only want to speak to them to find out who else might have contracted the disease to keep it from spreading , he argued .
“ We want people to do the right thing for their neighbors , ” and voluntarily speak to health officials , Day said .
However , he said , the people ’ s refusal to talk had forced the county to resort to subpoenas .
Rupert said the host of the party in question had coronavirus symptoms but held the event anyway .
We are not receiving the necessary cooperation when we contact those who are positive for COVID-19 or those who had been at some of these gatherings . My staff has been told that a person does not wish to or have to speak to my disease investigators . They hang up , they deny being at the party , even though we have found their name from another party attendee , or a parent provides us with the information .
“ Many do not answer their cell phones and do not call back , ” she added . “ Sometimes , parents answer for their adult children and promise that they have been home consistently when they have not been . This must stop . ”
According to public health officials , contact tracing is essential to stemming the COVID-19 spread . The process involves interviewing people who have contracted the deadly and highly contagious disease about who they have been around .
Health officials say the goal is to notify those people and require them to quarantine for 14 days to stem the disease ’ s spread .
Local news outlets claim officials in Rockland are struggling to contain a coronavirus infection cluster that began at the June 17 party .