Dr. Harvey Fineberg , chairman of a committee with the National Academy of Sciences , says that the coronavirus can be also possibly be spread even by talking and breathing .
Fineberg is also the former dean of the Harvard School of Public Health .
Fineberg presented the White House with a Wednesday night report on his research .
According to CNN , Fineberg wrote , `` While the current [ coronavirus ] specific research is limited , the results of available studies are consistent with aerosolization of virus from normal breathing . ''
The letter added , `` Currently available research supports the possibility that [ coronavirus ] could be spread via bioaerosols generated directly by patients ' exhalation . ''
Fineberg added that wearing face masks in public is imperative .
Further , on Wednesday , U.S . Surgeon General Jerome Adams requested that the Centers for Disease Control review protocol on the advice of wearing face coverings in public .
On NBC 's `` Today '' Wednesday , he admitted that he asked the CDC about the possibility , nothing that new research shows `` there is a significant amount of asymptomatic spread . ''
`` I 'm not going to wear a surgical mask , '' Fineberg told CNN , `` because clinicians need those . But I have a nice western-style bandana I might wear . Or I have a balaclava . I have some pretty nice options . ''
CNN reported that Fineberg insisted , however , that the coronavirus is n't as infectious as tuberculosis or measles .
`` If you generate an aerosol of the virus with no circulation in a room , it 's conceivable that if you walk through later , you could inhale the virus , '' Fineberg added . `` But if you 're outside , the breeze will likely disperse it . ''
According to WBZ-TV , Fineberg noted that the U.S. could potentially beat the outbreak in just 10 weeks if it were to follow six specific steps to do so :
First , the president should give full authority to one commander who can mobilize every civilian and military asset needed to fight the pandemic .
Second , the country should make millions of diagnostic tests available to be used over the next two weeks to trace the scope of the outbreak .
Third , the country should supply healthcare workers with the necessary personal protective equipment ( PPE ) , ventilators and other supplies necessary to care for the sick .
The fourth step is to put everyone into five different coronavirus buckets : those known to be infected , those assumed to be infected , those who have been exposed , those not known to have been exposed or infected and those who have recovered from infection and are immune .
The next step is to inspire and mobilize the public , individuals and businesses to do their part to socially distance , help friends and neighbors , utilize their skills to make equipment , find treatments and develop innovative solutions .
And finally , we need to learn as we go and make decisions based on science . We need to think about who 's most at risk , who is likely immune and how dangerous contaminated surfaces are so that we can safely decide when to reopen businesses and schools and get the economy back on track .
Fineberg added , `` Rather than stumble through a series of starts and stops and half-measures on both the health and the economic fronts , we should forge a strategy to defeat the coronavirus and open the way to economic revival . If we act immediately , we can make the anniversary of D-Day on June 6 , 2020 , the day America declares victory over the coronavirus . ''
At the time of this writing , at least 245,601 cases of the coronavirus have been confirmed in the U.S. , and at least 6,058 have died because of the virus .