“ The scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent , ” Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell said on Wednesday . “ Additional fiscal support could be costly but worth it if it helps avoid long-term economic damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery . ”
To understand why the U.S. needs additional fiscal support , let ’ s review where we stand on government assistance .
In March , the U.S. passed the CARES Act , which helped families and small businesses in a variety of ways . Most famous , perhaps , were the $ 1,200 checks for tens of millions of families . Unemployment Insurance got a $ 600-a-week bump . Congress also created the Paycheck Protection Program to accelerate the distribution of emergency cash to small and medium-size businesses .
While the CARES Act was an impressive start , and the largest stimulus or relief package ever signed in U.S. history , it wasn ’ t enough . The $ 600 benefit for unemployed workers will lapse on July 31 . Thousands of small businesses failed to snag necessary funds in the early rounds of the PPP . And now state and local governments are facing a catastrophic loss of tax revenue from sales and income taxes , which could force them to fire hundreds of thousands of people and slash funding for health care in the middle of a pandemic .
Derek Thompson : The economy is ruined . It didn ’ t have to be this way .
Preventing another Great Depression requires more relief , spread in at least four directions . The ideas and price tags below are a result of interviews with sources on the Hill .
For families : With unemployment projected to scream past 20 percent , the federal government has to step in to replace a big chunk of private-sector income . That should include adding another direct payment to families in the $ 1,000 range , an extension of the $ 600 unemployment-insurance benefit , and measures for food and housing , such as rental and mortgage support for families who might otherwise face eviction . The ideal economic-relief bill should also include a “ hiring bonus ” for workers who go off jobless benefits , to accelerate the labor-market recovery . Total cost : $ 1.2 trillion .
For businesses : PPP loan forgiveness has not worked for many small companies . The leisure and hospitality industry—which includes restaurants , hotels , and theaters—has accounted for almost half of job losses during the crisis but has received only 10 percent of the total PPP money . The federal government should guarantee zero-interest loans to small businesses that they could pay back over many years . This would give firms free money today , while pushing their expenses into the post-pandemic future . Total cost : $ 600 billion .