In April , the White House announced that the U.S. would halt funding to the World Health Organization ( WHO ) pending a review of the organization ’ s purported missteps responding to the COVID-19 pandemic . The United States is usually the largest funder of the WHO , followed by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation , and the United Kingdom .
This decision has sparked heated debate . We ’ ll get to that in a second .
WHO is part of the United Nations and is comprised of and run by 194 member nations
Member states choose a delegation to represent the country in the World Health Assembly .
The Executive Board operationalizes policies set by the World Health Assembly .
In its seventy-year life , the WHO has logged both successes , such as eradicating smallpox , and perceived failures , such as its delayed response to the Ebola outbreak in 2014 ( read more here and here ) .
The UN was founded in 1948 , several years after the United Nations was formed . Although it ’ s headquartered in Geneva , Switzerland , the organization functions through a collection of six semi-autonomous regional offices . The Director-General of the WHO is Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus , who is currently serving a five-year elected term .
The WHO is funded by assessed contributions and voluntary contributions . The assessed contributions are required of each member state , scaled by income and population . Meanwhile , voluntary contributions may be made by member states ( in addition to assessed contributions ) or may be made by individual donors . As noted , the Bill & Melinda Gates foundation is the second largest funder of the WHO via voluntary contributions . Overall , voluntary contributions make up 80 % of the total .
The WHO ’ s objective is to monitor and coordinate activities related to health issues including , genetically modified foods , climate change , tobacco and drug use , and road safety .
Many have been critical of the WHO ’ s response to the COVID-19 pandemic . There is particular concern over the influential role that China has played in curating the information released in the early stages of the crisis . A new article in the World Association for Disaster and Emergency Medicine , notes “ influence from powerful political donors , which has become most evident in the current COVID-19 pandemic . The global community can no longer tolerate an ineffectual and passive international response system , nor tolerate the self-serving political interference that authoritarian regimes and others have exercised over the WHO . ”
However , the White House move to halt funding entirely during the pandemic has also been met with considerable criticism . In the analysis below we ’ ll walk through the key points made by proponents of halting funds and opponents to halting funds .
Both sides say that the world needs effective and coordinated leadership to respond to global health crises .
Proponents claim halting WHO funding is necessary to address the missteps and clear political bias demonstrated by the WHO . Opponents of halting WHO funding say that it ’ s irresponsible to discontinue funding of the world ’ s most influential health organization in the middle of a pandemic .