Hospitals are now to send all COVID-19 patient information to a Department of Health and Human Services database in Washington , D.C. , through a new policy that is alarming health experts who say they are concerned that the information will be withheld from the public or politicized .
`` Historically , CDC [ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ] has been the place where public health data has been sent , and this raises questions about not just access for researchers but access for reporters , access for the public to try to better understand what is happening with the outbreak , '' said Jen Kates , the director of global health and HIV policy with the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation , in a comment to The New York Times . `` How will the data be protected ? Will there be transparency , will there be access , and what is the role of the CDC in understanding the data ? ”
The policy was posted in a document on the HHS website . Beginning Wednesday , the department and not the CDC will collect daily reports about patients , the number of available beds and ventilators , and other information on the pandemic .
The report said the change will streamline data gathering while helping the White House Coronavirus Task Force allocate supplies . However , the database is not open to the public , which medical officials fear will hinder researchers who rely on CDC data for projections and other decisions .
HHS spokesperson Michael Caputo , however , said the CDC 's system is inadequate , but that the agency will still make data available to the public . However , he added , the CDC `` has a week lag '' in reporting hospital data , but the United States needs it in `` real-time . ''
`` The CDC , an operating division of HHS , will certainly participate in this streamlined all-of-government response . They will simply no longer control it , '' Caputo added .
The change came after a conference call between White House coronavirus response coordinator Dr. Deborah Birx and hospital executives . She said hospitals were not being adequate while reporting data and brought together a working group to devise the new plan .