About three out of four Americans are now , or about to be , under some form of lockdown , as more states tighten measures to fight the coronavirus .
Maryland , Virginia , Arizona and Tennessee became the latest states to order citizens to stay at home , meaning 32 of 50 states have taken such steps .
Meanwhile governors are quarrelling with President Donald Trump about the availability of testing kits .
The US has more than 175,000 confirmed virus cases and over 3,400 deaths .
The US now has more Covid-19 fatalities than China , where the illness was first reported .
New York City is the worst-hit place in America , with 914 confirmed fatalities , according to Johns Hopkins University .
Some 245 million people are already under orders to stay at home , or facing such orders which come into effect later on Tuesday .
Almost two-thirds of states have issued directives for their citizens to stay put , while the remaining states have localised orders in effect .
In Florida , Governor Ron DeSantis , who has been reluctant to impose a state-wide order , said he would instruct people in four counties in the south - where more than half the state 's cases of the virus exist - to stay at home . He said this would last until at least the middle of May .
In general , the `` lockdowns '' allow people to only go out to get essential supplies and medicines , or limited forms of exercise .
The economic consequences have been profound , with millions of people having lost their jobs .
According to an estimate of the Federal Reserve , the US central bank , 47 million people could be out of work in the coming months , with the US still weeks away from the peak of infections .
According to CBS News , President Trump and state governors held a conference call on Monday in which Mr Trump suggested there was no longer a lack of kits to test people for Covid-19 .
In an audio recording obtained by the US network , Mr Trump says he has not `` heard about testing in weeks .
`` We 've tested more now than any nation in the world . We 've got these great tests and we 're coming out with a faster one this week ... I have n't heard about testing being a problem , '' he says .
However , Montana Governor Steve Bullock is heard to say his state does not have adequate numbers of kits .
`` Literally , we are one day away , if we do n't get test kits from the CDC [ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ] , that we would n't be able to do testing in Montana , '' he says .
Washington Governor Jay Inslee told the New York Times he was taken aback by Mr Trump 's assertion .
`` It would be shocking to me that if anyone who has had access to any newspaper , radio , social networks , or any other communication would not be knowledgeable about the need for test kits .
`` I can be assured that the White House knows very well about this desperate need for test kits , '' the newspaper quotes him as saying .
Earlier , the president said the US would be in `` a very good shape '' in terms of the number of ventilators available by the time the coronavirus outbreak peaks .
The president said at least 10 US companies were now making the medical devices , and some might be exported .
The virus can cause severe respiratory issues as it attacks the lungs , and ventilators help keep patients breathing . Several state and local officials have warned hospitals are at risk of running out of equipment .
Mr Trump has alleged some state governors were `` hoarding '' critical medical equipment , and that items including face masks were being stolen from hospitals . He has not presented any evidence for either claim .