A majority of Americans opposes recent protests against stay-at-home orders during the coronavirus crisis and feels President Trump should not encourage them , a new poll has found .
In a CBS News poll released on Thursday , 62 percent of respondents said they oppose those protesting coronavirus lockdowns in state capitals recently , with 23 percent saying they support them . A plurality of Republicans , 46 percent , said they oppose the protesters .
Asked if Trump should encourage these kinds of protests , just 7 percent of respondents said he should , while 55 percent said he should discourage them and 38 percent said he should n't say anything about the protests at all . Only 13 percent of Republicans said Trump should encourage the protesters .
`` In fact , only a quarter of people who support the protesters think the president should encourage the protests , '' CBS writes .
TRUMP AND THE PROTESTERS : Very few Americans – only 7 % - feel President Trump should encourage these protests . Only 13 % of Republicans think he should encourage them . Only a quarter of people who support the protesters think the President should encourage the protests . pic.twitter.com/B1WUPJiQ8D — Ed O'Keefe ( @ edokeefe ) April 23 , 2020
Trump last week tweeted calls to `` liberate '' numerous states with stay-at-home orders , although on Wednesday , he criticized Georgia 's governor for his plan to begin reopening some nonessential businesses , saying it 's `` too soon . ''
In the new CBS poll , 63 percent said their concern is reopening too fast rather than too slowly , and 70 percent said the country 's priority should be keeping up with social distancing even if it hurts the economy in the short term . This is consistent with other recent polls , and on Wednesday , an Associated Press poll found that 61 percent say current social distancing measures are about right , with another 26 percent saying they do n't go far enough .
The CBS poll was conducted by speaking to a sample of 2,112 U.S. residents from April 20-22 . The margin of error is 2.5 percentage points . Read more at CBS . Brendan Morrow