'Devastated ' : As Layoffs Keep Coming , Hopes Fade That Jobs Will Return Quickly
From airlines to paper mills , the job news is grim , and there are growing signs it wo n't be getting better anytime soon . On Thursday , the Labor Department reported nearly 2.4 million new applications for state and federal unemployment benefits last week .
And United Airlines is warning that it may have to furlough as many as 36,000 employees this fall . Demand for air travel has collapsed as a result of the coronavirus pandemic .
The president of the flight attendants union called the warning a `` gut punch '' but also `` the most honest assessment we 've seen on the state of the industry — and our entire economy . ''
Union President Sara Nelson tweeted that demand for air travel had recovered a small fraction of its pre-pandemic levels this summer and `` even those minimal gains evaporated over the last week due to surging COVID-19 cases across the country . ''
Jobs in other industries are facing similar threats as the coronavirus tightens its stubborn grip on the country .
Derse Inc. in Wisconsin builds exhibits for trade shows — a business that 's been decimated by the pandemic . Last month , the company notified state officials it was cutting 87 jobs in Milwaukee . The last of those layoffs come next week .
`` They 're devastated , '' said Dean Wanty , who represents some of the affected workers in the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades , Local 770 . `` This is something I hope I never have to see again in my lifetime . ''
Wanty said that when trade shows started getting canceled this spring , he thought it would be a short-term problem — certainly not one that would drag into the summer . But while other countries have managed to flatten the curve , the pandemic is accelerating in the United States , with daily infections now topping 60,000 .
`` Week after week , stuff just keeps getting canceled , further and further and further out , '' Wanty said .
Derse 's letter described the situation as unpredictable but warned that some of the layoffs may last more than six months .
`` To me , it 's not a matter of if our industry comes back . It 's a matter of when , '' CEO Brett Haney said . `` Unfortunately , it probably wo n't happen until some point next year . ''
To be sure , many bars , restaurants and retail shops have reopened , and millions of workers who were furloughed in March and April have now gone back to work . But two out of three jobs cut during the pandemic have not returned . And week after week , millions of new people apply for unemployment .
Last week 's jobless claims were down only slightly from the week before . While state claims dipped by 99,000 , claims under a special federal program rose by 42,000 .
`` I think that 's a really distressing and concerning sign for the labor market , '' said economist Nick Bunker of the Indeed Hiring Lab , the research arm of the job search website .
While weekly unemployment applications have fallen sharply from their springtime peak , they 're still high by historical standards . And the longer the recession drags on , the more lasting the damage may be .
`` Earlier in the crisis there was some optimism that people would return to their job fairly quickly , '' Bunker said . `` What we 're seeing now is more indication that lots more people who are unemployed are going to be unemployed for a longer period of time . ''
Verso Corp. , for example , is idling a paper mill in Wisconsin later this month and cutting 900 jobs . The company blames a sharp drop in demand for advertising paper used by retailers , sports teams and the tourist industry — all because of the pandemic . Verso said while the mill could be restarted if conditions improve , the shutdown may be permanent .
What 's more , there are few openings for people seeking new jobs . Bunker said listings on the Indeed website are down about 25 % from this time last year . That 's an improvement from the springtime when listings were down nearly 40 % . But Bunker said listings for higher-paid jobs have been slow to recover , likely reflecting employers ' uncertainty about where the economy might be six months to a year from now .
`` The concern is that the damage starts to ripple out to other parts of the economy that are indirectly affected by the virus , '' Bunker said .
Many of the federal relief programs approved early in the pandemic assumed the economy and the job market would be well on the road to recovery by now . Relief payments of $ 1,200 were not intended to cover more than a month or two of expenses . And supplemental unemployment benefits of $ 600 per week are set to expire at the end of July .
With double-digit unemployment and infections growing by the day , however , policymakers may have to rethink that timeline .