Despite what political leaders want them to say , COVID-19 models will become less predictive exactly when we need them most .
In the continuing drama of America ’ s coronavirus response , statistical models play the role of Hamlet ’ s father : foreboding , influencing the action on the stage but unable to speak for themselves .
Some health leaders have said that various COVID-19 models ’ worst projections — such as the Imperial College London model that predicted that 500,000 Britons would die — were overly dire . That skepticism about what the models truly say will play a growing role in the discussion about when and how to “ re-open ” the country . But the idea that the worst of the pandemic is behind us — and that the models prove it — is misleading at best and dangerous at worst , say experts .
Right now , the world is eager for news that the crisis is abating and that economic and social life can “ return to normal. ” Largely as a result of massive social distancing efforts , new infections in New York and other hotspots are going down . Some , like Andrew McCarthy at the National Review , feel like they ’ ve seen enough to toss the modelers out on their rears . “ There is no shortage of government spin , regurgitated by media commentators , assuring us that the drastic reductions in the projections over just a few days powerfully illustrate how well social distancing and the substantial shuttering of the economy is working . Nonsense , ” McCarthy writes .
What the models are , in fact , is poorly represented by the policy makers touting them . The vast majority of them aren ’ t built to project infection rates out beyond a few weeks , so they don ’ t tell us anything about the resurgences that may come . Some of the most influential models , such as the University of Pennsylvania ’ s COVID-19 Hospital Impact Model for Epidemics , or CHIME , were designed to help hospital managers stock up for worst-case scenarios . Yet , in the Washington , D.C. , mayor ’ s office , CHIME is the model of choice .
CHIME is an SIR model , which stands for susceptible , infected , recovered . They ’ re hardly perfect and they don ’ t pretend to be , as Michael Z . Levy , an associate professor in the Department of Biostatistics , Epidemiology & Informatics at the University of Pennsylvania , recently said in an online lecture . You can change the outcome drastically with small changes to various parameters . For it to be of the most use , you need to be seeking the answer to a specific question , like , “ How many beds will this hospital need in May ? ”
SIR models assume that “ everyone is bumping into everyone else like perfect spheres in a vacuum , ” Levy said . “ We didn ’ t act like that even before social distancing . ”
Such models are “ fine for short-term forecasts , but it becomes problematic when you start to ask different questions ” — like what will happen if social distancing is implemented in some places but not others ? What happens if infections go down but testing is still inadequate ? What changes if therapeutic drugs are available only in some places ?
The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation , or IHME , model used by the White House is a more general public-health model . It predicted peak hospital resource use during the second week in April along with ICU and hospital overcapacity . But it showed those outcomes could be mitigated through social distancing measures . When most people talk about “ flattening the curve , ” they ’ re referring to this model .
But the model ’ s creators admit to a big limitation that doesn ’ t make it into the White House briefings . It was originally designed only to track infection rates and hospital use through June . And while its creators at the University of Washington are constantly using new data to improve it , these updates don ’ t provide high-confidence predictions about the fall or next year because the number of variables is growing as new measures are implemented in lots of different ways across varied locations .
Another example : a March 25 article in the New York Times was intended to show the effects of two months of social distancing to “ flatten the curve. ” But it doesn ’ t extend past October . Wesley Pegden , an associate professor in the Department of Mathematical Sciences at Carnegie Mellon University , recently took to Medium to point out that two months of lockdown won ’ t end the pandemic , and people who say otherwise are mistaken or lying . In fact , a two-month lock down that isn ’ t followed by a uniform strategy to manage new infections without overwhelming the health system leads to a fall resurgence that eclipses the spring “ peak . ”
“ Two months of mitigations have not improved the outcome of the epidemic in this model , it has just delayed its terrible effects , ” Pegden wrote . “ In fact , because of the role of weather in the model presented in the [ New York Times ] article , two months of mitigations actually results in 50 % more infections and deaths than two weeks of mitigations , since it pushes the peak of the epidemic to the winter instead of the summer , whose warmer months this model assumes causes lower transmission rates…No model whose purpose is to study the overall benefits of mitigations should end at a time-point before a steady-state is reached . ”
In a conversation with ███ , Pegden said that the messaging around these models has left the public ill-informed . “ People have not been given enough sense of the uncertainty . They have not been given a sense of how a lockdown will not fix the problem . ”
When he tells people this , he finds them “ surprised and disturbed that a two-month lockdown was not going to fix the problem , ” he said .
Pegden ’ s concerns are much more in line with a model produced by Neil Ferguson of Imperial College London . It predicts resurgent infection spikes until a vaccine becomes widely available in a year or so .
Even the most dire projections remain a possibility despite the recent slump in new cases , Ferguson said .
1/4 - I think it would be helpful if I cleared up some confusion that has emerged in recent days . Some have interpreted my evidence to a UK parliamentary committee as indicating we have substantially revised our assessments of the potential mortality impact of COVID-19 . — neil_ferguson ( @ neil_ferguson ) March 26 , 2020
Pegden says that a lockdown from March to May could wind up making the situation much worse later precisely because policymakers overpromised on its effects . A lockdown only buys you time , time to get nationwide testing in order , ventilators to more places , and hospitals ready for a coming surge in patients . In the United States , that hasn ’ t happened to the extent it needs to .
“ It is not true , a priori , that every transmission you avoid today is saving lives , ” says Pegden . “ You can save lives by having more transmissions among more people in the short term . ”
He acknowledges that the idea of exposing more people to the virus is counterintuitive , but , he says , “ It ’ s not always the case that the most conservative thing you can do will save the most lives . If transmission levels revert to normal over the next year…then it would turn out that being locked down was a mistake . ”
It ’ s now up to policymakers to find a coherent way to reopen the country , guided by strategy and not models that will start to fall apart as more and more variables are introduced . A total lockdown until a vaccine arrives is neither politically nor economically viable . The question is how to ease the lockdown without overwhelming the healthcare system . Pegden put out a preprint paper looking at how to do just that . In essence , he says , you want to start lifting restrictions on people who are younger , a population that is less likely to need ICU care . But you don ’ t want to lift restrictions on all of them since some of them may live with someone in the more vulnerable 60-plus age group .
“ Age-targeting has the potential to greatly reduce total mortalities compared with optimum choices for homogeneous measures . At the same time , we see that the best strategies for age-targeting are sensitive to the fraction of the younger population which can be released . In general , if too few people are released initially , a second wave occurs when transmission levels return to normal , ” they write .
A visual representation of the effects of relaxing social distancing rules for some individuals under the age of 50 versus the entire U.S. population , from “ Modeling strict age-targeted mitigation strategies for COVID-19 ”
Policy-makers should also begin to prepare for the illness to start having a much worse effect on people with lower incomes . Reports show that they are more likely to have underlying health conditions and are less likely to be able to work remotely or to maintain social distance , said Levy . That diversity of health outcomes is already occurring to some extent , but it ’ s likely to get worse . A new visualization tool shows which areas are going to be more affected based on the demographics of the population .
Levy , in his lecture , pointed out that trying to tweak models to reflect the arrival of anti-COVID drugs won ’ t much improve them , since there are still too many variables to control for . “ To really affect transmission dynamics , ” he said , a potential drug “ would need to affect these other parameters . You would need an over-the-counter-cold-sniffy-nose-and-COVID drug . ”
One thing we probably should begin to model for now is mutation , since that ’ s going to affect the efficacy of drugs , vaccines , and other measures later on . That ’ s going to be more useful than trying to forecast infection and recovery among a population in an environment where that will become more difficult .
A recent paper by researchers at Carnegie Mellon University offers an interesting and useful take on precisely that very hard problem .
Predicting when a virus mutates into another virus is more challenging than mapping the spread of a contagion among a group . But looking at how information spreads and mutates online in social networks can provide some insight into how viruses spread and mutate in the real world .
“ There is some similarity from an evolution perspective via the mechanism of natural selection . A virus may go through a number of mutations ( mostly a random process ) . However , among a large number of these , the mutation that leads to highest infectiousness will be ‘ naturally selected ’ i.e. , it will be the one that we will see most commonly . For information it is also similar , ” Osman Yağan , an associate research professor at Carnegie Mellon ’ s Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering , told ███ in an email . “ Several people can attempt to modify a piece of information to make it more attractive . It will be the audience who will then ‘ select ’ the most appealing one and that particular version of the information will be much more prevalent ( say in Twitter ) than others . ”
Yağan says that the research could help epidemiologists better prepare in case the virus goes through a rapid mutation process , as well as to understand the effects of protective measures in a new way . “ We believe that there is some similarity between ‘ a virus mutating and becoming less easy to infect individuals ’ and ‘ people being careful about social-distancing and thus becoming less easy to get infected. ’ The analogy here is strengthened by the fact that those who do not obey social-distancing are more likely to infect each other ( a la carrying a second-strain of the virus ) than those who are obeying the guidelines . ”
The work is partially funded by the U.S. Army . Edward Palazzolo , program manager for the Social and Cognitive Networks Program at the Army Research Office , told ███ that it ’ s his job to bring people together across different disciplines to find new approaches to problems , which is what they did here . “ We ’ re always supporting basic research ” he said , and it ’ s a long-term effort . They began funding Yağan ’ s work in 2017 .
Speaking in a personal capacity and not as a representative of the U.S. Army , Palazzolo said that he was heartened to see more people learning some of the elementary basics of data science . But he said that contract tracing — a key to other countries ’ successful approaches — will be especially difficult in the United States because of the privacy implications of contact-tracing apps .
Palazzolo warned that leaders should avoid treating models like crystal balls . They “ should never take a model and say , ‘ This is the truth ’ , ” he said .
More importantly , they need to work with scientists to understand statistical terms — for example , what a confidence interval is . ( It ’ s the specific range of numbers the modeler is confident that the value falls within . ) “ Having the right people on the team will make all the difference . ”
Of course , having the right people only matters if you listen to them — lest we rely on models that seem to predict a recovery on the basis of assumptions that are no-longer true , like a tale told by an idiot , full of sound and fury , signifying nothing .