Also , Washington has the power to quarantine people to block the spread of communicable disease from other nations or between the states . But for most Americans , the shelter-in-place orders issued by state or local authorities will be far more important than such action taken by the federal government .
Of course , there are other coronavirus issues where Washington does have direct power . On Jan. 31 Mr. Trump barred entry into the United States of any foreign national who had been in mainland China in the prior two weeks . The White House has since issued similar edicts involving Iran , continental Europe , Ireland , and the United Kingdom .
As the 15-day mark approaches , Mr. Trump has become vocal about the possibility of lifting restrictions so as to get the economy moving again . But the president himself has no direct power to turn most of these musings into action . His 15-day recommendations were advisory ; it is state governors and city mayors who have used their police powers to issue edicts .
On March 16 President Donald Trump issued coronavirus guidelines for the nation titled , “ 15 Days to Slow the Spread. ” Among other things , the guidelines advised working from home if possible and avoiding social gatherings of more than 10 people .
Could President Donald Trump , in the name of restarting the economy , repeal the lockdown or semi-lockdown conditions that now exist in much of the United States , with nonessential stores shuttered , large groups prohibited , and many places of business closed ?
The answer to that question is almost certainly “ no. ” From Connecticut to California , it is state and local officials who have ordered most of the nation ’ s current restrictions on daily life . Mr. Trump could direct federal workers to return to their offices , and order some businesses to produce certain items under the Defense Production Act . But in terms of direct action , that ’ s about it .
“ While the federal government has authority to authorize quarantine and isolation under certain circumstances , the primary authority for quarantine and isolation exists at the state level as an exercise of the state ’ s police power , ” concludes a 2014 Congressional Research Service ( CRS ) summary of U.S. public health powers .
Government actions to deal with the spread of COVID-19 have taken place under the aegis of a variety of laws and regulations . Here ’ s an explainer on some of the legal underpinnings of steps taken so far :
Mr. Trump ’ s first big move meant to counter the coronavirus crisis was a travel ban . On Jan. 31 he issued a presidential proclamation barring entry into the U.S. of any foreign national who had been in mainland China at any point in the prior 14 days . ( U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents and their relatives weren ’ t covered by this ruling . )
His authority to issue this order derives from the Immigration and Nationality Act , which in its current form dates to 1965 . Section 212 ( f ) of the law authorizes blocking “ alien ” entry on grounds of public health , among other things .
In subsequent weeks the White House issued similar edicts banning foreign nationals who have recently been in Iran , the Schengen Area of the European Union , Ireland , and the United Kingdom .
This is the first time this particular slice of U.S. law has been used to try to halt the spread of a communicable disease , according to a CRS legal sidebar dealing with COVID-19 . But it also underpinned the Trump administration ’ s early travel ban barring entrants from a number of majority-Muslim countries . After several modifications to account for First Amendment concerns , that ban was upheld by the Supreme Court . The high court majority held that Section 212 ( f ) “ exudes deference to the President in every clause . ”
For most Americans , the coronavirus crisis ’ s shelter-in-place orders issued by state or local authorities will be far more important than such action taken by the federal government .
Washington has the power to quarantine people or take other measures to block the spread of communicable disease from other nations or between the states . Authority to enforce such actions comes from Section 361 of the Public Health Service Act of 1944 , according to CRS .
Those quarantined have some rights , however , given that involuntary detention is a deprivation of liberty . Under Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines , the federal government must test detainees within 72 hours and define the length of their quarantine from the outset .
A well-known 2014 test case of the government ’ s quarantine powers involved Kaci Hickox , a nurse who was involuntarily detained at Newark Airport after arriving from an area of West Africa where she had worked with Ebola patients . Legal action by Ms. Hickox eventually established that arriving passengers have the right to appeal quarantine decisions and seek legal advice .
States may isolate or quarantine people deemed public health risks under policing powers derived from the 10th Amendment . But their mandatory quarantine laws vary widely , with some vesting powers in health authorities and others requiring court orders for such a move . The national security legal blog Lawfare has compiled a useful summary of quarantine and isolation authorities in each state .
The use of state and local authority to enforce widespread self-quarantines in the face of a health threat is a new legal frontier . To this point enforcement has seemed relatively light-handed , with police breaking up large groups of people and asking them to return home . Mass arrests would be counterproductive to a need for social distancing .
But in some cases , police are using tougher measures . In Kentucky , a man who had tested positive for the novel coronavirus checked himself out of a Louisville hospital against doctors ’ advice and told police he would not follow orders to self-quarantine at home . The Nelson County Sheriff ’ s Office posted armed guards outside his door .
On March 16 Mr. Trump issued coronavirus guidelines for the nation titled , “ 15 Days to Slow the Spread. ” Among other things , the guidelines advised working or engaging in schooling from home if possible , avoiding social gatherings of more than 10 people , avoiding restaurants , and limiting travel as much as possible .
As the 15-day mark approaches the president has become increasingly vocal about the possibility of lifting these restrictions so as to get the country back to work and the economy moving again . A deep recession could be worse than the spread of the coronavirus , he said on Tuesday in a Fox News “ virtual town hall . ”
It would be better to “ have the country opened up ” by Easter , Mr. Trump said .
Many public health officials have argued strenuously against such loosening , saying the coronavirus is far from under control . But the president himself has no direct power to turn most of these musings into action . His 15-day recommendations were advisory ; it is state governors and city mayors who have used their police powers to issue edicts giving them teeth .
Every state , territory , and the District of Columbia has declared a public health emergency , according to lists compiled by the National Governors Association . Twenty-one states and the Virgin Islands have issued stay-at-home orders , according to the NGA ( not all these orders cover state territories in their entirety ) . Most have set limits of various levels on the size of permissible public gatherings .
Either statewide or locally directed school closures have occurred in all states . Thirty-six states and Puerto Rico have limited the operations of nonessential businesses .
Mr. Trump , of course , commands a lot of attention . He has the bully pulpits of the White House and his Twitter feed to make his desires known .
But many governors , particularly in hard-hit states such as New York , do not appear at all inclined to loosen regulations yet . A number of the governors at the forefront of closing down schools and businesses are Republican , such as Ohio Gov . Mike DeWine and Maryland Gov . Larry Hogan . They don ’ t seem inclined to follow the president ’ s wishes , either .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Governor Hogan , current chair of the NGA , said on Monday , “ We don ’ t think that we ’ re going to be in any way ready to be out of this in five or six days or so . ”