Despite a pandemic , Trump has n't slowed his attacks on immigrants .
At the height of the ongoing pandemic , the Trump Administration continues to weaponize COVID-19 against the immigrant community , using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) to pass restrictions he couldn ’ t pass prior to COVID-19 .
In the latest example , Trump used the CDC ’ s recent Amendment and Extension to “ suspend introduction of certain “ covered aliens ” into the United States for a period of 30 days . ”
According to the CDC , the “ extension found that the determinations of the March 20 , 2020 Order remain correct , and further determined that the suspension of introduction of covered aliens should continue for another 30 days based on the increasing numbers of COVID-19 infections in Canada , Mexico , and the United States . ”
In short , the amendment allows the administration another way to deny entry to anyone trying to escape violence and civil war to seek refuge in the United States .
In 2018 , the country witnessed similar attacks against immigrant children and their parents , including the caging of children , separation of families , detention of families , and a continued failure to reunite them .
It was former attorney general Jeff Sessions who orchestrated this new “ zero tolerance ” policy .
Later , Sessions also prosecuted everybody caught entering the U.S. as part of the same policy .
In addition to the thousands of children separated by their parents , the administration lost track of nearly 6,000 unaccompanied immigrant children .
In June 2018 , the Trump administration ended the policy of family separation but substituted it with a policy of family detention .
The closing of the family separation practice only came after enormous pressure from the public .
Later that year , Trump directed Sessions to alter a 2015 court order titled Reno v. Flores , also known as the Flores Settlement .
This settlement gave immigrant children the protection that they will not be detained for more than 20 days .
The rule also states that children be released to a licensed care program within those 20 days . However , the administration has attacked both sides of this protection by altering the rule that allows them to detain children for more than 20 days .
The CDC Amendment and Extension has allowed the administration to rapidly deport children under the context of public health while we are still fighting a pandemic .
Lee Gelernt , deputy director of the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) Immigrants ’ Rights Project said in an interview with CBS that “ this is the most extreme of the Trump administration ’ s anti-children anti-asylum policies… ”
Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) likewise stated that “ the United States government should immediately impose a moratorium on deportations during the COVID-19 pandemic to avoid contributing to the global spread of the virus . ”
Despite this , the U.S. ignored the advice from the Human Rights Watch and continued to deport people .
According to HRW , “ U.S . Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) carried out 232 deportation flights to Latin America and Caribbean countries between February 3 and April 24 , 2020 . ”
Some of those that were deported tested positive for COVID-19 and were deported to Mexico , Haiti , El Salvador , and Guatemala .
Another recent CBS report stated that “ nearly 21,000 removals were carried out in March and April alone , including 899 expulsions of unaccompanied children as young as 10 . ”
Children who are being processed under the new CDC Amendment are not being allowed to apply for humanitarian protections they had before . Instead , they are being deported to their home countries which completely ignores due process .
To receive weekly updates like this in your inbox , subscribe to The ███ newsletter here .