Facebook A Facebook Live filmed by St. Louis–based chiropractor Eric Nepute has been viewed over 21 million times .
The journalists at ███ are proud to bring you trustworthy and relevant reporting about the coronavirus . To help keep this news free , become a member and sign up for our newsletter , Outbreak Today .
Some chiropractors across the country are using social media to spread dangerous misinformation about the cause of COVID-19 , the disease caused by the novel coronavirus .
Even though the video has gone astoundingly viral in little under a week , Nepute ’ s advice is not only wrong , it could be dangerous . Dr. Luis Ostrosky , a professor of infectious diseases at McGovern Medical School at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston , told ███ that the treatments Nepute was advocating for in his video have no scientific basis .
“ I 'm guessing he 's going off of quinine as another antimalarial drug , ” Ostrosky said . “ There 's really nothing in the literature about quinine and COVID-19. ” He explained that quinine has some similarities to chloroquine , which President Donald Trump and his supporters have touted as a miracle drug for the coronavirus — despite the publishers of the journal that had published the study touting chloroquine later saying it `` did not meet expected standards ” among other criticisms of the study . Ostrosky said that there has been some evidence that zinc lozenges could alleviate some symptoms of the common cold , which has led some people to falsely extrapolate that it could be a way to combat COVID-19 . “ We should warn people about zinc . It causes severe gastrointestinal distress , ” he said . “ If it sounds too easy and too obvious , it 's probably not true. ” Outside of Facebook , Nepute 's video lives on . It has been viewed an additional 2.8 million times on YouTube , uploaded under titles like “ Frank Hahnel A real Doctor telling it like it is . It 's all Fake. ” The YouTube version was shared heavily on Twitter by QAnon-affiliated accounts . One of its biggest referrers on Facebook was from the actor Antonio Sabàto Jr. , who unsuccessfully ran for Congress in Ventura County , California , in 2018 . Dr. Ravina Kullar , an infectious diseases researcher , told ███ she had seen Nepute ’ s video and cautioned chiropractors not to use social media to spread misinformation or miracle cures . “ Being a medical expert or a medical professional , you 're given that responsibility that whatever comes out of your mouth , people are going to run with it , '' she said . Kullar said that people need to be especially careful about cures touted on platforms like Facebook and YouTube . “ My fear is that hearing this claim people might overdose on zinc , overdose on [ the quinine in ] tonic water , ” she said . “ You just see everyone trying to find something with the cure. ” The chiropractic community has roots in 19th-century pseudoscience , and despite an effort in the 21st century to move to more evidence-based treatments , Nepute is far from the only chiropractor spreading hoaxes about the coronavirus . The Twitter account for a clinic in Virginia on Monday told its followers to “ stop worrying about the germs and start taking care of the host ! ” A chiropractor from Colorado shared a tweet on Sunday that accused the NWO ( `` New World Order '' ) of forcing people to wear face masks . A chiropractor in New Jersey shared a video from a QAnon-affiliated Twitter account claiming the coronavirus death toll was fake . And on TikTok , California-based chiropractor Alicia Tsounis promoted colloidal silver spray , which is ineffective at killing the coronavirus . Earlier this month , an Idaho chiropractor who had previously posted videos advocating against vaccines ran Facebook ads falsely claiming his products could prevent COVID-19 . In one promoted video — “ How to PREVENT COVID-19 Virus from infecting you… ” — he advised people to use a “ silver spray ” instead of alcohol-based hand sanitizer . Facebook disabled his ad account and removed his page . Chiropractor Kim Gambino , the wife of former head of the California Chiropractic Association Dan Gambino , has been regularly using her public Facebook page to promote conspiracy theories about COVID-19 . Gambino has shared content railing against social distancing and is also a proponent of the conspiracy theory that 5G cellular technology is causing the coronavirus . “ Do you think these microwaves could be causing the same symptoms as the coronavirus ? ” Gambino wrote last month . Facebook ’ s Fact-Check widget even appears under one of Gambino ’ s posts , indicating a third-party fact-checker for the platform believed the post contained harmful content about COVID-19 . ███ has reached out to Gambino for comment .