Trump warns of 'painful two weeks ' as officials predict up to 240,000 US coronavirus deaths
Donald Trump has warned America to brace for a “ very , very painful two weeks ” as the White House projected that the coronavirus pandemic could claim 100,000 to 240,000 lives , even if current social distancing guidelines are maintained .
Striking an unusually sombre tone at the start a marathon two-hour briefing , the US president defended his early handling of the crisis and displayed models that , he said , justified his decision to keep much of the economy shut down .
New York 's Andrew Cuomo decries 'eBay'-style bidding war for ventilators Read more
“ I want every American to be prepared for the hard days that lie ahead , ” Trump said at the White House . “ We ’ re going to go through a very tough two weeks . This is going to be a very painful , very , very painful two weeks . ”
The US death toll from the coronavirus climbed past 3,800 on Tuesday , eclipsing China ’ s official count . Trump has been widely condemned for exacerbating the crisis by failing to prepare testing kits , breathing apparatus and other equipment .
On Tuesday his experts said their models showed between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans could die even if the US keeps mitigation measures in place .
Dr Deborah Birx , the White House coronavirus taskforce response coordinator , said models showed a worst case scenario of between 1.5m and 2.2m deaths in the US “ without mitigation ” .
But with measures in place , she added , the “ mountain ” could be reduced to a “ hill ” that projects 100,000–240,000 deaths – still a staggering total . She stressed that the number could be lower if people changed their behavior .
She displayed a chart in which New York had by far the most cumulative cases , followed by New Jersey , then the other 48 states bunched together . Birx expressed hope that social distancing could prevent major outbreaks in those states .
Early mitigation slowing the spread of disease in California and Washington state “ gives us great hope ” , she added . “ It ’ s communities that will do this . There ’ s no magic bullet . There ’ s no magic vaccine or therapy . It ’ s just behaviour . ”
Asked if Americans be prepared for the likelihood that there would be 100,000 Americans who die from this virus , Dr Anthony Fauci , director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , said : “ The answer is yes . As sobering a number as that is , we should be prepared for it .
“ Is it going to be that much ? I hope not , and I think the more we push on the mitigation , the less likelihood it will be that number ... We are really convinced mitigation is going to be doing the trick for us . ”
He added : “ We ’ re going to continue to see things go up . We can not be discouraged by that because the mitigation is actually working ... Now is the time , whenever you ’ re having an effect , not to take your foot off the accelerator and on the brake , but to just press it down on the accelerator . And that ’ s what I hope and I know that we can do over the next 30 days . ”
Trump eventually heeded such advice , and opinion polls , after previously declaring an ambition to restart the economy by Easter . He announced on Sunday that he was extending to 30 April the guidelines that urged Americans to cease social gatherings , work from home , suspend onsite learning at schools and more in a nationwide effort to stem the spread of the virus .
Trump spoke after another bad day for the stock market . The Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged more than 400 points , or roughly 1.9 % , to seal the worst first-quarter finish of its 135-year history .
But the president defended shutting down much of the economy , attempting to rewrite history . Trump , who in speeches and on Twitter has compared Covid-19 to the common flu , said : “ A lot of people have said , ‘ Ride it out . Don ’ t do anything , just ride it out . And think of it as the flu. ’ But it ’ s not the flu . It ’ s vicious . ”
And as the briefing wore on , more of the old Trump emerged . He made misleading claims about the early travel restrictions he imposed on China and Europe and , despite complaints from state governors , defended the supply of ventilators and other equipment .
Although public health experts raised the alarm early based on reports from China , the president claimed : “ Nobody knew how contagious this was . I don ’ t think any doctor knew it at the time . People have not seen anything like this . ”
The missing six weeks : how Trump failed the biggest test of his life Read more
And trying to put his own efforts in a positive light , he noted that without his mitigation guidelines , models show the death toll could have reached 2.2m . “ You would have had people dying all over the place .
“ You would have seen people dying in airplanes , you would have seen people dying in hotel lobbies . How many people have even seen anybody die ? You would have seen death all over . ”
The president added : “ One hundred thousand is , according to modeling , a very low number. ” But he also described the figure as “ very sobering ” .