In the last two weeks , almost 10 million Americans have filed new unemployment claims . Ten million Americans who , through no fault of their own , are now out of work . That ’ s catastrophic . It ’ s the herald of a severe economic crisis that could dwarf the Great Recession . The only way we will avert that outcome is through decisive action that gets relief directly to American workers and families , as quickly as possible .
That ’ s what the $ 2 trillion CARES Act was designed to do . It passed with overwhelming bipartisan support , because Congress understands that families and small businesses are already feeling the economic impact of this crisis . Now , it ’ s up to President Donald Trump and his administration to get that help in the hands of the people who need it . Earlier this week , I spoke with President Trump and shared my recommendations for what he should do now to address this crisis . It ’ s going to require a lot of hard , painstaking work .
Unfortunately , there are already signs the CARES Act is not being implemented quickly enough — reports that the Treasury may need five months to send out support checks ; banks that didn ’ t receive guidance until the last minute on how to get the small business lending program up and running ; laid-off workers who can ’ t even log on to apply for their unemployment checks . All the money in the world won ’ t matter if Americans can ’ t access it .
I was in charge of administering the $ 800 billion Recovery Act of 2009 , so I understand that the devil is in the details . It ’ s about accountability and transparency . We need our president to lead , not point fingers or lay blame . We need our government to work
That ’ s why I ’ ve offered a 10-point “ Make it Work ” checklist for how the Trump administration can get money out the door and into the hands of the American people . It ’ s a blueprint for what is required to administer a massive government relief program . I hope President Trump adopts the whole thing . Here are just a few of those steps :
►First , he needs to get unemployment checks out on time and in full . States are already overwhelmed by the millions of new claims , with more sure to come . They need more staff , better technology , and more robust systems to both accept claims and move funds out the door . The White House should make sure the states get all the resources they need to increase capacity . And Trump should stand up a response team , with empowered senior leaders , to help states navigate the inevitable challenges of distributing benefits .
►Second , Trump needs to get help to small businesses fast , so they can keep people on the payroll . The money in the CARES Act for small businesses should be available to every single eligible small business , regardless of how small they are , where they are located , or how well-connected their owner is . As designed , the program depends on private banks to provide government-backed loans , but there ’ s no mechanism to make sure they do . I ’ m calling for a Banks Defense Production Act , to make sure that banks are processing loans for all who qualify within a few working days of application , not sitting on this money or turning away qualified applicants .
Trump 's coronavirus chaos : If Trump wants to be seen as a 'wartime president , ' he should start acting like one
►Third , the latest unemployment claims and employment numbers make it clear that our economic priority has to be keeping as many people on payroll as possible . The administration should expand “ work-sharing ” programs to all 50 states , Washington D.C. , Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands . These programs help employers keep more workers employed , with the federal government making up the difference in lost hours .
There is much more detail in my checklist , but the driving theme is simple : Help as many working families and small businesses as possible , as fast as possible . American workers who have lost their jobs or seen their hours slashed and families who are struggling to pay rent and put food on the table need help immediately .
Get direct payments into people ’ s hands without any delays . Streamline the process . Use direct deposit and pre-paid debit cards wherever possible .
Stop trying to block oversight of the $ 500 billion fund for corporations , because any dollar wasted through fraud or abuse is a dollar that isn ’ t going to help an American family .
Biden on pandemic preparedness : Trump is worst possible leader to deal with coronavirus outbreak
And let ’ s put together a Phase 4 package immediately . We ’ re going to need it . America ’ s long-term recovery is going to require far more investment , and it needs to be smart and effective to help everyone . So let ’ s not waste time arguing about it . One tragedy of this crisis is how much pain could have been avoided with swift , decisive action .
Above all , President Trump needs to step up his response to the public health crisis . The failure to arrest the spread of the virus is the direct cause of the economic pain Americans are suffering today . None of this will matter if we don ’ t get our front line health workers the resources and personal protective equipment they need to break the infection curve , stop the spread of the virus , and save American lives .
I know the American people will beat this . We ’ re brave and big-hearted . We ’ ve emerged stronger from every crisis that has tested us as a nation—and we will again . This new enemy may be unseen , but we have the tools , the expertise , the will , and the spirit to defeat it . There is nothing we can not accomplish if we work together .
Former Vice President Joe Biden is a candidate for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination . Follow him on Twitter : @ JoeBiden