Dr. Deborah Birx is urging Americans not to rely on a “ false sense of security ” where the coronavirus outbreak is concerned .
On Tuesday , Birx appeared on German Marshall Fund ’ s Brussels Forum webcast where she spoke with the president of the organization about the coronavirus pandemic as Americans loosen social distancing practices .
During the discussion , Birx offered a reminder that cases will be unlikely to go down during the summer months .
“ None of us can be lulled into this false sense of security that the cases may go down this summer , ” Birx said .
According to Birx , local and state leaders are largely responsible for implementing safety measures , contact tracing , and surveillance in the event of a second wave of the coronavirus .
Noting no country ’ s population has reached a substantial level of immunity to the virus , Birx also noted the importance of Europe and other countries taking the same precautionary measures to prepare for a possible resurgence of the novel virus .
“ Europe needs to be preparing exactly the same way , ” Birx said . “ No country , no matter what approach that they have taken , have resulted in enough immunity to protect their population if the virus comes back in the fall . ”
Birx went on to admit the pandemic has served as a “ wake-up call ” that signals vast improvements that need to be made . She admitted she was shocked to hear of some of the supply shortages the country faced .
“ Our supply chains were not made for that kind of dramatic surge and they weren ’ t anywhere in the world , ” Birx said . “ The level of stress on the supply chain to the developed world was equal if not greater to the stress I have experienced in resource-limited settings . The things that we ran out of or came close to running out of — it was shocking to me . ”
Birx statement follows a tense week in the United States . Protests against police brutality have erupted nationwide following the death of George Floyd . Demonstrators have flooded the streets of cities all across the country .
While many protesters have been seen wearing masks , social distancing appears to be nearly non-existent which raises concerns about potential spikes in coronavirus cases in several states .
As of Tuesday afternoon , there are more than 1.8 million cases of coronavirus in the United States and more than 107,000 deaths .