The Major League Baseball Players Association informed MLB on Saturday night that they are done negotiating and want an answer by Monday on how many games they ’ ll play and when to show up for work .
“ It ’ s now become apparent that these efforts have fallen upon dead ears , ’ ’ Tony Clark , executive director of the MLBPA , said in a statement . “ In recent days , owners have decried the supposed unprofitability of owning a baseball team and the Commissioner has repeatedly threatened to schedule a dramatically shortened season unless players agree to hundreds of millions in further concessions . Our response has been consistently that such concessions are unwarranted , would be fundamentally unfair to players , and our sport deserves the fullest 2020 season possible . These remain our positions today , particularly in light of new reports regarding MLB ’ s national television rights — information that we requested from the league weeks ago but were never provided .
“ As a result , it unfortunately appears that further dialogue with the league would be futile . It ’ s time to get back to work . Tell us when and where . ’ ’
In other words , the union now is simply waiting for Commissioner Rob Manfred to unilaterally impose a short season , perhaps as few as 50 games , which would require the players to be paid at a prorated basis .
`` We have been consistent and upfront about everything from the beginning , ’ ’ said Andrew Miller , a member of the union ’ s executive committee . `` We want to play and have made that abundantly clear . It ’ s clear the negotiations were not being productive and it was time to put the ball into the hands of MLB to let us know when we should come to work . ''
Just like that , unless MLB comes back with a proposal that would pay the players full-prorated salaries without fans in the stands , 10 weeks of negotiations are over .
And perhaps plenty of players who may simply decide to sit out the season and rejoin their teams for spring training next season .
“ Ugly , ’ ’ one MLB owner said . “ And it ’ s going to get worse . ’ ’
In the letter lead attorney Bruce Meyer sent to deputy commissioner Dan Halem , he reiterated that the players will not take any pay cut from their prorated salaries , particularly in light of a news report that MLB has agreed to a lucrative contract extension with Turner Sports . The deal has yet to be finalized and will not be in effect until 2022 , two high-ranking officials with direct knowledge of the negotiations said , and will have no impact on this year ’ s economic losses .
“ We have made clear numerous times that players are not willing to accept less than their full prorated salaries for playing games , ’ ’ Meyer said in a letter obtained by ███ Sports . “ Your recitation of the March Agreement and negotiations leading up to it is both inaccurate and largely irrelevant . …
“ Your failure to produce numerous categories of documents that would allow us to validate your claims provided further confirmation of our position . For example , we still have never received unredacted RSN and national TV contracts or sponsorship agreements , the details of ongoing discussions with TV networks and sponsors , or projections of the value of any expanded playoffs . …
“ As far as how you have conducted negotiations and without getting into all of your underhanded tactics to circumvent the union , your approach has been one delay tactic after another : You wasted most of April and May on lobbying politicians regarding player concessions and leaking a so-called revenue sharing proposal to the media . …Your response has been wholly inadequate , and the league has continued to obstruct the Association ’ s efforts to obtain even a modicum of financial transparency from the league and its clubs . ’ ’
The union also believes that baseball should be played into November , despite MLB ’ s insistence that doctors and medical experts have warned them of a second wave of the virus , which potentially would cancel the postseason , and a loss of about $ 900 million .
“ Your refusal to play games in October is purportedly based primarily on concern for player health , ’ ’ the letter continues . “ We believe this is a pretext . We note that we requested information at our May 31 meeting on any basis for not playing games in October . You agreed to provide such information but we have yet to receive it . Other leagues are planning on playing in October and November , and we have proposed having the flexibility to play games at neutral sites if necessary to address any safety concerns . We believe your position is part and parcel of your general bad faith determination to play as few games as possible to punish players for refusing to capitulate to MLB ’ s demands for massive pay cuts .
“ Players remain united in their stance that a day ’ s work is worth a day ’ s pay , particularly in a situation where players and their families are being asked to take on additional burdens and risks . Given your continued insistence on hundreds of millions of dollars of additional pay reductions , we assume these negotiations are at an end . If it is your intention to unilaterally impose a season , we again request that you inform us and our members of how many games you intend to play and when and where players should report . It is unfair to leave players and the fans hanging at this point , and further delay risks compromising health and safety .
“ We demand that you inform us of your plans by close of business on Monday , June 15 . ’ ’
Major League Baseball responded Saturday night with a statement that read in part , `` We are disappointed that the MLBPA has chosen not to negotiate in good faith over resumption of play after MLB has made three successive proposals that would provide players , Clubs and our fans with an amicable resolution to a very difficult situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic . ...
`` ‘ We will evaluate the Union ’ s refusal to adhere to the terms of the March Agreement , and after consulting with ownership , determine the best course to bring baseball back to our fans . ”
It ’ s possible that MLB could submit a counter-proposal , after their last proposal guaranteeing 70 % pay during a 76-game regular season and 80 % if there ’ s a postseason , but why bother ?
MLB could turn around and propose a shortened season between 60 and 70 games with full pro-rated pay , guaranteeing a 16-team postseason , but it ’ s unlikely .
Simply , it ’ s clear these two sides have reached an impasse .
There will be a season , perhaps starting as early as July 14 , but the joy of a 2020 season has vanished in a sea of emails and zoom calls during these tumultuous negotiations .