A Chinese man wears a protective mask as he walks by a propaganda banner on February 20 , 2020 in Beijing , China .
The small outbreak in Iran has been linked to a case in Canada and another infection of a 45-year-old woman in Lebanon after those patients traveled to the Middle East nation .
Earlier in the day , Iran confirmed 13 new coronavirus cases , bringing its total in the country to 18 . Seven people with the flu-like virus were diagnosed in Qom , four people in Tehran and two in Gilan .
World health officials said Friday the COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak in Iran , where health officials confirmed 18 new cases and four deaths in just two days , is `` very worrisome . ''
`` The cases that we see in the rest of the world , although the numbers are small , but not linked to Wuhan or China , it 's very worrisome , '' Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus , director-general of the World Health Organization , said Friday at a news conference at the agency 's headquarters in Geneva . `` These dots are actually very concerning . ''
Health officials are receiving information about the patients in Iran , but `` we have to engage them even more , '' Tedros said .
World health officials still have a chance to contain the virus , he said , but it 's getting less likely by the day .
`` The window of opportunity is still there , but our window of opportunity is narrowing , '' he said . `` We need to act quickly before it closes completely . '' He also cautioned : `` This outbreak could still go in any direction . ''
Iran 's health-care system has the `` basic capacity '' to detect and contain the coronavirus , said Dr. Jaouad Mahjour , assistant director of emergency preparedness at WHO . World health officials said they remain concerned about the potential spread of the virus to countries with weaker health systems .
Outside of China , there are 1,152 cases across 26 countries , including eight deaths , Tedros said .
World health officials have said the respiratory disease is capable of spreading through human-to-human contact , droplets carried through sneezing and coughing and germs left on inanimate objects .