FILE - In this March 17 , 2020 , file photo a poll worker at the Su Nueva Lavanderia polling place uses rubber gloves as she enters a ballot in the ballot box in Chicago . A new poll from The ███-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research finds Democrats are now much more likely than Republicans to support their state conducting elections exclusively by mail , 47 % to 29 % . ( AP Photo/Charles Rex Arbogast , File )
FILE - In this March 17 , 2020 , file photo a poll worker at the Su Nueva Lavanderia polling place uses rubber gloves as she enters a ballot in the ballot box in Chicago . A new poll from The ███-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research finds Democrats are now much more likely than Republicans to support their state conducting elections exclusively by mail , 47 % to 29 % . ( AP Photo/Charles Rex Arbogast , File )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — Americans ’ support for mail-in voting has jumped amid concerns about the safety of polling places during the coronavirus pandemic , but a wide partisan divide suggests President Donald Trump ’ s public campaign against vote by mail may be resonating with his Republican backers .
A new poll from The ███-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research finds Democrats are now much more likely than Republicans to support their state conducting elections exclusively by mail , 47 % to 29 % .
In 2018 , about half as many Democrats were in favor , and there was little difference in the views of Democrats and Republicans on the question .
The survey also found a partisan divide on support for no-excuse absentee voting , the system in place in most states , including almost all the top presidential battlegrounds , even as a majority of Americans say they favor that practice .
The increased partisanship in the debate over how America votes comes just as that question has been thrust into the forefront of American politics . As health officials warn about the risk of spreading the coronavirus at polling places , some in the Republican Party have tried to limit the expansion of mail voting , with Trump and others openly fretting that it may enable too many people to cast their ballots for the GOP to win in November .
All states conduct elections differently , and only five states automatically mail ballots to every voter . But in response to the virus , some states — including Ohio on Tuesday — have shifted their primaries to virtually all-mail elections . On Monday , New York Democrats canceled their presidential primary , which had already been delayed until June 23 .
The Republican National Committee has been fighting some of those moves . Republicans successfully petitioned a New Mexico court to block the state from holding its June primary exclusively by mail , forcing the state to open some polling places and only send applications for absentee ballots to voters .
The Republican Attorney General in Texas argued unsuccessfully in a legal case that the coronavirus should not be an automatically accepted excuse for people seeking absentee ballots in that state .
Most prominently , the Republican-controlled Wisconsin legislature rebuffed a last-minute request to hold that state ’ s April 7 primary and state court election by mail . Democrats won a contested Supreme Court race , but not before shuttered polling locations left voters in long lines at polling places in Green Bay and Milwaukee , where only five of 183 stations were open .
But the debates over the primaries may only be a preview of the partisan battles ahead if the virus is still forcing stay-at-home orders and social distancing in November .
The poll finds that 39 % of Americans favor conducting all-mail elections , up from 19 % in 2018 . Another 40 % are opposed . But even more , 48 % , favor a move to voting only by mail if the coronavirus outbreak is ongoing in November .
The poll also shows 60 % of Americans support allowing people to vote via absentee ballot without requiring them to give a reason if the outbreak is still happening . That includes 73 % percent of Democrats and 46 % of Republicans . Some 40 % of Republicans are opposed .
The partisan differences could have a strong impact across the presidential battleground states . Five of the top seven swing states — Michigan , New Hampshire , North Carolina , Pennsylvania and Wisconsin — have divided government , and skirmishes over voting have already broken out in several . In some , there are signs that Democratic areas are moving faster than GOP ones to embrace mail voting .
In Wisconsin , Democrats have already started to bolster their mail voting operations for November . Reliably Democratic Milwaukee , the state ’ s largest city , will send every one of its 300,000 voters a request for an absentee ballot . Republicans , who have resisted a similar step statewide , acknowledge that Milwaukee ’ s move would put them at a disadvantage . “ It makes winning Wisconsin harder , ” said Andrew Hitt , chair of the state Republican Party , calling for intervention to “ level the playing field . ”
In Pennsylvania , Democratically-led areas are eager to expand absentee voting , but Republicans seem less so . The second-most populous county in the state , the Democratic bastion of Allegheny , which includes Pittsburgh , is sending absentee ballot requests to all its voters in its June primary .
The poll found roughly two-thirds of Republicans worried that voter fraud would be a major problem with all-mail voting . Two months ago , about as many described voter fraud as a major problem in U.S. elections in general . Widespread voter fraud in mail-in voting is uncommon .
Brynn Alexander , 36 , who just moved with her husband to military housing in Alabama , is one of those who worries about security .
“ How do you even identify that the mail got to the right person ? ” Alexander asked . She added that she favored exceptions for some , like her 70-year-old mother , but preferred votes at the polls .
“ It ’ s going to be better to make everybody feel confident with the results , ” she said of in-person voting in the presidential election . “ You don ’ t want one party or the other saying the other side cheated . ”
Meanwhile , only 29 % of Democrats were worried about fraud being a major problem in an all-mail election , though another 41 % described it as a minor problem . Rick Reinesch , a 59-year-old IT technician in Austin , Texas , said Republicans needlessly pump up worries about voter fraud . “ It ’ s trying to kill a gnat with a sledgehammer , ” he said .
Paul Miller , 81 , of Carlisle , Pennsylvania , is wary of voting by mail . He ’ s accustomed to going to the polls on Election Day . “ I ’ m just not sold on mail-in voting , ” the Republican and retired factory worker said .
But Miller may bow to the reality that he shouldn ’ t be face-to-face with poll workers anytime soon and cast his vote by absentee .
“ I ’ m not dead set against mail , ” Miller said . “ I could be persuaded . ”
The AP-NORC poll of 1,057 adults was conducted April 16-20 using a sample drawn from NORC ’ s probability-based AmeriSpeak Panel , which is designed to be representative of the U.S. population . The margin of sampling error for all respondents is plus or minus 4 percentage points .