Last night , speaking from the state ’ s emergency operations center in Sacramento , California Gov . Gavin Newsom ordered everyone in the state to stay home to slow the spread of COVID-19 , the disease caused by the novel coronavirus . Malls , retail stores , and other businesses not considered critical infrastructure were to close in the most sweeping lockdown so far in the US .
That same night , also in Sacramento , an Amazon worker received an automated call telling him that his job at a distribution center was essential , and he should continue to come to work . In Washington , an early epicenter of the US outbreak , managers at an Amazon warehouse told employees that they would continue doing their jobs despite the state-mandated closure of nonessential businesses and the fact that workers in Amazon ’ s nearby corporate offices have been working remotely since March 5th .
As the virus spreads and cities lock down , Amazon workers across the country are finding themselves thrust into a new role : delivering goods to a nation in quarantine . But many fear that the safety precautions , benefits , and protections have not changed sufficiently to reflect the new reality , and that if their warehouses continue operating as everything else shuts down , many will fall ill .
Crowded workplaces , nonexistent screenings for symptoms , a lack of cleaning supplies , and a pace of work that made proper sanitation difficult
“ We ’ re all going to get sick eventually , ” said a worker at a facility in Washington . “ The vibe with coworkers is that we are all probably going to get it . It ’ s just a matter of time . ”
Amazon is uniquely positioned to thrive in the crisis . It ’ s spent more than two decades building a robust logistics network capable of delivering almost anything to anyone , and now Americans stuck at home are turning to the company to supply basic necessities . Data supplied by JungleScout shows search volume surging first for face masks and hand sanitizer , then for rice , soup , webcams , monitors — anything Americans might need as they hunker down . Already infrastructure for a huge portion of e-commerce , Amazon is becoming infrastructure for a house-bound populace .
But the virus also poses an unprecedented threat to Amazon ’ s logistics system and , more importantly , the workers who make it run . The company ’ s fulfillment centers depend on staffs of a thousand or more working in close proximity . ███ spoke with 24 warehouse workers and delivery drivers , many of whom spoke of crowded workplaces , nonexistent screenings for symptoms , a lack of cleaning supplies , and a pace of work that made proper sanitation difficult . Across the country , workers are weighing the need for an income against the fear that they might become infected and endanger their loved ones .
These concerns will only become more acute as the pandemic worsens . On March 18th , The Atlantic reported that a worker at an Amazon distribution center in New York tested positive for the virus . Workers on the following shift said they weren ’ t notified and were expected to come in but refused when learning of the case from co-workers , shutting down the facility . ( Amazon said it notified workers and that they weren ’ t expected to work the following shift , and that it has temporarily closed the facility for cleaning . ) In Italy and Spain , Amazon has refused to shut down facilities where workers have been infected , prompting protests .
“ I think what will wind up happening is the warehouse is going to stay open pretty much no matter what , ” said Tyler Hamilton , a worker at a fulfillment center in Minnesota , where the governor has ordered schools and many businesses closed . “ I understand why , because everything else is closed , and to make sure for society that people get basic necessities , food , toiletries — that ’ s important . But if you ’ re going to have that happening you should be taking proper precautions for your workers so they ’ re not suffering at the expense for everyone else . ”
“ If someone has a virus , all of us have it . ”
In response to the pandemic , Amazon has altered policies and instituted new procedures . Last week , Amazon announced that employees who test positive for COVID-19 will get two weeks paid leave , though testing is still largely unavailable , and workers who take time off when symptoms appear risk going without pay if it turns out they were ill with something else . Amazon also announced that workers can take unlimited time off without pay . ( Previously , they would have been fired for overdrawing their quota of unpaid time off . ) While some workers have taken unpaid leave because they fear infection or need to care for children who have been sent home from school , many more say they can not afford to go without a paycheck .
Reached for comment about Amazon ’ s status as an essential service and safety concerns among workers , an Amazon spokesperson said that the company had instituted new cleaning procedures , taken measures to encourage social distancing in its warehouses , and made other changes . “ The health and safety of our employees and contractors around the world continues to be our top priority , ” the spokesperson said in a statement . “ As communities around the world are requiring social distancing , we ’ re seeing that our teams—much like grocery stores , pharmacies and other essential services—have a unique role getting customers the critical items they need and this is especially vital for the elderly , people with underlying health issues , and those sick or quarantined . ”
But while workers say they have been told to wipe down their stations and wash their hands with sanitizer , they ’ re still expected to maintain the same intense pace , which leaves little time to do so . “ The longer you take to do it , the faster you ’ re going to have to work later on , ” Hamilton said . “ They should allow associates to go to the bathroom , to wash their hands regularly , as opposed to counting it against them . ”
Warehouse workers in Washington , California , and Minnesota say they are not being screened for symptoms when arriving at work and that their jobs often require them to stand far closer than the six-foot distance recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . “ If you try to stretch your hand , it would reach next person , ” said Hibaq Mohamed , who works on the packaging line in a Minnesota fulfillment center . Workers pass items to each other and often share equipment . “ If someone has a virus , all of us have it , ” she said .
William Stolz , another worker at the facility , worries that operating without testing every worker and implementing other safety measures will cause the warehouse to become a major vector for transmission . “ I really think that with this pandemic , if Amazon is staying open with the risk of the transmission being what it is , if this pandemic gets worse , they ’ re going to be part of the reason why . ”
A delivery driver in Indianapolis said he was given sanitizing wipes on Monday but none after that
Last week , Amazon workers in New York began circulating a petition calling for paid sick leave regardless of diagnosis , hazard pay , the shutdown of facilities if workers test positive for the virus , and an end to penalties for not meeting the rate . “ As the coronavirus pandemic unfolds and communities everywhere prepare for the worst , Amazon workers have become crucial in getting people their food , water , and sanitation supplies , ” the group wrote .
Safety measures have also been uneven for delivery drivers , according to interviews with a dozen drivers , most of whom work for third-party companies that have contracts with Amazon . A delivery driver in Indianapolis said he was given sanitizing wipes on Monday but none after that . A driver in Virginia said some vans have hand sanitizer and wipes but others don ’ t and that every morning , he gathers with 20 to 30 other drivers to collect their keys . A driver in Georgia said she ’ d been told to sanitize her van and wash her hands but was given no supplies to do so . “ Our packages go through so many hands before we even get them , ” she said , noting that research found the virus can live on plastic for three days and cardboard for 24 hours . She ’ s scared , but she can ’ t afford not to work .
Nevertheless , some workers are choosing to take the financial hit and stay home . For some , they need to care for children who are no longer at school . Others fear becoming infected and passing the virus to others . “ There ’ s more attrition day-to-day , so you don ’ t have the same amount of staffing , ” said a worker at the Minnesota facility .
The reduced staffing comes at a time of unprecedented demand . Amazon typically hires thousands of temporary workers to handle the surges of Prime Day and holiday shopping , but it lets them go in January . “ It ’ s like Prime Day every day — Prime Week , ” said one warehouse worker , but without the staff to keep up . On Amazon , a growing number of items are showing up as out of stock , and deliveries that normally take a day or two now stretch to a week or more .
The bottleneck is being felt farther down the delivery chain . Drivers in Florida , Georgia , Virginia , and elsewhere said their routes have been shorter than usual all week . When a driver for Amazon Flex , the company ’ s on-demand delivery program , pulled up to their warehouse this weekend , the worker directing traffic said several workers had called out and deliveries were backed up , while another worker announced that they were starting hiring that day .
On Tuesday , Amazon announced that it was hiring 100,000 new workers and raising wages by $ 2 per hour , but it ’ s unclear whether that will be enough to entice people to venture into a crowded warehouse during a pandemic . “ All warehouses right now are going to have a very difficult time maintaining manpower , ” says Marc Wulfraat of the logistics consulting company MWPVL International . E-commerce companies like Amazon are particularly labor-intensive , he says , because they ship out individual products rather than bulk pallets . “ Those buildings that Amazon has are extremely populated , they have the biggest parking lots of any distribution centers that are being made . They ’ re like little cities of two thousand , three thousand people working under one roof . The only thing I can predict is that even with the extra money that they ’ re offering , they are going to be hit hard with throughput shortages . ”
“ Just like at a hospital , that is also mission critical . ”
Workers worry that if Amazon ’ s recruitment drive succeeds , their warehouses will become even more crowded at a time when other businesses are being ordered to shift to telework , reduce staff , or close entirely . Local governments vary on what businesses are considered essential and can maintain operations , but so far most orders exempt warehouses , food , and other categories Amazon could reasonably fall under . On Tuesday , Amazon announced that it was temporarily halting deliveries of nonessential items to its warehouses , an effort to meet surging demand for medical supplies and household staples , but also a move that would bolster its case that it needs to keep running .
Many workers agree that the pandemic has transformed their jobs into something more essential , though several noted that they ’ re still shipping plenty of phone cases , house decorations , and other low-priority goods . ( “ We physically can not keep up with the amount of orders , ” one worker pleaded . “ If you want to buy non-essentials , put it in your shopping cart , get it later , because it ’ s coming at the cost of sanitation supplies and food . It ’ s people staying fed and people staying healthy. ” ) But the virus has also transformed their jobs into something more dangerous , and if operations are going to continue as everything else shuts down , workers feel more substantive safety measures need to be taken .
“ You would have something like Amazon that does stay open and provide that basic service , but the workers would have the full precautions and protection to deal with it , because you are working in a pandemic in an area full of people , ” said Hamilton , the Minnesota warehouse worker . “ Just like at a hospital , that is also mission critical . “ You need the hospital during a pandemic , you need that service to make sure you get through it . But people in a hospital get protection , at least as much as we can , ” he said , acknowledging that even medical workers currently lack necessary protective gear . “ If we were to actually prepare better as a society , or in Amazon ’ s case as a company , it would look something like that . ”
Update March 21 , 11AM ET : The story has been updated to include a statement from Amazon .