Michigan Gov . Gretchen Whitmer ’ s husband reportedly sought special treatment in trying to get their boat on the water in time for Memorial Day weekend , even as his wife cautioned residents about traveling for the holiday .
`` This morning , I was out working when the office called me , there was a gentleman on hold who wanted his boat in the water before the weekend , '' read a post from NorthShore Dock on Facebook . `` Being Memorial weekend and the fact that we started working three weeks late means there is no chance this is going to happen . ''
`` Well our office personnel had explained this to the man and he replied , ' I am the husband to the governor , will this make a difference ? ' ''
The post was removed after it went viral , the company said , noting that they are too busy to handle media requests .
`` After a long day of keeping crews running , adhering to the additional safety regulations that need to be in place to operate our small business and fielding calls from customers frustrated with our lagging installation schedule I was told the governor 's husband called asking for install availability , '' the company said . `` Up until this point we , as a company , had no idea we installed their dock or boat . ''
According to the NorthShore Dock , Mallory was very understanding when they said they couldn ’ t fulfill his request .
Whitmer said last week that some restrictions in parts of Northern Michigan would be lifted but still warned those who didn ’ t live in the areas to “ think long and hard before you take a trip into them . ”
`` A small spike could put the hospital system in dire straits pretty quickly , ” she added . “ That 's precisely why we 're asking everyone to continue doing their part . Do n't descend on [ waterfront ] Traverse City from all regions of the state . ''
State Sen. Tom Barrett , R-Charlotte , wrote his own Facebook post on Friday , criticizing Mallory 's apparent request for the boat installation . The post was shared 500 times , Barrett said . But the lawmaker said he eventually deleted it after the governor 's office reached out to the staff of Senate Majority Leader Mike Shirkey , R-Clarklake , asking for the post to be removed and contending the comments were false . Barrett , who looked into the situation further , said he now believes the governor 's office had made him an `` unwilling '' accessory in an attempted cover-up of the situation . The senator also mentioned that Whitmer had told other Michigan residents not to `` descend '' on Traverse City . “ Yet , what did her family try and do ? '' Barrett said . `` In the Army , we have a tradition that the leaders get in line for chow last behind everyone else in the unit , '' he continued . `` Here is the leader of our state . … Her family is trying to cut people in line . '' ( The Detroit News )
She told citizens not to travel , not to visit lakes .
Then her husband tried to get a special exception to get HIS boat on the lake ... https : //t.co/huImSlJGpb — Liz Wheeler ( @ Liz_Wheeler ) May 26 , 2020
Whitmer and her husband have a vacation home 25 minutes from Traverse City , but their primary residence is in Lansing , which is more than 150 miles away .