Good news about the coronavirus is in short supply . The United States ’ confirmed case count is approaching half a million — more than triple any other country ’ s . The U.S. will soon lead the world in COVID-19 deaths as well . Roughly 95 percent of Americans are living under lockdown orders . No one seems to have any real sense of how or when this will end .
But look a little harder and you can just start to discern a faint light at the end of this very dark tunnel . You just have to know where to look .
Ignore the skyrocketing case count , or at least take it with a grain of salt . As FiveThirtyEight ’ s Nate Silver has explained , the number of positive tests reported in any given city , state or country is highly dependent on the number of tests conducted there — which differs wildly from place to place over time . Death tolls are more useful for comparing how the epidemic is evolving in different locales . But because it typically takes weeks for someone with COVID-19 to die , they ’ re also lagging indicators that tell you less about where on its epidemic trajectory the virus is now than where it was back then .
The number you really want to focus on is hospitalizations . And if it ’ s good news you ’ re after , pay particular attention to what ’ s happening in two key states : New York and California .
Until very recently , nationwide data about how many COVID-19 patients are currently receiving treatment in hospitals was hard to come by . It ’ s still incomplete and inconsistent . But on April 7 , researchers at the University of Minnesota launched the U.S. COVID-19 Hospitalization Tracking Project , which is just what it sounds like : the first effort to capture , track , visualize and compare daily data on the number of COVID-19 hospitalizations from the 37 state departments of health that are reporting this information ( so far ) .
The reason this information is so valuable is simple . Because hospitalization typically occurs a week or so after infection , it ’ s less of a lagging indicator than the death count ( which trails by two to two and a half weeks ) and more directly tied to the trajectory of the epidemic than the testing-dependent case count . It ’ s also a measure of the most pressing public health concern of all : how close we are to exceeding the capacity of our hospital system , which can make COVID-19 much deadlier than it would otherwise be .
Which brings us to New York and California . Chart each state ’ s hospitalization data over the last seven days or so , and two different narratives emerge .
Each day this week , New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo has delivered a cautiously optimistic message at his morning briefing .
“ We are reaching a plateau in the total number of hospitalizations , ” Cuomo said Tuesday . “ You can see the growth , and you see it ’ s starting to flatten . ”
“ All of this data suggests we are flattening the curve so far , ” he added Thursday . “ So far our efforts are working . They ’ re working better than anyone projected they would work . ”
The hospitalization numbers tell the tale . On Wednesday , New York ’ s daily death count hit an all-time high : 799 . But that reflects infections from weeks ago , before the state ’ s lockdown started . The number of people testing positive stayed relatively flat .