Veteran International Olympic Committee member Dick Pound told ███ Sports on Monday afternoon that the 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games are going to be postponed amid the coronavirus pandemic .
“ On the basis of the information the IOC has , postponement has been decided , ” Pound said in a phone interview . “ The parameters going forward have not been determined , but the games are not going to start on July 24 , that much I know . ”
Pound , a Canadian who has been one of the most influential members of the IOC for decades , said the games will likely be moved to 2021 , with the details to be worked out in the next four weeks . He said he expects the IOC to announce its next steps soon .
HERCULEAN EFFORT : What will it take to postpone the Olympics ? A lot .
“ It will come in stages , ” said Pound , 78 , the longest-serving IOC member . “ We will postpone this and begin to deal with all the ramifications of moving this , which are immense . ”
Neither the IOC nor the Tokyo 2020 organizing committee had announced a decision to postpone as of Monday afternoon .
When informed of Pound 's comments and asked for an IOC response , spokesman Mark Adams said , `` It is the right of every IOC member to interpret the decision of the IOC executive board which was announced ( Sunday ) . ''
In that announcement Sunday , IOC president Thomas Bach indicated , for the first time , that postponing the Tokyo Games would be a possibility .
In a letter to the athlete community , he wrote that the IOC would begin exploring alternate ways to stage the games , including postponement , and plan to reach a decision within the next four weeks . He emphasized that the IOC has ruled out canceling the games , a stance that was reiterated by key Japanese officials – including Prime Minister Shinzo Abe – on Monday .
CORONAVIRUS & SPORTS : Get the latest news and information right in your inbox . Sign up here .
WARNING : Health experts warn holding 2020 Summer Games too soon risks spreading coronavirus more
Representatives of the Tokyo 2020 organizing committee did not immediately reply to an email from ███ Sports seeking a response to Pound 's comments .
The Olympics would be the latest – and , by far , most significant – sporting event to date to fall victim to the coronavirus , which was first identified in Wuhan , China , in December . Also known as COVID-19 , the disease rapidly spread throughout China and across the world in subsequent months , infecting hundreds of thousands of people and causing major disruptions to daily life in numerous countries .
The spread of the coronavirus also has interrupted Olympic qualification procedures and severely affected training regimens , prompting athletes and sports governing bodies around the world to call for the games ' postponement .
`` I would have real moral objections , if the situation was the same as it was today , to competing , ” swimmer and five-time Olympic gold medalist Nathan Adrian told ███ Sports on Friday .
Pressure mounted over the weekend as World Athletics , the international federation that oversees track and field , publicly called for the games to be postponed . The Canadian Olympic and Paralympic Committees then took matters to another level Sunday night by announcing they will not send a delegation of athletes to the Tokyo Games unless they were postponed .
Within the next 12 hours , Australia 's Olympic Committee released a similar but more ambiguous statement , explaining that its executive board had agreed that `` an Australian team could not be assembled in the changing circumstances at home and abroad . '' And the German Olympic Committee joined its counterparts in Brazil and Norway , among other countries , in publicly urging the IOC to postpone the games .
The decision to postpone , when finalized and announced by the IOC , will mark a significant milestone . It would the first time the Olympics have been suspended , though the games have been canceled in times of war .
The 1916 Summer Games were canceled because of World War I , as were the Summer and Winter Games in 1940 and 1944 because of World War II . Boycotts also caused serious complications for the games in 1976 , 1980 and 1984 . But in each case , the event itself went on as scheduled .
`` I ’ ve had so many calls with athletes who have been in tears trying to train for their ultimate dream but not wanting to jeopardize their health , '' American hurdler Lolo Jones wrote on Twitter after Pound 's comments . `` This was the right thing to do . May the world heal . ''