Emanuel : Yes , restarting the economy has to be done in stages , and it does have to start with more physical distancing at a work site that allows people who are at lower risk to come back . Certain kinds of construction , or manufacturing or offices , in which you can maintain six-foot distances are more reasonable to start sooner . Larger gatherings — conferences , concerts , sporting events — when people say they ’ re going to reschedule this conference or graduation event for October 2020 , I have no idea how they think that ’ s a plausible possibility . I think those things will be the last to return . Realistically we ’ re talking fall 2021 at the earliest .
Restaurants where you can space tables out , maybe sooner . In Hong Kong , Singapore and other places , we ’ re seeing resurgences when they open up and allow more activity . It ’ s going to be this roller coaster , up and down . The question is : When it goes up , can we do better testing and contact tracing so that we can focus on particular people and isolate them and not have to reimpose shelter-in-place for everyone as we did before ?
Anne Case : The idea that tables could be spread far enough apart that it would be safe to open restaurants — maybe that ’ ll happen in many cities , but it seems highly unlikely that sector will bounce back , which means there are all these service workers who are not going to find work in the sector they were working in . Losing that for 18 months , that ’ s enormous . Eventually , when the time comes for people to go back to work , I worry that some large fraction of working-class people won ’ t have work to go back to .
Peter Singer : If we ’ re thinking of a year to 18 months of this kind of lockdown , then we really do need to think about the consequences other than in terms of deaths from Covid-19 . I think the consequences are horrific , in terms of unemployment in particular , which has been shown to have a very serious effect on well-being , and particularly for poorer people . Are we really going to be able to continue an assistance package to all of those people for 18 months ?
That ’ s a question each country will have to answer . Maybe some of the affluent countries can , but we have a lot of poor countries that just have no possibility of providing that kind of assistance for their poor people . That ’ s where we ’ ll get into saying , Yes , people will die if we open up , but the consequences of not opening up are so severe that maybe we ’ ve got to do it anyway . If we keep it locked down , then more younger people are going to die because they ’ re basically not going to get enough to eat or other basics . So , those trade-offs will come out differently in different countries .
The Rev . William Barber : Even when we take the rich countries , poor people know from history that every time there is some great struggle , whether it ’ s the Great War , or the Spanish flu , or the recession of 2008 , they are hit the hardest .
The United States has a whole lot of wounds from decades of racist policies and the criminalization of the poor . In 2011 , Columbia did a study that we ’ ve updated : At least 250,000 people die every year from poverty in America . Now , in a pandemic , that ’ s an open fissure .