Some argue that “ A recovery package could simply—and probably unsuccessfully—try to get the economy back up to where it was before the Covid-19 shutdowns took hold , complete with its decades of wage stagnation , exploding carbon emissions , and staggering inequality . Or , with politicians newly willing to spend , it could build a carbon-neutral , significantly stronger and fairer society—and put millions to work doing it… Before the immediate mobilization around World War II , the years leading up to it saw federal jobs programs employ millions in work the private sector simply didn ’ t see as important enough to create… “ Full employment was an animating demand of social movements through much of the postwar era , which led to it being featured in the Democratic Party platform until 1980… Thinking creatively in such a dire crisis—about silver linings and opportunities—can feel inappropriate , even irresponsible… [ But ] How lawmakers respond to Covid-19 and its economic fallout could either protect the next century from the persistent crises threatened by rising temperatures , or make them far worse. ” Kate Aronoff , New Republic
“ Governments should directly assume the debt of high-risk households . Trying to incentivise financial intermediaries to modify the terms of existing loans , as the US government did with the Home Affordable Modification Program after the 2008 crisis , will be too slow to meet the current challenge . It ’ s often said that the public health of the majority is determined by the most vulnerable in society . The same logic applies to a healthy political and economic system : its stability depends on how it treats its weakest members . Hedging our bets on an economic system that has neglected these truths and instead prioritised wealth creation at the top has put us all at risk. ” Katharina Pistor , The Guardian
“ Unless a business has been forced to fully close , there ’ s a way to keep workers on the payroll , ease the pain of a downturn and speed economic recovery . It ’ s called ‘ work-sharing. ’ … Employers experiencing a temporary reduction in business agree to cut employees ’ hours instead of laying off workers entirely . Employees on reduced hours receive unemployment benefits in proportion to the reduction in their hours . Businesses benefit by retaining valued employees and avoiding recruitment and training costs when economic conditions return to normal . Workers benefit by retaining most of their income and access to health insurance — a critical factor in a public health-triggered economic crisis like this one. ” Katharine G. Abraham and Susan N. Housman , Politico
“ President Trump has asked for aid to the airlines , which have already taken a huge hit . In practice , this would mean bailing out their shareholders . Here ’ s why I ’ m not terribly sympathetic to this idea : Airlines have access to major capital markets . They have managed to continue operations through many , many rounds of bankruptcies before , with little noticeable effect for customers or the rest of the economy… “ The same is not generally true for millions of small- and medium-sized companies — which are more likely to go out of business altogether , and take with them all the jobs on their payrolls . Compared to their larger counterparts , smaller businesses tend to operate on thinner margins and with smaller cash reserves… Just as lawmakers are leaning toward direct payments rather than loans to households , they might consider giving grants of some kind to businesses , too. ” Catherine Rampell , Washington Post
“ Has there ever been a sudden stop comparable to this ? ... The Great Depression , which began after the stock market crashed in October , 1929 , was wrenching and disastrous , of course . But [ economics professor Barry ] Eichengreen pointed out that it developed more gradually than the coronavirus shock . ‘ The production of goods and services fell by about a third , but over a period of three-plus years , ’ he said . ‘ Industrial production fell by half , but , again , over a period of three years . The unemployment rate rose to about one in four , but over four years . Now what we are talking about is the possibility that the unemployment rate could shoot up very dramatically in a very short period of time. ’ ” John Cassidy , New Yorker
The right urges the federal government to provide relief to businesses and local governments to ensure a speedy economic recovery once the pandemic subsides .
The right urges the federal government to provide relief to businesses and local governments to ensure a speedy economic recovery once the pandemic subsides .
“ The central goal of policy should be to keep businesses alive so they are ready to turn back on again [ when the pandemic ends ] . They must be able to keep rather than fire employees , to call them back quickly , and to help those employees pay bills and keep their health insurance… [ but ] not even the U.S. government has infinite resources . Its unique ability to borrow even when nobody else can borrow , and to promise eventual repayment by taxation , is a treasured but finite resource . When a crisis comes in which even the Treasury can ’ t borrow , we are in for a true catastrophe…
“ Lending is better than transfers . Since loans must be paid back , larger amounts can go where needed . Small Business Administration loans are a good start . But most business and most employment is large business . Large firms are often even more cash-poor and in hock to nervous creditors , and they are harder to replace or revive if they fail . Lend with the head , not the heart . ‘ People ’ might seem more worthy than ‘ corporations , ’ but we need corporations to hire people when it ’ s over . ”
“ We are intentionally turning the economy off to save lives and protect our future , but if we want any shot to turn that economy back on in three to six months , we ’ re going to need to make sure the small and mid-sized businesses that form our middle class and civil society ’ s spine are still there… Congress must authorize the [ Small Business Administration ] to take on a Federal Emergency Management Agency-like role , cutting checks and providing direct infusions to small and mid-sized businesses . The process must be streamlined , with discretion given to the administrator ( or a federal corona czar ) to oversee and move the machinery along . ”
“ If people can ’ t go out to a restaurant to spend the extra money from their government stimulus check or payroll-tax cut because they ’ re quarantined or sick , municipal tax revenue will plummet . Cities and states may not even be able to sell debt ( the municipal bond market is already signaling this ) to pay their bills and workers . New York City and state are already projecting steep drops in revenue for the coming year . The federal government should be in discussions with governors to see if state and local governments need a Wall Street-like bailout to get through a possible liquidity crisis until the virus panic blows over , people start spending money again and tax revenues recover . ”
“ Americans have been urged to ‘ social distance ’ and those who may have been exposed to the coronavirus to self-quarantine . A decade ago this would have been unpleasant but also impractical for most people . Fortunately , there ’ s now an app , or many , many apps , for that… These apps now let customers order rides , groceries and food delivery through their smartphones…
“ This week [ Amazon ] announced it would hire 100,000 workers to meet increasing demand for grocery and other online orders . This may provide work alternatives for Americans laid off in airlines , hospitality and other industries affected by the coronavirus . It is also raising its starting wage for workers at its fulfillment centers to $ 17 an hour from $ 15 . Workers can also quickly sign up for work on multiple apps and schedule their hours around when they must take care of kids at home . Progressives criticize this ‘ on-demand ’ work as somehow exploitative . But the coronavirus contagion is demonstrating that this free-market flexibility can be a labor lifesaver in a viral panic . ”