Why Germany 's Coronavirus Death Rate Is Far Lower Than In Other Countries
As confirmed cases of the coronavirus in Germany soared past 10,000 last week , hundreds of Berliners crowded Volkspark am Friedrichshain to play soccer and basketball , and to let their kids loose on the park 's many jungle gyms .
The conditions seemed ideal for the spread of a virus that has killed thousands . Indeed , as of Wednesday , Germany had the fifth-highest number of cases .
Yet Germany 's fatality rate so far — just 0.5 % — is the world 's lowest , by a long shot .
`` I believe that we are just testing much more than in other countries , and we are detecting our outbreak early , '' said Christian Drosten , director of the institute of virology at Berlin 's Charité hospital .
As Europe has become the epicenter of the global coronavirus pandemic , Italy 's fatality rate hovers around 10 % . France 's is around 5 % . Yet Germany 's fatality rate from COVID-19 has remained remarkably low since cases started showing up there more than a month ago . As of March 25 , there were 175 deaths and 34,055 cases .
Drosten , whose team of researchers developed the first COVID-19 test used in the public domain , said Germany 's low fatality rate is because of his country 's ability to test early and often . He estimates Germany has been testing around 120,000 people a week for COVID-19 during the monthlong period from late February to now , when it 's reached epidemic proportions in the country , the most extensive testing regimen in the world .
And that means Germany is more likely to have a lower number of undetected cases than other countries where testing is less prevalent , which raises the question : Why is Germany testing so much ?
`` We have a culture here in Germany that is actually not supporting a centralized diagnostic system , '' said Drosten , `` so Germany does not have a public health laboratory that would restrict other labs from doing the tests . So we had an open market from the beginning . ''
In other words , Germany 's equivalent to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — the Robert Koch Institute — makes recommendations but does not call the shots on testing for the entire country . Germany 's 16 federal states make their own decisions on coronavirus testing because each of them is responsible for their own health care systems .
When Drosten 's university medical center developed what became the test recommended by the World Health Organization , they rolled these tests out to their colleagues throughout Germany in January .
`` And they of course rolled this out to labs they know in the periphery and to hospital labs in the area where they are situated , '' Drosten said . `` This created a situation where , let 's say , by the beginning or middle of February , testing was already in place , broadly . ''
Drosten said that has meant quicker , earlier and more widespread testing for COVID-19 in Germany than in other countries .
Lothar Wieler , head of the Robert Koch Institute , Germany 's federal agency responsible for disease control and prevention , said at a news conference last week that Germany 's testing infrastructure means authorities have a more accurate read of confirmed cases of the virus .
`` We do n't know exactly how many unknown cases there are , but we estimate that this unknown number is not very high , '' Wieler said . `` The reason is simple . We issued recommendations in mid-January about who should be tested and who should n't be tested . ''
But some Berlin residents are n't as confident as Wieler . Nizana Nizzi Brautmann said she was worried when a teacher at her son 's school tested positive for COVID-19 and a day later she and her son woke up with fevers and persistent coughing . She said she could n't get through to Berlin 's coronavirus hotline , which was continuously busy .
She finally got through to the city 's emergency medical service number , `` and I told her I think we need to be checked because we have some symptoms , '' Brautmann recalled . `` The lady was just saying , 'We make no tests here . I ca n't help you . I would advise you to stay home and drink tea . ' ``
When she finally was able to speak to a doctor on the phone , the doctor told her to wait in line outside a local hospital to get tested , but she did n't have a mask for her or her son , and she did n't want to infect others in line , so she stayed home . She and her son are now in good health , but she said the episode left her wondering how prepared German society is for this pandemic .
Drosten said such experiences are probably an exception , not the rule .
`` I know the diagnostics community in Germany a bit , '' Drosten said . `` My feeling is that actually the supply of tests is still good . And of course , our epidemic is now also very much up-ramping and we will lose track here , too . ''
Drosten said the growing number of cases in Germany will soon exceed testing capacities . But for the time being , he thinks the country has had a robust response to the coronavirus pandemic . He 's most worried about countries in Africa that are n't well set up for this — countries that , once the crisis comes to them , will find it more difficult to flatten the curve .
NPR Berlin bureau producer Esme Nicholson contributed to this story .