FEMA similarly emphasized to ███ that the federal government is pursuing many strategies at once to obtain supplies , and that shortages are not unique to the U.S. An HHS spokesperson said the department has closely coordinated with FEMA and the White House 's coronavirus task force to ensure a `` locally executive , state managed , and federally supported response . ''
“ This is a global pandemic — demand continues to outweigh supply across the globe , not just in the U.S. , ” the FEMA spokesperson said . “ Considering that , FEMA and HHS are both working hard to ensure federal contracting efforts don ’ t compete with states ’ abilities to acquire PPE and other supplies . ”
Trump and his top officials have touted the nation ’ s testing ramp-up , stating repeatedly that the U.S. is doing more tests than any other country in the world . On May 1 , top Trump health appointee and testing coordinator Brett Giroir joined the interagency group ’ s meeting to praise an initiative to expand drive-through test sites across the country as a “ great success . ”
Yet in the days prior , officials cautioned that states trying to test scores of patients were hampered by equipment and gear shortages . Reporting on conversations he ’ d had with health officials in the mid-Atlantic region , one regional official told the interagency group on April 24 that states ’ “ supply appears to be the main limiting factor . ”
The story was similar among the Northeastern states , an official representing that region concurred .
“ Funding and staff is not an inhibitor , ” the official said on the same call . “ It ’ s the ability to secure testing supplies and PPE . ”
Indeed , while the nation ’ s testing figures have risen over the last month after lagging for much of February and March , public health experts broadly agree that the U.S. is still not testing enough people to have an accurate picture of the virus ’ spread .
The administration was only just beginning to shift its efforts from scrambling to import supplies to trying to boost domestic production of key materials like protective equipment , one official said on May 1 , speaking on behalf of an internal task force focused on supply chain issues . Some of those supplies are in demand not just in the health care system , but also by businesses trying to reopen while keeping workers and customers safe .
Participants on that May 1 call — which focused on the theme of “ Opening Up America Again ” — also spent much of the meeting grappling with the likelihood that as states began to lift their distancing restrictions , new coronavirus outbreaks would follow .
Nearly all of FEMA ’ s regional teams reported continued increases in both cases and deaths as governors moved to terminate stay-at-home orders , flagging on the calls new hot spots in prisons , meat processing plants , and other high-risk facilities .
At least two states at the time — South Carolina and Georgia — were among those planning to reopen despite logging zero consecutive days of decreasing cases , according to one slide distributed to the group and obtained by ███ , much less meeting any of the other basic reopening recommendations or “ gates ” laid out by the CDC . In Georgia , according to another slide the group saw , new Covid-19 cases were up 65 percent and deaths were up nearly 103 percent over a two-week period .
Trump has vacillated between praising and criticizing Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp ’ s decision to reopen the state , but on the same day as regional officials expressed concerns in the meeting , the president broadly championed states ’ push to reopen .
“ I like the states opening . They will be opening , ” he said . “ They ’ re going to open safely and quickly , I hope , because we have to get our country back. ” Later that week , after widespread blowback to Georgia ’ s move , including from several Republicans , Trump said Kemp was moving too fast by opening businesses like tattoo parlors and nail salons .
Though some in the administration have publicly acknowledged , and even expressed concern , that states were lifting restrictions before slowing the virus ’ spread , the president and his top advisers have largely cheered on the reopening states . They have also suggested that the CDC ’ s criteria are guidelines , not mandates , that states can use as they see fit .
Health officials in the meantime continued to scramble to stand up new tools to monitor for outbreaks — pulling data from various parts of the government in an attempt , as Redd described it , to “ respond to the increased demand and burden on the system ” should new clusters of cases pop up . The odds of such virus clusters cropping up , he added , “ we of course consider inevitable . ”
During that meeting , the officials also confronted a particularly bleak scenario : that the fresh waves of coronavirus cases could threaten once again to overwhelm the nation ’ s health system .
The U.S. has nearly 104,000 ventilators , according to one slide distributed to the group — of which only about 30,000 were currently in use . Yet while Trump has latched onto that surplus in recent weeks as evidence of the administration ’ s successful response — dubbing the U.S. “ the king of ventilators ” — officials on the call were focused on new modeling that predicted yet another ventilator crisis if Americans quickly resumed their pre-pandemic lives .
The model , outlined in a presentation slide obtained by ███ , illustrated a worst-case scenario that showed the rash of new cases maxing out and soon exceeding the nation ’ s ventilator supplies by the first week of June .
The potential crisis was just one of the dangers officials on the call emphasized would require continuous monitoring — and that , despite Trump ’ s wish for a rapid return to normal , they warned could force the nation back into another damaging lockdown .
“ As we lift mitigation , it ’ s going to be critical to monitor local transmission , public health capacity and health system capacity over time , ” one official said on May 1 , “ and if needed , reinitiate mitigation in the coming weeks . ”