MILWAUKEE ( ███ ) - Wisconsin is set to hold in-person voting next week after the state ’ s legislature on Saturday declined to take up an effort delaying the presidential primary due to the coronavirus pandemic .
The state ’ s Republican-controlled legislature quickly ended special weekend sessions without taking action on a call by Democratic Governor Tony Evers to make Tuesday ’ s primary an all-mail election and extend the time to return ballots until late May , local media outlets reported .
Reid Magney , public information officer for the Wisconsin Election Commission , confirmed to ███ that the election will go forward as planned , with in-person voting .
Leaders in the legislature , which has the sole authority to delay the ballot , blasted Evers for a late reversal on holding voting and said the election , which also will decide thousands of state and local offices , must go ahead as planned . Legislators could still reconsider in the coming days .
Republicans also asked the U.S. Supreme Court to prevent the extension of Wisconsin ’ s deadline for absentee voting to April 13 , which a federal judge had previously ordered .
“ Republicans in the Legislature are playing politics with public safety and ignoring the urgency of this public health crisis , ” Evers said in a statement . “ It ’ s wrong . No one should have to choose between their health and their right to vote . ”
Residents in the state are under orders to stay at home and public gatherings are banned because of the pandemic . Fears about infection have led to a shortage of poll workers and an explosion in requests for absentee ballots .
Officials in the state have warned of potential chaos if the voting goes ahead .
The pandemic has disrupted the Democratic race to pick a challenger to run against Republican President Donald Trump in the Nov. 3 election , forcing more than a dozen states to delay or adjust their primaries to limit the health risks .
Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden has said it is possible to conduct Wisconsin ’ s in-person vote safely . Rival Bernie Sanders , who trails Biden significantly in the race , called for the primary to be postponed .