Scientist and scholar Eric Toner , quoted above in an excerpt from a Friday interview with the business-news channel CNBC , explained that China ’ s efforts to contain the current outbreak of a fast-moving upper-respiratory illness are “ unlikely to be effective . ”
Cases of the illness , which is related to SARS , or severe acute respiratory syndrome , and MERS , Middle East respirator syndrome , have now turned up in a number of countries beyond China , where the illness originated in Wuhan City .
The number of infections of coronavirus , or CoV , in China has risen to nearly 4,500 , according to the Wall Street Journal . On top of that , the official death toll has climbed to 106 , from 56 as of Tuesday . The Journal reported that the outbreak was overwhelming Wuhan-area resources and hospitals .
Beijing has shut down parts of the Great Wall , as well as more than a dozen cities , restricting the movement of tens of millions of people , and canceling events related to the Lunar New Year , one of the busiest periods of travel and consumerism in the country . The holiday has been extended to Feb. 2 , in an effort to curb the spread of the virus .
The Journal on Saturday , citing people described as familiar with the situation , reported that a charter flight was being arranged by the U.S. government to evacuate U.S. citizens and diplomats from Wuhan .
CNBC reported that Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam has declared a virus emergency in the city of 7.3 million , extending school cancellations until Feb. 17 and barring visits to mainland China .
On Monday , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said at least 110 people in 26 states have been identified as persons under investigation for coronavirus , but only five officials cases have occurred thus far , including one in Arizona and California .
Toner , an M.D . and researcher at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security , took part in a simulation , undertaken in partnership with the World Economic Forum and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation , that posited such a disease could kill 65 million people within 18 months under the right circumstances .
Coronaviruses , with SARS and MERS among that group , are infections of the respiratory tract that can lead to illnesses like pneumonia or the common cold .
Toner told Business insider during an interview that he hasn ’ t completed research on the current strain of the Wuhan coronavirus , known as 2019-nCoV , but said that the death toll could run in the millions if the influenza were resistant to modern vaccines and was as easy to catch as the common flu .
Read : This is how far and fast the coronavirus has spread through U.S. stocks
To be sure , an outbreak of SARS about 17 years ago claimed nearly 800 lives and infected more than 8,000 people around the world . However , the death toll from that 2002-03 disease was nowhere near a million .
To put things into further perspective , the most virulent pandemic , the 1918 influenza , also known as the Spanish flu , killed an estimated 20 million to 50 million people .
Toner said that his coronavirus simulation “ was not [ focused primarily on ] the number of deaths ; it was to point out that there could be societal and economic consequences from a severe pandemic , not just health consequences. ” The simulation was also geared toward engendering international cooperation , making the case that governments and private companies alone can ’ t adequately respond to a pandemic .
One report estimates that a pandemic could cause an average annual economic loss of 0.7 % of global GDP — or $ 570 billion .
Meanwhile , the World Health Organization late this week wasn ’ t sounding global alarm bells about the illness either , declaring the coronavirus an emergency in China on Thursday but falling short of calling the outbreak an international emergency . U.S. health officials also have said that the risk domestically from the illness is low .
Check out : Here ’ s how the stock market has performed during past viral outbreaks , as epidemic locks down 3 Chinese cities
However , the coronavirus was exacting a toll on the U.S. stock market . The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA , +9.36 % on Monday was down 1.2 % . Meanwhile , the S & P 500 SPX , +9.28 % and Nasdaq Composite Index COMP , +9.34 % were trading sharply lower , extending a solid decline from Friday .
Toner said the WHO may have made a mistake by not declaring 2019-nCoV an international emergency .
Read : Coronavirus and Mideast tensions aren ’ t the stock market ’ s biggest problems this week , strategist warns
The Journal on Sunday reported that millions of residents from the outbreak ’ s epicenter , in Wuhan City , may have scattered around the country to visit family for the annual Lunar New Year holiday , before the lockdowns were put in place .
Zhou Xianwang , the Mayor of Wuhan , shared a similar view . He estimated that some 5 million people may have left the city before travel restrictions were imposed .
Read : Mayor of Wuhan , epicenter of coronavirus outbreak , says 5 million people left the city before travel restrictions were imposed