Coronavirus lockdowns abroad are raising questions about the upper limits of government power as health officials in the U.S. and around the world scramble to slow the spread of infection .
The U.S. public health toolbox contains a host of potential measures , ranging from gentle prodding over hand washing , to more severe actions like prohibitions on large gatherings and even sharp restrictions on the movement of infected individuals .
“ In the U.S. , quarantine is the most extreme use of government power over people who have committed no crime , ” said Polly Price , a professor of law and global health at Emory University .
Currently , no government in the U.S. — federal , state or local — has proposed anything resembling the kind of large-scale quarantine put in place in parts of China ’ s Hubei province , the epicenter of the outbreak .
But as an increasing number of American jurisdictions declare a state of emergency , and officials consider more serious responses , legal experts note that tighter restrictions will face even higher constitutional hurdles .
“ In times of emergency — including public health emergency — the temptation to violate individual rights is at its greatest , and the courts have often been called on to defend the rights of the vulnerable , ” said Harvard Law professor Glenn Cohen .
More than 118,000 coronavirus cases and more than 4,200 deaths have been confirmed worldwide , according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University . The United States has seen more than 800 cases and at least 28 deaths since tracking began in late January .
State officials in New York , which has the highest number of active cases , 173 , announced on Tuesday that they would deploy the National Guard and create a containment zone around the city of New Rochelle in Westchester County as the coronavirus spreads .
Under the plan , the National Guard will deliver food to homes and help with the cleaning of public spaces in the containment zone . Meanwhile , schools and other large gathering facilities within the zone , such as community centers and houses of worship , will be closed .
The move followed a declaration by Gov . Andrew Cuomo ( D ) on Saturday that New York was under a state of emergency . To date , at least 10 states have declared a state of emergency due to concerns over coronavirus .
Top U.S. health officials have tried to soothe public anxieties while also preparing the country for more robust government intervention .
During an interview on Sunday , Dr. Anthony Fauci , the head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , sought to manage public expectations while cautioning that “ anything ’ s possible . ”
“ I don ’ t think it would be as draconian as nobody in or nobody out , ” Fauci told Fox News , responding to a question about the possibility of widespread quarantines . “ But if we continue to get cases like this , particularly at the community level , there will be what we call ‘ mitigation , ’ where we have to essentially do social distancing , keep people out of crowded places , take a look at seriousness , do you really need to travel , and I think it ’ s particularly important among the most vulnerable . ”
“ You know , you don ’ t want to alarm people , but given the spread we ’ ve seen , you know , anything ’ s possible , ” he added . “ And that ’ s the reason why we ’ ve got to be prepared to take whatever action is appropriate to contain and mitigate the outbreak . ”
Federal law authorizes the U.S. government to put in place quarantines to block diseases from crossing national and state borders , though most of its public health power comes from the Constitution .
When confronted with legal challenges to public health measures , American courts have generally tried to strike a balance between the government ’ s authority to protect the population and an individual ’ s rights .
One consistent thread running throughout the court decisions is that the government is on stronger legal footing when it narrowly tailors its actions and minimizes their restrictiveness .
“ The government ’ s actions — such as trying to force people into isolation or impose quarantine — would be more likely found constitutional if it focuses on isolating individuals or groups who have tested positive or which it has good reason to suspect are exposed to coronavirus , ” said Cohen .
“ The less individualized that determination , the more constitutionally questionable , especially if it is done … without good reason linking the members of that group , individually , to exposure or risk , ” he added .
The courts have previously recognized government authority to quarantine , prevent travel , require vaccinations and make people submit to medical exams , according to Price . Still , defining the scope of public health authority “ continues to be a work in progress , ” she said .
The relatively small number of cases on the books , many of which were decided long ago , makes it difficult to nail down the precise scope of government public health power .
Perhaps the most famous Supreme Court case , Jacobson v. Massachusetts , dates back to 1905 and deals with the constitutionality of requiring a smallpox vaccination . Major legal decisions about quarantines , which have mostly been decided by state supreme courts , are also quite dated .
“ Because the courts have dealt with these questions so infrequently and the key cases are so long ago , it is quite hard to predict the exact limit of the power of the federal or state governments in this area , ” Cohen said .
According to Scott Burris , a law professor at Temple University , the limits on government power have less to do with the type of action than with the necessity for the measure .
“ Courts are generally reluctant to interfere with emergency measures , ” he said , “ so prediction is difficult . ”
Michelle Mello , a professor of law and medicine at Stanford University , said that as long as federal and state governments can satisfy stringent judicial scrutiny , they “ have broad emergency powers to do pretty much whatever is necessary . ”
But Mello and other experts noted that a maximalist approach is not always needed , or even the most effective means of combating the spread of infection .
In cases where people have only incidental contact with someone believed to be infected , Mello said , public health officials will likely continue to encourage voluntary “ self-isolation ” rather than mandatory orders .
As President Trump Donald John TrumpThe Hill 's Morning Report - Trump shifts his tone on coronavirus Senators balance coronavirus action with risks to health Coronavirus adds new element to rising US-Iran tensions MORE and lawmakers negotiate over an economic package to counter the outbreak , more government support in the form of paid sick leave , distance learning opportunities and defrayed health care costs could encourage public buy-in .
“ It ’ s better for everyone when we rely on cooperation and trust rather than command and control , ” Mello said .