Israel appeared headed for a unity government on Friday after opposition leader Benny Gantz moved towards an agreement with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu , disappointing voters who had hoped to bring down the right-wing leader .
Gantz was elected parliamentary speaker on Thursday with support from Netanyahu 's Likud and allied parties , angering many of his own partners over the possibility he could form an alliance with a leader who is under criminal indictment .
Gantz , a former military chief , cited the coronavirus epidemic as the reason for his decision . Israel , with 3,000 cases of the disease and 10 deaths , is under partial lockdown .
The shock move splintered Gantz 's centrist Blue and White coalition of three parties just 13 months after it came into existence as a grouping of Netanyahu opponents intent on bringing down Israel 's longest-serving prime minister .
It also drew an angry response from some among the hundreds of thousands of Israelis who turned out to support Gantz 's coalition in three elections in the past year . Some commentators accused the former general of caving into Netanyahu .
`` It makes me feel terrible . It 's exactly what I did not want to happen , to see Gantz actually partner with Netanyahu , '' said Tami Golan , 46 , who voted for Gantz in all three elections .
`` I understand the coronavirus makes for a special situation , but I ca n't help but feel disappointed - we might not be done with Netanyahu , '' Golan said .
Gantz , 60 , expressed regret on Friday that his decision had split his centrist alliance , but said dragging the country towards a fourth election would distract from fighting the coronavirus and aiding the economy .
`` [ We ] will make every effort to establish a national emergency government . We will take care of the health crisis . We will lift the country out of economic trauma , '' Gantz said in a statement .
`` I am at peace because I did what my nation needs , '' he added . `` This is the time for leaders to choose what is right and put the lingering issues and personal scores aside . ''
At least one member of Gantz 's own Israel Resilience Party came out against him on Friday - a lawmaker from Israel 's Arab Druze minority .
`` A leader does not betray his principles and his electorate ... I will not sit one day under the corrupt [ premier ] , '' Gadeer Mreeh wrote on Twitter .
But with Netanyahu 's coalition of right-wing parties needing only three more seats to reach a majority in the 120-member parliament , the early defection from Gantz 's 15-strong faction was unlikely to put a dent in moves towards a unity government .
United States President Donald Trump called his close ally Netanyahu on Friday to congratulate him `` on the fact that he would form a government under his premiership '' , Netanyahu said on his Arabic-language Twitter account .
During the campaign for the March 2 election , Gantz had ruled out serving with Netanyahu , citing the prime minister 's looming trial on charges of bribery , fraud and breach of trust . Netanyahu denies the charges .
But Gantz has lacked enough support on the centre and left to form a coalition after being asked by President Reuven Rivlin to try to form a government following the election .
Netanyahu , 70 , had proposed a unity government to tackle the coronavirus , promising to step down as prime minister within an agreed period , with Gantz then taking over .
Gantz 's move on Thursday opened up the possibility of such a `` rotation '' deal , but there has been no formal announcement that such an agreement had been reached .