Michelle E. of Scottsdale , Arizona , was relieved when President Trump last month signed into law the sweeping stimulus package intended to keep the U.S. economy afloat during the coronavirus pandemic .
Michelle and her husband have owned a small hardwood flooring business for 18 years . She hoped the law ’ s $ 350 billion for small-business loans would help them avoid laying off any of their five employees , whom she said are like family . So she got a loan application through her bank .
But as she filled it out , Michelle saw the question : Had any of the business owners pleaded guilty to or been on probation for a criminal offense ? Michelle immediately thought of her husband , who is on probation because he took a guilty plea on a theft charge after taking home the scope of someone else ’ s rifle on a hunting trip , something he says he did accidentally . His name and her last name are being withheld because his criminal case , and the couple ’ s loan application , are pending .
“ Because of that , our employees can ’ t get help from the United States government ? ” Michelle said .
It ’ s a little noticed frustration compared to the logistical problems of the Trump administration ’ s rollout of the CARES Act . A set of new regulations for implementing the law , issued by the Small Business Administration , prohibits small-business owners with criminal records from accessing the desperately needed loans .
“ We have never seen such a sweeping mandatory disqualification based on a criminal record , in any area of the law , ” wrote the Collateral Consequences Resource Center , a nonprofit , nonpartisan website that tracks how federal , state and local laws affect people with past charges or convictions . The site is run by Margaret Love , who was the U.S . Pardon Attorney during the Clinton administration .
It is unclear how many small-business owners nationally have a criminal history . But The Sentencing Project , a research and advocacy group , has estimated that as many as 100 million Americans have an arrest or conviction in their past , and there are more than 30 million small businesses around the country , according to the Small Business Administration . Because people with felony records in particular often can ’ t get jobs , many start their own businesses , from plumbing to food-services to fitness , experts say .
Add to that the people working for each small-business owner , and you see how the new regulations can have a cascading negative effect on employment , Love said in an interview .
The Small Business Administration has yet to respond to questions from ███ about its new loan guidelines .
To be sure , under previous presidencies the Small Business Administration has considered many aspects of loan applicants ’ criminal records , and more broadly whether they are of “ good character. ” This is in part because banks , which the agency uses to distribute loans , typically do background checks in their regular loan process .
And in the wake of any disaster , some criminal enterprises and grifters come out of the woodwork seeking relief money . In the past , negotiations between the Small Business Administration and banks about steps required to make sure this doesn ’ t happen have often been extensive .
But seldom has there been such a dire need to dole out cash to businesses quickly , broadly and without additional red tape , economists say .
What ’ s more , never in recent U.S. history have so many conservatives and liberals agreed that people with criminal histories deserve a second chance—especially job-creating small-business owners .
The CARES Act as passed by Congress included specifics about who was and was not eligible for the loans , but experts noted it mandated nothing about criminal records .
Entrepreneurs with criminal records across the country said in interviews that they are confused about the details of the new regulations , which changed three times last week . A man in Austin , Texas , who owns a website-design business said he could not figure out whether his misdemeanor , a charge last year for first-time DUI , would bar him from getting a loan .
The CARES Act includes two types of loans for businesses employing 500 or fewer people : the Paycheck Protection Program , meant to help companies keep paying employees while the coronavirus crisis lasts , as well as an expansion of loans to companies impacted by disasters .
For the paycheck program , the new policy from the Small Business Administration says business owners can ’ t get a loan if they are facing criminal charges or have had a felony conviction in the past five years . But the actual application form seems to exclude more people : It also asks whether you have , during the same time period , pleaded “ no contest , ” were placed in a diversion program—which often takes place outside of court and does not mean that you admitted guilt—or spent any time on probation or parole in a felony case .
The second loan program is also bewildering many applicants with criminal records . The online portal to request federal aid asks a three-part question about your criminal history , but the available answers are only “ yes ” or “ no. ” Seemingly , a small business owner convicted now of murder and another one charged but not convicted 20 years ago for a DUI would both have to check “ yes . ”
The Small Business Administration did not respond Tuesday to multiple requests for clarification .
Critics of the new regulations said the rules waste precious time examining people ’ s pasts when so many are , with each new day , losing their lives or livelihoods .
One New Jersey pet-supply store owner with a 10-year-old felony conviction put it this way in an email to the Collateral Consequences Resource Center : It is as if , after Hurricane Katrina flooded New Orleans , rescuers flying in helicopters asked families stranded on their roofs if they had ever faced a criminal charge .
“ And if anyone answered yes , ” he wrote , “ they would move along to the next house . ”