The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not necessarily represent the views of ███.com .
After a month of sheltering in place , hundreds of millions of Americans will soon emerge from the new “ normal. ” Georgia , Colorado , and Alaska ( among other states ) are giving their residents some freedom to return to their old lives , with many “ non-essential ” businesses resuming operations . Plenty of public health advocates are concerned and have raised legitimate questions about the timing of such policies . But , done right , a cautious re-opening of America can lay the groundwork for renewed prosperity and lead to better health outcomes than continued , blanket stay-at-home orders . And a robust system of American federalism allows states to emulate best practices and learn from failed policies . With prudent practices and state-centric experimentation , America can finally get past the Coronavirus crisis .
For the beleaguered residents of New York and Washington , D.C. , it ’ s hard to see life-as-we-knew-it returning anytime soon . There ’ s a very different reality for state citizens of , say , Alaska , who are already distancing themselves from social distancing . On April 24 , Anchorage restaurants resumed dine-in services albeit under a series of strict stipulations agreed to by the city and state . Anchorage Daily News reports , “ You can only go to a restaurant as a household , with no other guests at your table . And you have to make a reservation first — no walk-ins allowed…Restaurants can only be filled to 25 % of their capacity at once. ” Furthermore , restaurants are required to have a logbook with names and phone numbers of patrons over a month-long period to aid with track-and-trace efforts .
Colorado has opted for a more restrictive route , continuing to restrict restaurants to delivery and carry-out pending further progress against COVID-19 . But under Governor Jared Polis ’ ( D ) “ Safer at Home ” initiative ( a phase of his larger response plan ) , services such as childcare , hair salons , and tattoo parlors started to re-open on April 27 . Teleworking is still strongly encouraged , while many offices re-open to half capacity .
Pundits , public officials , and Twitter denizens have wasted little time arguing about these re-opening plans . Thanks to a poisonous political environment that long predates the current crisis , these debates are much worse than they need to be . While it ’ s tempting and politically gratifying to lump Alaskan and Coloradan state officials with the protests that have popped up across the country , there ’ s a wide spectrum of different approaches to re-open America . One extreme is pretending the Coronavirus doesn ’ t exist anymore and going about our lives as if nothing happened .
This approach , demanded by some protestors , would likely result in a second wave of the deadly disease and necessitate further quarantines . Continuing a lockdown indefinitely would also spell economic disaster for millions of American households . George Mason University economist Dr. Tyler Cowen notes , “ If we keep the economy closed at current levels , it will continue to decay , and at some point turn into irreversible , non-linear damage . No one knows when , or how to model the course of that process . That decay also will eat into our future public health capacities , and perhaps boost hunger and poverty around the world . ”
There is little choice other than to try out different approaches to slowly but surely re-open the country . Dozens of states can come up with dozens of different , educated guesses about whether , say , allowing 50 percent restaurant capacity makes more sense than permitting 25 percent capacity . That ’ s the advantage of federalism – states can learn from each other ’ s successes and failures . Along the way , the federal government must adopt permissive policies that keep families and businesses informed and safe . For example , by approving more at-home testing , the U.S. Food and Drug Administration can empower consumers to let restaurants and salons know that it ’ s safe to serve them .
Ultimately , federal , state , and public health officials have little idea what ’ s next or the “ right ” way to proceed . But America will decay and suffer by embracing one extreme of indefinite , complete isolation or the other of Coronavirus denialism . The middle road is the best one , and federalism can chart the course .