People walk through a nearly empty Times Square during the coronavirus outbreak in New York City , March 19 , 2020 . ( Lucas Jackson/Reuters )
The more effective the efforts have been , the more opposed the critics are to them .
An irony of the coronavirus debate is that the more successful lockdowns are in squelching the disease , the more vulnerable they will be to attack as unnecessary in the first place .
A growing chorus on the right is slamming the shutdowns as an overreaction and agitating to end them . A good example of the genre is an op-ed co-authored by former Education Secretary William Bennett and talk-radio host Seth Leibsohn . It is titled , tendentiously and not very accurately , “ Coronavirus Lessons : Fact and Reason vs . Paranoia and Fear . ”
They cite an estimate that the current outbreak will kill 68,000 Americans . Then , they note that about 60,000 people died of the flu in 2017-18 . For this , they thunder , we ’ ve imposed huge economic and social costs on the country ?
This is obviously a deeply flawed way of looking at it .
If we are going to have 60,000 deaths with people not leaving their homes for more than a month , the number of deaths obviously would have been higher — much higher — if everyone had gone about business as usual . We didn ’ t lock down the country to try to prevent 60,000 deaths ; we locked down the country to limit deaths to 60,000 ( or whatever the ultimate toll is ) .
By Bennett and Leibsohn ’ s logic , we could just as easily ask : Why did we adopt tough-on-crime policies when crime rates are at historic lows ? Why did we work to find a treatment for HIV/AIDs when so many of the people with the disease now have normal life expectancies ?
Of course , it was precisely the actions we took that caused those welcome outcomes .
Consider the perversity of their reasoning a different way . If we had shut down the country a month sooner and there had been , say , only 2,000 deaths , then on their terms they ’ d have an even stronger argument , i.e. , “ We did all this , and there were only a couple of thousand fatalities ? ”
In other words , the more effective a lockdown would have been , the more opposed Bennett and Leibsohn would be to it .
As for the flu comparison , it isn ’ t as telling as Bennett and Leibsohn believe . The 2017-18 season , with 60,000 flu-related deaths , was particularly bad . But the coronavirus might kill a similar number — with the country on lockdown .
In the 2011-12 season , 12,000 people died of the flu in the entire country . New York alone has eclipsed that in a little more than a month ( again , while on lockdown ) . In 2018-19 , there were 34,000 flu-related deaths in the U.S. We ’ ve already surpassed that number nationally ( yet again , while on lockdown ) .
Why have people reacted so dramatically to this virus ? Bennett and Leibsohn have a theory : “ New York City is where the epidemic has struck the hardest . The media is centered in New York City . ”
New York certainly gets disproportionate media attention , but it is also , as all of us had no hesitation recognizing on Sept. 11 , 2001 , part of America .
If the disease struck smaller heartland cities such as Omaha and Wichita , would Bennett and Leibsohn hope that the story got ignored ?
Bennett and Leibsohn neglect the key fact that the economy began to shut down before there were widespread official orders . People voted with their feet because they were fearful of a highly transmissible , virulent disease . And they acted rationally . If everything had gone on as normal , the outbreak would have been worse , and we would have eventually had shutdowns anyway .
The most objectionable part of the Bennett and Leibsohn posture is its sneering attitude toward “ frenzied , panicked ” ordinary Americans who have sacrificed so much to protect their families and co-workers ( and complete strangers ) .
By all means , let ’ s open up the economy as soon as we can , but it will require more careful thought than the most fervent critics of the shutdowns have demonstrated during the peak of this pandemic .