The U.S. reported the highest coronavirus death toll in the world as of Saturday , per Johns Hopkins data . 18,860 Americans have died .
The big picture : Europeans and Americans are desperate to move beyond the worst of the crisis and return to something approximating normal , but the World Health Organization has cautioned that moving too fast will undermine sacrifices made so far .
By the numbers : There have been over 390,000 global recoveries . The U.S. has reported the most cases ( over 503,500 ) and deaths ( over 19,700 ) . Spain had reported the most cases outside the U.S. ( more than 161,000 ) . Half the planet 's population is on lockdown .
What 's happening : Crime is dropping around the world as the coronavirus keeps people home — but police around the globe are taking extra efforts to enforce social distancing over Easter weekend .
Food shortages in richer countries and hunger in poorer ones could be caused by the crisis , as some crops rot in fields and others are subject to export bans .
in richer countries and hunger in poorer ones could be caused by the crisis , as some crops rot in fields and others are subject to export bans . In India , people are able to see blue skies for the first time in years as the country 's three-week lockdown has drastically cut air pollution .
people are able to see blue skies for the first time in years as the country 's three-week lockdown has drastically cut air pollution . Iran started reopening government buildings on Saturday after a brief lockdown .
started reopening government buildings on Saturday after a brief lockdown . China 's shipments of N95 respirators , ventilators , hospital gowns and other products face new delays .
of N95 respirators , ventilators , hospital gowns and other products face new delays . South Korea has threatened to track residents with electronic wristbands if they break self-quarantine .
has threatened to track residents with electronic wristbands if they break self-quarantine . A Good Friday ceremony was held at the Notre Dame to provide a `` message of hope . ''
was held at the Notre Dame to provide a `` message of hope . '' The U.K. reported its highest daily rise in coronavirus deaths on Friday , with 980 dead within 24 hours . Prime Minister Boris Johnson is out of intensive care .
reported its highest daily rise in coronavirus deaths on Friday , with 980 dead within 24 hours . Prime Minister Boris Johnson is out of intensive care . More people are dying each day in France than in Italy and Spain , the countries with the highest case numbers in Europe , per Johhs Hopkins .
each day in France than in Italy and Spain , the countries with the highest case numbers in Europe , per Johhs Hopkins . Gen Z may be defined by the coronavirus .
may be defined by the coronavirus . WHO ’ s Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said Wednesday countries should put politics aside `` if you don ’ t want to have many more body bags , '' after President Trump claimed the WHO `` probably '' knew of the dangers of the pandemic months before the agency sounded the alarm .
Between the lines : Policy responses to the crisis have been every-country-for-itself and — in the case of the U.S. and China — tinged with geopolitical rivalry .
But the scientific work under way to understand the virus and develop a vaccine has been globalized on an unprecedented scale .