Wellness experts regret that public health and the economy are being pitted against each other . The two are inextricably connected and support each other , they say . “ The question should be : How do we prevent the most number of people from dying from anything , period , ” says Benjamin Miller , chief strategy officer of Well Being Trust .
At the same time , isolation and joblessness have their own costs – among them , mental health , children ’ s welfare , and financial ruin . Unemployment stands at 14.7 % , the highest rate since the Great Depression . The pandemic could lead to 75,000 additional “ deaths of despair , ” according to Well Being Trust .
This week , COVID-19 deaths topped 93,000 in the United States , far more than the 58,000-plus Americans who died in the Vietnam War . Marginalized and vulnerable populations are bearing the brunt .
In California and across the country , pressure is on to reopen , expressed in lawsuits and protests . Over it all looms an election in November . No fewer than a dozen suits have been filed against California and Gov . Gavin Newsom by gun shops , churches , businesses , and even a bride to be .
Michael Flood feels for America ’ s government leaders . They have difficult choices to make in deciding how quickly to reopen economies . As president of the Los Angeles Regional Food Bank , he ’ s seeing both sides of human hurt in the coronavirus pandemic .
On one hand , a lockdown to prevent spread of the virus has caused great economic and mental stress , illustrated in the skyrocketing demand for food pantries in Los Angeles County , the most populous county in the nation . The food bank ’ s distribution has surged 80 % since the beginning of March – nearly twice the increase during the Great Recession . Several times a week , upward of a thousand cars line up at parking lots for drive-through groceries .
At the same time , two people who worked at the food bank ’ s partners have died from the virus . Los Angeles County is the epicenter for the outbreak in California , with about 2,000 deaths so far . The disease “ feels like a personal threat to all of us , ” explains Mr . Flood .
“ We ’ re seeing on both ends , people who have died from COVID and this huge impact . I really struggle with this . It ’ s so hard to figure out . ”
It is no wonder that Mr . Flood is wrestling with trade-offs in the reopening . Much of the country is entering a “ gray space , ” as Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti puts it . That space lies between flinging open the doors and cautionary measures to prevent a virus resurgence . It includes ethical dimensions as governors and local officials make life-altering choices , while those unhappy with the decisions push back in the courts and on the street . Americans need to have a national conversation about these choices and their consequences , say social scientists . But it ’ s a tough subject .
Hans Gutknecht/The Orange County Register/AP Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti , shown at a press conference in Reseda , Calif. , May 19 , 2020 , says the country is entering a “ gray space ” when it comes to decisionmaking around the coronavirus outbreak .
As New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo recently put it , “ How much is a human life worth ? That is the real discussion that no one is admitting , openly or freely . ”
The national narrative on choices surrounding the pandemic is evolving , says Anita Chandra , director of the Rand Corp. ’ s research on social and economic well-being . It started with “ we ’ re all in this together ” and “ sheltering in place ” to save lives and not overwhelm hospitals . Now , with the curve flattening in states like California , Washington , and New York , some people are saying that their personal liberty and other aspects of their well-being are more important .
But the conversation needs to advance further , and be more directly addressed , says Dr. Chandra . She puts it plainly , “ How much do you weigh different parts of our total well-being against each other ? ” It ’ s an “ uncomfortable ” question , she says , but necessary , because it forces moral questions about American values and prepares the country to deal with a possible resurgence of the virus – and learn from it .
For instance , what choices will government leaders make if the nation muddles through a summer of retail and restaurants at half capacity and sees an uptick in the economy – and then faces a spike of infections ? Many people will want to keep the economic vitality going , while others will worry about contracting the virus .
“ There ’ s a lot of fear . Even as we reopen , a lot of people say to me , ‘ Don ’ t reopen . I don ’ t want to work . It ’ s not safe , ’ ” says Dr. Barbara Ferrer , director of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health .
This week , COVID-19 deaths topped 93,000 in the United States , far more than the 58,000 Americans who died in the Vietnam War . Marginalized and vulnerable populations are bearing the brunt .
At the same time , isolation and joblessness have their own costs – among them , mental health , children ’ s welfare , and financial ruin . Unemployment stands at 14.7 % , the highest rate since the Great Depression . The pandemic could lead to 75,000 additional “ deaths of despair ” resulting from drug or alcohol abuse and suicide , according to the Well Being Trust , a national wellness foundation .
In trying to prevent COVID deaths , the medical profession is doing exactly what you would expect them to – save lives , says Dr. Chandra . But that needs to be “ balanced against all these other aspects of well-being . ”
Governments do have a mathematical way to figure a cost-benefit analysis for policies as they relate to risk of a lost life . It ’ s called the value of a statistical life , or VSL , and it ’ s based on how much individuals themselves are willing to pay to reduce the risk of death . Right now , VSLs range between $ 9 million and $ 11 million per life and are used to determine , for instance , the cost of environmental regulations or road improvements .
But some say that ’ s too blunt of an instrument to use – or at least use by itself – because it ’ s rooted in narrow trade-offs that don ’ t fit a broad condition like a pandemic . Questions about American values also have to be considered , says Dr. Chandra : “ What are the ethics around liberty and freedom of movement ? What are the ethics around whose life is worth more ? And what are the ethics around protecting the most vulnerable ? ”
Wellness experts regret that public health and the economy are being pitted against each other . The two are actually inextricably connected and support each other , they say . “ The question should be : How do we prevent the most number of people from dying from anything , period , ” says Benjamin Miller , chief strategy officer of Well Being Trust .
Gregory Bull/AP Workers at Pigment prepare floral arrangements for curbside service May 19 , 2020 , in San Diego . With encouraging results in their fight against the coronavirus , San Diego County supervisors voted Tuesday to ask the state to be a test case for whether more rapid reopening can safely occur .
“ I think the way the choice is being presented is between saving grandma and saving the economy , and the way we look at it is if we ’ re not careful , we ’ re going to kill grandma and kill the economy , ” says Alex Tabarrok , director of the Center for Study of Public Choice at George Mason University in Fairfax , Virginia . “ These two things are not in opposition to one another . ”
He co-authored an Op-Ed in The Washington Post arguing that quick , congressional funding of sufficient testing , contact tracing , and quarantining would provide the confidence and safety needed to open up businesses and bring people back to work . This should be combined with “ zones ” that open at different paces , recognizing that the virus has not hit all regions equally .
Others see more federal spending as the way to protect against harm from disease and a decimated economy , pointing to Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell ’ s remarks that Congress may need to do more in the way of fiscal support . The House passed a $ 3 trillion stimulus bill that would aid state and local governments that faces an uncertain future in the Senate . On the other hand , President Donald Trump is pushing for a speedy reopening , as is his treasury secretary , Steve Mnuchin .
And then there are those who point to American creativity as a bridge to carry the country forward . A case in point : Didi Hirsch Mental Health Services , which provides free mental health , substance abuse , and suicide prevention help .
The group completely reoriented its work from on-site only to allow people to work remotely . In a herculean effort , it outfitted its 80 staff and 215 volunteers with laptops and headsets , trained them , and changed the setup for callers to the crisis line .
The inflow of calls related to COVID-19 has been huge , and for the first time , caller and counselor have been experiencing many of the same things . The nonprofit had to contend with virus exposure , quarantining staff . Some staff have lost family members , says Carolyn Levitan , the crisis line director .
On the other hand , the forced reorientation has opened a whole new way of operating , says Ms. Levitan . “ It ’ s a huge eye-opener . I ’ m really excited about it , ” she says . It turns out not everyone wants to endure Los Angeles traffic to volunteer in person , and people have other reasons for wanting to work from home .
No matter what state and county officials decide about the pace of reopening , though , her group will take a “ thoughtful ” approach . “ It ’ s going to be a very slow return for us , ” in part because of people ’ s fears about safety , though the center has put social distancing and extra hygiene measures in place .
County leaders are now hoping to open up more fully by July 4 , but they still want to keep a lid on hospitalizations .
“ We do acknowledge there are trade-offs , ” says Paul Simon , chief science officer for LA County ’ s Department of Public Health . Early on , everyone was focused on locking down the disease , but now health officials are looking closely at other indicators such as suicides ( a lagging indicator that has actually decreased slightly ) .
“ We ’ re in a tough situation with this pandemic and hard choices are going to have to be made , but I think they can be made in a thoughtful way . ”
In California and across the country , pressure is on to reopen , expressed in lawsuits and protests . Over it all looms an election in November . No fewer than a dozen suits have been filed against California and Gov . Gavin Newsom by gun shops , churches , businesses , and even a bride to be . Last week , the Wisconsin Supreme Court overturned the state ’ s “ safer at home ” order , saying it needed approval in the Legislature .
Eugene Volokh , who teaches at the University of California Los Angeles law school , says it is unlikely that it will be the courts that push reopening . Governments have “ extremely broad authority ” in a pandemic , especially over everyday business , he explains , citing the 1905 Supreme Court smallpox case , Jacobson v. Massachusetts . It may be a little different where some specific individual rights are involved – such as with churches or guns . Stay-at-home orders also may violate some state constitutions .
But it is economic pressure that will do the pushing , he says . “ Long before the courts accept any of these business claims , many states are going to recognize that at some point , the shutdown causes more harm than good. ” Governors don ’ t want to be seen as causing more deaths than the pandemic , he says , and at the same time , they need revenues to implement their programs and balance their budgets .
“ The interests of business , and the interests of citizens , and the interests of government officials , while not completely aligned , will be largely aligned in favor of opening things up as long as it is seen as marginally safe . ”
Indeed , with decreased hospitalizations , Governor Newsom this week relaxed criteria for counties to move further along the road to reopening . LA County officials , too , feel a sense of urgency from businesses to open or risk permanent job loss .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ Time is of the essence , ” said Kathryn Barger , chair of the county ’ s Board of Supervisors after meeting with business leaders this week . “ Now it is time to begin to move from safer at home , to safer at work , and safer in our communities . ”