“ The 360 ” shows you diverse perspectives on the day ’ s top stories and debates .
The Trump administration last week announced a program to dramatically speed up the process of creating a vaccine for the coronavirus through a project called “ Operation Warp Speed. ” Containment efforts like social distancing and a robust testing regime can help limit virus spread , but experts agree the pandemic won ’ t be truly behind us until the broader population is given immunity through a vaccine .
Despite the urgency , creating a vaccine is a slow , painstaking process . There are as many as 90 vaccines in development around the world , though only a handful are in the earliest stages of human trials . The most optimistic predictions suggest it will be at least a year to 18 months before a vaccine is widely available . That may seem slow , but it would actually shatter the record for fastest vaccine ever developed , which currently stands at four years .
Some scientists have proposed a controversial step they say could shave months from that time line : deliberately exposing people to the coronavirus to test vaccines more quickly .
Vaccines are typically tested by giving subjects a dose , then letting them go back to their everyday lives with the expectation that a certain number of them will come in contact with the virus . This process could take a long time for the coronavirus , especially given the steps to avoid infection that are part of our typical daily routines . Exposing subjects to the virus — what ’ s known as a “ human challenge trial ” — would eliminate that wait time .
Human challenge trials are rare because they are seen by many as violating the core principle of medicine : “ First , do no harm. ” Exposing people to the virus would inevitably mean some of them would get sick or even die .
Proponents of using challenge trials to develop a coronavirus vaccine say the current pandemic challenges that logic . A delay of several months to getting a vaccine on the market would likely lead to thousands of deaths , a far worse outcome than any potential drawbacks of a challenge trial , they argue .
Advocates say the health risks to subjects could be dramatically reduced by exposing them to a less potent version of the virus and selecting volunteers from less vulnerable groups , like young adults . A key element is the consent of the people involved in the trial . If individuals are willing to take on the risk of exposure to help save the lives of potentially thousands of people , they should be allowed to do that , supporters say . A website set up to collect names of those willing to participate in a challenge trial has received more than 10,000 volunteers as of Monday .
The idea has also received significant pushback from scientists who argue it ’ s impossible to gauge how much risk participants are being subjected to because so much is unknown about the virus and how it behaves . There is also skepticism that the results of a challenge trial made up of young , healthy subjects could be applied to the broader population .
Others worry about the logistics of carrying out such trials , especially if several vaccines are tested at the same time . Some of those vaccines will inevitably fail , meaning all subjects will be put at risk without any protection . Challenge trials also face unique hurdles — like determining the correct form and amount of the virus to expose subjects to — that some experts say could make them take even longer than traditional methods .
No challenge trials in the U.S. can be started without the approval of the Food and Drug Administration . A group of 35 lawmakers recently sent a letter to the FDA asking for the agency to acknowledge the urgency of the pandemic and allow future trials to go forward . With only a few vaccines in the early stages of human testing , it will likely be several months before any of them are ready for large-scale trials of any kind .
The sooner a vaccine is ready , the more lives will be saved
“ Covid-19 is currently killing thousands of people a day . The vast majority of the world ’ s population has no acquired immunity to the disease . And the economy is grinding to a halt to curb its spread . Given the dire situation , the value of even marginally speeding the widespread availability of a vaccine is incredibly high and warrants much more attention and more extreme measures. ” — Matthew Yglesias , Vox