Democrats blocked a massive $ 1.8 trillion stimulus spending bill to protect the U.S. economy and provide relief to American families who are suffering as a result of the coronavirus outbreak .
“ The fate of a sweeping government rescue package to prop up an economy devastated by the coronavirus pandemic was in limbo on Sunday after Democrats blocked action in the Senate , ” The New York Times reported . “ The 47-47 vote was a stunning setback for a package that was emerging as the largest economic stimulus measure in modern American history – now expected to cost $ 1.8 trillion or more . ”
The Times noted that the Democrats ’ decision to block the bill sent U.S. stock futures tumbling to the maximum limit on Sunday evening . The Times further added that Republicans and Democrats had agreed that the plan was “ crucial ” to stopping economic fallout from the outbreak of the coronavirus as the bill would have sent $ 1,200 in direct payments to millions of Americans and would have provided lots of additional benefits .
Now is the time for leadership – not politics . The American people deserve action to confront this crisis . pic.twitter.com/Ix2UnpwdMS — Mark Bednar ( @ MarkBednar ) March 23 , 2020
Townhall political editor Guy Benson reported that Senate sources said that Democrat House Speaker Nancy Pelosi was responsible for tanking the bill .
“ Talking to some Senate GOP sources . They seem stunned and angry , ” Benson said . “ I ’ m told there was lots of bipartisan input into the legislative outline & emerging specifics – including an agreement in principle on broad strokes . Then Pelosi showed up and threw a partisan grenade . ”
“ One source thinks D leadership decided crisis provided big opportunity to pack goodies into bill , so bipartisan process/momentum broke down , ” Benson added . “ Economists believe there is no time for a partisan standoff . But here we are . D ’ s counting on media cover & ‘ corporations ’ talking point . ”
One source thinks D leadership decided crisis provided big opportunity to pack goodies into bill , so bipartisan process/momentum broke down . Economists believe there is no time for a partisan standoff . But here we are . D ’ s counting on media cover & “ corporations ” talking point . — Guy Benson ( @ guypbenson ) March 22 , 2020
Numerous other notable political and media figures also noted that Pelosi was responsible for ruining the bill .
Manhattan Institute Senior Fellow Brian Riedl tweeted : “ The Senate Democrats just engaged in one of the most cynical displays of partisanship I have ever seen in the U.S. Senate . They let Pelosi blow up a bipartisan agreement . And they ’ ll get away with it too by denying what was in the agreement . ”
The Senate Democrats just engaged in one of the most cynical displays of partisanship I have ever seen in the U.S. Senate . They let Pelosi blow up a bipartisan agreement . And they 'll get away with it too by denying what was in the agreement . — Brian Riedl ( @ Brian_Riedl ) March 22 , 2020
Nicole Kaeding , Vice President of Policy Promotion and Economist at the National Taxpayers Union Foundation , wrote on Twitter , “ I love the people in my feed saying McConnell should negotiate . He did , guys . The bill released today was watered down from the one the other day on several R issues . There were clear bipartisan changes . ”
I love the people in my feed saying McConnell should negotiate . He did , guys . The bill released today was watered down from the one the other day on several R issues . There were clear bipartisan changes . — Nicole Kaeding ( @ NKaeding ) March 22 , 2020
Political commentator Hugh Hewitt tweeted : “ He jammed his own caucus to pass @ SpeakerPelosi bill because he knows we are in a catastrophe and action needed . If businesses founder , they can not be resurrected from ashes . Vote by @ SenateDems most outrageous obstructionism I ’ ve ever seen and @ senatemajldr anger is righteous . ”
He jammed his own caucus to pass @ SpeakerPelosi bill because he knows we are in a catastrophe and action needed . If businesses founder , they can not be resurrected from ashes . Vote by @ SenateDems most outrageous obstructionism I ’ ve ever seen and @ senatemajldr anger is righteous . https : //t.co/OONylAntmm — Hugh Hewitt ( @ hughhewitt ) March 23 , 2020
Democrats tried to claim that the bill was a corporate bailout and a slush fund and did not protect workers , which is misleading .
Part of what Democrats have used to try to make the claim was a component of the relief package that gives the Treasury Department the power to distribute $ 500 billion in emergency federal loans to states , cities , and businesses .
House Republican Whip Steve Scalise ( LA ) tweeted : “ Now is NOT the time for politics . Senate Dems & Nancy Pelosi need to quit playing political games & support the Coronavirus relief bill they co-wrote in the first place . Enough is enough . Lives are at stake . The economy is at stake . Families & workers need help NOW . ”
Now is NOT the time for politics . Senate Dems & Nancy Pelosi need to quit playing political games & support the Coronavirus relief bill they co-wrote in the first place . Enough is enough . Lives are at stake .
Families & workers need help NOW . — Steve Scalise ( @ SteveScalise ) March 22 , 2020
This is a breaking news story , refresh the page for updates .