On Thursday , the president suggested that perhaps an `` injection '' of disinfectant could help cure people of COVID-19 . Critics of Donald Trump went to town—and rightfully so ! —while supporters scrambled to settle on a defense ( both `` he did n't really say that '' and `` he did but it was sarcasm '' have been in play ) . By Saturday morning , social media was abuzz with articles about people calling poison control centers , each crafted to illustrate how Americans had apparently taken Trump 's ramblings to heart and consumed household disinfectants like Lysol and bleach .
The problem ? Articles shared as illustrations of this actually said no such thing .
One article making the rounds , from the New York Daily News , is headlined `` A spike in New Yorkers ingesting household cleaners following Trump 's controversial coronavirus comments . '' But the article makes no mention of anyone deliberately consuming household cleaners . It simply states that 30 people called the city 's poison control hotline `` over fears that they had ingested bleach or other household cleaners . ''
Fearing that you ingested something does n't jibe with having intentionally consumed that substance .
The authors of the Daily News piece , Anna Sanders and Chris Sommerfeldt , try to circumvent this inconvenient fact by noting that over the same time period in 2019 , the Poison Control Center `` only handled 13 similar cases . '' And while this time , nine calls were about possible Lysol exposure and ten about bleach , last year 's calls contained `` no cases reported about Lysol exposure and only two were specifically in regards to bleach . ''
The paper does n't present any other data about calls to Poison Control for comparison . But one need n't do a detailed analysis to surmise why exposure to things like Lysol and bleach—and fears about this exposure—might be up this month over April 2019 . And one need n't reach for the ridiculous explanation that it 's because people deliberately consumed it en masse after listening to Trump . We are in the midst of a pandemic right now and we were not in April 2019 . Of course more people are being exposed to household disinfectants at the moment than were during this time last year .
The Daily News does note that none of the callers died or required hospitalization , which also suggests their exposure was minimal and not of the Lysol-mouthwash variety .
But the Daily News piece is far from the only poison-control story being framed misleadingly . A story out of Kentucky that 's being shared as `` evidence '' people have been consuming household cleaners following Trump 's Thursday statements is actually about calls to Kentucky poison control centers in March .
`` Poison control centers around the country , including here in Kentucky , are seeing a spike in calls related to COVID-19 , '' says the WDRB.com story . Ashley Webb , director of the Kentucky Poison Control Center , told the outlet that `` just in March , we saw about a 30 % increase in hand sanitizer exposures and about a 50 % increase in household cleaners . ''
A similar spike in calls to poison control centers has been seen in many states . But these boosts all started in March , as people began using more household disinfectants to try and stave off the new coronavirus , and not just last week .
Michigan reported `` a nine percent increase in calls for accidental poisoning from home cleaning supplies '' in March , says ABC 57 .
In Maryland , over the past six weeks , `` calls for toxic exposure to hand sanitizers have nearly doubled since the same time in 2018 , '' according to Fox 5 Baltimore . `` In addition , the MD Control Center has had 95 calls for bleach exposure , more than double last year 's 46 calls in the same time period . ''
In Illinois , two people `` had 'inappropriate exposure ' to disinfectants after President Trump 's COVID-19 briefing Thursday , '' reported WCIA.com on Friday . But a spokesperson for Illinois Poison Control told WCIA that this was n't unusual and calls had been up 36 percent since the COVID-19 pandemic 's start , often related to people doing things like trying to wash produce with cleaners that are toxic for people to ingest .
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , 28,158 people called U.S. poison control centers about possible exposure to household cleaners in March 2020 , compared to 25,021 in March 2019 . The number of calls about possible exposure to disinfectants went from 12,801 in March 2019 to 17,392 in March 2020 .
The CDC report containing these numbers was released this week , so many have interpreted the data as being related to the Trump disinfectant hoopla . But the CDC data on poison control calls end on March 31 .