Another 6.6 million people applied for unemployment benefits last week , the government reported on Thursday , as the economic shutdown due to the coronavirus continued to devastate the labor market .
Claims for the previous week were revised upward to 6.8 million . The three-week total for jobless claims now stands at 16.5 million .
Meanwhile , the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department announced Thursday another $ 2.3 trillion in stimulus . They established a Main Street Business Lending Program and a Municipal Liquidity Facility to support the flow of credit to American workers , businesses , states , counties , and cities impacted by the pandemic .
“ The Main Street Business Lending Program will make a significant difference for the 40,000 medium-sized businesses that employ 35 million Americans , ” said Treasury Secretary Steven T. Mnuchin .
Treasury said small and medium-sized businesses , “ through no fault of their own , have faced severe financial strain from widespread closures and liquidity pressures in the financial system . ”
Using funds appropriated under the CARES Act , Treasury will make a $ 75 billion equity investment to implement the Main Street Business Lending Program . This investment will enable up to $ 600 billion in new financing for businesses with up to 10,000 employees or $ 2.5 billion in 2019 annual revenues .
Stocks opened higher on the Fed announcement , with major indexes gaining about 2 % in early trading .
The $ 2.2 trillion economic rescue package signed into law by President Trump on March 27 provides an extra $ 600 per week in unemployment benefits on top of the normal state jobless benefit .
Senate Republicans on Thursday want to approve an extra $ 250 billion to replenish the Paycheck Protection Program , a $ 350 billion emergency job-retention fund for small businesses . But Democrats are threatening to block the move unless Republicans agree to add billions more for hospitals , low-income communities , states and food-stamp benefits .
Alfredo Ortiz , president and CEO of the conservative Job Creators Network , said the latest unemployment claims show that the nation is “ in a true economic emergency , losing 34,000 jobs every hour over the past three weeks . ”
“ The $ 349 billion Paycheck Protection Program , launched just six days ago , is a lifeline for small businesses , but we need a lot more immediately , ” Mr. Ortiz said . “ The Trump administration and [ Senate Majority Leader ] Mitch McConnell recognize this , but [ House Speaker ] Nancy Pelosi and [ Senate Minority Leader ] Chuck Schumer are playing politics at the worst possible time . We need Congress to approve another round of PPP funding today . No delays , no excuses . ”