The United States of America faces two critical emergencies . One is the coronavirus pandemic . The other is the presidency of Donald Trump .
The latter assertion is n't just linked to the Trump administration 's well-documented mishandling of the pandemic response . Indeed , Trump is not the first president to be caught short by an unexpected crisis . But other presidents — FDR after Pearl Harbor , George W. Bush after 9/11 , Barack Obama after the economy collapsed in 2008 — brought their focus to bear on meeting the great challenges before them . But as anybody who watched Trump 's latest bonkers news briefing on Monday can attest , beating back a virus that threatens public health is a priority for Trump only to the extent that it helps him assert his power and preserve his own image .
Trump used the briefing to show a campaign-style video defending his management of the pandemic , featuring glowing quotes from governors . `` Everything we did was right , '' he told reporters . That is n't true : Reports have shown that Trump was slow to take action on the virus , diverting early discussions to talk of vaping and accusing advisers of being alarmist when they warned the virus might require the shutdowns we 're now seeing . The president 's overwhelming need to brag and burnish his reputation is unseemly at the best of times . That he insists on prioritizing it when thousands of Americans are dying of COVID-19 speaks to his rare moral and spiritual bankruptcy . We now have a definitive answer to an old question : Does character matter in a president ? Yes , it does , and Trump lacks it completely .
But the most troubling part of the president 's Monday performance came when Trump said he might order state governors to ease shelter-at-home rules and begin to re-open their economies . Trump is likely pushing for this because he fears facing re-election while the economy is in tatters thanks to widespread lockdowns . But experts fear that lifting the lockdowns too quickly could lead to a new wave of coronavirus illnesses and deaths .
Asked what authority he had to command states re-open , Trump responded : `` When someone is president of the United States , the authority is total . And that 's the way it 's got ta be . ''
Trump : `` When somebody 's the president of the United States , the authority is total . And that 's the way it 's got ta be . '' Quick flag : This is untrue and unconstitutional . pic.twitter.com/jf8ACMWkfD — Pod Save America ( @ PodSaveAmerica ) April 13 , 2020
That is breathtakingly wrong . The Constitution plainly divvies up federal authority between the three branches of government , and the 10th Amendment explicitly delegates power to the states . The system is set up so that no person or branch has `` total authority . '' It is the most basic lesson taught in our civics classes , but Trump has long demonstrated a convenient ignorance of the Constitution 's details and limits on his presidential power .
Trump 's performance should finally kill any notion that the Republican Party and its Tea Party base are motivated by a deep fidelity to the Constitution or `` limited government . '' If former President Obama had asserted `` total authority '' at any point in his presidency , conservative protesters would have taken to the streets within hours , cheered on by Fox News and GOP leaders . Now , the president 's autocratic assertions are received with silence and assent . The hypocrisy would be stunning if it were n't so predictable .
Trump 's claim of unlimited authority would be more frightening if he had n't frequently evaded actually using such authority during this crisis , preferring instead to scapegoat the nation 's governors under the guise of federalism . Most notably , he has refused to issue a national stay-at-home order , leaving that decision up to individual states . `` We have a thing called the Constitution , which I cherish , number one , '' he said earlier this month . `` Number two , those governors — I know every one of them — they 're doing a great job . They 're being very , very successful in what they 're doing . And as you know , I want the governors to be running things . '' To the extent he has used his authority , it has been to pursue old bugaboos like closing down the nation 's borders , or to engage in corruption like using ventilators as a form of patronage to favored Republican politicians .
In the absence of federal leadership , the nation 's governors are devising their own workarounds . Gov . Gavin Newsom ( D-Calif. ) announced Monday his state is forming a pact with Washington and Oregon to plan how to re-open their economies ; New York , New Jersey , Connecticut , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , Massachusetts , and Delaware are undertaking a similar initiative .
In short : The federal government under President Trump is broken , unwilling or unable to perform the tasks expected of it during a national emergency . The president wants all the power , all the credit , and none of the responsibility . The result is a terrifying mix of authoritarianism and fecklessness that threatens American democracy and public health .
There seem to be no remedies for Trump 's behavior , at least until the November election . Voters should remember not just that he mismanaged this deadly pandemic , but that his own behavior constituted a crisis in its own right .
Want more essential commentary and analysis like this delivered straight to your inbox ? Sign up for The Week 's `` Today 's best articles '' newsletter here .