The number of coronavirus cases in New York surged by more than 4,500 on Saturday , jolting the statewide number of infected past 11,600 on the eve of an unprecedented lockdown from Brooklyn to Buffalo aimed at containing the deadly bug .
New York City , which remained the epicenter of the nation ’ s COVID-19 crisis , accounted for the bulk of the alarming increase . More than 2,400 new cases were reported in the Big Apple , raising the total number of sick to 8,115 , city officials said .
The virus killed at least 15 more people in the city on Saturday , officials said , bringing the death toll to 60 . The day before , COVID-19 claimed 14 lives between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. , a troubling rate of more than one an hour . The statewide coronavirus death toll meanwhile exceeded 70 .
Nationwide , there were more than 25,000 cases with 300 deaths , data Johns Hopkins University revealed Saturday , as New Jersey joined four other states — New York , California , Illinois and Connecticut — in imposing restrictions on movement to stop the spread of the virus .
In response to the mounting crisis — and the expectation that the grim numbers will continue to rise exponentially— Gov . Andrew Cuomo promised to purchase 6,000 new ventilators and two million virus-blocking N95 masks .
A million of the masks will be sent to health care responders in the city , and 500,000 would go to Long Island , he said .
“ We are literally scouring the globe looking for medical supplies , ” he said in a press conference .
Hospitals statewide have been directed to end elective surgeries and alter their space and staffing to accommodate the flood of infected .
“ We are now working with hospitals to reconfigure space to get more beds and find more staff to manage the beds , ’ Cuomo said .
New York is also reviewing four possible locations for temporary “ field hospitals , ” to be set up by the Army Corps of Engineers and operated with FEMA assistance , Cuomo said .
The four sites being mulled are the city ’ s Javits Center , SUNY Stony Brook , SUNY Westbury and the Westchester Convention Center .
The Javits Center could be turned into a 1,000-patient hospital in the next few days , Cuomo said .
The Army Corps has also been eyeing empty hotels and college dorms as potential medical space .
And the Navy still intends to send the USS Comfort to New York Harbor in the next few weeks , where overflow , non-coronavirus hospital cases would be treated .
New York ’ s goal is to increase the state ’ s number of hospital beds from the current 50,000 up to 70,000 .
Shoring up existing hospital space — and building more — is vital .
Some 15 percent of the state ’ s sick have required some hospitalization — so far about 1,600 people .
see also Cuomo orders lockdown , shuts down non-essential businesses Gov . Andrew Cuomo ordered a statewide lockdown as New York ...
In New York City , 1,160 people have required hospitalization , including 260 in an ICU .
“ Every piston is firing , ” Cuomo said . “ Everything that can be done will be done . ”
The governor continued urging all but essential workers to stay home , or at least stay apart .
A lockdown that takes effect 8 p.m. Sunday night will set tight limits on how New Yorkers shop , work , and play — all designed to minimize close contact and prevent a healthcare-system-crippling spike in cases .
That means all New Yorkers , even the young , the governor said , flatly telling young people who think they have immunity to the deadly bug : “ You are wrong . ”
Just over half of the state ’ s coronavirus patients — 54 percent — are 18 to 49 years old .
“ You can get this virus and you can transfer the virus and you can wind up hurting someone who you love , or hurting someone wholly inadvertently , ” he said .
Social distancing is vital to slow down the growth of contagion so that the state does not exhaust its medical personnel or its supply of ventilators , protective garb , and hospital space .
“ We ’ re trying to reduce the spread to over a period of months , ” Cuomo explained in a press conference .
“ Over a period of months , our health care system can deal with the numbers . ”
In some encouraging news the number of cases in Westchester — where the state ’ s first major outbreak was located — is slowing .
“ That is good news , ” the governor said , proof that the original “ containment zone ” is working . Still , there were at least 294 cases there as of Saturday .
In New Jersey , Gov . Phil Murphy signed an executive order directing most residents to stay home .
Jersey ’ s sick tally rose to 1,327 Saturday , with 16 deaths . That ’ s up from 890 cases and 11 deaths on Friday .
Both Murphy and Cuomo attributed their states ’ hikes in reported infections on increased testing .
“ No one is spiking any footballs , but we have been ahead of the curve on testing , ” Murphy said .
Further jangling area nerves , all flights were briefly suspended Saturday afternoon at airports from Philadelphia to Westchester after an air traffic controller trainee who was stationed at the FAA ’ s New York Air Route Traffic Control Center in Ronkonkoma tested positive for the virus .
The center , which handles high-altitude flights and flyovers , was shut for a deep cleaning .
Sunday night ’ s lockdown will force the shutdown of most of the state ’ s businesses , with the exception of grocery stores and bodegas , liquor stores , gas stations , laundromats and restaurant delivery services .
The city has appointed a “ Food Czar , ” Kathryn Garcia , to ensure no one goes hungry , Mayor Bill de Blasio said .
Those lucky enough to still be working in “ non-essential ” businesses must do so from home ; and exercising out of doors was limited to such solitary , non-team endeavors as walking , biking and running .
Saturday ’ s sunny , low-50s weather drew crowds of New Yorkers — all eager to shake off the self-isolation blues — to the city ’ s parks and beaches .
“ You should send these pictures to Cuomo , this place is too crowded , ” one Central Park-goer shouted to a Post photographer on a west side foot path .
“ I wanted to do something today with my friends , ” Matt Johnson , 42 , said of a birthday party he held on the sands of Rockaway beach .
Seven pals brought surfboards , a small vanilla cake and a can of Lysol .
“ It ’ s kinda like your last meal on death row , ” agreed Devin Romeo , 28 , who was surfing nearby . “ You are out in the sun and getting your last wave in and its bitter-sweet . ”
In Washington Square Park , the virus couldn ’ t slow down chess players such as Sarfaraz Ahmed . “ How long are you going to be in prison in your own house ? ” he asked . “ I ’ ll take my chances . ”
Additional reporting by Georgett Roberts , Rosemary Misdary , Sam Raskin and Bernadette Hogan and Post Wires