California Gov . Gavin Newsom Gavin NewsomCalifornia breaks daily record with more than 8,000 new COVID-19 cases ███ 's Coronavirus Report : Cure Violence Global founder Gary Slutkin says violence and epidemics follow same patterns ; Global death toll surpasses half a million California governor orders bars in L.A. , six other counties to close MORE ( D ) on Wednesday imposed a round of tougher restrictions on businesses to combat a surge in coronavirus cases .
Newsom ordered all indoor non-essential businesses to close in 19 counties across the state , including some of the most populous , including Los Angeles County and Orange County .
These include bars , dine-in restaurants , indoor movie theaters and indoor tasting rooms at wineries . Restaurants may remain open for takeout meals .
The restrictions will remain in place for at least three weeks , Newsom said .
“ I deeply respect people ’ s liberty , their desire to go back to the way things were , but I can not impress upon you more , our actions have an impact on other people , '' Newsom said .
Newsom recommended that fireworks shows be cancelled , and said parking lots at state beaches in Southern California and the Bay Area will be closed this weekend in an effort to limit crowds .
The announcement comes just ahead of the July 4 weekend , when Newsom said he is concerned about people in coronavirus hot spots ignoring public health guidelines and making the situation even worse .
California reported 110 deaths on Wednesday , the most the state has recorded since April , and nearly 6,000 new cases , Newsom said .
Hospitalizations have jumped 51 percent in the past two weeks , and ICU admissions are up 47 percent over the same period .
`` Please disabuse yourself that somehow , people are no longer dying , '' Newsom said . `` Please do not take your guard down , please do not believe those that somehow want to manipulate the reality that is demonstrable in those lives lost and those families that have been torn apart because of COVID-19 . ''
Newsom allowed local governments to begin reopening in early May . The most recent reopening phase took effect in mid-June and allowed retail stores , bars , dine-in restaurants , gyms , and hair and nail salons to reopen with certain occupancy restrictions .
Newsom said the new closures are being targeted at trouble spots , rather than being imposed statewide .
`` We 're focusing and targeting local parts of the state where we 're seeing an increase in community spread and we 're seeing an increase in the positivity rate , '' Newsom said Wednesday .
`` Not every part of the state is impacted equally , and as a consequence we are not targeting on a statewide level these rules and regulations , we are focusing in on areas of concern , '' Newsom said .
California 's restrictions come as an increasing number of states have been backtracking their reopenings as coronavirus cases and hospitalization spike just ahead of the July 4 holiday weekend .
States like Arizona , Georgia , Texas and Ohio all reported record numbers of cases on Wednesday . Some records have been broken on a near-daily basis , while others were set at the height of the COVID-19 outbreak in the spring .
Georgia recorded nearly 3,000 new cases on Wednesday , breaking the previous single-day record of 2,225 cases , which was recorded Sunday . The state has also been increasing testing , and the cumulative positivity rate is currently 9 percent .
In Ohio , the state reported 1,076 new cases of COVID-19 on Wednesday , the first time daily reported coronavirus cases have exceeded 1,000 since April .
Texas again broke its own daily record for new cases , reporting 8,076 new COVID-19 cases on Wednesday .
Arizona on Wednesday also continued to break records , with nearly 5,000 new daily cases reported . Even more concerning , the death rates have also been increasing . Deaths are a lagging indicator , and officials have been citing a low death rate as a way to diminish the impact the virus has had .
Nationally , more than 48,000 new coronavirus cases were reported in the United States on Tuesday , according to data collected by the New York Times .