Those achievements have come at an enormous price . In the past two months , almost 40 million Americans have lost their jobs — about a quarter of our working population . One recent study suggested that 42 percent of those layoffs may be permanent .
The costs are not just in lost jobs , but in lost lives . Americans have been forced to put off care for non-covid-19 illnesses such as cancer and cardiac disease — forgoing screenings , surgeries , chemotherapy and emergency room visits . Zoran Lasic , a cardiologist at the Jamaica Hospital Medical Center and Lenox Hill Hospital in New York , told the New England Journal of Medicine that when we look back “ the toll on non-covid patients will be much greater than covid deaths. ” While the government is speeding clinical trials for covid-19 treatments and vaccines , trials for many non-covid diseases have ground to a halt . David Ryan , chief of oncology at Massachusetts General Hospital , told the NEJM that `` clinical research in cancer will be set back by at least a year as we all drop what we ’ re doing to take care of the surge of [ covid ] patients. ” According to a model from the Meadows Mental Health Policy Institute , we could see an additional 40,000 deaths due to suicides and drug overdoses among the jobless , as well as an additional 2 million people addicted to drugs .
When the pandemic first arrived , we did not have data to show which populations were most vulnerable . Now we know the vast majority of covid victims are older Americans , like my mother , with underlying health conditions . We must continue to shelter and protect them . But for everyone else , especially young people , the risks of resuming activity are much lower .
Usually children are most vulnerable in a pandemic , which is why we shut down schools . That was the right decision when the novel coronavirus emerged . But we now we know that covid has largely spared children . New York City , the epicenter of the epidemic , reports just 13 confirmed or suspected covid-19 deaths among those 17 and under — and almost all of those victims had an underlying illness . ( There have been another five suspected or confirmed deaths in New York among children with a rare covid-19-linked inflammatory syndrome . )
Parents uncomfortable sending their kids to school should be given the option of distance learning . But the vast majority of students should be allowed back in the classroom with appropriate social distancing precautions . According to Dimitri Christakis , director of the Center for Child Health , Behavior and Development at Seattle Children ’ s Hospital and editor of JAMA Pediatrics , children will suffer a 9- to-12-month learning loss because of the lockdown . That will only worsen if it continues in the fall . Yet Michael Chertoff , chairman of ReOpen DC Advisory Group , has recommended that Washington , D.C. , schools not fully reopen for in-person learning until there is a vaccine . That ’ s completely senseless .
Even if we see a spike in cases when the lockdown ends , we now have the capacity to handle it . With adequate testing in place , we should have good data on where covid-19 is spreading in the fall , and the ability to employ local rather than national mitigation measures to ring-fence any hot spots . We should all do our part — washing our hands , wearing masks indoors , practicing social distancing and protecting the vulnerable . But it ’ s time to stop asking millions of Americans to sacrifice their livelihoods . It is time to restart treatments and clinical trials for non-covid-19 patients . And it ’ s time for kids to go back to school .