About 50 inmates — including eight registered sex offenders — have been released from an upstate New York jail as part of the efforts to stop the spread of the coronavirus , according to a report .
The inmates were sprung Saturday from the Monroe County Jail as part of a statewide order by the Department of Corrections and Community Services , WIVB reported .
Nine of them are staying at a Holiday Inn Express in Greece , NY — including four of the sex offenders , three of whom have been convicted of raping minors and were registered as Level 3 , meaning they are most likely to re-offend , according to the news outlet .
“ It doesn ’ t make any sense . If you could present an argument to me that makes sense , I ’ m willing to listen . But this doesn ’ t make any sense , ” Greece Police Chief Patrick Phelan said .
The inmates were moved to the hotel after the department was ordered to release low-level technical parole violators amid concerns that the bug has spread in local lockups .
“ So you have a violent criminal who ’ s done time in state prison who ’ s been given the chance of parole , and not followed the conditions of their parole . That ’ s who you ’ re talking about right now , ” Phelan said .
The chief criticized the move and said he would have liked to have been notified because of the threat the inmates pose to the community .
“ We weren ’ t told by anyone . I think good practice would be if you ’ re going to release convicted felons , ” he said . “ Some of them very violent , some of those level 3 sex offenders , you might want to give law enforcement the heads-up . ”
The department told the station it made decisions on whom to release based on a “ review of the underlying technical violation , not the original crime . ”
“ This significant action is being taken in response to a growing number of COVID-19 cases in local jails over the past few days and weeks , ” DOCCS said .
“ Our top priority remains the public health and safety of New Yorkers during this global public health emergency and this measure will further protect a vulnerable population from contracting and transmitting this infectious disease . ”