A man walks past a retail store that is going out of business due to the coronavirus pandemic in Winnetka , Ill. , Tuesday , June 23 , 2020 . Illinois Gov . J.B Pritzker announced a package of state grant programs that will help support communities and businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and unrest in the area . ( AP Photo/Nam Y. Huh )
A man walks past a retail store that is going out of business due to the coronavirus pandemic in Winnetka , Ill. , Tuesday , June 23 , 2020 . Illinois Gov . J.B Pritzker announced a package of state grant programs that will help support communities and businesses impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and unrest in the area . ( AP Photo/Nam Y. Huh )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — The number of laid-off workers seeking U.S. unemployment aid barely fell last week , and the reopening of small businesses has leveled off — evidence that the job market ’ s gains may have stalled just as a surge in coronavirus cases is endangering an economic recovery .
The government also reported Thursday that the economy contracted at a 5 % annual rate in the first three months of the year , a further sign of the damage being inflicted by the viral pandemic . The economy is expected to shrink at a roughly 30 % rate in the current quarter . That would be the worst quarterly contraction , by far , since record-keeping began in 1948 . Economists do expect a snap-back in the second half of the year , though not enough to reverse all the damage .
Last week , the number of people applying for jobless benefits declined slightly to 1.48 million . It was the 12th straight weekly drop . An additional 700,000 people applied through a program for self-employed and gig workers that made them eligible for aid for the first time . These figures aren ’ t adjusted for seasonal variations , so the government doesn ’ t include them in the official count .
Combining those figures , overall applications for jobless aid have edged down just 3 % in the past two weeks — a much slower pace than in late April and May .
“ There has been no real decline in weekly claims the past two weeks , ” said Julia Pollak , a labor economist at ZipRecruiter . “ There has also been no real increase in job openings . What seemed like encouraging signs of recovery in May largely stalled in June . ”
A separate government report Thursday said orders for durable goods unexpectedly jumped nearly 16 % in May , reflecting a rebound in some business activity . Still , the pace of orders and shipments remains far below pre-pandemic levels . And excluding the volatile transportation category , so-called core orders rose only modestly , reflecting still-sluggish business investment .
The virus is once again squeezing companies across the economy .
Disney is postponing the scheduled mid-July reopening of its Southern California theme parks until it receives guidelines from the state . Macy ’ s is cutting nearly 4,000 corporate jobs — roughly 3 % of its workforce — in response to financial strain caused by the virus .
Apple announced late Wednesday that it would re-close seven of its stores in the Houston area , which is suffering a spike in cases . Last week , it had said would re-close 11 other stores in four states . And the parent company of Chuck E. Cheese restaurants will seek Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection , in part because of the restaurants it has been forced to close as a result of the pandemic .
Larry Kudlow , President Donald Trump ’ s top economic adviser , asserted Thursday on Fox Business that the economy is rebounding quickly .
“ I think the strong ‘ V ’ recovery is right still there , ” Kudlow said , referring to the shape of a sharp rebound on a chart .
Most private economists , though , foresee a much more tepid recovery . And the latest economic figures coincide with a sudden resurgence of COVID-19 cases in the United States , especially in the South and West , that is threatening to derail the nascent economic rebound . On Wednesday , the nation set a high for new confirmed coronavirus cases . Many states are establishing their own new peaks for confirmed daily infections , including Arizona , California , Mississippi , Nevada , Texas and Oklahoma . Cases of coronavirus have also jumped in Florida and Georgia .
The number of infections is thought to be far higher still because many people have not been tested , and studies suggest that people can be infected with the virus without feeling sick .
Should the trends continue , states may reimpose some limits on businesses that would likely trigger job cuts . And if not , consumers may choose to shop , eat out , and travel less .
Texas Gov . Greg Abbott said Thursday that that state will suspend its business reopenings amid a surge in coronavirus infections .
Real time data on small businesses suggests that the job market ’ s improvement slowed in June compared with May , when 2.5 million jobs were unexpectedly added . About 78 % of small businesses have reopened as states have lifted shutdown orders , according to data from Homebase , a company that provides scheduling and time-tracking software to small businesses . Yet nationally , that figure has been flat for the past week .
In states that are suffering spikes in COVID-19 cases , small businesses are closing again and cutting some jobs .
Ray Sandza , an executive at Homebase , said the plateau in business reopenings is a worrisome sign that the remaining 20 % of small companies could end up closing permanently .
“ If you haven ’ t reopened yet , the likelihood of coming back is low , ” Sandza said .
He noted that most small businesses had just one or two months ’ of cash on hand when the pandemic intensified three months ago .
In Florida , Texas , and Arizona , the proportion of small businesses that have closed has risen in the past week as a result of the resurgent viral outbreaks . And in Arizona , as of Monday , the number of employees working at small companies was 31 % below the pre-pandemic level . That ’ s worse than the previous week , when it was 26.5 % .
Homebase ’ s data showed a solid rebound in jobs and hours worked in May that was consistent with the May jobs report , which also showed that the unemployment rate fell to 13.3 % from 14.7 % . Those are the two highest unemployment rates since the Great Depression .
Other real-time data is showing similar results . Kronos , which also produces small business scheduling software , said the number of shifts worked is now growing at only half the pace it was in late April and May . And shifts worked have actually fallen in 10 states in the past week , according to Dave Gilbertson , a Kronos official .
Thursday ’ s data on jobless claims included one bright spot : The total number of people receiving unemployment benefits aid fell to 19.5 million from 20.3 million , which suggests that employers are rehiring some workers .
For the unemployed , the federal government has been providing $ 600 in weekly benefits , on top of whatever state jobless aid recipients are receiving . This federal money has pumped nearly $ 20 billion a week into the economy and enabled many of the unemployed to stay afloat .
It has been a major help to Alexis O ’ Neill , who was laid off in March from an accounting job at an aviation fuel company . O ’ Neill , 49 , who lives with her mother in Ann Arbor , Michigan , is looking for a job that would allow her to work from home so she could avoid putting her mother at risk of contracting the virus .
She has applied for at least a dozen jobs but has received no responses except an acknowledgement of her application . Many open jobs now seem to offer lower pay than before the pandemic struck . Compounding the dilemma for O ’ Neill , Michigan is stuck with the nation ’ s second-highest state unemployment rate , 21.2 % .
“ The job market is terrible , ” she said . “ Everything either pays so badly or doesn ’ t come with benefits . ”