“ It ’ s like we ’ re firefighting – first dropping water on the whole building , ” says Ioana Marinescu , an economist at the University of Pennsylvania .
What ’ s not clear is whether fiscal policy will be strong enough to cushion the blow of a health emergency that has idled workers and emptied schools and offices . Economists predict a severe contraction in economic activity and a surge in unemployment . The challenge for policymakers is to keep workers attached to their employers so that businesses can rev up once the worst is over . Simply bailing out struggling companies may not in itself solve that problem , which is why Congress may soon be cutting checks to American families so that spending doesn ’ t crash .
Germany , the United States , and other major economies have begun to inject money into their stricken economies , providing credit to companies like Ms. Sator ’ s . She ’ s hesitant to go into debt , given the uncertainty in her industry and others , but relieved that policymakers are acting .
Katja Sator owns an auto-parts plant in Germany that is still running , despite a sudden halt at many automakers . Technicians on the production lines work 2 meters ( 6 1/2 feet ) apart to reduce the risk from the coronavirus that has begun to decimate the global economy .
It ’ s a seemingly intractable dilemma , suddenly as salient in Berlin or Tokyo as it is in Washington : How do you save people ’ s economic livelihoods while telling those same people to stay home ?
A global recession , many forecasters say , is already here and is growing more severe by the day , as millions of consumers and workers in Europe , Asia , and North America have been sidelined as governments take extreme measures to stem the COVID-19 pandemic .
Finally , though , actions by governments and central banks appear to be ramping up , not so much in an effort to prevent a recession as simply to weather a storm that could easily become more severe than the global financial crisis a decade ago .
Help can ’ t come soon enough for Dominik Wilkinson and his co-workers at a restaurant in the northern German town of Bielefeld . The restaurant ’ s 40 staff members are already working sharply reduced hours , and there ’ s talk in town of curfews starting Friday . A prolonged closure would be , “ death , in terms of revenue . It ’ s basically the same for every small and medium-sized company , ” says Mr. Wilkinson , a shift manager .
In the United States , the past few days have seen automakers mothball factories , hotel chains furlough tens of thousands of workers , and major retailers trim store hours or go online only . A Labor Department report today showed claims for unemployment benefits spiking to 281,000 last week . Every day brings more turmoil in global stock and bond markets as investors seek safe havens , even as central banks cough up amounts not seen since the financial meltdown of 2008 .
Yet the situation ’ s very severity is spurring governments into action . Relief measures range from mortgage or tax holidays to cash infusions for households , while also lending or simply giving money to businesses to prevent mass layoffs or permanent closures .
Analysts say these are precisely the kinds of measures that can help , but their effectiveness will hinge greatly on their magnitude and speed of delivery . And what makes this crisis different , they add , is that a pandemic must also be tamed because the economic and health crises are intertwined .
The Group of Seven international economic organization has already issued a “ whatever it takes ” statement of determination . The International Monetary Fund and World Bank are mobilizing help for developing nations . But so far it ’ s an open question whether global leadership today can match the kind of concerted effort that emerged from the depths of the 2008 crisis .
John Minchillo/AP Visitors to the state Department of Labor in New York are turned away at the door by personnel due to closures over coronavirus concerns , on March 18 , 2020 . Applications for jobless benefits are surging as governments have ordered millions of workers and shoppers to stay home .
“ A lot of people didn ’ t quite measure the gravity of the situation for a while , including myself to be honest , ” says Ioana Marinescu , an economist at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia . “ We have to think about supporting business . That ’ s very important because if we allow businesses to fail , we are losing jobs . ... We ’ re also losing capital . ”
The top priority remains a pandemic that has killed more than 9,000 people and spread to every continent except Antarctica . Yet , if the economic side effects are left unaddressed , the result would be significant human hardship of another kind . It is costly to rehire workers , let alone to start new businesses from scratch . And the more workers lose jobs and paychecks now , the sharper the downward spiral .
So in the U.S. , members of Congress are considering emergency relief for the economy that could surpass $ 1 trillion in value , of which about half may be cash handouts to families that can be spent as quickly as possible . But in parallel , the Trump administration wants to bail out airlines and other hard-hit industries , and offer loans to help small businesses cope .
Other steps around the world include emergency loans in China and Japan , unemployment benefits for French workers forced into part-time status , and emergency legislation in Britain to halt evictions by landlords during the pandemic .
In Washington , a sense of urgency has blunted partisan edges , at least in part . On Wednesday , Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell successfully urged his colleagues to approve a measure , crafted by Democrats in the House , to expand unemployment benefits and paid sick leave , and to make tests for the coronavirus free .
“ More than usually , this touches many , many , many actors and not just the most vulnerable . So I think that ’ s a reason to go broad ” with emergency support , says Dr. Marinescu . “ It ’ s like we ’ re firefighting – first dropping water on the whole building , ” then thinking about more targeted relief going forward .
Markus Schreiber/AP A seasonal worker from Romania walks over an asparagus harvest field near Genthin , Germany , on March 18 , 2020 . This year some farms face shortages of seasonal labor as European Union countries tighten border crossings because of the coronavirus outbreak .
Last week , Germany green-lit a host of fiscal measures to offset the pandemic crunch . Companies large and small can access increased credit , apply for funds to pay idled workers , and seek tax deferrals .
But Katja Sator , owner of a precision engineering company in the southwest state of Baden-Württemberg , worries the emergency aid only amounts to a “ mound of debt , ” whereas grants wouldn ’ t weigh down her balance sheet .
“ It ’ s great that we ’ re receiving help with liquidity and that we can get new credit , ” says Ms. Sator , whose company , Frankenstein Präzision GmBH , makes precision parts for automakers and other industries . “ But we have to pay everything back . That means it ’ s not clear whether we ’ ll be in the red for the year if we have to close down production . ”
She hasn ’ t laid anyone off , but she ’ s not extending temporary contracts . Her production lines are still running , with technicians spaced 2 meters ( 6 1/2 feet ) apart .
As markets react to the pandemic , central banks have in many cases acted faster since they are inherently nimbler than legislatures . But unlike in 2008 , when the crisis began in an over-leveraged financial sector , the coronavirus has slammed into the real economy , which monetary policy alone is hard-pressed to rescue .
On Tuesday , the U.S. Federal Reserve reopened two programs last used during the global financial crisis a decade ago , to keep the flow of short-term credit from clogging .
And on Wednesday , European Central Bank President Christine LaGarde cited “ no limits ” to support efforts as the bank launched an $ 820 billion program to buy government and corporate debt .
For all the actions underway , the question economists raise is what will be enough in these extraordinary times . Forecasting the depth of the slowdown is challenging ; recent estimates suggest up to a 14 % drop in U.S. economic output ( annualized ) in the second quarter .
Although the term “ fiscal stimulus ” often is used for recession-fighting programs , the goal today is really about helping individuals and businesses survive this economic stallout . A rebound will come later . The challenge is to contain the current damage by slowing the spread of COVID-19 while minimizing job losses and firm closures .
“ Right now what needs to happen is flattening the curve [ of the outbreak ] while still doing whatever it takes ... to keep the fabric of the economy and of society alive , ” says Fabio Ghironi , an economist at the University of Washington in Seattle .
That means economic rescue should include support for stretched health care systems , he says – something far different from recessions with purely economic causes .
The U.S. and other governments are making some big efforts , but Dr. Ghironi and others argue much more will be needed .
Many less-developed economies face an especially hard time finding the resources for both a public-health crisis and an economic one .
In Mexico City , Julio Bisrreal Alcantaria stands beneath a lush green tree on the sidewalk beside his fruit truck slicing mangoes and papayas . He hasn ’ t seen much of a slowdown in business due to the coronavirus , he says , but expects nationwide school closures starting this week to hit his business hard .
“ I can make it about two weeks with slow sales , and then I ’ m in trouble , ” he says . “ If kids aren ’ t in school and people aren ’ t going to their offices , I have no one to sell to . ”
Mr. Bisrreal is one of the estimated 30 million Mexicans working in the informal economy – without social security or job protections . As with gig economy workers in the U.S. , flexibility becomes moot if a pandemic forces people indoors and consumer spending evaporates .
Mexico ’ s finance ministry has proposed lines of credit , debt refinancing , and helping small businesses stay afloat . But “ there ’ s no real discussion ” in the legislature about economic stimulus , says Valeria Moy , an economist at Mexico ¿Como Vamos ? , a think tank .
School closings aside , President Andrés Manuel López Obrador has resisted an economywide lockdown , arguing that it would hurt poor people . There are “ pressures of all types . Close the airport , shut down everything , paralyze the economy . No , ” he told a press conference .
Worldwide , the stakes are high . In Odemira , Portugal , Domingos Vicente owns a fruit distribution business with 40 employees , mostly migrants .
“ If my business shuts down , I won ’ t be able to pay them to stay at home not working , and they will not stay around , which means it will be hard to start over again once it ’ s possible and hire new workers . That means trouble for the agricultural supply in Portugal . ”
In Italy , the nation hardest hit in Europe by the virus , the government is helping employers meet their payrolls and freezing loan and mortgage payments for many who are affected by the crisis .
But as in other nations , the emergency programs take time to reach people and may not be enough . That ’ s especially true for workers in the gig economy like Claudia Bellante , a freelance journalist in Milan . Her husband , a photographer , has seen his work dry up . He ’ ll be eligible for some emergency grants , but she won ’ t .
“ I understand these are emergency measures for this time , but I worry when the pandemic ends we ’ re going to be in a very difficult place , ” Ms. Bellante says . “ I doubt there will be enough money for everyone . ”
Dr. Ghironi , the Italian-born economist at the University of Washington , says South Korea has shown how to fight the pandemic without economy-debilitating lockdowns by using prompt testing and infection tracing . Whatever steps work , he says the public-health approach and economic rescue go hand in hand .
“ We need the resources and the stimulus to be injected , while the [ public health ] pieces of the mechanism are put in place , so the lockdown can be lifted as soon as possible . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Lenora Chu in Berlin , Whitney Eulich in Mexico City , and Catarina Fernandes Martins in Castelo Branco , Portugal , contributed to this article .