The Bureau of Labor Statistics on Friday will release its more precise estimate of the April unemployment rate as part of its monthly jobs report .
The private payroll company ADP reported Wednesday that its own survey indicated 20.2 million private-sector jobs were lost last month , largely in the service-providing industries . But that number could well be too low , given that the report relies on data that runs only through April 12 .
According to Indeed 's Bunker , the number of people who have newly applied for benefits over the past seven weeks suggests one in five jobs have been lost due to the pandemic .
California saw the greatest number of new claims last week , receiving an estimated 318,064 applications . Texas followed with 247,179 new claims .
Self-employed workers who were made temporarily eligible last month for jobless benefits under the CARES Act are starting to trickle into DOL ’ s weekly claims count . Thirty-one states have updated their systems to begin cutting unemployment checks to those workers , according to DOL . But 21 of those states implemented the new program only in the last two weeks .
States have struggled to process the flood of new claims that began in mid-March , when non-essential workers were first ordered to stay home . Nine states have asked DOL for $ 36 billion in federal advances to cover the skyrocketing costs of the benefit payouts amid the pandemic , with Illinois topping the list with an $ 11 billion request .
California took out its first $ 348 million unemployment insurance loan last week , just two years after repaying the $ 65 billion it borrowed from the federal government during and after the Great Recession of 2007-9 .
More than two dozen states have started reopening their economies and reducing stay-at-home restrictions , as lawmakers in Washington debate whether to move forward with another round of coronavirus relief .
Ian Shepherdson , chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics , wrote in reaction to the report that `` if the current rate of decline continues , '' the number of weekly claims would fall below 1 million , `` in the second or—more likely—third week of June . ''
But despite the continued weekly deluge of unemployment claims , Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Richard Clarida this week predicted that the economy will get its bearings in the second half of the year .
“ We ’ re living through the most severe contraction in activity and surge in unemployment that we ’ ve seen in our lifetimes , ” he said Tuesday on CNBC .
Chicago Federal Reserve President Charles Evans agreed , telling reporters on Tuesday that “ the pickup in activity will likely be slow at first , because of continued social distancing and other safety precautions . ”