From The New York Times , I ’ m Michael Barbaro . This is “ The Daily. ” Today : It was supposed to be a relatively simple part of preparing for the coronavirus in the United States — testing for it . My colleague Sheri Fink on what went wrong . It ’ s Wednesday , March 11 .
So in 2018 , it was the hundredth anniversary of the terrible 1918 flu pandemic . This was called the Spanish flu . And it just killed millions and millions of people around the world . So on that hundredth-year anniversary , many gatherings were held to discuss the lessons of that flu pandemic for today . And there was this one gathering of high-level people in Atlanta , Georgia , where the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is based . And among the officials there was a group from the National Security Council . It had actually been created , a special unit on global health security that was created after that terrible Ebola outbreak in West Africa .
So one of the officials with that group , with that unit —
archived recording ( luciano borio ) Well , it ’ s a pleasure to be here with so many of my colleagues . And we ’ ve been working together for more than a decade on these issues .
— she steps up to the podium and she says —
archived recording ( luciano borio ) The threat of pandemic flu is our number one health security concern . We know that it can not be stopped at the border .
So this is a pretty senior health official on the National Security Council warning her colleagues that there is a very predictable threat here — a pandemic flu and —
archived recording ( luciano borio ) Are we ready to respond to a pandemic ? I fear the answer is no .
— in her words , the country is just not really ready for it . So we should do something about it .
Exactly . And as it happens , the very next day , that global health security unit where she worked was shut down by a senior member of the Trump administration . So fast forward two years . And it ’ s early January , January 3 . It ’ s a Friday . And the secretary of health and human services , Alex Azar , is at home in Washington . And he gets this phone call from Robert Redfield , this doctor who ’ s the head of the C.D.C . And Dr. Redfield tells Azar about these reports coming out of China , that there are these clusters of pneumonia cases , and that the likely culprit is a new coronavirus . And Alex Azar , the health and human services secretary , says , this is a very big deal .
And what does Azar do with this information and this understanding that whatever this is , it ’ s going to be a big deal ?
The Trump administration officials start meeting every day in the basement of the West Wing . And so at first , they say , OK , let ’ s screen the flights that are coming from China . But there ’ s an even more serious question that comes up , which is , should we ban flights altogether ? And should we deny entry to anybody who has come from China in the last 14 days , to anybody who isn ’ t a citizen or a permanent resident here ? So then that debate got shifted right to the Oval Office . And the top health officials of the nation , at that point , were agreed . A ban from traveling from the center of this epidemic could buy us some time , could help us to prepare ourselves before this came . It could slow that down . The president asked , what could the consequences be on the economy ? All logical things that you would probably ask . In the end , he sided with the aides who supported the idea that this could actually help protect our nation ’ s health . The problem was we weren ’ t completely prepared . Our government wasn ’ t completely prepared to use that time .
The biggest issue that the government had to face was testing — being able to diagnose somebody who has this illness .
And what is the problem with testing at this point ?
Well , it didn ’ t seem like there would be a problem . Even though it was a new virus , the Chinese quickly made the sequence of it available . And labs were really quickly able to create a test for that , including the World Health Organization had already approved a test that was developed by some German scientists . But the U.S. , which considers the C.D.C the world ’ s premier public health agency , they decided to make their own test . But it didn ’ t actually get F.D.A . approved until the first week of February . And at that point , it could be distributed to public health laboratories across the country . But , you know , now we ’ re already over a month into this scary new outbreak by that point .
So this is already off to a pretty slow start at a moment where every single day counts .
That ’ s right . So now , we ’ re like a month into this thing . And they ’ re finally able to mail out the kits to public health laboratories around the country — state health laboratories , some big city health laboratories , this network of labs that our public health system has . And the next day — the first step that the labs have to do is they have to check that test . They have to what ’ s called “ validate it , ” make sure it ’ s working . And right that next day , the C.D.C starts getting reports from some of these public health labs , saying , we ’ re not able to validate this test . We ’ re having problems . We ’ re getting some inconclusive results . And that ’ s the first sign that something may have gone wrong .
Well , the C.D.C says it was definitely working in their lab . So they ’ ve told all the labs across the country , if it ’ s not working for you , of course , don ’ t use it . Just send samples to us . Of course , that adds time . You have to collect a sample in your local area and then send it to Atlanta , and then wait for that result to come back .
So what impact does this testing snafu have at this point on our understanding of the epidemic ?
It just means that we don ’ t know . We actually don ’ t know . We say we have a low number of cases in this country at that point . But if you don ’ t test , how can you know ?
OK. And for these weeks where it seemed like we had cases in the low double digits in the United States , and there was a sense that things were quite stable and the danger was pretty low , the virus very well could have been spreading and spreading widely , and we wouldn ’ t have known . Because we weren ’ t doing the testing that would have told us that .
Exactly . And here ’ s why . Because only a small proportion of people who get the virus get really , really sick , fortunately . But by the time that they get into a critical care bed at a hospital — and the doctors there are scratching their heads , and they ’ ve tested for all the known things that cause like pneumonia and severe , severe respiratory distress — weeks have gone by since that person was infected . So you ’ re actually looking at history . If you finally get a positive test at that point , then , yes , it has been spreading in the community . And that ’ s all that time that you lose .
Right . So this time that the Trump administration had bought the American people with that dramatic step — with shutting its border to Chinese travelers — is kind of being squandered .
Yeah , there were so many people who were starting to feel , at this point , like this time is being squandered . And we needed to get eyes on this . There were travelers coming from parts of the world where we didn ’ t have a travel ban that now had a large number of cases . And they weren ’ t being screened at the airports . They were going out into the communities . And there was just this urgency of being able to test more . And that ’ s when this one group of doctors and researchers took matters into their own hands .
[ phone dialing ] helen chu Hello ? This is Helen . sheri fink Hi , Helen . How are you doing ? helen chu I ’ m doing well . How are you ? sheri fink I ’ m well . Thanks .
She ’ s a physician and a researcher in Washington state , which is where the first case of coronavirus was detected in the U.S. back in January . And she and her colleagues see a potential solution to this testing problem in their own work .
helen chu We had a study in place that was set up for detection of respiratory viral illnesses in the community —
She specializes in studying how viruses pass from person-to-person within that same community . And she and her colleagues have this big study where they ’ re collecting all these samples .
helen chu — from people who are sick , and then testing them in the lab for flu and other respiratory viruses .
And through collecting hundreds and hundreds of samples every week , they ’ re trying to track the spread of viruses .
And she was in the middle of collecting samples when the coronavirus arrives in Washington ?
So we had this infrastructure in place already , essentially , in the Seattle area to be able to detect early entry of a virus into the city and then to understand how it spread .
And that sounds like it would make her very well positioned to do the same thing for the coronavirus .
Exactly . She thought of that . The state health officials knew about their project . And they immediately thought about the potential of this project to help with this issue of testing .
They make their own coronavirus test really fast . And they ’ re ready to go to help the state by the first week of February . But there ’ s one hitch .
helen chu We had to go through regulatory clearance , essentially . We had to talk to C.D.C . We had to talk to F.D.A ..
They don ’ t have the approval to test and then give those results out for two reasons . One is they ’ re not a clinical lab , so they don ’ t have the regulatory approval for that . And number two is they ’ ve just created this new coronavirus test , which isn ’ t yet F.D.A . approved .
helen chu And so we were at a point where we could test thousands and thousands of samples at very high throughput . But we didn ’ t know what to do when we found a positive .
So there ’ s good reason to have some of those regulations in place . But they figure , this is a public health emergency . And they feel like there ’ s got to be some way around this bureaucratic red tape , where they could at least screen these samples and get that information out to the public health authorities to confirm that test , whatever it is . But —
helen chu Everybody felt very hesitant about us being able to provide results or to do the testing at all .
— the C.D.C doesn ’ t seem to find a way around it . Weeks go by . And they ’ re getting more and more frustrated . And they ’ re seeing the outbreak is growing in China , and it ’ s spreading to other countries . So we know there ’ s a potential for it to be an outbreak not just in China .
helen chu We had the information . We had the data there sitting in our lab where we could actually answer the question . And that was frustrating , that we could answer it . We had the capacity to answer it , but we couldn ’ t move forward , because we didn ’ t know what to do .
They feel like they ’ re sitting on a gold mine . And they feel like the virus very well could be out there . After all , there had been this case in Washington state more than a month earlier , and nobody ’ s had eyes on it . Nobody ’ s been doing surveillance in the community , testing samples . So they ’ re getting more and more nervous . Is there something we ’ re not seeing ? Because we ’ re not really testing very widely .
So what did they end up doing ? Just kind of keeping those samples on ice and doing nothing ?
Well , at first , that ’ s what they did . Because they thought they could speak with these officials and find out some official workaround , so that they wouldn ’ t be violating regulations and get in trouble .
helen chu Everyone wanted to be able to do this the proper way — to go through C.D.C and state labs and have them have the high capacity to do the testing of all of these patients who really needed a diagnosis . But it just couldn ’ t be done .
And then it gets to February 25 . I mean , the month is almost gone . It ’ s more than a month since that first case . And they finally just said —
helen chu What we would do is move forward with research testing only .
— we ’ re going to start using this unapproved coronavirus test that we have , and that we believe is very reliable , and start testing these samples .
Well , they ’ re just going for it . And technically , they can test , right ? But the issue is , they can ’ t report the results .
helen chu So what we would do would just be to go ahead and test the samples for coronavirus , but not to associate that with the information from the sample . So the clinical information .
So they have a plan to test for the coronavirus . And if they find it , that would mean that they ’ re sitting on information that they ’ re not supposed to have .
They ’ re sitting on information that they ’ re not supposed to communicate because of these regulatory issues . It ’ s all going to be fine as long as they don ’ t find a case .
OK , so once they decided to do that , what happened ?
What happened was , one of the very first days that they started testing —
helen chu What I thought was , oh , no . If it came up that early in our testing , that meant that it had probably been here for a while and that we just didn ’ t know that it was there . And so the questions racing through my head at that point where , what is the right thing to do right now ? And so what happened at that point was that we rapidly convened a meeting of the investigators .
The group just convenes . They all get on the phone . And they talk about ethics at this point .
helen chu We talked through the ethics of the different options — keep it to ourselves , tell public health , or tell the participants . And what we are allowed to do was to keep it to ourselves . But what we felt like we needed to do was to tell public health . And so that ’ s what we did .
They decide that the most ethical thing is to report the result to the local health authority . They confirmed the result . And it ’ s this local teenager in the very same county as that first positive case , but no known link to that person and no travel history . And that next morning , the public health lab went out and they found this teenager , who was feeling better by that point . Because he had had a mild form of this illness , which is most common , especially in young people . And they get to him just after he walks into his school , because he ’ s —
Yeah . And they end up shutting the school down to make sure that nobody else will catch the virus .
helen chu I mean , that was a good moment for our team , I thought . You know , we did something that didn ’ t follow the rules , but we were able to prevent spread in a high school . And that seemed really important .
So because of the doctor ’ s actions , they catch him , basically , in the nick of time .
They do . And they also realize that they may have a big problem on their hands . Because if this case descended from that first case , if that person potentially had infected somebody without knowing it , and then there was mild illness going on , and nobody caught it , there could be hundreds of cases in the area . And so that gave them the information that they needed to start acting , to start looking more seriously for the virus in the community .
I wonder . Had Dr. Chu not broken the rules in this case , how that would have changed how we understand the coronavirus in the Seattle region ?
Well , we wouldn ’ t have known , until the people started dying , that there was a problem . And unfortunately , the really sad thing is that that happened really soon after that . And so if Dr. Chu and her colleagues had been able to test sooner , they would have been able to alert the authorities earlier . And that ’ s the real tragedy here .
Sheri , on the one hand , the story that you have just told — it ’ s a pretty heroic story of a doctor willing to go against the rules , the instructions , because she felt that it was needed in the moment , in the midst of a public health crisis . On the other hand , it feels risky for the lesson here to be that medical professionals should go rogue in the middle of a crisis . I mean , what in your mind is the lesson here ?
I mean , I ’ m somebody who ’ s reported on disasters for many years and used to do some disaster response myself . And I ’ ve always seen in crises that thinking outside the box can really solve problems and it can save lives . And I think we generally accept that already , that the rules do have to bend , that people need to think creatively . And one of the reasons they have to do it — and it was so evident here — was that the larger system , the official responders , the official system in place couldn ’ t do everything and was faltering .
But I wonder , how much would things potentially have been different , Sheri , if , thinking back to the start of our conversation , those government programs — the National Security Council ’ s health program , for example — hadn ’ t been cut ? I mean , how much does that reflect an overall approach to this epidemic from the people currently in charge from the Trump administration ?
I think you can trace it back further than that . It is a pattern that these programs , when there ’ s a crisis , they get really well funded . And as soon as Ebola recedes into history , we start cutting those parts of government . You can look back after the anthrax attacks and 9/11 . And there was all this money that went into bioterrorism preparedness and hospital preparedness . And then you look at the numbers , and they go down over time . This is a reaction of humanity and society and government , is to sort of like — when it ’ s in the news and it ’ s fresh in our minds , we invest in it , and then we turn away . So I feel like this is a pattern . And when this happens , and we have these gaps in our preparedness that the government always seems to have , what I have found over and over again as a reporter is regular people step in and fill some of those holes . And I ’ m thinking — right now I have this image of Hurricane Katrina and government officials not being able to rescue everybody who needed help all at once . People waving towels off of rooftops and people stuck in hospitals . And then it was these regular people who had airboats , who were fishermen from western Louisiana . And they show up , and they just take people to dry ground . I ’ ve seen examples like that over and over . In this case , we saw Dr. Chu and her colleagues doing something like that . But , what I found out today on the phone with Dr. Chu was that —
helen chu Yesterday , the Washington state regulators called their lab and asked us to shut down .
— the project got shut down again . So the state regulators told them they can ’ t keep doing this . So it looks like the government isn ’ t going to allow this to continue to fill that hole . And so that hole remains .
The question is whether this will be one of those lessons that comes out of this particular outbreak . And of course , there will be a tomorrow . There will be a day where we ’ re not in the midst of something so frightening that we ’ re in right now . And the question is , will this fit that same cycle where we say , we ’ ve learned the lesson , we need to kind of innovate and come up with new systems that will ensure that we ’ re on a better footing , that we can have some backup system so that we can roll out testing as a country much more quickly ? Or will this fit that same cycle , where once the immediate danger goes away , we stop investing , or we just forget ?
A few days ago , my colleague Peter Baker asked President Trump whether he regrets eliminating the global health unit of the National Security Council in light of the coronavirus epidemic .
donald trump I just think this is something , Peter , that you can never really think is going to happen . I ’ ve heard all about , this could be a big deal , from before it happened . Something like this could happen .
The president claimed , despite past warnings from federal health officials , that such an epidemic was previously unimaginable .
donald trump But who would have thought ? Look , how long ago was it ? Six , seven , eight weeks ago , who would have thought we ’ d even be having this subject ? We were going to hit 30,000 on the Dow like it was clockwork , right ?
Here ’ s what else you need to know today . On Tuesday , public and private institutions across the United States took their strongest measures yet to limit the spread of the coronavirus . Dozens of colleges and universities , from the University of California , Berkeley to Harvard , are closing their doors or asking students to attend classes remotely . Major airlines , including Delta and American Airlines , said they would drastically cut back on international flights . And the nursing home industry issued a recommendation to bar visits from family and friends after deadly outbreaks inside of five nursing homes around Seattle . In New York , officials have created a containment cell around the source of a major outbreak in the city of New Rochelle , north of New York City , ordering schools , community centers and houses of worship within the zone to close for the next two weeks and deploying the National Guard inside the containment area . And in California , a cruise ship with at least 21 infected passengers docked in Oakland , where it was met by workers in protective gear , who took those on board to a nearby military base in the largest quarantine operation so far on American soil . For the results of Tuesday night ’ s Democratic primaries , which were held in six states , listen to this morning ’ s episode of “ The Latest. ” You can find it on “ The Daily ” feed or by searching for “ The Latest , ” wherever you listen .