███ is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power . Sign up to receive our biggest stories as soon as they ’ re published . Leer en Español .
When a woman who didn ’ t speak English arrived at the overrun emergency room of a Brooklyn hospital last week , she was initially placed in a unit for patients who didn ’ t have the coronavirus .
But on Thursday , a doctor realized she had a cough and fever and should be treated for COVID-19 . The doctor brought her over to the coronavirus unit with a warning : “ Good luck . She speaks Hungarian . ”
A medical resident who treated her believes she would have gotten better care if she spoke English .
In the ER , where no one has enough time , particularly now , the resident said he could tell that no one wanted to work with an interpreter to take down the woman ’ s medical history . He placed his phone on the woman ’ s shoulder and dialed the interpreter service on speakerphone . Between the N95 mask covering his mouth and the helmet covering his ears , it was difficult to speak clearly and to hear .
“ When they asked what language , ” he said , “ I spent five minutes just yelling : ‘ Hungarian ! Hungarian ! ’ And they were like , ‘ Spanish ? ’ ”
The woman may have died even if she spoke English , but the episode and others like it demonstrate how those who speak a foreign language are at a disadvantage in New York City ’ s chaotic and crowded hospitals .
“ It takes 10 minutes of sitting on the phone to get an interpreter , and that ’ s valuable time when you ’ re inundated , ” the resident said . “ So this utilitarian calculus kicks in . And the patients that are most mainstream get the best care . ”
Even in normal times , those who don ’ t speak English have worse health outcomes for a range of routine procedures and can struggle to gain access to interpreters . Some research also shows that professional interpreters make clinically significant errors substantially less often than ad hoc interpreters , such as family members .
Those gaps are magnified in times of crisis . ███ spoke to 11 New York City health care workers about their experiences caring for coronavirus patients who didn ’ t speak English . While their employers ranged from top-tier nonprofit facilities in Manhattan to safety net hospitals in Brooklyn , they all described broken communication and hastily improvised stopgaps .
Get Our Top Investigations Subscribe to the Big Story newsletter .
They ’ re worried that language barriers will leave immigrants with COVID-19 in a particularly dire situation : alone , confused and without the appropriate care .
One doctor in the Bronx described a colleague working in his facility ’ s triage tent , trying to assess patients using the Google Translate app on his smartphone .
In another situation , the Brooklyn emergency room resident said he felt comfortable enough with Spanish that he decided to forgo an interpreter while taking the medical history of an incoming Hispanic patient . Her symptoms weren ’ t severe , but he thought she told him she had heart surgery three years ago , so he admitted her into the hospital because that put her at risk . Later , he realized she ’ d said she had heart surgery when she was 3 years old . If he had known that , he would ’ ve sent her home .
A resident at another Brooklyn hospital treated a woman on Sunday who only spoke French Creole . The oxygen mask over her face meant the interpreter couldn ’ t fully understand her , the resident said , and the patient clearly remained very confused . She died the next day .
A Manhattan hospital-based physician described how he calls interpreters on his cellphone outside patients ’ rooms and places the phone in his breast pocket so it doesn ’ t get covered in virus particles . Then he puts on a yellow protective gown over his scrubs and enters the room , standing at a distance from the patients . But all of these steps make it hard for the patient and the interpreter to hear each other . “ Then we tell them they have a virus that is killing people all over the world , ” he said . “ We tell them they can ’ t have any visitors , they can ’ t leave the room . And then we shut the door . ”
Read More Taxpayers Paid Millions to Design a Low-Cost Ventilator for a Pandemic . Instead , the Company Is Selling Versions of It Overseas . As coronavirus sweeps the globe , there is not a single Trilogy Evo Universal ventilator — developed with government funds — in the U.S. stockpile . Meanwhile , Royal Philips N.V. has sold higher-priced versions to clients around the world .
About 1 in 5 Americans speaks a language other than English at home , according to census data . Among New Yorkers , it ’ s 49 % . But with more than 40,000 confirmed coronavirus cases within New York City limits , when residents without a strong grasp of English get sick , providers point to a number of ways the language gap could lead to worse care . Patients well enough to go home may misunderstand their discharge instructions , causing them to not quarantine properly or to not return to the ER if they take a turn for the worse . Mistakes could be made during triage , as underlying conditions get overlooked .
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 has long been understood to require hospitals to provide access to language interpretation if they receive federal funding ( such as Medicare and Medicaid ) , with failure to do so considered “ discrimination by national origin. ” Regulations put in place in 2016 to implement part of the Affordable Care Act bolstered that mandate . Hospitals now must use a “ qualified interpreter ” — patients have the right to sue if they don ’ t — and the use of family members and bilingual but untrained staff is restricted . ( There are exceptions , like translating through family members in emergencies . )
Elena Langdon , former chair of the National Board of Certification for Medical Interpreters , said she recognizes doctors may be unable to always provide the quality of care they ’ d like to right now , but that equity and the right to interpretation can ’ t fall by the wayside . “ While it ’ s made more difficult by the situation , it doesn ’ t mean you don ’ t have to do it , ” she said . “ It ’ s a public health issue . ”
She said hospitals may need to have a staff member on site dedicated to coordinating language access . Several hospital systems at which the examples in this story occurred did not return emails or phone calls seeking comment .
Even outside of pandemics , providers acknowledge these provisions are often violated , like by having a grandchild translate instead of a professional .
Such options are now unavailable , however . Many hospitals in the city have prohibited visitors , making it impossible for English-speaking family members to help patients communicate . In-person interpreters would be at risk of infecting themselves or others , and the use of personal protective equipment makes talking on the phone hard .
An ICU nurse in a third Brooklyn hospital said that at her facility , when she needs an interpreter , she calls an operator through a big , blue corded phone installed in each room . Then she sits on hold until an interpreter becomes available . The wait time depends on the language . Spanish is relatively fast , she said ; Mandarin takes 10 or 15 minutes ; some uncommon Asian dialects take over an hour .
Now that visitors are forbidden , the nurse worries , patients are left without advocates , and the family is kept out of the loop . “ At this point , ” she said , “ we ’ re not going to call unless we need consent or they die . ”
Last week , a Spanish speaker in his early 40s was admitted into the hospital ’ s ICU where the nurse works . He seemed relatively healthy , and while he was a little overweight , he had no underlying health conditions , the nurse said . Nevertheless , he soon was on a ventilator . Despite the hospital ’ s policy against visitors , his wife showed up and she spoke less English than her husband did . “ His wife hadn ’ t been able to see him or talk to him , ” the nurse explained . “ She kept just saying : ‘ I don ’ t understand . He was OK. ’ … It ’ s part of our job as nurses to go up to a family member you see like that and explain what ’ s going on . But these conversations aren ’ t happening with translation patients . In this scenario , I don ’ t have the time . ”
“ And then he died , ” she said . “ And they had to tell her over the phone. ” She ’ s not sure if the hospital used an interpreter or just winged it .
Tell Us More About Coronavirus Are you a public health worker , medical provider , elected official , patient or other COVID-19 expert ? Help make sure our journalism is responsible and focused on the right issues . This form requires JavaScript to complete . Powered by Screendoor .