The term `` personal protective equipment , '' known as PPE , has quickly become a fixture in the American lexicon . It is the armor doctors and nurses rely on to keep themselves safe while treating the contagious .
This week on 60 Minutes , correspondent Bill Whitaker reported on the national shortage of protective medical equipment including gloves , masks and face shields .
For the story , Whitaker interviewed Peter Navarro , President Donald Trump 's trade adviser and newly designated policy coordinator of the Defense Production Act .
The Defense Production Act allows the President to force companies to produce goods needed to defend the country . President Trump signed an executive order to utilize the law on March 18 .
Throughout our interview with Navarro , we were surprised to find that he was , at times , more interested in attacking 60 Minutes than discussing preparations the Trump administration made for a global pandemic .
`` I challenge you , show me the 60 Minutes episode a year ago , two years ago , or during the Obama administration , during the Bush administration that said , 'Hey , global pandemic 's coming , ' '' Navarro said to Bill Whitaker .
In a 2005 story `` Chasing the Flu , '' 60 Minutes correspondent Steve Kroft reported on H5N1 or avian flu . The report featured an interview with Dr. Anthony Fauci of the National Institutes of Health . Fauci was the point person for the Bush administration 's response to the virus .
`` Right now , and we all admit that , right now if we had an explosion of an H5N1 , we would not be prepared for that , '' Fauci told 60 Minutes in 2005 .
In November 2005 , President Bush proposed a $ 7.1 billion program and unveiled a national pandemic strategy .
`` By making critical investments today , we 'll strengthen our ability to safeguard the American people in the awful event of a devastating global pandemic , and at the same time will bring our nation 's public health and medical infrastructure more squarely in the 21st century , '' said President Bush at the time .
You can watch Steve Kroft 's 2005 report on the avian flu below .
In 2009 , 60 Minutes correspondent Scott Pelley reported on the H1N1 pandemic . The Centers for Disease Control gave 60 Minutes rare access to see how it was responding to the nationwide crisis .
Rear Admiral Anne Schuchat was the CDC 's chief health officer during the H1N1 pandemic .
`` We think the virus is virtually everywhere in the country , '' Schuchat told 60 Minutes in 2009 . `` Quite a lot of illness , hospitalizations , and deaths . ''
Dr. Schuchat currently serves as principal deputy director of the CDC . She has twice served as acting director during the Trump administration .
`` This is one of the really tragic parts of this epidemic , that people who are in the prime of their life , totally healthy , can suddenly become so sick , '' Schuchat said of H1N1 in 2009 . `` The virus is serious , it can cause overwhelming bacterial pneumonia in some people -- the influenza followed by a bacterial pneumonia . ''
The present day shortage of personal protective equipment has led some countries to block exports of essential medical equipment .
The World Health Organization warned there was likely to be a worldwide shortage of personal protective equipment on March 3 . The WHO suggested countries and private companies increase production by 40 % . The organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic on March 11 .
President Trump used the Defense Production Act for the first time on March 27 to compel General Motors to produce ventilators .
`` Chasing the Flu '' was produced by L. Franklin Devine and Associate Producer Kay Lim .