“ If there is one positive aspect , this crisis is proving that reforming healthcare doesn ’ t necessarily take decades . It ’ s just a matter of will , ” says Nicola Draoli , an Italian nurse .
Hospitals and clinics are also ramping up telemedicine , out of necessity , amid a pandemic that requires social distancing and has put huge strain on health care resources . This pivot has drawn attention to telemedicine as a longer-term solution that could help overcome , at least in some aspects of medicine , the shortfalls in medical staff in rich aging societies like Italy and Germany .
Long before COVID-19 hit the headlines , health care systems across Europe and the U.S. had been struggling to plug recruitment gaps , particularly in their nursing ranks . Now that shortfall has become a crisis , leading to a call-up of recent retirees and new graduates to support front-line staff treating patients .
Veteran Seattle nurse Carolyn Grant had just finished kicking off her retirement with a trip to Hawaii when she got a text from her old boss : Would Ms. Grant come out of retirement to help the medical center ’ s COVID-19 testing program ? That night , she said yes .
In Germany , where “ not a single hospital has enough staff , ” says a Berlin ICU nurse , the government is calling medical students to action , and dissolving bureaucratic hurdles so hospitals can mobilize more medical workers .
In Italy , which has seen the world ’ s highest coronavirus death toll , the government has asked recently retired doctors to come back to work , and allocated funding to hire 20,000 more health professionals .
Chronic worker shortages can be patchworked during normal times , but as the COVID-19 pandemic slams medical systems around the globe , having the right personnel can mean the difference between life and death . Administrators are rehiring retired professionals , tapping medical students before they even graduate , and turning to the military and volunteers to supplement a stretched workforce that even before the current crisis was coming up short .
“ It is like we have a blanket that is too short and everyone is trying to pull it to his side , ” says Nicola Draoli , an Italian nurse .
From Berlin to Seattle , hospitals and clinics are also ramping up telehealth options , which in a few weeks have been overcoming medical , bureaucratic , and consumer resistance that had stymied advocates for years . As COVID-19 brings waves of patients through hospital and clinic doors , health care systems are turning to solutions that might become increasingly attractive going forward .
“ If there is one positive aspect , this crisis is proving that reforming health care doesn ’ t necessarily take decades . It ’ s just a matter of will , ” says Mr. Draoli , a member of the central committee of Italy ’ s national federation of nursing .
In Berlin , a nurse in an intensive care unit who prefers to be called Nico because he ’ s not authorized to speak to the news media loves working with patients , and the undersupply of nurses means ironclad job stability . “ I think I could work at any hospital or any ICU in Germany , ” he says .
But the shortage has downsides : The hospital had closed a quarter of its ICU beds over the last two years due to lack of staff . Nico was constantly on call to pick up extra shifts , and also needed to clean patient rooms and tidy pharmacies due to a shortage of assistants . Over the years , Nico has seen colleagues vote with their feet . “ The workload is so heavy , ” he says .
Today , Nico ’ s hospital is prepping for the COVID-19 crisis by adding ICU beds and training non-ICU staff . Administrators are also preparing to hire medical students , who now have government-mandated flexibility for education , training , and licensing requirements .
“ We ’ re waiting for the big wave of patients , expecting it to hit in late April , ” says Nico .
Germany is currently facing a shortage of 70,000 nurses in hospitals alone , according to Verdi , a German trade union . “ We ’ ve lost 300,000 health care workers each year to retirement , ” says Stefan Sell , a professor of economics and social policy at the University of Koblenz . “ And the younger generation is very small , and young people go into other jobs . ”
The situation is no better in other developed countries . Italy is currently short about 53,000 nurses , estimates Mr. Draoli of the nursing federation . The United Kingdom ’ s National Health Service is missing about 100,000 health care workers of all kinds , and the United States needs to recruit at least 200,000 more registered nurses each year . All have aging populations that need more elder and long-term care .
The main reasons are high turnover and not enough new nursing graduates entering the workforce in wealthy countries . Sociocultural factors also come into play ; most health care workers are women , who are more likely to take part-time shifts because of child care requirements , says Dr. Sell , meaning you need more hires to provide full-time coverage .
Put simply , the job isn ’ t attractive enough , as pay for nursing and medical assistant work hasn ’ t remained competitive . In Italy , for example , health care salaries have declined from roughly 40 % of the country ’ s annual public health budget two decades ago , to less than a third today .
“ In the U.K. , we have a lot of vacancies that remain unfilled , ” says Dr. Rocco Friebel , a London School of Economics health policy professor . “ Working conditions are poor . It ’ s a very high-pressure job . ”
Staffing projections worldwide are sobering . By 2030 , countries in North , Central and South America are expected to face a combined shortage of roughly 2.5 million doctors , nurses , and other workers , with Europe ’ s shortfall at around 1.4 million , according to a 2017 study by medical researchers .
Governments in the U.S. and Europe have attempted to tackle shortages by shifting workloads , digitizing services , providing funding to create elder care positions , and looking at worker wage increases , among other initiatives .
“ In the U.K. , we ’ ve seen a push to employ clinical assistants , who can do bookkeeping and a lot of the day-to-day tasks , which then frees up fully qualified nurses to take care of the most severe cases , ” says Dr. Friebel .
But the main strategy in wealthy nations is to fill their ranks with foreign nurses and health care workers . The German government is working with Kosovo , Mexico , and the Philippines to integrate workers into its health care system . In the U.K. , the National Health Service has long tapped European Union nationals , especially those from Poland and other Eastern European countries , to fill jobs .
That ’ s only a partial solution , says Dr. Sell , the German economist , in part because of the competition . “ A lot of other countries such as the Netherlands , France , and Switzerland are also trying to get people from Russia , Ukraine , and other countries , ” he says . Also , he points out , many potential migrants don ’ t speak the adopted country ’ s language .
“ Ultimately , we have to get additional staff from our [ home ] labor force , ” says Dr. Sell . “ That will require a multidimensional strategy such as improving working conditions and education ” for workers .
A shortage that will take decades to solve feels acute in the face of a pandemic .
In the U.S. , top officials are crying out for medical volunteers of all stripes . In New York , more than 50,000 health care workers have answered Gov . Andrew Cuomo ’ s pleas . In California , a newly created health corps to expand the workforce has garnered more than 70,000 registrations from “ underemployed ” medical professionals of all stripes .
In Washington state , Gov . Jay Inslee last week told recent medical retirees and qualified students , “ Like Uncle Sam , we want you ! ”
Another infusion of medical manpower is coming from the U.S. military . Three hundred soldiers from an Army unit in Fort Carson , Colorado , arrived in Seattle last week to set up a 250-bed hospital inside the Seattle Seahawks ’ football stadium , and a Navy hospital ship has docked in New York City . By caring for patients without COVID-19 , they can free up local hospital beds for those who have the virus .
Health care workers are also being asked to shift gears , as they ’ re redeployed to other units , such as from transplant ICUs to respiratory care .
Italy ’ s worst-hit regions like Lombardy are also tapping another strategy : emphasizing primary-care monitoring and home care rather than hospital admissions . “ Hospitals have always seen too many people that don ’ t belong in the hospital , ” says Dr. Friebel , the analyst .
As Italian doctors have discovered by necessity , initial screenings of suspected COVID-19 patients can be done without a physical visit .
“ It turns out that a lot of both screening and follow-up of [ COVID-19 ] patients – the mild cases – is about asking questions about symptoms , ” says Joseph Kvedar , a Harvard Medical School professor and incoming president of the American Telemedicine Association . “ It ’ s a perfect setup for [ telehealth ] technology . ”
Advocates of telemedicine say many health care needs can , in fact , be serviced without stepping foot into an office , clinic , or hospital .
Inquiries from U.S. clinicians about telehealth have skyrocketed , Dr. Kvedar says , at the same time that states and the federal government are loosening requirements for licensing across state borders and privacy issues around technology . They ’ re also reexamining what ’ s defined as a “ visit ” for insurance purposes .
“ There ’ s been a staggering amount of creativity and collaboration , ” says Dr. Charlotte Wu , a physician and founder of Harness Health Partners , a Boston-based consultancy . “ We ’ re seeing an increased acceptance of virtual medicine , leveraging the skills of diverse team members , and collaborating across institutions – who were traditionally competitors . ”
At Asian Counseling and Referral Service in Seattle , counselors are now offering mental health care by phone and video apps such as Zoom and Doxy.me . “ We can accept consent via telephone versus in writing ” in treating substance use disorders , says Michael Byun , who runs the nonprofit .
COVID-19 is spurring innovations that might eventually pave the way for routine remote-monitoring of chronic illnesses . The possibilities are legion . Seventy percent of U.S. health care costs go to treating health conditions like high blood pressure or high cholesterol that are attributed to or worsened by smoking , lack of exercise , or poor eating habits ; they can be followed by a virtual-care quick check-in , says Dr. Kvedar .
“ We don ’ t have enough people to deliver service one-to-one in a room at a time , ” says Dr. Kvedar . “ There ’ s a lot of inefficiency in the way we deliver care . When the dust settles , I hope we don ’ t go back to doing every single thing in the office . ”
New technologies are also helping tackle staffing shortages . Germany recently called on the public to suggest COVID-19 related innovations , and among the entries was a “ digital waiting room ” that vets a patient ’ s symptoms , and an app that rotates nurses more effectively . Practitioners and researchers are also using artificial intelligence to help forecast disease spread , implement rapid-testing technologies , and develop new approaches to contact tracing .
Back in Seattle , the veteran nurse Ms. Grant has bid her short-lived retirement goodbye ; she ’ s now working 10- to 12-hour days , six days a week , managing COVID-19 testing sites . Her day begins early to ensure adequate supplies for the testers , as she leads a team of nurses at the University of Washington Medical Center – Northwest who were displaced from outpatient surgery centers and clinics .
Ms. Grant was part of a wave of nurses who entered the workforce during a severe nursing shortage in the U.S. during the 1980s . “ Many people in that age bracket are exiting the workforce , ” she says , so it ’ s no surprise they ’ re being called back to fill the gaps they ’ ve left . Ms. Grant feels a “ loyalty ” and a call to duty . “ I am able to help this community at a difficult time . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
This story was reported by Monitor correspondent Lenora Chu in Berlin , staff writer Ann Scott Tyson in Seattle , contributor Daniela Sala in Rome , and contributor Austin Davis in Berlin .