Instead of a celebratory backdrop that would have served as a momentum builder , only Biden and his wife , Jill , were in the camera shot as he delivered a sober speech . His staff stood at a distance behind a rope .
Bernie Sanders , who like Trump has made rallies a staple of his insurgent campaign , has also ditched large events for now .
The Trump campaign had been eager for months to get the canceled Las Vegas fundraiser with Adelson on the books . The White House also scrapped what was to be first lady Melania Trump ’ s first solo fundraiser , which had been scheduled for next week in Los Angeles , now placed under a state of emergency .
Biden has also aborted upcoming fundraisers , including two in Chicago . The campaign said it would be holding its fundraisers online indefinitely .
While the Trump campaign and its allies at the Republican National Committee are giving employees the option of teleworking , the Biden campaign has gone further . On Thursday , the former vice president ’ s effort distributed an internal memo informing employees at its Philadelphia headquarters that beginning this weekend they are to work from home . Staffers scattered across the country , meanwhile , will have the option of working from their homes or from short-term housing rentals .
The Sanders campaign similarly announced Thursday that all staff are to work from home .
( A Trump campaign official confirmed that it would be asking its employees who work at the Arlington , Va. , headquarters to work at home March 13-16 while the office was sanitized . )
Field organizing , which of course ca n't be done entirely from home , has been made vastly more complicated by the outbreak . The RNC had been planning a National Week of Training next week — a nationwide effort to recruit and activate supporters and test the party ’ s get-out-the-vote operation . While some of those gatherings were initially to be in person , they are now slated to be held online and over the phone . The committee is also planning an upcoming online training day for volunteers .
After spending more than a year developing a massive digital infrastructure and database of contact information , the Trump campaign is betting it will be able to reach key voters online . The reelection effort recently set up a new website , ArmyforTrump.com , which is designed to be an online home for volunteers .
“ The Trump campaign is built on data and uses technology to its highest advantages , so is better positioned to virtually engage voters than any other campaign , ” said Tim Murtaugh , a Trump campaign spokesman .
2020 Election Results Who ’ s winning 2020 ? We ’ ll tell you . The latest election results sent straight to your inbox . Sign Up Loading By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply .
The Biden campaign has also taken dramatic steps . In its Thursday memo , the campaign announced it is closing all field offices to the public and would instead be organizing “ voters across the country through phone banking , text messaging , virtual events , and other distributed organizing models . ”
Despite a series of key primaries taking place next week , the Sanders campaign said it would put a halt to all “ door-to-door canvasses , instead moving to digital formats and outreach wherever possible . ”
While Trump advisers are worried about how the president ’ s response to the coronavirus — and accompanying stock market crash — will affect his reelection hopes , they largely remain sanguine . But with schools and offices shutting down and people dying , they also said they recognized the accompanying political danger .
People familiar with Wednesday ’ s White House meeting said the president seemed to grasp the urgency of the situation .
Biden is using the crisis as an opportunity to cast himself as a steady leader who will return the country to normalcy after a turbulent Trump presidency . During a Thursday speech on the outbreak , Biden charged that “ public fears are being compounded by a pervasive lack of trust in this president , fueled by his adversarial relationship with the truth . ”
Biden then emphasized the need to embrace science , take the lead from experts , and be frank with the public — implying Trump has done the opposite .
“ The No . 1 question right now , ” said Ron Klain , a top Biden campaign adviser who coordinated the Obama administration ’ s response to an Ebola outbreak in late 2014 , “ is what ’ s your response to this coronavirus ? ”