Dr. Anthony Fauci was careful not to directly rebuke President Donald Trump during Tuesday ’ s Senate hearing on the coronavirus pandemic . Even so , the totality of his testimony undermined talking points Trump has used to downplay the pandemic while pushing for the premature opening of businesses and schools .
Fauci — who as director of National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases is the government ’ s top infectious disease expert — made clear that he thinks states should pump the brakes on reopening until the number of new cases per day starts going down . And with one notable exception , senators — even the Republican ones — seemed appreciative of his input .
The tone for the hearing was set immediately , when Sen. Lamar Alexander ( R-TN ) — chair of the Health , Education , Labor and Pensions Committee — kicked things off by talking about people going “ back to school and back to work , ” even though he ’ s currently self-quarantining in Tennessee after one of his staffers tested positive for Covid-19 . Fauci didn ’ t waste any time pouring cold water on a question Alexander asked about the possibility of universities reopening in the fall .
“ The idea of having treatments available or a vaccine to facilitate the re-entry of students into the fall term would be something that would be a bit of a bridge too far , ” he said .
Minutes later , Sen. Bernie Sanders ( I-VT ) used his questioning time to guide Fauci through the demolition of two of Trump ’ s favorite talking points .
Trump , for instance , has repeatedly insisted that the coronavirus “ is going to disappear , ” including as recently as last week . But in response to a question from Sanders , Fauci made clear that is not going to happen .
“ When you talk about ‘ will this virus just disappear ’ — and I ’ ve said publicly many times , that is just not gon na happen because it ’ s such a highly transmissible virus , ” he said . “ And even if we get better control over several months , it is likely that there will be virus somewhere on this planet that will eventually get back to us . ”
Fauci with a subtle rebuke of Trump : `` When you talk about 'will this virus just disappear ' -- and I 've said publicly many times , that is just not gon na happen because it 's such a highly transmissible virus . '' pic.twitter.com/af6xgx2dpb — Aaron Rupar ( @ atrupar ) May 12 , 2020
Fauci also agreed with a question Sanders asked him about whether he concurs with experts who have concluded the US coronavirus death toll , which has reached more than 80,000 , represents an undercount — comments undercutting arguments Trump and his advisers have reportedly embraced in private about official death numbers being inflated .
“ Most of us feel that the number of deaths are likely higher than that number , because given the situation particularly in New York City when they were really strapped with a very serious challenge to their health care system , that there may have been people who died at home who did have Covid who were not counting as Covid , because they never really got to the hospital , ” Fauci said .
Sanders asks Fauci if coronavirus deaths are being undercounted . Fauci says `` most of us feel the numbers of deaths are likely higher '' than the official numbers . pic.twitter.com/dxyQj7C914 — Aaron Rupar ( @ atrupar ) May 12 , 2020
When Trump hasn ’ t been engaged in wishful thinking or denialism , he ’ s tried to shift blame for America ’ s coronavirus woes , going as far as to absurdly attack former President Barack Obama for not developing tests for a virus that didn ’ t even exist at the time he was president .
During Tuesday ’ s hearing , Sen. Mitt Romney ( R-UT ) asked Fauci if Obama did anything that “ made the likelihood of creating a vaccine less likely. ” Fauci quickly dismissed the question — and , by implication , Trump ’ s talking point .
ROMNEY : The president said the other day that Obama is responsible for our lack of a vaccine . Are Obama or Trump responsible ?
FAUCI : `` No , senator , not at all . '' pic.twitter.com/pvqwwaj17F — Aaron Rupar ( @ atrupar ) May 12 , 2020
As Trump prematurely declares victory over the coronavirus and focuses on getting the economy up and running in time to salvage his flagging reelection hopes , Fauci made clear that if states reopen schools and businesses without first meeting the White House coronavirus task force ’ s criteria for doing so — and so far none of them have — there will be deadly consequences .
“ If some areas — city , states , or what have you — jump over those various checkpoints and prematurely open up without having the capability of being able to respond effectively and efficiently , my concern is that we will start to see the spikes that might turn into outbreaks , ” he said .
One state that is currently experiencing a coronavirus outbreak is Kentucky . But that didn ’ t deter Sen. Rand Paul ( R-KY ) from using his questioning time to push back on Fauci and downplay the coronavirus in Trumpian fashion .
Paul began by discussing what he described as the “ silver linings ” of coronavirus outbreaks at meatpacking plants — namely , his unproven belief that people who get Covid-19 gain immunity and therefore can go back to work . He then pivoted into making a case that more rural states like his haven ’ t been hit as hard by the coronavirus as some may think .
“ In rural states we never really reached any sort of pandemic levels in Kentucky and other states , ” Paul said , adding , “ really , outside of New England , we ’ ve had a relatively benign course for this virus nationwide . ”
Rand Paul : `` In rural states we never really reached any sort of pandemic levels in Kentucky and other states ... outside of New England , we 've had a relatively benign course for this virus nationwide . '' ( More than 81,000 Americans are dead . ) pic.twitter.com/tQSZvU6gfx — Aaron Rupar ( @ atrupar ) May 12 , 2020
“ I don ’ t think you ’ re the end-all , ” Paul said . “ I don ’ t think you ’ re the one person who gets to make a decision . We can listen to your advice , but there are people on the other side saying there ’ s not going to be a surge and we can safely reopen the economy . ”
In response , Fauci pointed out that “ I have never made myself out to be the end-all and only voice in this . I ’ m a scientist , a physician , and a public health official. ” He warned that Paul ’ s push to reopen schools at a time when doctors are struggling to understand the link between Covid-19 and a potentially deadly syndrome developed by kids who have contracted it could be ill-advised .
“ We don ’ t know everything about this virus , and we really ought to be very careful , particularly when it comes to children , ” Fauci said .
Sen. Rand Paul : `` I do n't think you 're the end all . I do n't think you 're the one person that gets to make a decision . ''
Dr. Anthony Fauci : `` I have never made myself out to be the end all and only voice in this . I 'm a scientist , a physician and a public health official . '' pic.twitter.com/Nqlg3zOqn3 — CSPAN ( @ cspan ) May 12 , 2020
If Paul represented the Trumpiest end of the Republican spectrum , Romney represented the end that has mostly been purged as Trump has consolidated control of the GOP .
Romney not only devoted his questioning time to pushing back on the president ’ s conspiracy theories , he also rebuked administration officials for misleading the American public about the status of coronavirus testing in the US .
Addressing Dr. Brett Giroir , assistant secretary of health and human services , Romney said : “ I understand that politicians are going to frame data in a way that ’ s most positive politically . Of course they don ’ t expect that from admirals . But yesterday you celebrated that we had done more tests and more tests per capita even than South Korea . But you ignored the fact that they accomplished theirs at the beginning of the outbreak , while we treaded water during February and March . ”
“ As a result , by March 6 , the US had completed just 2,000 tests , whereas South Korea had conducted more than 140,000 tests , ” Romney continued . “ So , partially as a result of that , they have 256 deaths and we have almost 80,000 deaths . I find our test record to be nothing to celebrate . ”
Romney rebukes HHS official Giroir for comparing the US testing record favorably with South Korea : `` Politicians are going to frame data in a way that 's most positive politically . Of course they do n't expect that from admirals ... I find our testing record nothing to celebrate . '' pic.twitter.com/afUBHieThH — Aaron Rupar ( @ atrupar ) May 12 , 2020
Many senators let Fauci do the talking for them . Sen. Tim Kaine ( D-VA ) , for instance , alluded to the reality that not only does the US have the most coronavirus deaths in the world , but also a death rate that ’ s on the high end of the spectrum , and asked Fauci if that means the US has to do better .
“ Of course , ” Fauci said . “ You always have to do better . ”
Sen @ timkaine : Dr Fauci , the coronavirus death rate in the US when compared with other nations is unacceptable , is n't it ?
KAINE : Would you say the US has to do better ?
FAUCI : `` Of course . You always have to do better . '' pic.twitter.com/EUtroCnE6l — Aaron Rupar ( @ atrupar ) May 12 , 2020
That may seem like merely stating the obvious , and in a normal situation it would be . But as Trump tries to turn reality on its head by falsely telling Americans that the federal government ’ s coronavirus response has been the toast of the world , Fauci acknowledging that things aren ’ t as rosy as the president wants people to believe had an element of speaking truth to power .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .