As much of the world remains at home due to the coronavirus , a lot of people have put their hopes of a big economic reopening on a vaccine . With more than 100 vaccine candidates for Covid-19 in production , things seem to be looking up — and the conventional wisdom , often restated by White House officials , is that this medical reprieve could come within 12 to 18 months . Secretary of Defense Mark Esper outright promised that “ we will deliver , by the end of this year , a vaccine at scale to treat the American people and our partners abroad . ”
But some experts caution even 12 to 18 months might be optimistic for a Covid-19 vaccine : The previous record for getting a vaccine was four years , and a cliché in the field is that vaccine development is measured in years , not months .
That ’ s not to say that the chances of a widely available vaccine within 12 to 18 months are zero . But they ’ re not 100 percent either . Amesh Adalja , a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security , told me the 12- to 18-month timeline is “ very ambitious. ” Kendall Hoyt , a vaccine and biosecurity expert at Dartmouth , told me it will be a challenge , but arguably doable : “ It ’ s conceivable we could have something in that timeline — if everything goes right . ”
There are two major problems . First , it ’ s not clear whether a vaccine can even be developed ; it ’ s possible — as has been true for other pathogens , like malaria and HIV — that even the world ’ s best scientists just never crack the Covid-19 coronavirus .
Second , even if a vaccine candidate does show promise , time is a necessary component of this line of research . Scientists need months to evaluate not just if a vaccine is effective at conferring immunity for months , but also if it ’ s safe , since side effects could pop up weeks or months down the line . Safety has important implications for public health , too : Any harm from a Covid-19 vaccine could be used by anti-vaccine advocates , who ’ ve already spread their message even with the facts against them , to perpetuate their agenda .
Even without a vaccine , there ’ s still a chance that other scientific and medical innovations come around that make Covid-19 significantly less dangerous , even if they don ’ t outright cure it . Advances in treatment , along with enough health care capacity to see all infected patients ( still a work in progress ) , could bring an end to at least some social distancing even if a vaccine doesn ’ t .
And some experts are still hopeful a vaccine will come quickly . “ I ’ m optimistic , ” Natalie Dean , a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida , told me . “ There ’ s just so much work being done in parallel . ”
But a vaccine savior may not come as quickly as we all hope . For policymakers , that means putting more stock in other medical treatments as well as a vaccine , and boosting other measures , like testing and tracing , that will let states somewhat ease social distancing even without a vaccine . For the general public , it means preparing to stay home , to some degree , for longer than they might prefer .
Experts emphasized that vaccine development takes a lot of time — and it ’ s not just due to bureaucratic hurdles or overly cautious measures .
For one , a vaccine candidate , which can be validated as the real thing through research , has to be discovered . This alone takes a lot of work , with scientists still tinkering with different types of vaccines — some of which have never been successfully developed and used in humans — to see what can work with Covid-19 as well as other kinds of viruses . That can range from the traditional vaccine , in which a weakened version of a virus is used to spur immunity , to newer kinds of vaccines , like the potential use of messenger RNA to attempt to more precisely trigger an immune response . ( For more on the different kinds of vaccines , I strongly recommend Derek Lowe ’ s post on the topic at Science magazine . )
Whether a truly successful vaccine candidate is developed is the first big hurdle . “ Things can fail for multiple reasons , ” Hoyt said . “ Something that can look very promising in the lab just might not behave in a human body in a way that we expect it to . ”
This isn ’ t just true of vaccines : An analysis by Stuart Thompson at the New York Times found that less than 10 percent of drugs that entered clinical trials were ultimately approved by the Food and Drug Administration . So for every 10 articles you see about promising new drugs , chances are nine of those drugs will fail .
Other experts are more optimistic on this front . Adalja noted that there ’ s a coronavirus vaccine for cows — not for the SARS-CoV-2 virus that ’ s sending people into hiding today , but for another type of coronavirus . That gives Covid-19 vaccines better odds than HIV vaccines , Adalja argued : “ I don ’ t think the same obstacles that apply to the HIV quest even come close to the coronavirus vaccine quest . ”
Even if we do get a promising vaccine candidate , though , the work of making sure that candidate is safe and effective will take time . Researchers need months to make sure that immunity lasts in the long term , while making sure the vaccine doesn ’ t produce nasty side effects that could , albeit typically in rare cases , make the cure worse than the disease .
And if a vaccine candidate does make it through all these trials and into manufacturing , that won ’ t be the end of the challenges . This is a vaccine that the entire world will want . “ There will be a capacity problem because a large percentage of the world population will need a vaccine , ” Hoyt said . “ You ’ re just not going to get enough . Vaccine companies are not built to produce enough vaccines for the whole world in a short time frame . ”
Thompson at the Times analyzed the many steps required for a vaccine candidate to make it out into the real world : academic research , pre-clinical work , three phases of trials , building up factories and manufacturing , and distribution . From the first point to the last , a vaccine could take up to 16 years .
Thankfully , there are ways to speed that along . Some of these steps can be done in parallel . Public and private entities could start building vaccine factories right now , as Bill Gates has already promised to do . Human challenge trials , which directly expose healthy people to the virus , could help test for immunity more quickly ( though some people in the field are skeptical , because setting up these trials could take longer than more traditional studies ) .
Even without human challenge trials — which can raise genuine ethical concerns if there ’ s no treatment for the virus people are being infected with — there ’ s a case for optimism on this front as well : Because coronavirus is already all over the world , testing for immunity in real-world settings ( unfortunately ) won ’ t be difficult . With some viruses , this isn ’ t so easy ; Dean pointed out that this was really hard for the MERS vaccine because the virus wasn ’ t widely circulating . “ It ’ s so rare , ” she explained . “ That ’ s not a problem here ” with Covid-19 .
According to Thompson ’ s analysis , if every step is successfully sped up , there ’ s a chance that we could get emergency vaccine deployment by February 2021 and full distribution by the end of that year . But , again , those are big ifs — assuming that a lot of bets do pay off in the end .
“ Finding a working vaccine in that time frame would be remarkable , ” Hoyt said . “ It would be something to be very , very proud of . Having enough of that vaccine for everyone in that time frame would be a miracle . ”
Beyond the unavoidable time constraints , there are good reasons that vaccines take a long time to develop and distribute : Without months or even years of evidence , there might not be enough proof that a vaccine works as promised . That could lull people into a false sense of security , or lead to dangerous side effects down the line .
There ’ s some good reason for caution with Covid-19 . In the New England Journal of Medicine , experts with the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovation warned that vaccine trials for the coronaviruses SARS and MERS “ raised concerns about exacerbating lung disease , either directly or as a result of antibody-dependent enhancement . ”
Now , modern vaccines are very safe , based on large reviews of the research . They have helped eradicate diseases , including smallpox , at the national and global scale .
But one of the reasons these vaccines got to be so safe is because the researchers and manufacturers behind them followed rigorous scientific standards . They made sure these medicines produced lasting immunity without major side effects . They made sure the vaccines were produced in safe conditions without contamination . They made sure the people administering the vaccines were properly equipped and trained . These things can be viewed as hurdles , but they ’ re there to protect people .
Related A guide to the vaccines and drugs that could fight coronavirus
If these steps aren ’ t properly followed , there ’ s a real risk . In 1976 , America rushed out a vaccine in response to fears of a widespread swine flu outbreak . It turned out the swine flu that year wasn ’ t as widespread as officials feared , and the improperly tested vaccine led to a rare neurological disorder , Guillain-Barré syndrome , in 450 people . “ It caused more harm than it saved , ” Josh Michaud , associate director for global health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation , told me .
Vaccine production has come a long way since 1976 . But it ’ s come a long way in part because we have regulations and safeguards to try to guarantee efficacy and safety , and those protections now might slow the arrival of a cure beyond the 12- to 18-month window .
And lapses still happen , like a European H1N1 flu vaccine that increased the risk of narcolepsy .
The potential harm here is not just at the personal but social level . If a Covid-19 vaccine leads to bad side effects , some experts worried that anti-vaccination groups — already perpetuating concerns about the disease , even when the facts aren ’ t on their side — could capitalize on the problems to spread their message . That would be a public health disaster .
“ We ’ ve already seen anti-vaxxers rallying against the vaccine we don ’ t even have yet , ” Tara Smith , an epidemiologist at Kent State University , told me . “ It is huge in my mind that we need to do this as quickly as possible but not skimp in any way on any of the safety mechanisms . ”
Still , the risks of rushing also have to be weighed with the realities people are dealing with right now . Covid-19 is killing hundreds of thousands of people around the globe . It ’ s forcing places to shut down their economies and individuals to stay home — causing harm not just through losses in jobs and income but also to activities that helped sustain people ’ s mental health and happiness . There may be a risk of harm from a rushed vaccine , but keeping the world trapped in its current condition carries risks and harms as well .
It ’ s a balancing act . And we may not know if we ’ ve struck the right balance until a vaccine has been out in the world for a few months or years , giving researchers time and data to see if it ’ s truly safe and effective .
“ Everything is cost-benefit , ” Hoyt said . “ Going to the grocery store is not risk-free currently . Which risk would you rather have ? ”
At the same time , humanity doesn ’ t necessarily have to rely on a vaccine to get us out of the current situation .
The story of HIV is instructive . While a safe and effective HIV vaccine has eluded humanity for decades , we have developed antiretrovirals that can combat HIV so well that it becomes undetectable in the body — even preventing its spread — and other treatments that make it much less likely someone will catch the virus from someone who ’ s HIV-positive . People now treated early for HIV can live as long as their HIV-negative peers . There are many differences between HIV and the coronavirus , but this shows that there are alternatives to a vaccine .
With the coronavirus , research into non-vaccine treatments is still early . So far , the results have been mixed with remdesivir and disappointing with hydroxychloroquine . But , again , it ’ s early , so there could be a big breakthrough at some point among the 280-plus non-vaccine therapeutics currently under study . Short of a blockbuster drug , a new process in hospitals and clinics could at least help treat Covid-19 patients much more effectively and safely .
The downside , though , is producing these alternatives could still take weeks or months . “ We need more time , ” Saskia Popescu , an infectious disease epidemiologist , told me . “ It ’ s going to be a while until we really understand some of the medical interventions that work and don ’ t work . ”
Other medications and treatments could also help make a vaccine . If one of the concerns with human challenge trials , for example , is that they will expose people to a virus that can ’ t be treated , that concern is obviously going to be mitigated if there are medications that can effectively treat Covid-19 . That could open the door to more aggressive means of testing a vaccine , speeding up its development and deployment .
Outside of treatment , there are also public health interventions that could help control the coronavirus without a vaccine . Other countries , such as South Korea and Germany , have aggressively deployed widespread testing and contact tracing to isolate people who are infected , quarantine their contacts , and deploy community-wide efforts , like lockdowns or other forms of social distancing , as necessary . These measures alone aren ’ t enough to let life return to normal — as South Korea and Germany are learning — but they make it much easier , experts say , to put out embers before they become wildfires .
Again , this will take time — likely more than it should . The US has made some progress in recent weeks in doing more testing , but the great majority of states still don ’ t have enough .
These public health interventions and the prospects of non-vaccine medications aren ’ t the best possible outcome — a vaccine still holds that claim — but they could offer some relief . As people get tired of staying home , the reprieves and hope the alternatives provide could help buy time until a vaccine arrives — whether that takes six months or many more years .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .