The left focuses on the challenges that must be overcome in order to reopen the economy .
“ [ Trump ] pretends there is a switch and that he alone can flick it , but of course no such thing exists . This crisis is not all about him . It ’ s all about us . For one thing , Trump is not the one who decided to shut everything down : He never issued a nationwide stay-at-home order . We are sequestered and socially distanced because our governors and mayors told us we needed to be . And we continue housebound , wearing masks when we infrequently venture outside and dutifully scrubbing our hands when we return , because we understand the need to protect our health and that of others . I ’ d love it if everything suddenly went back to normal . But I know that isn ’ t possible…
“ Would you feel safe on a crowded bus , commuter train or subway car ? What about in a carpool : How would you feel if someone in the back seat were to cough ? If you work in retail , how would you interact with customers ? At arm ’ s length , wearing a mask and gloves ? … Our lives will reboot gradually , perhaps haltingly , and it doesn ’ t matter how frantically Trump pushes the ‘ on ’ button . ”
“ Everything we see in the polling data suggests that almost no one thinks that we need to reopen the economy right now . In a Fox News poll this week , 80 % of voters nationwide say they would favor the federal government announcing a stay at home order for everybody but essential workers . You usually ca n't get 80 % of voters to agree upon anything , and the 80 % is certainly higher than the approval Trump is getting for his handling of the coronavirus . Voters are n't concerned Trump is being too proactive . If anything , they think he is being too cautious . The same Fox News poll showed that a mere 4 % of voters thought Trump was overreacting to the virus . That compares with 47 % who think he is n't taking the virus seriously enough…
“ The point is that there 's a lot in the data to indicate that Americans want the President to focus most on the public health issue at hand more so than they are worried about him fixing the economy right now . If people are allowed to go about their normal routine too soon and the number of coronavirus cases rise afterward , there 's a good case to be made that 's far more dangerous to Trump 's reelection chances than a bad economy . ”
“ In different ways , all [ the plans put forth so far ] say the same thing : Even if you can imagine the herculean political , social , and economic changes necessary to manage our way through this crisis effectively , there is no normal for the foreseeable future . Until there ’ s a vaccine , the United States either needs economically ruinous levels of social distancing , a digital surveillance state of shocking size and scope , or a mass testing apparatus of even more shocking size and intrusiveness . ”
“ To truly end the crisis , keep deaths low , and allow the economy to recover , testing has to happen on an enormous scale . How enormous ? … One of the lower-end benchmarks estimates the US will need 750,000 tests per week . The high-end proposal , from Nobel laureate economist Paul Romer , starts at 22 million tests per day and goes up . And not just one test per person , but repeated testing over time… Getting to 35 million tests per day would cost around $ 100 billion , according to Romer . It ’ s a steep price tag , but a fraction of the $ 350 billion or so in monthly economic losses due to the ongoing lockdowns… half-measures will only prolong the problem . Go big or stay home . ”