Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
The Obama administration sought several cuts in funding for the Strategic National Stockpile ( SNS ) of personal protective equipment ( PPE ) and other critical medical supplies -- although some of the reductions were relatively small , and most came after Republicans implemented a new law to restrict federal discretionary spending , records reviewed by Fox News show .
Former Vice President Joe Biden 's campaign has recently stepped up its attacks on President Trump 's pandemic preparedness , drawing what could be one of the most consequential battle lines of the presidential race amid the coronavirus crisis . A widely cited USA Today fact-check , which found that the Obama administration had allowed the N95 mask stockpile to deplete , has become a flashpoint in that increasingly murky and numbers-heavy debate .
In its fiscal 2011 budget , submitted in early 2010 , the Obama administration explicitly sought a reduction in the SNS : `` CDC requests $ 523,533,000 for the Strategic National Stockpile in FY 2011 , a decrease of $ 72,216,000 below the FY 2010 Omnibus , '' the budget request reads .
The document went on to make clear that $ 68,515,000 would separately be transferred to the SNS from the fiscal 2009 appropriation for an H1N1-related fund , meaning that overall , the strategic stockpile would receive $ 592,048,000 -- a reduction of only a few million dollars from the previous year .
A top Biden adviser told Fox News on Thursday that the fiscal 2011 budget was `` almost identical '' to the previous year 's budget , and pointed out that the 2011 cuts constituted a reduction of less than 1 percentage point .
The Obama administration also sought a $ 47.572 million cut to the stockpile in fiscal 2013 , a $ 38.190 million cut to the stockpile in fiscal 2014 , and a smaller drop of at least several million dollars in fiscal 2015 .
However , the Budget Control Act -- legislation passed after the Tea Party wave mandating a bipartisan “ super committee ” find ways to cut discretionary spending or else trigger across-the-board cuts known as “ sequestration '' -- became law in August 2011 and influenced those cuts , the Biden campaign told Fox News .
Indeed , the Obama administration 's budget requests implicitly reference the Budget Control Act several times . The fiscal 2013 budget , for example , states that the `` current fiscal climate necessitates scaling back '' even though the SNS is a `` key resource . ''
And , the fiscal 2015 budget states : `` CDC has always sought to maximize the effectiveness of resources and investments , and is even more focused on doing so in the current fiscal environment . ''
INSIDE GEORGE W. BUSH 'S PUSH TO PREVENT A PANDEMIC -- AND WHERE WE WENT WRONG
Even as those cuts took place , the Biden adviser told Fox News , the Obama administration worked to `` modernize the strategic stockpile . '' The line-by-line budget cuts , the adviser said , could mislead because the `` qualitative story of the stockpile of those years is actually one of modernization '' -- particularly concerning the mass production of masks and the ability to reuse masks . Those plans were n't acted on by the Trump administration , the Biden adviser said .
“ Sleepy Joe doesn ’ t want to accept responsibility for leaving America unprepared for a pandemic , but the facts are the facts , '' Trump campaign Deputy Director of Communications Matt Wolking told Fox News . `` Biden made no effort to replenish the supply of masks in the Strategic National Stockpile after the 2009 swine flu , despite multiple warnings from experts . ''
Wolking continued : `` Biden ’ s administration also repeatedly tried to cut funding for the stockpile , including before any budget caps existed . Regardless , the Obama-Biden budget proposals repeatedly ignored the caps , so they are no excuse . Biden ’ s defenses simply don ’ t hold water . ''
The Ebola and Zika virus outbreaks prompted the Obama administration to seek budget supplementals that could have replenished the SNS by 2016 , but securing congressional authorization proved challenging . In 2016 , when Congress green-lit funds to combat the Zika virus , the CDC received less than half of what the Obama administration sought .
The Trump administration 's fiscal 2021 budget request , released in February , said the stockpile 's funding should be maintained at $ 705 million . Fox News has reported that the George W. Bush administration was heavily focused on pandemic response beginning in 2005 , including by greatly expanding the stockpile and implementing war games and regular briefings -- but those efforts were n't maintained in the following decade .
In its own statement to Fox News , the Biden campaign took aim squarely at the current administration , while blaming Congress for past budget constraints .
`` The Obama-Biden administration maintained consistent funding for the Strategic National Stockpile in the midst of a massive budget squeeze , put together a White House office and comprehensive playbook focused on pandemic response , and successfully handled dangerous outbreaks in 2009 and 2014 , '' Biden campaign spokesperson Michael Gwin told Fox News .
DEMS , JOURNOS CHANGE TUNE AFTER HITTING TRUMP ON CHINA TRAVEL BAN
`` Instead of building on the strong foundation left to him by the Obama-Biden administration , Trump scrapped the office , threw out the playbook , and wasted months ignoring the threat of the coronavirus instead of securing ventilators , personal protective equipment , and other life-saving supplies , '' Gwin continued .
Trump counters that the Obama-Biden administration left his own with `` empty cupboards . ''
A PolitiFact analysis notes that while the inventory was not actually bare , there still was not enough to handle the coronavirus pandemic , particularly when it came to N95 masks depleted in the wake of H1N1 .
Recalling the budget battles of the prior administration , the analysis notes stockpile funding dropped to its lowest level in 2013 -- about $ 477 million -- but those levels have steadily grown since , including under Trump .
The Trump campaign has also argued that Biden has misstated Trump 's record and mishandled the crisis . For example , Biden condemned Trump 's `` xenophobia '' shortly after he announced a restriction on travel from China on Jan. 31 , although the Biden team has denied that the former vice president was referring specifically to the travel ban . Those travel restrictions have been adopted by other countries , and experts credit them with saving lives .
JOHNS HOPKINS : U.S. MORE PREPARED FOR PANDEMIC THAN ANY OTHER COUNTRY
Additionally , Biden has claimed that Trump himself successfully slashed the CDC budget , and Biden has suggested that he would never pursue similar cuts . The Associated Press has noted that those claims `` distort '' the facts , with FactCheck.org pointing out that CDC funding has actually increased under the current administration , largely because Congress insisted on maintaining funding levels for both CDC and the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) even as the Trump administration sought the CDC cuts .
Nevertheless , speaking to ABC News ' “ This Week ” on March 1 , Biden claimed : “ They ’ ve cut the funding for the CDC . ”
Biden stepped up his attacks on social media as well , writing on Twitter : `` Donald Trump 's careless , shortsighted actions left our nation ill-prepared and now Americans are paying the price . ''
And , at a virtual town hall on Wednesday , Biden remarked that coronavirus had `` magnified some of our worst systemic inequities , '' and that black and Hispanic communities are suffering higher infection and death rates than white communities .
Streaming live to some 1,621 viewers on YouTube , Biden , whose comments were sometimes muddled , added : “ It ’ s sick , it ’ s troubling , it ’ s wrong -- and we ’ re going to fight back with everything we ’ ve got . ''
`` That 's unconscionable , '' he concluded . `` We need more data on how Latinos and other communities of color are impacted , so we know exactly what has to be done . ''
Amid the finger-pointing , it emerged in March that the United States was ranked the best-prepared country in the world to handle a pandemic in late 2019 by the Nuclear Threat Initiative ( NTI ) and the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security ( JHCHS ) -- an assessment seemingly at odds with claims by Democrats that the Trump administration left the country vulnerable to the ongoing coronavirus outbreak .
For his part , Trump has focused less on the numbers and more on perceived competency . At coronavirus task force briefing Wednesday at the White House , Trump noted that Biden still had n't secured the endorsement of his former boss , even after rival Bernie Sanders dropped out of the race and made him the presumptive nominee .
`` There 's something he feels is wrong , '' Trump remarked . `` He knows something that you do n't know , that I think I know . ''