`` This is a moment where we need some straight talk and we need to tell people the truth : We need to bend the curve in the state of California , '' Gov . Gavin Newsom said .
The journalists at ███ are proud to bring you trustworthy and relevant reporting about the coronavirus . To help keep this news free , become a member and sign up for our newsletter , Outbreak Today .
All Californians , nearly 40 million people , have been ordered to stay at home except for when it is absolutely necessary for them to leave `` until further notice '' to help slow the spread of the novel coronavirus . Gov . Gavin Newsom announced the order late Thursday , just an hour after officials in Los Angeles County , the most populous county in the US , issued a similar mandate . Earlier this week , their Bay Area counterparts handed down similar `` shelter-in-place '' orders , the strictest measures taken in the country so far . `` This is a moment we need to make tough decisions , '' Newsom said . `` This is a moment where we need some straight talk and we need to tell people the truth : We need to bend the curve in the state of California . ''
Across the state of California , health officials have confirmed 675 cases of COVID-19 and 16 deaths from the disease as of Wednesday evening , behind Washington state and New York , where more than 5,000 cases have been confirmed .
The state 's order takes effect immediately and will be in place indefinitely with Newsom telling reporters that officials `` could not give a deadline that we really could believe in . '' `` This is a dynamic situation , '' he said . The Los Angeles order , which will stay in effect until at least April 19 , requires all businesses , including museums , malls , retail stores , and workplaces , to stop operations and only allows people to leave their home for `` essential activities , '' like to pick up food , go to the doctor , or take a walk in the neighborhood . It will take effect midnight Thursday , though businesses will have an additional day to prepare to close .
`` We ’ ve already radically changed how we live in Los Angeles , '' Mayor Eric Garcetti said during a press briefing . `` We need to be painfully honest tonight that we 're about to enter into a new way of living here . ''