Florida health officials have stopped publishing real-time coronavirus death data reported by medical examiners after they showed a higher number of fatalities than the official state total .
The Sunshine State has not released lists compiled by the state Medical Examiners Commission in the last nine days . The updates stopped after The Tampa Bay Times reported that the medical examiners ' death count was 10 % higher than the number reported by the Florida Department of Health .
Dr. Stephen Nelson , who heads the commission , told the outlet that the change in policy came after state health officials `` intervened . ''
Nelson said the officials told him they plan to redact causes of deaths and descriptions of cases from the data , which he said would make the lists `` meaningless . ''
`` This is no different than any other public record we deal with , '' Nelson added . `` It 's paid for by taxpayer dollars , and the taxpayers have a right to know . ''
Nelson said the lists have always been made public since medical examiners began to compile them in 1992 .
Paul Petrino , who runs the Palm Beach County medical examiner 's office , told The Times that county lawyers instructed him to stop releasing the numbers last week .
`` I was actually taken aback when they called us , '' Petrino said , adding that the data was important to make public so that individuals have accurate information about the health crisis . `` I 'd hate to see anything hinder that . Hopefully , it wo n't . ''
The health department told The Times that it `` participated in conference calls '' with law enforcement officials to express `` privacy concerns for the individuals that passed away related to COVID-19 . ''
The request came after the health department last month tried to convince the Miami-Dade County medical examiner 's office to block access to death records , according to The Miami Herald . The county released the data , anyway .
The health department also refused to release information about infections in nursing homes until news outlets sued for the information .
`` It 's just shocking to me the level of interference , '' Barbara Petersen of the First Amendment Foundation told The Times .
A spokesperson for the health department in Hillsborough County argued that the discrepancies in the state 's numbers could be due to a lag in reporting . Florida also excludes travelers and seasonal residents who died in the state , even though medical examiners do include them .
The efforts to keep public health information under wraps came as Florida Gov . Ron DeSantis , a Republican , moved to reopen parts of the state 's economy after he delayed issuing a stay-at-home order earlier in the outbreak . DeSantis on Wednesday announced the plan to reopen , as the state saw its largest spike in coronavirus deaths since the pandemic began .
Florida 's Democratic congressional delegation wrote a letter to DeSantis last week , which questioned the `` inconsistencies between COVID-19 death tracking methods used by the Florida Department of Health and county medical examiners . ''
`` We ask that you work with the Department of Health and county medical examiners to ensure that COVID-19 cases are detected and reported accurately , '' they said , calling for a `` detailed explanation of the public health justification '' for excluding nonresidents from the state 's death count .