As a critical care doctor in New York City , Monica is used to dealing with high-octane situations and treating severely ill patients . But she says the COVID-19 outbreak is unlike anything she ’ s seen before . Over the past few weeks , operating rooms have been transformed into ICUs , physicians of all backgrounds have been drafted into emergency room work , and two of her colleagues became ICU patients . While Monica is proud of her coworkers for rising to the challenge , she says it ’ s been hard for them to fight a prolonged battle against a deadly , highly contagious illness with no known cure .
To make matters worse , Monica recently tested positive for COVID-19 , and she believes she brought the virus home to her husband . Both have gotten sick and are improving , but he had a much harder time with the disease than she did . Monica says that , while she ’ s used the inherent risk of her job , she feels her hospital failed to protect her and her family — and she blames herself , in part , for her husband ’ s illness . “ There ’ s this sinking feeling that you have , ” says Monica , who requested anonymity because she feared professional repercussions for speaking candidly , “ not only , like , the hospital let you down , and that the system let us down as doctors and didn ’ t protect us , but then I didn ’ t protect my own family . ”
In hospitals around the world , doctors , nurses and other healthcare workers like Monica are fighting an enemy that has already killed more than 95,000 people , including over 16,000 in the United States . And as with any war , the fight against COVID-19 will result not just in direct casualties , but also take a terrible toll on the minds of many of those who survive .
It will be years before the mental health toll of the COVID-19 pandemic is fully understood , but some early data already paints a bleak picture . A study published March 23 in the medical journal JAMA found that , among 1,257 healthcare workers working with COVID-19 patients in China , 50.4 % reported symptoms of depression , 44.6 % symptoms of anxiety , 34 % insomnia , and 71.5 % reported distress . Nurses and other frontline workers were among those with the most severe symptoms .
In interviews with TIME , several doctors and nurses said that fighting COVID-19 is making them feel more dedicated to their profession , and determined to push through and help their patients . However , many also admitted to harboring darker feelings . They ’ re afraid of spreading the disease to their families , frustrated about a lack of adequate protective gear and a sense they can ’ t do enough for their patients , exhausted as hours have stretched longer without a clear end in sight , and , most of all , deeply sad for their dying patients , many of whom are slipping away without their loved ones at their side .
It ’ s those lonely deaths that have hit the hardest for some . Natalie Jones , an ICU-registered nurse at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital Hamilton in New Jersey , says it ’ s been agonizing to have to turn away people who want to visit their loved ones one last time . She ’ s trying to find ways to be compassionate where she can — last week , she passed on a message from a patient ’ s wife just before he died : “ That they love him , and it ’ s O.K . to go. ” But even simply carrying a message of such emotional weight can take a toll .
“ We carry that burden for the families , too , ” says Jones , who ’ s having difficultly sleeping without nightmares . “ And we understand it ’ s so difficult that they can ’ t be there . And that hurts us too . As nurses , we ’ re healers , and we ’ re compassionate . It hits very close to home for us as well . ”
“ We ’ re all affected , ” adds Jones , whose already hectic schedule has gotten even more intense amid the outbreak , costing her the sleep that might otherwise help her cope with what she ’ s experiencing . “ To say that we ’ re not would be a lie . ”
The coronavirus is taking a mental toll even on those medical experts who aren ’ t on the front lines . Since the start of the outbreak , Dr. Morgan Katz , an infectious disease expert at Johns Hopkins University , has been advising nursing homes and long-term care centers on dealing with the coronavirus . But she ’ s struggling with the gap between what she believes to be the proper procedures and what ’ s actually possible in this crisis . Many of the facilities she ’ s advising are suffering from a lack of protective equipment , limited staffing and insufficient testing , and a sense of helplessness is taking hold .
“ We didn ’ t have the resources before this that we needed , and this has completely strapped them beyond anything feasible , ” says Katz . “ It ’ s so sad . I really feel for these nursing homes and the staff of these nursing homes , because I truly believe that they ’ re trying to do the right thing . But I really don ’ t feel like they ’ re being protected the way that we need to protect them . ”
Finding ways to support medical workers ’ mental health could be a key component in the fight against COVID-19 . Dr. Albert Wu , professor of health policy and management and medicine at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health , says that evidence from the 2003 SARS outbreak suggests that failing to support healthcare workers in a crisis , including by not providing enough protective gear , can erode their “ wellbeing and resilience , ” ultimately leading to chronic burnout . Some healthcare workers could leave the profession , be absent more often from work , or develop PTSD , and any preexisting mental health conditions could be exacerbated . Furthermore , healthcare workers are human like the rest of us , and under extreme stress , they could be prone to making mistakes — which could lead to worse outcomes for patients , and further erode doctors ’ and nurses ’ mental health . “ We can ’ t get away from our physiology , ” says Wu .
If healthcare workers can ’ t provide the care they typically believe is medically necessary for their patients , they may experience a phenomenon known as “ moral injury , ” says Dr. Wendy Dean , a psychiatrist and the co-founder of the nonprofit Fix Moral Injury . Dean says that American healthcare providers are used to doing anything and everything to help their patients , but inadequate protective gear and triage procedures will force them to make “ exquisitely painful ” decisions , such as choosing whether or not to risk infecting themselves , their family and other patients in order to help everyone in their care .
Still , Dean says the scope of the mental health crisis among healthcare workers won ’ t come into focus until the more immediate problem has ebbed .
“ When I think the real challenge is going to come is when the pandemic eases up and people start having time to process , ” she says . “ All that they ’ ve seen , all that they ’ ve done , all that they ’ ve felt and pushed away . ”
Several healthcare workers said that , amid all the uncertainty and horrors , they have found some relief in drawing upon support from their families , communities , and one another . Monica , for one , says her friends brought food to her and her husband after they got sick , and she deeply appreciated the support . She ’ s also proud of the way her colleagues have come together as a team to fight the virus . “ There has been a real feeling of , everybody ’ s in the trenches together , ” she says . “ What I ’ ve been most amazed about is people have really risen to that call . ”
The Coronavirus Brief . Everything you need to know about the global spread of COVID-19 Please enter a valid email address . Sign Up Now Check the box if you do not wish to receive promotional offers via email from TIME . You can unsubscribe at any time . By signing up you are agreeing to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy Thank you ! For your security , we 've sent a confirmation email to the address you entered . Click the link to confirm your subscription and begin receiving our newsletters . If you do n't get the confirmation within 10 minutes , please check your spam folder .