Which means Arizona , Texas and Florida , states that reopened early and now are experiencing runaway infection rates , are likely to be burying more dead in July .
“ As long as there is a fair amount of testing going on , if there is an uptick in covid-19 infections , then we are likely to see that in the confirmed case data before we see it in the death data , ” said Nicholas G. Reich , associate professor of biostatistics at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst , in an email .
He predicted “ rises in covid-19 deaths over the next month in many of the states that are seeing upticks in cases , like Texas , California , Florida and others , even though the deaths have been either steady or declining in recent weeks . ”
The virus has come surging back in recent days , with 38,173 U.S. infections Wednesday , more than any previous day in the pandemic , including the catastrophic days of April . This time , the increases are mainly in the South and West , while New York and New Jersey , which were nearly overwhelmed in the spring and have been slow to reopen , are seeing declining cases .
California , which shut down early and has taken a slow approach toward reopening , nevertheless reported more than 7,000 new cases Wednesday , easily surpassing its record of 5,019 set Tuesday . Oklahoma — where President Trump on Saturday held an indoor campaign rally — and Florida also hit new single-day highs Wednesday .
Those three states , along with Nevada and North Carolina , reached new peaks in their seven-day rolling averages , considered a more reliable indicator of the virus ’ s impact . Arizona set a record with 2,270 hospitalizations .
Coronavirus hospitalizations have tripled in Houston since Memorial Day , Houston Methodist Hospital chief executive Marc Boom said Wednesday . Texas reported 5,551 new cases , the most in a single day , along with 4,389 hospitalizations , up almost 300 from Tuesday ’ s record high .
The state ’ s seven-day rolling average of new cases has increased 70 percent since last Tuesday , setting a record for the 14th consecutive day .
Overall , 2.36 million people have been infected in the United States and at least 119,000 have died — by far the largest numbers for any country in the world .
Governors of New York , New Jersey and Connecticut said they will advise travelers arriving from states with wide community spread of the virus to quarantine for 14 days , the three announced Wednesday at a joint news conference .
The new rules will apply to people from states with an infection rate of 10 per 100,000 people on a seven-day rolling average , or a 10 percent or greater positive test rate over a seven-day period , according to New York Gov . Andrew M. Cuomo ( D ) . Eight states currently are in that group : Alabama , Arkansas , Arizona , Florida , North Carolina , South Carolina , , Utah and Texas . On Wednesday , the state of Washington was erroneously included but has since been removed from the restriction .
Despite the numbers , Vice President Pence urged Republican senators during a closed-door lunch to focus on “ encouraging signs. ” Lawmakers have begun to express alarm about rising infection rates in states such as Florida , Arizona and Texas , which are likely to be critical in the outcome of the presidential race and control of the Senate .
Senators said Pence pointed to positive indicators , including the lagging mortality rate . That is partly because there is more testing , and younger and healthier people now account for larger shares of those getting tested , Pence contended .
Stocks , meanwhile , fell on news of the increase in cases , as the International Monetary Fund said Wednesday that the global economy will shrink by 4.9 percent this year and a sluggish recovery would follow .
Officials tracking the startling comeback of covid-19 , the disease caused by the virus , are somewhat buoyed by lessons learned and progress in the health-care system since the virus stormed ashore outside Seattle in late February and later inundated New York City .
Some said the greater availability of tests is responsible for turning up more cases . The results of those tests are revealing a larger number of younger people with the virus than there were in the early days of the outbreak .
When the pandemic first gripped the United States , it was nearly impossible for anyone without severe symptoms to secure a test . Younger people , who generally suffer milder cases and are more likely to be asymptomatic , may have been underrepresented as a result , said Jennifer Nuzzo , an epidemiologist at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health ’ s Center for Health Security .
Now they are accounting for some of the rise in the overall caseload and a greater proportion of hospitalizations in places like Arizona . There may be fewer deaths among the younger group , but those individuals are likely to infect more older people , she said .
With states reopening , “ you have the young folks out and about . They ’ re spreading it , ” she said . “ It may take time to find its way to older , vulnerable people , who are more likely to die . ”
Tom Frieden , former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , said older people now have a better understanding of how vulnerable they are . The medical system also has taken steps to better protect people older than 65 , including those living in nursing homes and other care facilities . The virus is no longer racing through those places and killing people by the ­dozens , as it did early in the pandemic .
CDC statistics show how thoroughly covid-19 attacks the elderly . From Feb. 1 to June 13 , covid-19 was involved in just 2,630 deaths among people 44 or younger . But the disease was fatal to 83,426 people 65 or older .
Medical care for the most critically ill patients also has improved during the four months that U.S. caregivers have been battling the disease . Doctors have become more adept at using ventilators and othertools and techniques to help patients breathe . They have turned to drugs like remdesivir and dexamethasone . , which has shown a small benefit for seriously ill patients , and the steroid dexamethasone , which has reduced the risk of death for people with severe lung damage . Sick people have learned to track the level of oxygen in their blood with home use of pulse oximeters .
Even if the death toll does not rebound to previous levels , the current surge will have serious consequences , said Saskia Popescu , an infectious-disease epidemiologist who teaches at the University of Arizona . For some people who do not become critically ill , the virus can cause severe , and sometimes long-lasting , problems , she said .
“ Illness is a really significant outcome too , ” Popescu said . “ Deaths are obviously worst case ; we don ’ t want people to die . But I don ’ t want people to get sick , especially so sick they have to go the hospital . That ’ s hard on them , that ’ s hard on the health-care system . Focusing only on deaths does a disservice to patients and the community . ”