All states in America had begun a phased reopening of their economies as of Wednesday after shutting down non-essential businesses to stem the spread of COVID-19 , the illness associated with the novel coronavirus .
Although lockdown orders remain in effect in a handful of states as well as the nation ’ s capital and the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico , some non-essential businesses in those regions have reopened , data compiled by the New York Times revealed as of Wednesday afternoon , echoing other analyses .
Still , Democrat-allied mainstream media outlets like the Times argue that it is premature for states to reopen at this juncture , despite some metrics , like hospitalizations , showing improvements in the coronavirus situation across the United States .
While some health experts have acknowledged that deaths and cases may increase with the reopening of the country as more people go outside their homes , others warn about the potentially lethal costs of keeping the shutdown in place .
Testing has also improved in recent weeks , which will lead to health officials detecting more cases .
Several states ( 8 ) did not impose a shutdown . The vast majority of the remaining ones have allowed their shelter-in-place order to expire , either already or by next week ( 35 ) .
Puerto Rico ’ s stay-at-home order will expire next week on May 25 . Meanwhile , the District of Columbia has extended its quarantine order to June 8 .
Some states may choose to extend their quarantine orders after they expire or cut them short if conditions improve .
On Tuesday , U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin warned a Senate panel about the devastation long-term shutdown measures can have on the American economy .
“ There is [ a ] risk of permanent damage , ” he told the Senate Banking Committee .
Echoing other health experts , Dr. Francis Collins , the director of the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) , cautioned in April that there is a clear and present danger that lockdown measures may fuel mental health issues like suicides .
“ Particularly with suicide , one worries about the people who already are struggling with depression , and then are put in a circumstance of being isolated from others , ” Dr. Collins told the medical news site STAT . “ That ’ s exactly the wrong thing . ”
“ So that ’ s one more reason why we need to figure out [ the health consequences of the lockdowns ] in a safe way , and an evidence-based way how we can get ourselves back out there again because people are suffering with this , ” he added .
President Donald Trump has acknowledged there is a real health cost to keeping people cooped up in their homes for long periods .
The Trump administration has provided guidelines for states to reopen . President Trump , however , has left it up to the states to decide when and how .