The possibility of a pandemic is a challenge Donald Trump is unqualified to handle as president . I remember how Trump sought to stoke fear and stigma during the 2014 Ebola epidemic . He called President Barack Obama a “ dope ” and “ incompetent ” and railed against the evidence-based response our administration put in place — which quelled the crisis and saved hundreds of thousands of lives — in favor of reactionary travel bans that would only have made things worse . He advocated abandoning exposed and infected American citizens rather than bringing them home for treatment .
Trump ’ s demonstrated failures of judgment and his repeated rejection of science make him the worst possible person to lead our country through a global health challenge .
The outbreak of a new coronavirus , which has already infected more than 2,700 people and killed over 80 in China , will get worse before it gets better . Cases have been confirmed in a dozen countries , with at least five in the United States . There will likely be more .
The State Department has scheduled an evacuation flight and advised Americans against traveling to Hubei province , the epicenter of the outbreak , and is evacuating non-essential personnel .
Trump has blithely tweeted that “ it will all work out well. ” Yet the steps he has taken as president have only weakened our capacity to respond .
Trump has rolled back much of the progress President Obama and I made to strengthen global health security . He proposed draconian cuts to the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) and the Agency for International Development — the very agencies we need to fight this outbreak and prevent future ones .
He dismissed the top White House official in charge of global health security and dismantled the entire team . And he has treated with utmost contempt institutions that facilitate international cooperation , thus undermining the global efforts that keep us safe from pandemics and biological attacks .
To be blunt , I am concerned that the Trump administration ’ s shortsighted policies have left us unprepared for a dangerous epidemic that will come sooner or later .
Pandemic diseases are a prime example of why international cooperation is a requirement of leadership in 2020 . Diseases do not stop at borders . They can not be thwarted by building a wall . We can not keep ourselves safe without helping to keep others safe as well and without enlisting the help of other nations in return . And here ’ s the truth — the United States must step forward to lead these efforts , because no other nation has the resources , the reach or the relationships to marshal an effective international response .
Cruel and unusual : Trump tweeted heartlessly about Ebola in 2014 . He 's ill-equipped to handle 2019 outbreak .
That ’ s how we broke the infection curve on Ebola . In September 2014 , CDC projections warned that over 1 million people could be infected if we failed to act . By February 2015 , thanks to the leadership of our administration , the number of new Ebola cases was fewer than 400 . A few months later , the epidemic was essentially extinguished .
We brought the world together behind a response that only the United States could mobilize — including dispatching our military on a limited mission to help build the urgent infrastructure necessary to coordinate a massive global public health response , deploying American disaster assistance response teams to Africa , unleashing the NIH to help spur the discovery of new treatments and vaccines , protecting our citizens from potential cases of Ebola in the USA , and harnessing civilian expertise from the CDC at home and abroad .
We acted over the chorus of uninformed objections from critics like Donald Trump , and more than 60 countries followed our lead , contributing over $ 2 billion , thousands of health professionals and personnel , and other critical resources like personal protective equipment . Just as important , we strengthened our focus on preparing for the next crisis .
That ’ s the kind of leadership a moment like this demands — a leadership Trump could never deliver .
Unintended consequences : Measles outbreak drains resources we may need for a future epidemic or bioterrorist attack
As president , I will reassert U.S. leadership in global health security . My policies will always uphold science , not fiction or fearmongering . I will ask Congress to beef up the Public Health Emergency Fund and give me the power to use the Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act to declare a disaster if an infectious disease threat merits it .
I will also renew funding — set to expire in May — for the nationwide network of hospitals that can isolate and treat people with infectious diseases , and fully fund the Global Health Security Agenda so the world is ready for the next outbreak . And I will rebuild public trust , make sure we have dedicated resources to help us respond to crises quickly , and better harness the capabilities of the private sector to protect the American people . Our national security requires nothing less .
Former Vice President Joe Biden is a candidate for the Democratic nomination for president . Follow him on Twitter : @ JoeBiden