“ It is imperative that states get busy now ordering absentee ballots … There are downsides to vote-by-mail , though not necessarily the ones Trump has in mind . Rapidly going from in-person voting to exclusively mail-in ballots is likely to disenfranchise some voters . At the very least , a state would need to engage in a fairly robust publicity and outreach campaign to pull this off . And more realistically , it would need to plan for some in-person voting , perhaps through a reduced footprint of sites , with expanded early-voting hours and public-health precautions… “ None of this is cheap . Furthermore , the states , which are already facing huge public safety costs amid declining tax revenues , are limited in their ability to borrow and will need help from Washington… The legislation sets aside $ 500 billion for bailouts for airlines and companies deemed to be of national security importance . Certainly , safe and fair elections are a matter of urgent national security as well. ” Editorial Board , USA Today
“ [ The Supreme Court decision is ] the opening salvo in what is likely to be a seven-month long series of legal battles about how the 2020 elections will be accomplished with Covid-19 disrupting the voting process . So it ’ s highly unfortunate that the justices split along partisan lines in this first case , a case with relatively low stakes . The nation badly needs the court to avoid a scenario reminiscent of the 2000 Bush v. Gore case , in which the justices were perceived to have decided the election for Bush along roughly ideological lines… “ Given the likely effects of the pandemic on that election , there exists a substantial likelihood that both political parties will be poised to question the fairness of the election results . The only way to avoid a potentially serious legitimacy crisis is not to rely on the Supreme Court to resolve it . States need to put electoral processes in place early so that the rules are clear in advance . And we should avoid the temptation , however powerful , to expect the courts to tweak those rules to make them more ‘ fair , ’ as measured by our own lights. ” Noah Feldman , Bloomberg
Regarding the Supreme Court decision , “ In the main body of the opinion , you would never learn that a deadly pandemic even existed , let alone that it was the driving motivation of the district court ’ s decision . This is cowardly . If you want to make a case that the law is the law and it needs to be followed even in the middle of a destructive plague , then go ahead . But at the very least , you need to have the integrity to make the case . You need to be willing to say forthrightly that legal technicalities need to be followed even if they will either ( a ) deprive thousands of people of their votes or ( b ) drive them to the polls , where they run the risk of contracting a deadly disease. ” Kevin Drum , Mother Jones
“ The motivations of [ the Republican legislators ] require little speculation . The marquee race in Wisconsin on Tuesday was not the Democratic presidential primary but the retention election for a highly conservative state Supreme Court justice , a race in which Wisconsin Republicans have a large stake . Before Tuesday ’ s election , Republican state lawmakers had already imposed an extremely gerrymandered legislative district map on Wisconsin , mandated strict voter-ID requirements and stripped powers from Mr. Evers… “ Forcing voters to make a potentially deadly decision about whether to show up , thereby discouraging turnout , was yet another move in their bare-knuckle fight to hold on to power , even at the expense of democracy. ” Editorial Board , Washington Post
“ Evers tried to move the date to June 9 , first by calling a special legislative session this weekend and then through executive order on Monday night . Both times , he was overruled by Wisconsin Republicans in the state legislature and the state Supreme Court . Republican leaders in the state legislature gaveled out of the weekend special session almost immediately after it was convened… “ Many voters who had requested absentee ballots had yet to receive them as of Monday evening , meaning that people probably wouldn ’ t be able to postmark them by the required Tuesday , April 7 , deadline . According to the Wisconsin Elections Commission , roughly 408,000 absentee ballots still hadn ’ t been returned across the state as of Tuesday morning… Absentee ballots in Wisconsin also require a witness to sign the ballot , a requirement that ’ s incredibly limiting during the current public health crisis , where people are being advised to stay away from others… “ The handling of Tuesday ’ s primary is expected to hurt specific subsets of voters disproportionately , including black voters , older voters , and voters with disabilities. ” Ella Nilsen and Li Zhou , Vox
The right is critical of both parties in Wisconsin for not delaying the election and supports the Supreme Court ’ s decision .
The right is critical of both parties in Wisconsin for not delaying the election and supports the Supreme Court ’ s decision .
“ Rather than come together in an emergency , the scorched-earth politics of the last ten years — initiated by a legislative walkout and a union-backed futile recall election — rendered the state government incapable of the simple task of delaying the primary by a few weeks…
“ Evers has been all over the place on this point rather than demonstrating any real leadership on it . However , the Republican-controlled legislature hasn ’ t fared much better . They could have passed a delay when they were finally called into special session over the weekend , but chose not to act instead . Evers ’ flip-flopping didn ’ t give them much political cover for delaying the primary , but they probably didn ’ t need much political cover for it , either . Voters who have to go out and stand in line today are likely to say a pox on both houses as a result , irony fully intended . And they would not be wrong . ”
“ Why did Evers , a Democrat , wait until April 3 , just days before the polls would open , to call a legislative session to postpone the election ? Of course , struggles with absentee ballot requests overwhelming the system , and poll volunteers withdrawing over health concerns surely held the governor and district judge ’ s feet to the flame . But with a global health crisis that had been ramping up for months and other states taking early measures to postpone their elections , is it possible the last-minute decisions regarding the Wisconsin election were actually the result of poor leadership and planning rather than of GOP-fueled partisanship within the Supreme Court ? …
“ While much of this saga could have been avoided absent obvious blunders in the Dairy State , this coronavirus-prompted mess certainly could have serious implications not only for other state primaries and even the upcoming Democratic National Convention , but even for the general election this fall . If we can learn anything from Wisconsin about coronavirus and election panics , maybe it ’ s that it ’ s time to start thinking about November . ”
“ We might beat COVID-19 by fall . But if we don ’ t , what happens to our November election ? Two principles are paramount . The election must be held . And people who want to vote must be able to do so without fear of infection and without worsening the pandemic . To uphold those principles , we must expand no-excuse absentee voting and make drive-through voting possible…
“ These changes will neither clearly help one party at the other ’ s expense , nor increase voter fraud . The No . 1 group that votes by mail now are the elderly , who tend to vote Republican . As the elderly are also the group most affected by COVID-19 , voting by mail might help them the most . On the other hand , increased turnout is typically good for Democrats , who benefit from greater youth and minority votes…
“ The truth is that no one knows whom expanded absentee voting and drive-through voting would favor in November 2020 . That should make it easier to set aside our partisan identities and do what is right for democracy . So long as the change is a one-off , which can be written into state and federal legislation , it should overcome partisan bickering . ”
Under the ruling overturned by the Supreme Court , “ absentee ballots were eligible to be counted regardless of when they were mailed in or otherwise delivered , as long as they came in by the April 13 deadline . In effect , that meant absentee ballots could be cast after in-person primary voting had closed on April 7 ...
`` Obviously , this could mean the election would be materially altered by events occurring after formal conclusion of the primary election — not least , news about the apparent election result . To address this problem , Judge Conley further ordered the Wisconsin Election Commission and election inspectors to suppress any report of the voting results until after the new April 13 deadline… the district court ’ s resolution worked a significant change in election rules . This ran afoul of Supreme Court precedent . ”