The COVID-19 pandemic has not spared any aspect of American society , including the criminal justice system . Eight of the 10 biggest clusters of COVID-19 cases currently are in jails and prisons . The Cook County jail in Illinois , for example , has confirmed nearly 1,000 cases . In Ohio , more than 25 percent of the 16,000 statewide cases are in prisons , which includes the nearly 2,200 confirmed cases in the Marion Correctional Institution alone . As of April 30 , 2020 , 1,692 individuals in federal custody and 349 Bureau of Prisons staff have tested positive for COVID-19 , and there have been 33 deaths among incarcerated people .
This troubling trend does not come as much of a surprise . Many public health experts and criminal justice advocates have pointed to the heightened risk of the novel coronavirus ’ s rampant spread in jails and prisons given the confined nature of those facilities and how they are operated . Physical distancing in corrections facilities is nearly impossible , especially due to overcrowding and confined quarters , and infirmaries do not have adequate resources . What ’ s more , individuals in prisons may be at higher risk for health complications due to the prevalence of chronic illnesses and the vulnerability of the aging prison population .
The spread of the coronavirus also is not limited to the inside of the walls of a prison or jail . Corrections officers and staff have regular interactions with those they are charged with supervising , and exposure to the virus has already affected their families and surrounding communities . Moreover , jail populations are continually revolving because they include people who are awaiting trial or have been sentenced to a relatively short term . And nearly 95 percent of those in prisons eventually return to their communities after serving their sentence .
In order to reduce the spread of COVID-19 in prisons and jail—and subsequently in communities—state and local governments and their federal counterpart must significantly and safely reduce their corrections populations . They can do so through a variety of authorities—including early parole and expanded use of home confinement—but an overlooked power that they should use more aggressively is commutations . Each governor as well as the president of the United States has the power to grant commutations that shorten the sentence of a person incarcerated within their jurisdiction , allowing them to be released early . This is a ready-made authority for situations such as the current pandemic where public health and safety dictate the need to significantly reduce corrections populations . Yet , public officials—and especially the president of the United States—are not using this tool in significant enough ways .
Commutations and other forms of clemency such as pardons have always been an important tool for remedying individual instances of injustice , such as cases of wrongful convictions or sentences that outweigh the severity of an offense . However , then-President Barack Obama , who issued 1,715 commutations over the course of his presidency , explained how commutations can also be used for large-scale changes :
By shifting the narrative to the way clemency can be used to correct injustices in the system — and reminding people of the value of second chances — I worked to reinvigorate the clemency power and to set a precedent that will make it easier for future Presidents , governors , and other public officials to use it for good .
The process of granting commutations is not necessarily free of bureaucracy . In most jurisdictions , the governor grants a commutation after review by relevant state agencies and officials . Governors in some states , such as Alabama , Connecticut , and Louisiana , delegate to or share power with a clemency board . At the federal level , the U.S. Department of Justice ( DOJ ) has historically been heavily involved with vetting who is eligible for commutations—a process that has come under heavy criticism from advocates , researchers , and practitioners .
Nevertheless , the ultimate power to grant commutations resides with the president and the governors , and those bureaucratic hurdles can be streamlined and possibly eliminated altogether given current circumstances and the public support for lowering jail and prison populations in response to the pandemic . For example , a recent Data for Progress poll showed that 66 percent of likely voters , including 59 percent of those who identify themselves as “ very conservative , ” agreed that “ elected officials should be considering measures to reduce overcrowding in prisons and jails as a response to coronavirus . ”
The Trump administration has lagged behind governors ’ modest efforts to commute sentences
Several governors have recognized the need to utilize the power of commutations . Washington Gov . Jay Inslee ( D ) issued an emergency commutation that will allow for the release of more than 1,000 individuals . Oklahoma Gov . Kevin Stitt ( R ) , who notably granted commutations and pardons to more than 1,000 people in his first year in office prior to the pandemic , commuted the sentences of more than 450 additional people . And Gov . Andy Beshear of Kentucky ( D ) issued commutations in early April for 186 individuals who were at high risk for serious complications or death if they contracted COVID-19 ; he followed that up by granting an additional 352 commutations later that month . These are significant starts , but more needs to be done to address this surging aspect of the pandemic—especially considering there are more than 2.2 million people in America ’ s jails and prisons .
At the federal level , President Donald Trump has not granted a single commutation in the last two months to any of the more than 170,000 people incarcerated in the federal Bureau of Prisons . This is unsurprising , since he granted a total of only 10 commutations during the more than three years he has been in office . Trump did make a splashy announcement in February that he was assembling a White House task force to ramp up the number of people to whom he would grant commutations and pardons . The White House task force would establish an independent review process outside the DOJ ’ s Office of the Pardon Attorney . But the task force concerningly diverges from recommendations by policy experts in that it lacks public accountability and transparency—the central issue of a recent lawsuit . Moreover , the task force has yet to clarify or announce its standards and criteria for deciding who is granted relief . Even now , more than a month into the height of the pandemic , the task force has yet to recommend a single commutation , and it is unclear if it has even held a single meeting .
The need to utilize commutations at the federal level is even more apparent in light of the slow pace of releases through other measures . For example , the DOJ announced in early April an expansion of the use of home confinement . Yet , this authority is being woefully underutilized : Less than 1 percent of the Bureau of Prisons population has been released under the new policy . This is not unique to the federal system ; states also have been slow to act and have not moved with the requisite urgency .
In a crisis such as the current COVID-19 pandemic , officials—especially an elected leader who claims to be a criminal justice reformer—should be utilizing every available tool to save American lives , including those behind bars and the officers and staff who work in prisons and jails . Commutations are a tool that the head of every state and of the country can utilize to slow the spread of the coronavirus . Lives are at stake , and urgent action is necessary to protect the immensely vulnerable individuals incarcerated in this nation ’ s prisons and jails .
Ed Chung is the vice president for Criminal Justice Reform at the ███ . Lea Hunter is a research associate for Criminal Justice Reform at the Center .
To find the latest CAP resources on the coronavirus , visit our coronavirus resource page .