During a news conference Wednesday , Dr. Bruce Dart , the director of the Tulsa Health Department , suggested that large gatherings in the county within the past few weeks — such as President Donald Trump 's rally and protests — `` more than likely contributed '' to the recent spike in coronavirus cases in Tulsa County , Oklahoma .
After the county reported a record-high 261 new cases on Monday and 206 on Tuesday , Dart said it was sensible to assume that the large gatherings had something to do with it .
`` Are we starting to see connections to the Trump rally or other protests ? ' '' Dart said to reiterate a reporter 's question . `` The past two days we 've had almost 500 cases , and we know we had several large events a little over two weeks ago , which is about right , so I guess we just connect the dots . ''
A little earlier in the news conference , Dart acknowledged that Tulsa County was reporting the highest number of cases in the state and added that `` we 've had some significant events in the past few weeks that more than likely contributed to that . ''
You can watch Dart 's remarks below beginning at the 30-minute mark :
Despite Dart 's clear mention of events , plural , that may have contributed to the spike , several major news outlets elected to report solely on the Trump rally . Here 's a rundown of some of the headlines :
Coronavirus Surge in Tulsa 'More Than Likely ' Linked to Trump Rally - the New York Times
Health official : Trump rally 'likely ' source of virus surge - Associated Press
Tulsa sees Covid-19 surge in the wake of Trump 's June rally - CNN
Tulsa Health Official Says Trump Rally 'Likely Contributed ' to Surge in COVID-19 Cases - Time
Trump Rally Likely Fueled Virus Cases , Tulsa Official Says - Bloomberg
Tulsa health official says Trump rally 'likely contributed ' to spike in coronavirus cases - CBS News
Trump rally likely contributed to surge in COVID-19 cases , Tulsa health official says - ABC News
While it is true that Dart specifically cited the June 20 Trump rally as a likely contributing factor , he also made reference to `` other protests '' and `` several large events , '' which would include the Black Lives Matter demonstrations that occurred in the city in mid-June , as well .
A day before the president came to town , `` more than a thousand people gathered along Greenwood Avenue '' in Tulsa to celebrate Juneteenth , the New York Times reported . Then on the day of the rally , separate Black Lives Matter protests were held outside the venue that Trump was set to speak at .
CBS News even reported that while the majority of interactions were civil , `` little-to-no social distancing was '' being practiced between BLM protesters and Trump supporters .
Yet most major news outlets , save the Washington Post , make no mention of these `` other protests '' in their headlines .
It is this type of selective reporting that causes many Americans to distrust the media .