Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
Attorney General Bill Barr has instructed federal prosecutors to `` be on the lookout '' for overly restrictive state and local shutdown orders that may infringe on people 's constitutional rights .
In a memo issued Monday , Barr recognized that while some restrictions are necessary and proper for combating the coronavirus pandemic , others could go too far .
STATES SEE CORONAVIRUS TENSION AS SOME START LIFTING STAY-AT-HOME ORDERS , OTHERS STAY PUT
`` If a state or local ordinance crosses the line from an appropriate exercise of authority to stop the spread of COVID-19 into an overbearing infringement of constitutional and statutory protections , the Department of Justice may have an obligation to address that overreach in federal court , '' Barr said .
The attorney general noted that while in the past , the DOJ warned against orders that discriminate against religious institutions , `` the Constitution also forbids , in certain circumstances , discrimination against disfavored speech and undue interference with the national economy . ''
The Justice Department previously filed a statement of interest in a Mississippi lawsuit , siding with a church after local officials tried to stop Holy Week services broadcasting to people sitting in their cars in the parking lot .
While some states are in the process of loosening restrictions as the number of cases decreases , others remain as vigilant as ever . Protests have popped up in some areas of the country as shutdown orders have resulted in a skyrocketing unemployment rate .
In a recent appearance on Hugh Hewitt 's radio program , Barr said some state orders were `` disturbingly close to house arrest . '' He said that while the goal was to flatten the curve of COVID-19 cases , that goal has largely been achieved and states should now use `` more targeted approaches . ''
Barr said in his memo that he is placing the head of the Justice Department ’ s civil rights division and the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Michigan in charge of coordinating the department ’ s efforts to monitor state and local policies and take action if needed .
`` Many policies that would be unthinkable in regular times have become commonplace in recent weeks , and we do not want to unduly interfere with the important efforts of state and local officials to protect the public , '' Barr 's memo said . `` But the Constitution is not suspended in times of crisis . ''
President Trump was asked at a Monday press briefing about Barr 's directive .
“ Well , you ’ d have to ask Attorney General Barr , but I think he wants to see — like everybody , he wants to see people get back and he wants to see people get back to work , ” Trump said . “ He doesn ’ t want people to be held up when there ’ s no reason for doing it . In some cases , perhaps it ’ s too strict . He wants to make sure people have the rights and they maintain the rights , very importantly . ”