For indispensable reporting on the coronavirus crisis and more , subscribe to ███ ' newsletters
As the world grapples with the devastation of the coronavirus , one thing is clear : The United States simply wasn ’ t prepared . Despite repeated warnings from infectious disease experts over the years , we lacked essential beds , equipment , and medication ; public health advice was confusing , and our leadership offered no clear direction while sidelining credible health professionals and institutions . Infectious disease experts agree that it ’ s only a matter of time before the next pandemic hits , and that could be even more deadly . So how do we fix what COVID has shown was broken ? In this ███ series , we ’ re asking experts from a wide range of disciplines one question : What are the most important steps we can take to make sure we ’ re better prepared next time around ?
Before the pandemic , Laurel Bristow was an infectious disease researcher studying respiratory pathogens at Emory University ’ s Vaccine Center . In March , her lab paused its work because of the pandemic . Within days , Bristow began posting Instagram videos from her cheerful kitchen explaining the science behind the coronavirus headlines . She struck a nerve : Her account quickly grew from a few hundred to 99,000 followers . It ’ s not hard to see why she ’ s popular—Bristow deftly unpacks complex scientific concepts . She explains why critics of masks are wrong . She handily dispatches with conspiracy theories . She sheds light on the mysterious vaccine development process . She emphasizes the connection between science and the struggle for racial justice . And she does it all with millennial sass , the occasional silly filter , and cameos from her cat . Through her posts , she ’ s won her followers ’ trust . “ We ’ ve built social media platforms in a way that people trust individuals accounts and are more inclined to listen to what they ’ re saying—whether it ’ s right or wrong—than they are to a government agency that feels outdated and inaccessible , ” she says . Bristow posts on Instagram at @ kinggutterbaby .
On how her account grew : In mid-March , I had a private Instagram account with under 700 followers . It was all just people that I personally knew . My studies at work had gotten halted because of coronavirus , so I just made a post one day and said , “ Would anybody be interested in knowing and understanding what ’ s going on with Coronavirus ? ” I think like 10 people said , “ Yeah , I would love to hear it. ” So I made my first ever front-facing video to just explain , what coronavirus is , and why we ’ re concerned , and why we need to flatten the curve , and what that means . People asked if I could make my profile public so that they could share it . I ’ m pretty sure my post said something like , Alright , I ’ m gon na make my profile public for 24 hours . Please don ’ t be horny about it and don ’ t send me weird DMs , strangers ! I got 500 followers overnight and 2000 followers by the weekend . People just kept sending me stuff asking Can you explain this ? Or what does this mean ? So I just started making little videos and little stories , explaining the research that was coming out . I ’ ve never hash-tagged anything . I ’ ve never asked anyone to share my account . It has just grown from people really wanting information from someone that they feel that they can trust . Now , when I look at the stories that I ’ ve posted , after they ’ ve been out for almost a day , 20 or 30,000 people are watching them .
If you aren ’ t reaching people on their level on these social media accounts , other accounts with large followings are going to fill that void . And that ’ s how a lot of misinformation gets spread .
On the disconnect between scientists and the public : It ’ s been interesting to see how much my Instagram has grown . I think it highlights that there is such a big gap between the content of scientific papers and how they get translated to the public . I suspect a lot of media outlets don ’ t necessarily have a science writer on staff . So it causes a lot of confusion about what is fact and what is still theoretical . I think people are really desperate to have someone lay things out for them in a way that they can understand , that doesn ’ t feel condescending , that feels like it ’ s a factual summary of really complex ideas . They want to know who to trust and how to understand what makes a good research paper , as well as the limitations of specific papers , or even just of what science can accomplish right now .
It ’ s hard because in the age of the internet , people are so used to getting answers quickly . It ’ s been a big adjustment to try to understand that things are going to change as we have more information . In the beginning , the CDC told people not to wear masks , because the only thing people were thinking of were hospital grade masks , and we didn ’ t want to take that away from frontline workers who needed them . No one really considered the benefit of wearing cloth masks . So the recommendations changed . The difference between asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic has also caused a lot of issues with communication . People in the industry sometimes say something that is very clear to other people who are in the industry , but it ’ s not very clear to the public . At the same time , the public doesn ’ t understand that because we ’ re in a pandemic , some things will be reported as preliminary and then updated later . And when it gets updated , people get confused and think that they were lied to at the beginning , when the reality is , everything ’ s getting updated all the time .
On how she explains the pandemic to the public : I write outlines as if I ’ m having a conversation with someone . I was always taught that the best way to learn a subject is to see if you can teach it to somebody else . So I imagine I ’ m teaching a lesson , and I want to make sure that everyone can understand the concepts . I use a lot of analogies to try to convey complex scientific ideas , and people respond to that pretty well because they want it in a context that they are familiar with .
Humility and understanding go a long way . Sometimes I get DMs where people say , “ Okay , you said this , I have absolutely no idea what that means. ” And I have to go back and explain it . I always remind myself that when people understand science , and they understand the methods , and they understand what research is saying , they feel empowered , not scared . A lot of people right now don ’ t understand what ’ s happening , it causes them to have a lot of anxiety and feel a lot of fear about it . And that ’ s not how we should feel about science . Information should be empowering so that people feel like they can make smart and informed decisions for themselves and their families .
On why her approach works : People like the format that I use . They like to be able to go on social media and see a story—have someone explain something to them and spell it out . I ’ m not really familiar with the social media accounts of the CDC all the local departments of public health . But judging from what I saw when I worked in San Francisco on tuberculosis control for the Department of Public Health—all of these places could use a little bit of an upgrade on their social media management , because that is where so many people get their news from . If you aren ’ t reaching people on their level on these social media accounts , other accounts with large followings are going to fill that void . And that ’ s how a lot of misinformation gets spread . The organizations tasked with understanding and controlling this pandemic are putting out information , but they ’ re not putting it out in a way that ’ s accessible to people . So people are going to turn to the Instagram accounts of someone else who ’ s telling them in the simplest terms , often what they want to hear , which is not always the truth .
On how to make journalists better at reporting on pandemics : In the time of the pandemic , it would be beneficial for large media organizations to have a literature review class , or some kind of workshop for people who are going to cover it . They could learn , for example , what to look for when they ’ re reading and critiquing research papers . That goes for people who write headlines , too . Those can be a huge source of miscommunication : The article itself will say one thing , and the headline will say something that ’ s not entirely true , and that causes a lot of anxiety .
On battling misinformation on social media : People will say , “ Oh , this person is saying this , can you address this ? ” And it ’ s hard for me—I have to resist the temptation to address those specific accounts outright , because it gives the false idea that we are equivalent . I have the vast , vast majority in the scientific community backing up what I ’ m saying with mountains of research , and these people have cherry-picked a few studies that are not even applicable to COVID or to recent research .
On occasion , I ’ ve directly referenced posts that I know that people will recognize , even if I ’ m not tagging the person involved . And I ’ ve said , “ Here ’ s where all of this is wrong. ” Because I do think it ’ s important to pop in sometimes and say , “ Look , here ’ s the thing that you guys need to look for when someone ’ s posting stuff like this . That looks too good to be true . Here are a few key things to check in and ask yourself , is this real or is this convenient ? ”
On the need for science literacy education : I spend a lot of time thinking about this . Society ’ s perception of science for so many years was glasses and a lab coat in a lab taking care of it . The scientists are figuring it out ; the scientists will take care of it . It was a very far removed thing that the public didn ’ t have to think about or interact with . People were okay with that for a long time . Then , as time progressed , science became more elite . It ’ s used a lot in advertising now , to get people to buy products without questioning . There are a lot of ads that list complex chemical interactions or claim that something boosts your immune system . But they don ’ t actually explain it . And the underlying feeling behind that is , don ’ t worry about it . It ’ s science . It ’ s too hard to understand . Just trust us .
So I think years of that combination has caused people to finally say , “ Wait , I don ’ t know what ’ s happening . And I don ’ t know why I should trust you without understanding what ’ s happening. ” But they don ’ t have the tools to understand it for themselves . It ’ s like a lot of other practical things that should be taught as part of the curriculum , things like how to do your taxes . You should also learn how to evaluate a scientific paper . And luckily , there are some books out there that are doing that , and they ’ re really fun to read . Honestly , debunking bad science is really enjoyable for me because it ’ s like a little treasure hunt where you figure out where they went wrong or how they ’ re manipulating things for their own needs , and then you get to say that you cracked the case .