FILE - In this March 31 , 2020 file photo , New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio speaks at the USTA Indoor Training Center where a 350-bed temporary hospital will be built in New York . De Blasio oversaw the dispersal of a large , tightly packed Hasidic Jewish funeral and lashed out at the mourners who had gathered in defiance of social distancing rules . He tweeted Tuesday , April 28 , that his message to the Jewish community “ and all communities ” is that the time for warnings has passed . ( AP Photo/Frank Franklin II , File )
FILE - In this March 31 , 2020 file photo , New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio speaks at the USTA Indoor Training Center where a 350-bed temporary hospital will be built in New York . De Blasio oversaw the dispersal of a large , tightly packed Hasidic Jewish funeral and lashed out at the mourners who had gathered in defiance of social distancing rules . He tweeted Tuesday , April 28 , that his message to the Jewish community “ and all communities ” is that the time for warnings has passed . ( AP Photo/Frank Franklin II , File )
NEW YORK ( AP ) — New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio defended his tweets criticizing a large Orthodox Jewish funeral . Gov . Andrew Cuomo said daily deaths are down but still “ disgustingly high. ” Front-line health care workers and first responders will be mass tested for antibodies .
De Blasio oversaw the dispersal of a large , tightly packed Hasidic Jewish funeral Tuesday night and lashed out at the mourners who had gathered in defiance of social distancing rules intended to curb the spread of the coronavirus .
“ My message to the Jewish community , and all communities , is this simple : the time for warnings has passed , ” de Blasio tweeted after police dispersed the funeral in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn .
In another tweet , de Blasio called the large gathering , the latest in a string of ultra-Orthodox funerals to be broken up by police , “ absolutely unacceptable . ”
“ What I saw WILL NOT be tolerated so long as we are fighting the Coronavirus , ” he wrote .
Images posted on social media show hundreds of people on the street for the funeral of a rabbi who had died of COVID-19 . Some mourners wore face coverings .
There were no arrests , but Police Commissioner Dermot Shea said Wednesday that a dozen summonses were issued citing social distancing violations and refusal to disperse .
Shea said that mourners who defy the state ’ s ban are not only risking giving the virus to each other , but potentially also exposing officers who have to respond for crowd control .
“ You are putting my cops ’ lives at risk , and it ’ s unacceptable , ” Shea said .
Critics , however , assailed de Blasio for the language in his tweet chiding “ the Jewish community ” for the actions of members of one sect .
World Jewish Congress President Ronald S. Lauder said Wednesday he was recommending that the group formally censure de Blasio .
“ I agree with the Mayor that social distancing is vitally important — and last night ’ s gathering was not appropriate , ” Lauder said in a statement . “ But to blame the entire Jewish community is the type of stereotyping that is dangerous and unacceptable at any time , and particularly pernicious while the world is gripped in fear and the worst among us are looking for scapegoats . ”
Anti-Defamation League CEO Jonathan Greenblatt tweeted that generalizing about the whole Jewish population of New York City “ is outrageous especially when so many are scapegoating Jews . ”
Others noted the crowds that gathered earlier Tuesday to watch a flyover by the Navy ’ s Blue Angels and the Air Force ’ s Thunderbirds to honor health-care workers .
“ Only bigots have a problem when a few 100 Hasidim do what thousands of people in the same city have done the same day ( not social distance ) . ” the Orthodox Jewish Public Affairs Council tweeted .
De Blasio said Wednesday that he was sorry if his words hurt anyone ’ s feelings but he didn ’ t regret calling out what he characterized as a dangerous violation of social distancing rules .
“ If you saw anger and frustration , you ’ re right . I spoke out of real distress , ” the mayor said . “ It ’ s not like people gathering in the park . This was thousands of people , ” he said . “ What I saw , I have not seen anywhere else . ”
Adherence to social distancing guidelines has been a challenge in some Orthodox Jewish communities , where trust in secular authorities is low .
Leaders of several U.S . Orthodox organizations issued a statement last month urging people to heed social distancing rules after the Fire Department had to break up a large Orthodox wedding in Brooklyn .
New York reported 330 new COVID-19 deaths , continuing a trend of daily fatalities decreasing slowly over the past three weeks .
“ The decline has been slow at best and still disgustingly high , ” Cuomo said Wednesday .
The virus has claimed just over 18,000 lives statewide since the outbreak began last month , according to state figures . The state total doesn ’ t include more than 5,300 New York City deaths that were attributed to the virus on death certificates but weren ’ t confirmed by a lab test .
Cuomo said virus-related hospitalization rates continue to tick down . But the number of new hospital admissions is holding at around 950 people a day .
The coronavirus causes mild symptoms in many , but it can cause serious illness or death for some , particularly older adults and those with certain health conditions .
De Blasio announced Wednesday that antibody testing to show whether a person was previously infected with the coronavirus will be offered to 150,000 health care workers and first responders under a partnership with the federal Department of Health and Human Services . The testing will begin next week and will take place at the front-line workers ’ workplaces , the mayor said .
A positive antibody test does not guarantee immunity to the virus , and the mayor said health care workers and first responders should not let down their guard or shed protective equipment . Still , he said , a positive antibody test should offer some reassurance .
“ Anyone who has been infected and came through obviously had the ability to beat this disease , ” de Blasio said . “ Knowing you ’ ve been exposed to it is powerful information . ”
A towering collage of hundreds of multi-colored face masks sent to New York to help fight the outbreak was unveiled by Cuomo at his daily briefing .
Five days after highlighting the generosity of a retired Kansas farmer who donated a mask , Cuomo said thousands more have come in from across the country .
The mix of masks included homemade coverings decorated with little hand prints , stripes and tie-dyed patterns . One read “ I Love NY. ” Cuomo called it a “ self-portrait of America . ”
“ This is just people ’ s way of saying we care and we want to help , ” he said . “ This is what this country ’ s about . And this is what America ’ s about . ”
Many of New York City ’ s suburbs have also been hit hard by the outbreak . In some , there have been more fatalities per capita than in Manhattan .
In cities around the world , public transportation systems are key to getting workers back on the job . Yet methods of getting around will have to be re-imagined for the coronavirus era .
New York City ’ s arts community — dancers , actors , visual artists and designers , who never made much income to start with — is especially suffering , imperiling New York City as a creative capital .