( CNN ) When Covid-19 suddenly ravaged New York , hospitals looked `` apocalyptic . '' Refrigerated trucks turned into morgues because there was n't enough space for all the victims .
That was March . Three months later , the state had `` done a full 180 , from worst to first , '' Gov . Andrew Cuomo said .
Now , the rates of infection , hospitalizations or deaths have plummeted in New York and several other states -- paving the way for full economic reopenings .
It 's the opposite of what 's happening in most of the US , where the virus is surging and more than half the states have paused or backtracked their reopenings .
Here 's how some states have helped get coronavirus under control -- and what they 're doing to make sure it stays that way :
Connecticut has consistently had one of the lowest rates of transmission ( R numbers ) of any state in the country . An R number represents how many people each infected person is likely to go on and infect , on average .
Connecticut has an R number of about 0.90 . That means fewer and fewer people are getting infected in the state .
And the number of new deaths has plummeted since April 26 , when the seven-day average of daily deaths was 113 . That number has stayed below 5 every day since July 2 , according to data from Johns Hopkins University .
Many other states did n't start requiring masks until two months later .
It also reopened later than many states , starting on May 20 .
And like New York and New Jersey , Connecticut has required visitors from states with high rates of Covid-19 to quarantine for 14 days
How they 're planning to keep a lid on the virus :
Even though Connecticut had some of the best numbers in the nation , Gov . Ned Lamont decided not to move forward with Phase 3 reopening plans on July 6 . That meant bars will remain closed , and restaurants must stay at 50 % capacity .
`` Look , I like a beer at the bar as much as the next person . I know how frustrating this can be , '' Lamont said . `` But right now , with this pandemic flaring up in a majority of other states , this is not the time to take a risk . ''
Lamont also said the state would hold off on allowing outdoor gatherings of more than 100 people .
CDC director : The 'most powerful weapon ' against Covid-19 is social distancing
New York started Phase 2 of its reopening on May 29 , allowing office-based work , in-store retail shopping and some barbershop services to resume in much of the state .
And between May 29 and July 10 , average daily new cases in New York state has dropped about 55 % -- from about 1,447 new cases a day to 651 cases a day , according to data from Johns Hopkins .
New York has by far the most Covid-19 deaths in the country , with more than 32,000 since the pandemic began .
On Monday , New York City reported no new deaths from Covid-19 for the first time in months .
On March 20 , as Covid-19 was spiraling out of control in New York , Gov . Andrew Cuomo announced all employees of nonessential businesses must stay home . It was one of the earliest shutdown mandates in the country .
`` If someone is unhappy , if somebody wants to blame someone , or complain about someone , blame me . There is no one else who is responsible for this decision , '' Cuomo said that day . `` This is not life as usual . And accept it and realize it and deal with it . ''
And at a time when testing was scarce across the country , New York tried to ramp up capabilities on its own . With FDA approval , New York state announced on March 13 it could authorize 28 public and private labs to start testing for coronavirus -- the first state to do so .
`` We 're hunting positives , '' Cuomo said in March . `` We 're hunting positives so we can isolate them and reduce the spread . ''
New Yorkers tuned into Cuomo 's daily briefings for updates on the virus and how to stay safe . During his 111th and final daily briefing on June 19 , Cuomo said the state had gone `` from worst to first . ''
He credited residents who followed guidance , stayed home , and wore masks when they had to go out in public .
`` This was n't only about what government did . This was about what people did , '' Cuomo said . `` Together , New Yorkers bent the curve because we acted responsibly and we looked out for each other . Now we must stay the course . ''
As a popular tourist destination , New York is trying to prevent visitors from spreading the virus . So anyone coming from a state where coronavirus is surging must quarantine for 14 days upon arrival .
`` The quarantine applies to any person arriving from a state with a positive test rate higher than 10 per 100,000 residents over a 7-day rolling average or a state with a 10 % or higher positivity rate over a 7-day rolling average , '' the governor 's office said .
As of Tuesday , 22 states were on that travel advisory . Those arriving at a New York airport must fill out a traveler form .
`` Travelers who leave the airport without completing the form will be subject to a $ 2,000 fine and may be brought to a hearing and ordered to complete mandatory quarantine , '' the governor 's office said .
New York also released concrete metrics for when to allow schools to reopen , and when classes would need to go virtual if the situation gets worse .
While some have accused Cuomo of prematurely taking a victory lap , the governor 's website stresses the fight is not over :
`` Coronavirus is still active in New York , '' the top of the website reads . `` We have to be smart . Wear a mask and maintain 6 feet distance in public . ''
Massachusetts started reopening on May 25 . But since then , the rate of new cases has gone down , not up .
Between May 25 and July 10 , the rate of daily new cases in Massachusetts has dropped by 75 % , according to data from Johns Hopkins University .
Between April 15 and July 14 , Covid-19 hospitalizations have dropped by about 84 % , and the rate of new deaths has dropped by about 95 % , according to data from the Massachusetts Department of Health .
Massachusetts waited to start reopening and was one of the last states to do so .
It also enacted a mask mandate before most other states did , on May 6 . But unlike some states , the mandate in Massachusetts also applies to outdoor public areas where it might not be possible to stay 6 feet away from others .
Massachusetts is doubling down on testing to try to snuff out coronavirus in the state .
This month , Gov . Charlie Baker announced a `` Stop the Spread '' testing initiative that will last until mid-August .
The effort will focus on eight communities where the rates of Covid-19 are higher than the statewide average .
`` The goal of this initiative is to provide widespread asymptomatic testing in an easy-to-access location within these communities '' to help stop community spread , Baker said .
And Massachusetts is aiming to resume classroom education this fall -- but with face masks and distancing rules .
`` Students in grade 2 and above are required to wear a mask/face covering that covers their nose and mouth , '' according to initial guidance from the state education department . The same applies to teachers and staff members .
For those unable to wear a mask , face shields may be used . And mask breaks should occur throughout the day if there 's adequate distancing or ventilation .
New Jersey was hit hard early in this pandemic , with hospitalizations and deaths soaring . The state has the highest rate of Covid-19 deaths per capita : 175 per 100,000 people .
But now , New Jersey is among just a handful of states on track to contain Covid-19 , according to CovidActNow.org , which tracks each state in four key areas : the infection rate , the test positivity rate , hospital capacity and contact tracing ability .
While testing has increased , the rate of new cases has decreased . New Jersey now has a test positivity rate of about 1.3 % .
And the rate of transmission ( Rt ) is about 0.91 , which means fewer and fewer people are getting infected .
In mid-March , Gov . Phil Murphy activated the National Guard and issued sweeping orders , including :
-- The closure of all schools and universities starting on March 18
-- The closure of all casinos , racetracks , theaters and gyms
-- The closure of all nonessential retail , recreational and entertainment businesses after 8 p.m. each day
New Jersey was the first state to issue a mask mandate , back on April 8 .
Businesses must provide masks to employees and deny entry to any customer who refuse to wear them inside the business . Those riding public transit in the state must also wear face masks .
New Jersey also joined forces with New York and Connecticut on requiring visitors from hot-spot states to quarantine for 14 days .
How New Jersey is trying to keep Covid-19 under control :
Officials are urging residents not to get complacent just because the numbers have improved .
`` Our rate of transmission is in a good place today , but only a week ago ... it was above 1.0 , '' the governor said Monday .
`` And if we change course , it 's going to not only rise , but so will the number of positive test results , so will the number of hospitalizations , and so will the number , sadly , of residents who pass . ''
Vermont has the lowest test positivity rate in the nation -- 0.78 % as of Wednesday , according to Johns Hopkins University .
It also has the 3rd lowest number of coronavirus cases per capita and the 10th lowest Covid-19 death rate of any state .
Contact tracing has steadily improved in Vermont -- from an average of 2.7 contacts made per case in April to 4.8 contacts made per case in June .
As of last week , `` 2,469 contacts have been identified , '' the Vermont Department of Health said .
`` 172 contacts became a COVID-19 case . This means that this group of people knew to stay home , and likely did not spread the virus further . ''
When schools reopen this fall , `` All staff and students are required to wear facial coverings while in the building , as well as outside where physical distancing can not be maintained , '' according to guidance issued last month by state health and education officials . That guidance could change before the school year starts .
And despite having the lowest test positivity rate in the country , Vermont 's state of emergency will be extended for another month , Gov . Phil Scott announced Tuesday .
`` It 's the vehicle we need to keep certain protections in place ( and ) control outbreaks as they come up , so we can keep the economy open and manage this ongoing crisis , '' Scott said .
`` As long as the data stays consistent , we will stick with our effort to incrementally lift restrictions and get closer to a point where this order is no longer necessary . ''