The Wuhan virus is spreading fear around the globe thanks to a Trump deranged and irresponsible media . This isn ’ t some superbug , folks . The seasonal flu is still deadlier . Now , that ’ s not to say you shouldn ’ t wash your hands regularly or take any of the precautions recommended by health officials that greatly reduce the chance of you getting sick . Regardless , those most at risk are the usual suspects : the elderly and the immunocompromised . A large chunk of the deaths in the U.S. from the WuFlu , which is extremely low compared to seasonal flu , stems from the Washington nursing facility . Yet , this outbreak has done something else . It ’ s forced airlines to waste thousands on fuel on so-called ghost flights to avoid having their slots handed off to competitors . As Business Insider reported , Europe has a regulation stating that an airline must run 80 percent of its flights to avoid having their slots being allocated elsewhere :
Airlines have wasted thousands of gallons of fuel running empty `` ghost '' flights during the coronavirus outbreak because of European rules saying operators can lose their flight slots if they keep their planes on the ground . Demand for flights has collapsed across the globe amid growing fears about the outbreak . Under Europe 's rules , airlines operating out of the continent must continue to run 80 % of their allocated slots or risk losing them to a competitor . This has led to some operators flying empty planes into and out of European countries at huge costs , The Times of London reported . On Thursday , UK Transport Secretary Grant Shapps wrote to Airport Coordination Limited asking for the rules to be suspended during the outbreak to prevent further environmental and economic damage . [ … ] The International Air Transport Association has estimated that the outbreak could wipe out up to $ 113 billion in airline sales worldwide .
Cruise lines are also going to suffer . In fact , the hurt has been felt everywhere . The circuit breakers were tripped on trading yesterday after the Dow Jones fell 1,800 points at the opening bell . It dipped seven percent . It ’ s rebounded some this morning , but trillions have been removed from the market as a result of this Wuhan virus that has been overblown to no end . Again , not saying it ’ s not serious . It is—but context is missing entirely here . This year some 18,000 have died from the seasonal flu , with around 32-45 million Americans infected . That ’ s just the U.S. Keep that in mind the next time the liberal media peddles a doomsday prediction with this virus .