( ███ ) - Auto companies and suppliers around the world are ramping up production of critical healthcare products and machines - everything from cloth face masks to sophisticated ventilator systems - to meet a critical shortage of those items at hospitals and care facilities in North America , Europe and Asia .
Here is a look at what some companies have announced .
General Motors Co said it will partner with Washington-based Ventec Life Systems to make ventilators at GM ’ s Kokomo , Indiana , electrical components plant as soon as April , at the rate of 10,000 a month , up to 200,000 units . GM also will make surgical masks at its Warren , Michigan , facility , starting in early April and ramping up to 50,000 masks a day , with the ability to double that .
Ford Motor Co said it would partner with GE Healthcare to expand production of GE ’ s ventilators , while developing a simplified design that Ford could build at one of its plants . Ford also said it will work with 3M Co to increase production of 3M ’ s respirators , while also developing a simpler model to be built in a Ford plant . The automaker said it may make face shields for first responders to use with N95 respirator masks at an undisclosed Michigan plant , at a rate of up to 100,000 a week .
Toyota Motor Corp said it is finalizing deals with at least two companies to help increase production of ventilators and respirators . It expects to begin mass-producing 3D-printed face shields next week , and is seeking partners to make filters for face masks .
Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV said it will begin making more than 1 million face masks a month , to be distributed initially to first responders and healthcare workers in North America .
Tesla Inc said it would reopen its Buffalo , New York , solar panel plant to produce Medtronic ventilators . The company also said it bought 1,255 ventilators in China and is distributing them in North America .
China ’ s BYD Co said it had opened the world ’ s largest face mask plant in China , making 5 million masks a day , plus 300,000 bottles of disinfectant .
The joint venture between SAIC Motor Corp Ltd , GM and Wuling is converting one of its China plants to make face masks and is building additional machines to increase mask production .
GAC is converting one of its China plants to make face masks .
Volkswagen AG ( VOWG_p.DE ) said it is testing 3D printers to make parts for ventilators .
Mahindra CIE Automotive Ltd said it is working with a ventilator manufacturer in India to help simplify the design and scale up production , including at some Mahindra plants .