Moments after President Donald Trump declared a national emergency in response to the coronavirus pandemic , he violated one major rule his public health officials have advised against—by shaking several people ’ s hands .
Trump , who spent the weekend with at least one person who has since tested positive for the novel coronavirus , also manhandled the microphone as he explained the need to declare a national emergency to allow the government to marshal more resources to cities and states struggling to contain the spread of the virus .
In his Friday speech , the self-proclaimed germaphobe pledged $ 50 billion in disaster relief aid to help states and municipalities fight the pandemic that has infected hundreds across the country .
“ I am officially declaring a national emergency . Two very big words , ” Trump said as he was flanked by Vice President Mike Pence , Secretary of Health and Human Services Alex Azar , health officials Dr. Anthony Fauci and Dr. Deborah Birx , and several private health company CEOs . “ No resource will be spared , nothing whatsoever . ”
As each health official and corporate executive took a turn at the microphone , they earned a handshake from the president .
According to Center for Disease Control and Prevention ’ s health and safety guidelines to avoid contracting the coronavirus , Americans should stop “ stop handshaking ” and “ use other non-contact methods of greeting ” —like the elbow bump that Bruce Greenstein , from the home healthcare provider LHC , used on Trump during Friday ’ s press conference .
“ I like that . That ’ s good , ” Trump responded after awkwardly returning the elbow bump .
On Tuesday , however , Vice President Mike Pence suggested both he and Trump would continue to shake people ’ s hands , violating health and safety guidelines . “ Look , as the president has said , in our line of work , you shake hands when someone wants to shake your hand . And I expect the president will continue to do that . I 'll continue to do it . ”
There were also handshakes all around during a dinner on Saturday at Mar-a-Lago with Trump and Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro , whose press secretary has since tested positive for COVID-19 . While Bolsonaro denied reports Friday that he had tested positive for COVID-19 after returning from his U.S. trip , he has confirmed that he has taken a test for the virus .
Fabio Wajngarten , Bolsonaro ’ s communication secretary , has tested positive for the coronavirus . Trump initially said he was “ not concerned ” about potentially being exposed to the flu-like virus but he said on Friday , after being asked by a reporter if his refusal to get tested was “ selfish , ” said he will “ most-likely ” undergo an examination .
“ I think I will do it anyway , ” Trump said , while stressing he didn ’ t have any symptoms . He did not commit to sharing the results of his test . “ We are working out a schedule , ” he added .