As the coronavirus sweeps across the US , a term you ’ ve probably heard a lot is “ social distancing ” : a way to flatten the epidemic curve by asking people to stay home and limit their nonessential travel .
While social distancing is our best tool for slowing the spread of this virus , it ’ s also likely to create what my ███ colleague Ezra Klein has called a “ loneliness epidemic. ” In a fragmented society like ours , asking people to isolate themselves for an extended period will be hard on vulnerable populations , like older people and those with disabilities and existing medical conditions .
To reduce those effects , we ’ ll need what Eric Klinenberg , a sociologist at New York University , calls “ social solidarity. ” We ’ ll have to care about more than “ our own personal security , ” he wrote in a New York Times article . We ’ ll have to knock on our older neighbor ’ s door , call friends and loved ones , volunteer to deliver food to people who can ’ t leave their homes , and whatever else we can do to be of use to the people around us .
But the reality , Klinenberg says , is that American culture will make this kind of collective effort difficult . We live in a deeply individualistic society , and that way of thinking is corrosive to the cooperation we now need . Yet despite all that , Klinenberg believes there are many things you can do individually to make a significant difference .
I spoke to him by phone about how we can promote more solidarity in this tumultuous time , why the costs of social distancing are so high for marginalized populations , and why extreme situations like this one reveal deep truths about who we are as a country .
What happens to societies under sustained periods of “ social distancing ” ?
I don ’ t think we have a long track record of this , so it ’ s hard to say . We do know that there ’ s variation from society to society , state to state . As a sociologist , what I expect is that these extreme situations expose the essence of who we are and what we value .
If you have a society that holds the public good in high regard , and that has been bolstered by strong investments in public institutions , you reap real rewards in moments like this . But if you live in a society that doesn ’ t value the common good , that doesn ’ t have strong social bonds , then periods like this will be much harder for everyone .
If that ’ s right , the US is especially unprepared for this crisis . We ’ re politically divided , socially fragmented , and we live in a deeply individualistic culture — that seems like a nightmarish cocktail at a moment like this .
It is , and I ’ m really worried about it . When you see videos of 20-somethings dancing in crowded nightclubs across the country , that ’ s a sign that the urgent public health messaging about why it ’ s important to be physically distanced is not getting across . It ’ s a sign that people just don ’ t care about the consequences of their actions for others .
When you have politicians telling residents that if they ’ re healthy it ’ s fine to go out to restaurants , bars , to support their local businesses , that ’ s a problem . When you have the most popular cable news channel in the country raising questions about the scientific legitimacy of the crisis , and praising the bumbling leader as if he ’ s doing everything right , you ’ re sending a very confusing message to the public .
In the best-case scenario , a diverse and fragmented society would be a kind of testing ground where you could see which places operate best and then model their programs . But that ’ s not the situation we ’ re in . What we have is widespread confusion and dysfunction . That ’ s why I ’ m nervous .
Let ’ s set America ’ s cultural pathologies aside for a second and assume that , as things get more dire , more and more people will be practicing social distancing . Which population groups suffer the most under that kind of social isolation ?
Well , there ’ s different varieties of suffering , so I am concerned about poor people who are already living paycheck to paycheck , who are already on the edge , who are losing their jobs and not getting enough support to pay the bills , who will be unable to feed themselves and their children , and possibly worse . It ’ s incredibly serious .
And there are real health concerns for people who already live alone and are isolated , who really suffer from lack of social contact . We have a massive number of Americans who live alone and who are aging alone . Under ordinary circumstances , or under ordinary conditions , they can go out into public and find companionship in libraries , and senior centers , and parks , and other shared gathering places , but at a time like this , they ’ re at real risk of falling through the cracks .
I want to talk about what we can do to help those people , but first I ’ d love to know if we have a lot of data showing the impact of social distancing on marriages , on relationships , on mental health , or any other relevant indicators ?
I ’ m not aware of any solid data on this , but you could see it going either way . The best-case scenario is that families hunker down together , and come to appreciate that they have each other , and learn to cherish fundamental things that we take for granted too often .
The worse-case scenario is that couples are stuck together under periods of incredible stress and anxiety , and if they lack the skills and emotional resources to manage the intense feelings that they ’ ll have , you could see a lot of relationships fall apart .
So it ’ s an open question as to whether nine months from now we have a baby boom or a divorce spike .
Are there any other analogous experiences in the past that we can learn from right now ?
We ’ ve seen extreme social distancing responses in China , and we could certainly learn something from them , but we have to remember these are very different situations . There are much higher levels of surveillance in China and also much more compliance from the public . Their culture is much less individualistic than our culture . People don ’ t worship the market in the same way we do .
America also has a paucity of public programs . We have a weak public health system , weak public support for all kinds of caring activities , and we rely mostly on the marketplace and on ourselves . But now we ’ re at a moment where the market is failing and we ’ ve been made far weaker . We , as individuals and families , can only do so much when we ’ re on our own , so I think we ’ re bumping up against the limits of excessive American individualism and market society .
What you ’ re saying is true , and all of America ’ s cultural weaknesses are being exposed right now . But if we ’ re going to get through this , people are going to have to step up on their own and do their part . You say the only antidote to social distancing is “ social solidarity. ” Can you lay out your vision ?
Social solidarity is the strength we gain as a collective . It ’ s what happens when we recognize our interdependence and linked fate . When solidarity is stronger , we ’ re more likely to invest in each other ’ s well-being , to make individual sacrifices for the common good . We ’ re more equal , more just , more honest with ourselves and each other .
When social solidarity is low , we see runaway inequality . We see social atomization . We see disagreement over basic facts . We ’ re probably close to a record low in American solidarity right now . The country is bigger and more isolated than it ’ s ever been . And this is a social crisis on top of our public health crisis .
And yet it ’ s possible that this is the kind of shock event that changes our culture in profound ways . You ’ ve argued that crises can be “ switching points for states and societies. ” What does that mean ?
“ Social solidarity is the strength we gain as a collective . It ’ s what happens when we recognize our interdependence and linked fate . ”
It means there are some crises in which our convictions get tested . Ideology can fold more quickly than you think when your health and your life is on the line . Think about how many anti-vaxxers would walk away from a coronavirus vaccine right now — I suspect a lot of them would change their minds in a hurry .
So I ’ m not totally pessimistic about our situation . I think it ’ s moments like this that compel us to support one another in new ways . And already I ’ m seeing all kinds of small , local programs where people who want to help are finding new ways to do it , and that goes for everything from finding ways to make home meal deliveries to older people who feel too afraid to go outside , to culture and education programs for parents whose children are stuck at home .
I think a lot of people find it hard to embrace social solidarity while social distancing at the same time . How do you connect with people when you ’ re forced to self-isolate ?
Some of us will have to leave our houses some of the time . We have to get food . We have to get medicine . We have to go for walks , and move around , and so we ’ re going to need some people to do deliveries of food to older people , and people with underlying medical conditions , who really need to hunker down . And already there are local projects to set up new food delivery systems for those who can do it . It ’ s obviously not easy because there are risks involved , but there ’ s no way to get food from the grocery store or restaurant into someone else ’ s kitchen without some human effort .
I ’ m talking about small-scale solidarity , about what you can do as an individual to help people in your neighborhood , but there ’ s also larger acts of social solidarity , which involve making demands on the government to make paid sick leave mandatory during a crisis , or to provide additional Social Security payments or a universal basic income to everyone , at least during a crisis .
Cutting the interest rates to zero is not the only way that you can boost an economy in a moment like this , and so I think it would be an act of solidarity to push the policies that are better for ordinary people , too .
Any other recommendations for people who are reading this and want to engage constructively but don ’ t know how ?
I think it goes from the very basic , which is to pick up your phone and text or call the people in your life you ’ re concerned about , or just friends you haven ’ t spoken to for a while , to say hello and check in . There ’ s something profoundly affirming about staying connected in a moment like this , and showing some compassion .
And doing these things will boost your own mood . It feels good to be engaged , to care for other people . The basic sense of solidarity that comes from feeling like you ’ re in it together with other people . These are the moments to embrace that .
I ’ d also recommend calling homeless shelters in your neighborhood , and seeing if there ’ s anything they need , anything you can do . Find out who ’ s running the senior centers in your city or community , and see if they need assistance , or if they have programs to try to provide contact for older people who are isolated .
I have friends who are single , without children , who have started creating shared programming online for people who are stuck at home with children . I think there are a wide variety of things that we can do , and at times in our history the American capacity for civic imagination and innovation has been impressive .
Unfortunately , when we talk about innovation these days , we ’ re mainly talking about figuring out ways to make more money . I think this is a moment where we have to shift our priorities and put our minds to work on protecting each other .