( CNN ) A New York City emergency room doctor who recovered from Covid-19 and continued to treat coronavirus patients has died by suicide , her father confirmed to CNN .
Dr. Lorna Breen , 49 , died a hero , said her father , Philip Breen .
`` She was in the trenches , '' he said . `` She was a hero . ''
Lorna Breen died Sunday morning by suicide in Charlottesville , Virginia , her father said .
Breen worked in the Columbia University Irving Medical Center and New York-Presbyterian hospital system .
'Killed by the enemy on the front line , ' father says
`` She went down in the trenches and was killed by the enemy on the front line , '' Philip Breen said . `` She loved New York and would n't hear about living anywhere else . She loved her coworkers and did what she could for them . ''
`` I just want people to know how special she was , '' he added .
Philip Breen is a retired trauma surgeon , and he and his daughter would speak frequently about work , he said .
Lorna Breen told her father that her colleagues were putting in 18-hour days and sleeping in hallways , and that ambulances could n't get in because it was so busy .
She worked in the emergency department and had been on the front lines for weeks , handling the onslaught of cases , her father said . New York City has been the US ' pandemic epicenter , recording nearly 300,000 cases and more than 22,000 deaths as of Tuesday morning .
Breen contracted Covid-19 and took a week and a half off to recover , but when she went back to work , she could n't last through a 12-hour shift , her father said . Still , she felt like she had to get back in there to help her colleagues .
Then , a doctor friend visited Breen at home and told her she should go home to Virginia , where most of her family is based , Philip Breen said . Some friends and relatives helped get her to Charlottesville .
Lorna Breen soon was admitted to the hospital at the University of Virginia for exhaustion , her father said , adding that her mother is a doctor in the ward where she was treated .
After about a week , Lorna Breen left the hospital to stay with her mom , her father said . Then , last weekend , she went to stay with her sister , and that is where she died .
Officers responded Sunday to a call for medical assistance and identified the victim as Breen , the Charlottesville Police Department said in a news release . She was taken to University of Virginia Hospital for treatment and `` later succumbed to self-inflicted injuries , '' police said .
`` Frontline healthcare professionals and first responders are not immune to the mental or physical effects of the current pandemic , '' said Charlottesville Police Chief RaShall Brackney . `` On a daily basis , these professionals operate under the most stressful of circumstances , and the Coronavirus has introduced additional stressors . ''
`` Words can not convey the sense of loss we feel today , '' the New York City hospitals where Breen worked said in a statement .
`` Dr. Breen is a hero who brought the highest ideals of medicine to the challenging front lines of the emergency department , '' they said . `` Our focus today is to provide support to her family , friends , and colleagues as they cope with this news during what is already an extraordinarily difficult time . ''