A car drives through downtown Cedarville in Modoc County | AP Photo California to reopen many retailers Friday , loosen rules on rural counties
OAKLAND — Facing intense pressure to expedite California 's reopening , Gov . Gavin Newsom said Monday that some counties will gain more autonomy and certain retailers statewide could offer curbside pickup as soon as Friday .
The announcement acknowledged the mounting political tension driven by the coronavirus ' disparate impact on California . Even as major urban centers are still battling the spread of the coronavirus , less populous and rural counties have increasingly clamored for relief given their relatively lower caseloads .
A growing chorus of local elected officials had called for more leeway , and three counties have defiantly allowed businesses to reopen in violation of Newsom 's statewide stay-at-home order . Now , counties will be able to return if their county health officers and elected officials approve plans that account for metrics like testing capacity and sanitation , Newsom said .
“ Many of these counties , many of these regions have done a ton of work in this space and they ’ re ready to go , ” Newsom said , adding that additional leeway could encompass “ the prospect of restaurants with modification opening , hospitality more broadly . ”
Newsom stressed that areas with more severe outbreaks , like Southern California and the Bay Area , can continue to maintain tougher restrictions .
The governor seemed to offer some praise for the thought that Modoc , Yuba and Sutter counties put into their social distancing requirements despite defying his order , but said that local governments need to follow a formal statewide process .
`` Some were ready , fire , aim instead of ready , aim , fire , but we 'll work with them , '' Newsom said .
Newsom acknowledged that some businesses are ignoring the state by welcoming customers and “ not waiting on these announcements ” from the state . He warned that preemptive reopenings could invite “ unfortunate consequences , ” noting that scores of alcohol-serving establishments had retreated and closed again after state regulators threatened to pull their licenses .
While local officials will be responsible for crafting their own plans to restart , Newsom said the state would monitor their adherence to a list of “ very prescriptive ” guidelines and retains the ability to “ ratchet back up ” if counties backslide .
Assemblyman James Gallagher ( R-Nicolaus ) — who signed a letter imploring the governor to let less-affected counties like those Gallagher represents revive sooner — said in a statement that “ it appears that the Governor may be finally listening to what rural counties have been saying for the past few weeks . ”
“ Our local small business owners deserve a sigh of relief and shouldn ’ t have to worry about the heavy hand of state government cracking down on them , ” Gallagher said .
Newsom also laid out the most concrete timeline yet for California to begin emerging from its coronavirus-induced economic paralysis . As the rate of infections has eased off in recent weeks , spurring Newsom to lay out a framework for easing restrictions , local elected officials have been increasingly vocal in calling on Newsom to loosen a statewide stay-at-home order .
Newsom had already described a next phase that would allow some retail and manufacturing businesses to resume operations . On Monday he said that businesses that meet a forthcoming list of requirements could begin pickup transactions as soon as Friday .
“ As early as the end of this week you will have the capacity as a retailer ” to carry out transactions through curbside pickups , Newsom said , citing clothing , bookstores , music , toys , sporting goods stores , florists with Mother ’ s Day coming up . ”
A phased reopening will unfurl in the coming months , starting with the businesses deemed to post the lowest public health risk . California Department of Public Health Director Sonia Angell stressed that shopping malls and seated dining at restaurants would have to wait .
“ We ’ re going to move as rapidly as we can but as safely as we can , ” Angell said .
The governor acknowledged that some businesses are ignoring the state by welcoming back customers and “ not waiting on these announcements . '' He warned that preemptive reopenings could invite “ unfortunate consequences , ” noting that some food establishments had retreated and closed again after being threatened with the loss of their licenses .