Now , as COVID-19 sweeps into small-town America – with two-thirds of rural counties reporting at least one confirmed case as of last week – a new pandemic geography is emerging .
The U.S. has adopted a state-by-state approach to battling the novel coronavirus . But there ’ s also a divide between steps taken in America ’ s large cities , where the disease hit first , and its rural counties , where people might not be able to even see their nearest neighbor .
People in rural areas have social distancing “ already built into their lifestyle , ” Representative Larson says , but when the statewide order went into effect , “ people took that seriously . ”
As more cases were reported , Lyle Larson , a Republican state representative from San Antonio , was calling for weeks for a statewide order . He understands the various interests the governor had to balance , however , including broader health care realities , such as 26 rural hospitals that have closed across the state since 2010 .
Some 9 in 10 Texans live in or near a city , but the state boasts vast stretches of ranchland , scrub , and desert . Until early April , Republican Gov . Greg Abbott preferred to let cities and counties decide for themselves the wisest course of action .
Rep. Vikki Goodwin ’ s district in Texas took swift action to protect residents from the novel coronavirus in early March . Austin canceled the popular SXSW festival for the first time in more than three decades , losing an estimated $ 350 million in revenue .
But last week , 30 miles out in her district , which stretches into the sparsely populated Hill Country , the town of Lago Vista 's golf course was still open – a week after Republican Gov . Greg Abbott issued a statewide stay-at-home order .
In more suburban and rural stretches of Texas , there seems to be a sense that the virus is a distant , perhaps overblown , crisis .
“ That ’ s a concern to me , ” says state Representative Goodwin , a Democrat . “ In rural areas the feeling is it hasn ’ t gotten there yet and it won ’ t spread . There ’ s maybe a false sense of security . ”
The U.S. , as has been widely reported , has adopted a state-by-state approach to battling the novel coronavirus . But there ’ s also a divide between steps taken in America ’ s large cities , where the disease hit first , and its rural counties , where people might not be able to even see their nearest neighbor and social distancing has long been a way of life . The idea that “ it can ’ t happen here ” also plays on cultural suspicions that date back to Aesop ’ s Fables , where the country mouse tells the city mouse she prefers her plain food and simple life in the country with the peace and security that go with it .
Now , as COVID-19 sweeps into small-town America – with two-thirds of rural counties reporting at least one confirmed case as of last week – a new pandemic geography is emerging . In a recent poll , 74 % of Democrats support restrictive policies to protect people , including some infringements on civil liberties , as did 71 % of Republicans .
“ The initial take among a lot of elected officials and Southerners in general , especially in rural areas , was ... ‘ This is their problem . We don ’ t see it , ’ ” says Cal Jillson , a political scientist at Southern Methodist University in Dallas . “ When you put the importance of church with the small government ethic and where people don ’ t want to be told what to do , it ’ s true , you can do the wrong thing for a good and understandable reason and still pay a very heavy price . ”
In rural America , that ’ s playing out from pews to boat ramps .
In St. Augustine , Florida , some 10,000 people have signed Eric Hires ’ petition to reopen the beaches of St. Johns County , despite the state ’ s 20,000 confirmed cases .
“ People have called me selfish , but this has become much bigger than me , ” says Mr . Hires , a surfer in his 30s , in a phone interview . He points out the golf course was allowed to stay open , and says he just wants early and late-morning hours with no congregating . “ I ’ m more libertarian . I don ’ t like the government infringing on rights or freedoms . But there is also an element of personal freedom . If you live near the beach and the ocean is your sanctuary , you should be able to go there . ”
Some 9 in 10 Texans live in or near a big city , but the state boasts vast stretches of ranchland , scrub , and desert . Until early April , Governor Abbott preferred to let cities and counties decide for themselves the wisest course of action .
As more cases were reported , Lyle Larson , a Republican state representative from San Antonio , had been calling for weeks for a statewide order . He understands the various interests the governor had to balance , however , including politics and broader health care realities , including that 26 rural hospitals have closed across the state since 2010 .
Ricardo B. Brazziell/Austin American-Statesman/AP Texas Gov . Greg Abbott expressed optimism during a coronavirus news conference , April 10 , 2020 , in Austin , Texas . Governor Abbott also said the state 's death toll was lower than many other states .
“ Some people don ’ t like the government making blanket declarations on what they can and can ’ t do , and there are others who want a total shutdown , ” says Representative Larson . People in rural areas have social distancing “ already built into their lifestyle , ” he adds , but when the statewide order went into effect , “ people took that seriously . ”
A handful of states with large rural populations have yet to order statewide lockdowns , trying to balance local interests against what former FEMA director Craig Fugate calls a “ slow-rolling disaster . ”
“ What is happening is that there is much less coordinated federal control in this emergency than in past ones , so you do see an absolute flowering of federalism driven by ... geography , demography , and ideological makeup , ” says Mr. Jillson . “ That means if you are in the South or Mountain West and you have a diverse state geographically – a few major cities and large open stretches between them – you have been conflicted as to how to proceed . ”
Noting a regional difference , “ we ’ ve been pretty aggressive as a geography and I think that ’ s important , ” Michigan Gov . Gretchen Whitmer , a Democrat , said on CNN . Governor Whitmer issued a stay-at-home order in March , one of the first governors to do so , but Michigan remains one of the hardest-hit states , with about 25,000 cases .
In contrast , South Dakota Gov . Kristi Noem , a Republican , told a press conference in early April that “ the people themselves are primarily responsible for their safety. ” And , she added , “ South Dakota is not New York City. ” Over the weekend , one of the largest pork processors in the U.S. , Smithfield , announced it was shutting down its Sioux Falls plant indefinitely after 293 workers tested positive .
People talk about infringements on constitutional rights , but “ what I think people forget about is their constitutional responsibilities : You live in this country and you have a duty that includes not endangering others , ” says Polly Price , a professor of law and global health at Emory University in Atlanta . “ This kind of effort relies on citizen participation . ”
On Tybee Island , the stakes have risen dramatically . On March 20 , after spring break crowds flocked along Tybrisa Street , the city barricaded the beach .
But in early April , as part of a statewide lockdown order , Republican Gov . Brian Kemp reopened the beaches to allow Georgians to access their common outdoor property . His chief of staff even urged , “ Go to the beach ! ”
Patrik Jonsson/The ███ Two Georgia state troopers try to keep a minimum six foot distance on April 5 , 2020 , as they prepare to patrol the beach at Tybee Island . Gov . Brian Kemp reopened Georgia 's three beaches , including Tybee , superseding local closure orders . That means law enforcement is walking a thin line ‘ between a rock and a hard place , ' says one trooper after his shift .
As a precaution , Governor Kemp sent dozens of state troopers and game wardens to patrol to make sure social distancing protocols were observed .
Ken and Jessica Branch drove down from North Carolina , where beach communities have closed off access to outsiders .
“ As long as we abide by the rules , I think we ’ ll be OK. We needed a break . We needed this , ” says Ms . Branch .
Tybee local Dan Lockwood , on the other hand , watched beachgoers violate six-foot distancing orders as they passed each other on narrow dune overwalks . “ Governor Kemp is basically saying , ‘ Stay at home , but don ’ t take it seriously , ’ ” says Mr. Lockwood .
Like many Republicans along the conservative Georgia coast , state Rep. Jeff Jones , a carwash operator , has struggled to come to terms with the governor ’ s decision .
On one hand , he says , “ I think media reporting of the CV-19 outbreak is overblown . ”
Yet Representative Jones disagrees with Mr. Kemp ’ s decision to reopen the beaches , including those in his district at St. Simons Island .
“ I am scratching my head , ” he writes in an email . “ Locally , we logically knew that if people travel away from their homes , the chances of spreading the highly contagious CV-19 increased exponentially . This has , no surprise , turned out to be correct . ”
To Mr. Fugate , who served as Florida ’ s emergency director under former Republican Gov . Jeb Bush and as FEMA director under Democratic President Barack Obama , the case-by-case approach underscores larger failures of communication as the pandemic moves into arguably more vulnerable populations , given health and welfare disparities in the South .
“ Until we have enough ability to do rapid testing and until everybody self-isolates , we are still on the front end of the pandemic , ” says Mr. Fugate , who hails from a Southern tobacco farming family and vacations on Georgia ’ s Jekyll Island . “ We ’ re seeing places like New York explode , we ’ re watching New Orleans explode , and then now Albany , Georgia , and these micro-areas that don ’ t have a lot of depth [ in their health care systems ] . We know what to do , yet we are reluctant or slow to embrace the only tools that we have . It ’ s a brutal math : Do people die or do businesses die ? ”
The fears of outsiders played out in Huntsville , Alabama , as the crisis began in late February .
A federal plan to house stricken cruise ship passengers on a decommissioned Army base fell apart amid a conspiracy theory-fueled pushback from residents and politicians . Seeing what he considers a lack of resolve in the federal response , Michael Barton , Calhoun County emergency management director , initiated the state ’ s first infectious disease task force .
Until two weeks ago , Alabama had not recorded a single death and Republican Gov . Kay Ivey had resisted a lockdown . “ Y ’ all , we are not California , ” she said . “ We are not New York . We are not even Louisiana . ”
But by last week , as the state recorded 1,400 cases – including 200 nurses – Governor Ivey switched course , ending a press conference with a prayer for Alabamans ’ safety .
“ Those numbers are increasing and that gets people ’ s attention , ” says Mr. Barton , a former special deputy United States marshal . “ Sure , we have some people saying it ’ s overblown . But the mantra we are following here is we are going to prepare for the worst and work for the best . ”
On Tybee Island , the crowds never really arrived . While the beaches are technically open , the city fought to keep the majority of narrow dune crossovers closed to enforce distancing . And after the town of 3,000 people – which has at least six first responders in quarantine and two hospitalized city employees – became inundated with requests for short-term rentals , the governor reinstated the ban on rentals in an amended order Wednesday .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ This is the challenge with mixed messages in a crisis : Telling people what to do isn ’ t really always effective , ” says Mr. Fugate . “ What is effective is telling people the why and giving them the information to make a decision . ”