The traditional Holy Week starts tomorrow with Palm Sunday , and across the country , many churches are shuttered -- most voluntarily but some by decree of the government .
That 's certainly a debate to be had once the crisis is past . But in the meantime , churches have watched as their Sunday gift collection plates have disappeared with nothing to replace them . This has led to a financial crisis for many churches that depend almost solely on donations from worshippers for their survival .
The Archdiocese of Newark ( New Jersey ) set up an online GoFundMe donation page where anyone can contribute to specific parishes or to a more general “ Parishes in Need Fund. ” “ Our parishes face increased risk of financial shortfalls due to Coronavirus ( COVID-19 ) pandemic and its effects on everyday life , ” said Cardinal Joseph W. Tobin in a statement on the page .
It 's a fact of financial life for these churches that Holy Week brings in a large amount in donations , much of which goes to fund important charity work . Priests and clergy tend their flocks , giving food to hungry families , paying the occasional monthly rent for others , and a thousand other uses that those donations allow .
“ It ’ s a concern for our pastors in our churches because the celebrations of Holy Week bring together a great number of people , ” said Bishop Robert Casey of the Archdiocese of Chicago . “ It ’ s a homecoming time for us , but it ’ s also a very important fundraising time that allows us to continue with our mission and our ministries . And so this Holy Week will be especially worrisome for our parishes . ”
Other critical needs met by the donations include payroll for church employees and third-party employee contracts , including maintenance workers and cleaning staff .
“ The last thing we want to do is lay off anyone or furlough especially during this time , ” said Father Paul Vigil of St. Timothy ’ s Catholic Church in Los Angeles . He echoes the wishes of the Archdiocese of Los Angeles which said it is “ encouraging parishes and schools to avoid furloughs and layoffs. ” It is also calling on parishioners to support extending unemployment benefits to church workers which in many states do not have access to state unemployment insurance .
Money is tight all around and asking parishioners to dig deep in tough economic times has always been hard . When families barely have enough to put food on the table and keep a roof over their heads , as much as they may love the church , they just ca n't give what they might normally give .
The churches will survive . They 've survived depressions , wars , and now , a pandemic presents the latest challenge . The historic goodness and generosity of the American people will see them through . There are still enough devout believers to continue what they see as God 's work on earth .