President Donald Trump has said he `` ca n't imagine why '' US hotline calls about disinfectant have risen after he suggested injecting the substance to treat coronavirus .
The governors of Michigan and Maryland on Sunday blamed the president for the spike in such calls .
Following heavy criticism from medical professionals , Mr Trump said his remarks were made sarcastically .
Disinfectants are hazardous substances and can be poisonous if ingested .
During Monday 's Covid-19 news conference , a reporter noted that the state of Maryland 's emergency hotline had received hundreds of calls in recent days seeking guidance about Mr Trump 's comments .
`` I ca n't imagine why , '' the president said , moving quickly on . `` I ca n't imagine that . ''
When asked whether he took responsibility at all for the increase in calls , Mr Trump replied : `` No , I do n't . ''
Last week , the Maryland governor 's office said it had issued a statewide alert warning against ingesting or injecting disinfectants following the president 's remarks .
Mr Trump made the disinfectant remarks on Thursday , after an official presented the results of US government research that showed Covid-19 could be killed in minutes by bleach .
`` I see the disinfectant where it knocks it out in a minute . One minute , '' Mr Trump said . `` And is there a way we can do something like that , by injection inside or almost a cleaning ? ''
On Friday afternoon , Mr Trump told journalists : `` I was asking a question sarcastically to reporters like you just to see what would happen . ''
During Monday 's Rose Garden press conference , Mr Trump was also asked whether he would delay the presidential election in November .
`` I never even thought of changing the date of the election , '' he said . `` Why would I do that ? ''
Former US Vice-President Joe Biden , Mr Trump 's presumptive Democratic opponent , said last week he thought Mr Trump would `` try to kick back the election somehow '' .
But Mr Trump told reporters the idea was `` made-up propaganda '' .
Constitutional scholars have already noted that if a president wanted to change the timing of a White House election he would be unable to do so - even in an emergency - because the date is set by Congress .
Mr Trump then took questions on a wide range of subjects , including :