You might notice something unusual , not to mention unfortunate , next time you try to stock up on bathroom supplies at your local grocery store .
Not just the bare shelves where hand sanitizer and cleansing wipes were plentiful only a few weeks ago , but the empty aisles where toilet paper usually abounds in quantities from single rolls to packages of more than a dozen .
Some are even adorned with signs limiting the number of purchases per customer .
Such caps have become a trend in the U.S. and Canada after supermarkets in the United Kingdom ran out and grocery stores across Australia hired security guards to make sure the rules are followed .
What 's the reason for the run , especially when toilet paper is n't known to have any virus-blocking properties ?
One is reason is that people are going to extremes because of conflicting messages , Steven Taylor , a clinical psychologist and author of `` The Psychology of Pandemics , '' told CNN .
`` On the one hand , [ the response is ] understandable , but on the other hand it 's excessive , '' Taylor , a professor and clinical psychologist at the University of British Columbia , told the TV network . `` We can prepare without panicking . ''
The novel coronavirus has scared many Americans because there is little information -- and there is n't a vaccine yet . When people hear conflicting messages about the risk , it affects how they cope and how they prepare , Taylor said .
The second reason : They are n't receiving clear direction from the government .
Many are watching what 's happening in Europe and clinging to their own knowledge on how to best prepare for a mass quarantine . Although the United States has said it would n't consider such a measure , people still believe it 's a real possibility .
CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK IN ITALIAN HOSPITALS IS A 'TSUNAMI , ' DOCTOR SAYS
Social media has heightened the tension , as have visits to stores where other shoppers are stockpiling with abandon .
With the shelves of many retailers across the country remaining empty for over a week , consumers are buying in bulk so that they wo n't need to come back for some time .
`` People , being social creatures , we look to each other for cues for what is safe and what is dangerous , '' he said . `` And when you see someone in the store panic-buying , that can cause a fear-contagion effect . ''
Finally , purchasing products in bulk gives people a sense of control over their situations , releasing some pent-up anxiety .
`` People become anxious ahead of the actual infection , '' Taylor said . `` They have n't thought about the bigger picture , like what are the consequences of stockpiling toilet paper . ''
As of March 14th , the United States has 2,195 reported COVID-19 cases with 49 confirmed fatalities . Worldwide , more than 130,000 people have been infected , and more than 4,900 have died .