Across the United States and across the world , prisoners are among the most vulnerable to the coronavirus . Overcrowded facilities , shortages of food and medicine , and totally inadequate testing expose prisoners who are disproportionately poor and afflicted with prior conditions that render them vulnerable to the disease .
Prisoners increasingly are protesting their conditions , objecting to being sentenced to die in prison .
Experts across the world are urging governments to reduce their prison populations swiftly . Michelle Bachelet , the United Nations high commissioner for Human Rights , warned that “ The consequences of neglecting [ overcrowded conditions ] are potentially catastrophic . ”
Many countries have begun to act . Turkey ’ s parliament authorized the release of 45,000 prisoners . Indonesia has released at least 30,000 . Even Iran ’ s dictatorial regime has released roughly 85,000 detainees , while dealing harshly with those protesting the risks .
The United States locks up more people than any other country in the world , largely because of harsh and wrong-headed policies . Fifty-five thousand are detained in jail awaiting trials , too poor to pay for their freedom under the current cash bail system that is prevalent in many states .
The Prison Policy Initiative reports that 48,000 children are incarcerated on any given day . Many are charged only with “ status offenses , ” such as truancy or homelessness . The Health and Human Services office in charge of the custody of unaccompanied undocumented minors reports that 2,000 are locked up . The New York Times reports that 59 in custody have already tested positive for COVID-19 .
In California , The Marshall Project notes , more than one in seven prisoners are over the age of 55 . The percentage of those 55 and older in prison in the country has tripled over the course of this century .
As Piper Kerman , author of “ Orange is the New Black , ” wrote in the Washington Post , this is largely the result of prison sentences that are longer than those imposed by any other country . “ Elderly probationers and parolees have some of the lowest recidivism rates of all former inmates . Releasing such people poses very low public safety risks and will have a dramatic effect on preserving public health . ”
After an outbreak killed six inmates in a federal prison in Lisbon , Ohio , U.S. District Court Judge James Gwin decried the “ shockingly limited ” amount of testing , noting that the prison has received fewer than 100 tests , while a state prison of similar size had done about 4,000 tests . Two federal prisons in New York City reported that they had tested a total of only 19 inmates since the outbreak began ; 11 were positive .
This has to change before the pandemic spreads , and prisons across the country go up in flames as prisoners ’ riot against their conditions .
Inmates awaiting trial , the elderly , the afflicted , and those who have served much of their sentence should get early release , if possible quarantined at home to ensure they are safe .
The space freed up should be used to provide more “ social distancing , ” while emergency steps are taken to provide adequate medicine , protective equipment like masks and gloves , and food .
Correctional officials need particular priority , for they are most at risk and , if infected , could spread the virus in the local communities . And the failure to provide adequate testing in prisons and jails , as well as in society as a whole , is utterly inexcusable at this late date .
The crisis should also lead to larger reforms— drastically reducing sentences while expanding alternatives to incarceration , ending the cash bail system and the practice of locking poor people up while they await trial , expanding parole , reducing the overcrowded and primitive conditions of too many jails and prisons .
The virus is like getting hit by a club across the head . Perhaps that might help bring us to our senses .