Testing is an essential part of resolving the Covid-19 coronavirus pandemic .
It ’ s essential to determining who has the virus , which can spread from people who may not exhibit any symptoms at all , sometimes for weeks . These unwitting spreaders are prolonging the pandemic , forcing the government to enact costly economic shutdowns . The way to relax these measures is to test people , sometimes repeatedly , and isolate the infected .
But since there still aren ’ t enough tests in the US to go around , who should be tested ?
Current guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) put hospitalized patients with symptoms ; health care workers and first responders with symptoms ; and nursing home residents and prisoners at the top of the list — and people who don ’ t have any Covid-19 symptoms much lower .
However , some researchers say the focus right now should be on finding people with the virus who don ’ t have symptoms because they are driving new infections . People who are starting to experience fever , shortness of breath , and a loss of smell , they say , should not be tested and should be treated as if they are already infected .
It ’ s a debate that exposes the tension between treating individual patients and protecting the public at large . But it ’ s not a hypothetical ; these are decisions that have to be made now . Experts estimate we should be deploying upward of millions of tests per day . Yet the United States is barely getting above 220,000 daily tests . And it ’ s forcing many health districts into the unfamiliar territory of rationing tests , forcing them to confront the prickly question of who does or does not get swabbed .
The number of tests and how they ’ re deployed will shape the trajectory of this pandemic .
There are several therapies for Covid-19 under investigation . Some , like remdesivir , are being used to treat patients under compassionate use guidelines or emergency use guidelines .
But right now , there isn ’ t a specific drug for Covid-19 for broad use , so a positive diagnostic test for the illness doesn ’ t change how most patients are treated . In other words , if you have symptoms , a diagnosis won ’ t affect how you ’ re treated by doctors .
In addition , by the time an infected person has symptoms like fever and breathing difficulty , the virus is often quite far into its replication cycle and may be in decline , so a diagnostic test may not even pick up the disease . And at that point , many of the symptoms stem from the body ’ s immune response to the virus , like inflammation and fever , rather than the direct damage from the virus itself .
France ’ s health minister Olivier Véran told the French broadcaster LCI on April 30 that testing people with symptoms wouldn ’ t have done much to control the pandemic .
“ A test does not cure . A test doesn ’ t change the treatment . A test doesn ’ t change isolation [ protocol ] , ” he said . “ If we had tested absolutely everyone , everyone with symptoms , we would have had more or less the same number of cases . ”
Since it doesn ’ t make a difference in how patients are treated , Paul Romer , an economist at New York University , argues that testing such patients doesn ’ t make sense . Romer co-authored an article for the Atlantic with bioethicist Ezekiel Emanuel laying out his case for not testing patients with symptoms .
“ To safely reopen closed businesses and revive American social life , we need to perform many more tests — and focus them on the people most likely to spread Covid-19 , not sick patients , ” wrote Romer and Emanuel .
Romer explained that by the time a patient has symptoms of Covid-19 , the diagnostic test doesn ’ t provide much more useful information . For instance , a patient may show up with a very low blood oxygen saturation , fever , and congested lungs , and may have been exposed to someone else with Covid-19 .
“ Suppose you run the test . If it comes back positive , you ’ re going to treat it like they ’ re positive . If it comes back negative , you ’ re probably going to say ‘ it was a false negative and we got ta presume this person is positive ’ and do the same thing , ” Romer said . “ So what ’ s the point of the test ? ”
The better approach , according to Romer , is to presume that people with symptoms have the virus and are infectious . And rather than testing again to confirm the virus is gone , hospitals should establish a standard isolation period after the last date symptoms are present . ( The CDC recommends 10 days of precautions after symptoms first appear and three days after recovery . ) Those saved tests can then be deployed to trace the contacts of the presumed infected , some of whom might not have symptoms and could be contagious .
Those who test positive for Covid-19 , even without symptoms , can then be directed to isolate themselves until the infection passes , limiting further spread of the disease . This pattern of repeated testing and isolation will eventually extinguish the pandemic .
Tests aren ’ t the only scarce resource in the Covid-19 pandemic ; there also aren ’ t enough gowns , masks , beds , and health care personnel to go around .
That ’ s why some experts say we need to make sure critical resources , like personal protective equipment ( PPE ) , are reserved for health workers dealing directly with the highly infectious virus . Some Covid-19 patients need to be treated for weeks , and everyone entering their room needs fresh protective gear every time they enter , so treating a single patient can consume a lot of scarce resources .
“ Right now , we ’ re sort of in the midst of shortages of so many different materials around the country , and one thing our institution is really trying to do is save on PPE , ” said David Pride , an infectious disease specialist at UC San Diego Health . “ And to do that we ’ ve had to do a protocol where we are testing every single person that gets admitted to our hospital system . ”
Pride added that another issue is that the isolation regulations around Covid-19 patients mean that they can ’ t see their families , which is a huge emotional burden . “ If we can demonstrate through successive testing , meaning multiple rounds of testing , that they are not shedding the virus , they can come off of these precautions , which means that they can actually have their loved ones there , ” he said .
Robert Atmar , an infectious disease physician at the Baylor College of Medicine , said that it ’ s also worth considering how the information from a test can be used for public health .
“ The main question is how the health department responds to a positive test , ” Atmar said in an email . If no contacts are being traced , then it might make sense to presume infections in patients to save tests . But if everyone who is presumed infected is traced , then contact tracers will waste valuable time and resources following the footsteps of people who may not have been infected .
Christine Mitchell , the executive director at the Center for Bioethics at Harvard Medical School , noted that while finding asymptomatic spreaders is essential to slowing the pandemic , identifying the infected can help limit the spread inside hospitals . For instance , testing can help determine whether someone can share a room with another Covid-19 patient . If they were uninfected , this could expose them to the virus and add new complications .
“ I don ’ t know why it ’ s necessary to advocate not testing patients , ” Mitchell said . “ You do need to know these things to create a safe environment for patients as well as a safe environment for other patients . ”
Aside from whether to test patients who have symptoms for Covid-19 , most experts do agree on who else should be ranked high for testing , namely health workers and first responders on the front lines of the pandemic .
Doctors , nurses , and hospital staff face a greater risk of exposure to the virus , and because they are in a health setting , they run the risk of infecting others as they move from patient to patient . If they ’ re sidelined with an infection , they aren ’ t easily replaced , adding more strain on the health system as the number of caregivers declines . So it ’ s crucial to catch any infection in their ranks early , which may mean testing as frequently as every day .
Other workers in essential , high-exposure roles like grocery store clerks , aides in assisted care facilities , and delivery personnel should also be tested regularly .
Mitchell said another high priority should be testing people in situations where Covid-19 infections can run rampant . “ Nursing homes , senior living facilities , prisons , immigrants in these big camps who are in very , very close quarters , ” Mitchell said .
Another important category is people who could benefit from early detection and treatment , particularly those with preexisting health conditions , like high blood pressure or compromised immune systems .
Mitchell added that testing should not just center on diagnosing patients , but some resources should also be used to estimate the prevalence of the virus in the population . This information can be valuable for public health officials , providing population-level data that can help them interpret individual tests . Data can be gathered with diagnostic tests as well as serological tests for antibodies to the virus , which can identify people who were previously infected but don ’ t have an active infection . That protocol could mix random tests with contact traces .
“ That ’ s easily justified under a ‘ greater good ’ rationale , ” Mitchell said . “ That would allow us to take a look overall at the country in a way that has some scientific support for choosing where to lighten up on physical distancing or being at home all the time . ”
But as long as testing capacity is limited , there will be people who want tests who can ’ t get them . Without a massive scale-up in testing capacity , more difficult decisions about allocating tests lie ahead .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .