Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
A judge in Harris County , Texas , on Wednesday ordered residents to start wearing face masks in public for 30 days beginning next week — or possibly face a fine .
But Judge Lina Hidalgo ’ s action , which intended to help stem the spread of the coronavirus in the third most populous county in the U.S. , drew immediate pushback — including from the state ’ s lieutenant governor , who called the move “ the ultimate government overreach , ” and Rep. Dan Crenshaw , who wrote that `` commonsense guidelines '' should never lead to `` unjust tyranny . ''
Lt. Gov . Dan Patrick noted in a Twitter message that Hidalgo ’ s order – affecting some 4 million Texans in Houston and some nearby communities – was announced on the same day as plans surfaced for closing a costly temporary hospital “ because it wasn ’ t needed . ”
TEXAS GOV . ABBOTT ON REOPENING STATE DURING FIGHT AGAINST CORONAVIRUS : 'GOD 'S HAND IS WORKING '
“ These kind of confused government policies fuel public anger — and rightfully so , ” wrote Patrick , who has been a vocal advocate for reopening the Texas economy and getting people back to work .
Crenshaw said health guidelines should be `` emphatically promoted , '' but he objected to the punitive aspects of the judge 's order .
The order by Hidalgo -- whose role as a county judge in Texas is similar to that of `` county executive '' in other states -- is scheduled to take effect Monday . It requires that people in public areas or in close proximity to other people cover their nose and mouth with a mask or other covering – or face a $ 1,000 fine , FOX 26 of Houston reported .
The order does not apply for exercising or outdoor walks and does not apply to children under 10 , the report said .
Aside from Patrick and Crenshaw , Hidalgo ’ s order also drew backlash from a Houston police officers ’ union , which called the order “ draconian , ” and said it was seeking guidance from the state attorney general ’ s office on whether the fine for offenders was legal , the Houston Chronicle reported .
“ It is clear the so-called leader of Harris County lacks any critical thinking skills , ” President Joe Gamaldi of Houston Police Officers ’ Union Lodge 110 wrote in a statement . “ But let me assure the public , our officers do ! ”
Hildalgo responded by saying the police were “ entitled to their opinions . '' She added that she wasn ’ t looking to impose “ a police state , ” but rather was looking to slow the spread of the virus .
“ It ’ s something we have to do for the sake of our safety , our lives and our economy , ” the judge said , according to the Chronicle .
The city of Houston reported 27 new infections Wednesday , and for the third straight day reported no deaths related to the virus , the newspaper reported .