First-time applications for unemployment benefits topped 1.3 million last week , marking a continued pain point in the nation 's economic recovery after 17 straight weeks of job losses in the millions .
The data , released Thursday by the Department of Labor , comes amid a spike in coronavirus cases in 40 states , complicating a broader nationwide reopening of businesses .
Meanwhile , lawmakers in Washington remain at loggerheads over extending the supplemental $ 600 in pandemic unemployment assistance that has been a lifeline to families affected by coronavirus-induced layoffs . The benefit is set to expire at the end of the month .
Let our news meet your inbox . The news and stories that matters , delivered weekday mornings . This site is protected by recaptcha
Some of those families broadsided by the collapse in the labor market are now facing eviction , as states lift temporary moratoriums put in place to protect people who fell behind on rent because of the coronavirus .
While some regions have seen upticks in hiring as businesses reopen , there are still signs of ongoing distress in the workforce . American Airlines this week warned that it could lay off as much as 20 percent of its workforce as travel demand remains at historic lows . Retailers including JCPenney and PVH , which operates stores such as Calvin Klein , also announced layoffs this week .
Nearly half of small-business owners worry they can not afford to carry on with normal operations once state stay-at-home orders are lifted , according to a recent LendingTree survey . Around 25,000 retail stores will close this year — double the number that shuttered in 2019 , The Wall Street Journal reported on Thursday .
First-time unemployment applications peaked at a staggering 6.9 million at the end of March , before abating to levels that , while much lower , are nonetheless almost 10 times the usual claims . Weeks of elevated numbers are partly due to the fact that state unemployment offices continue to work through a backlog of claims , some dating back as far as March .
Economists say the pain is likely not over yet . As government aid runs out for businesses who received a loan through the Paycheck Protection Program , more layoffs are expected . And any rise in coronavirus cases will lead to further contraction of the economy as consumer spending shrivels up amid continued — or repeat — shutdowns .