China reported its highest daily coronavirus death toll Tuesday , the 103 additional fatalities pushing the total past 1,100 and providing a somber warning that the epidemic represents `` a very grave threat to the rest of the world . ''
All but two of the 1,115 deaths attributed to the outbreak that emerged in December have been in mainland China . The virus is continuing to spread into other countries : Almost 500 of the 45,182 confirmed cases are outside China . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week reported the 13th case in the U.S .
`` The rise in mortality cases is concerning , '' Ogbonnaya Omenka , an assistant professor and public health specialist at Butler University 's College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences , told ███ . `` In China , health workers are overstretched , and diagnostic processes are not keeping up with the cases . ''
Omenka said testing and confirming cases takes longer because of a shortage of diagnostic tools . And supportive treatment is not available for many cases because of the shortage of facilities and health workers , he said .
For the latest on coronavirus : Get ███ 's Daily Briefing in your inbox
A team from the World Health Organization arrived in China this week to lay the groundwork for a larger international team that will aid the Chinese effort while learning traits of the outbreak that could help scientists contain its spread , WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said .
`` With 99 % of cases in China , this remains very much an emergency for that country , but one that holds a very grave threat for the rest of the world , '' Tedros said . `` It ’ s hard to believe that just two months ago , this virus – which has come to captivate the attention of media , financial markets and political leaders – was completely unknown to us . ''
In the U.S. , almost 200 people evacuated from Wuhan , China , on the first charter flight from the country were being released Tuesday , said Anne Schuchat , principal deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . She said the 195 people had been monitored for symptoms of the respiratory virus for the past 14 days , the maximum incubation time . None had common symptoms such as fever or coughing .
Of the 800 people evacuated on five separate charter flights , only one person has been confirmed with coronavirus , Schuchat said .
Schuchat said coronavirus seems to spread more easily than SARS – severe acute respiratory syndrome – but appears to be less lethal . SARS , which originated in China and spread globally in 2003 , killed about one in 10 people . So far , the death rate for coronavirus is about 2 % in China , and that figure might drop as China counts people with milder cases . The transmissibility of the virus may be more similar to that of the flu or the common cold , she said .
`` It may be with additional cases , particularly if they don ’ t involve symptoms or very mild symptoms , that it will be very difficult to block the spread , '' Schuchat said .
US workers at Hong Kong consulate given OK to leave
The State Department has authorized the voluntary departure of non-emergency employees at the U.S. Consulate General in Hong Kong . One death and 49 coronavirus cases have been reported in the administrative region of China . The decision to allow employees and their families the option of leaving was made `` out of an abundance of caution , '' a department spokesperson said in a statement . The status will be reviewed in 30 days , the statement said .
Coronavirus , explained : Everything you need to know about the deadly virus
WHO announced a formal name for the coronavirus – COVID-19 . Tedros said officials needed a name that did not refer to a geographical location , an animal , an individual or group of people . It also had to be pronounceable and related to the disease , he said .
`` Having a name matters , to prevent the use of other names that can be inaccurate or stigmatizing , '' he said . `` It also gives us a standard format to use for any future coronavirus outbreaks . ''
The new coronavirus could become a pandemic : What is that ? Should I be worried ?
The CDC confirmed the 13th U.S. coronavirus case Monday . The case , detected in California , involved a patient under a federal quarantine order at Marine Corps Air Station Miramar near San Diego after recently returning from Wuhan .
Wuhan and Hubei province are where the outbreak of respiratory illness caused by the virus was discovered in December .
The CDC said it was conducting a thorough `` contact investigation '' of the person who has tested positive to determine whether friends , relatives or others are should be considered high-risk .
WHO , which declared a global emergency two weeks ago , on Tuesday convened a two-day global forum to encourage international action and fast-track new tests , treatments and vaccines . The forum , meeting in Geneva with some experts attending remotely , includes scientists , researchers from public health agencies , regulatory experts and bioethicists with expertise in research emergencies .
`` We want you to know that we stand with you in solidarity and we wish you courage , patience , success and good health in these extremely trying circumstances , '' Tedros told participants .
Chinese doctor dies : He had been censured for warning about coronavirus
In Japan , the government is considering a plan to release some elderly passengers with chronic illnesses from a cruise ship quarantined in Yokohama over coronavirus infection fears , multiple media outlets in Japan reported .
One hundred seventy-four of the 3,700 people aboard have tested positive for the virus . The government had asked about 3,600 passengers and crew members to stay on board during the two-week isolation period through Feb. 19 . About 80 % of the 2,666 passengers are 60 or older ; 215 are in their 80s and 11 are in their 90s , authorities say .
Masahiro Kami , head of the nonprofit Medical Governance Research Institute , told Kyodo News that elderly people with chronic illnesses that stress from confinement to cramped cabins could make them `` susceptible to virus infection and risk their lives . ''
Outbreak : A look inside the cruise ship quarantined by the coronavirus