The left criticizes Republicans for refusing to put minimal conditions on big business and calls for more direct help for struggling families .
“ The Republican bill would let small businesses borrow up to $ 10 million , and those loans would then be forgiven for any business that avoided cuts in jobs or wages . That ’ s a fair deal . But Republicans are proposing different rules for big businesses . Recipients of government bailouts would be required to avoid job or wage cuts only ‘ to the extent practicable ’ — a loophole so large it amounts to a lack of any meaningful obligation… what is the point of passing a bailout that does not protect jobs and wages ? …
“ Republicans can quickly resolve this standoff by accepting the necessary changes to protect the public interest . Alternatively , the Senate could table the big-business bailout . Boeing , the major airlines and other companies clamoring for help simply do not need federal assistance with the same urgency as small businesses and individual workers do — particularly because the Fed in recent days has stepped in to help big companies borrow money . ”
“ The proposal backed by the White House and Senate Republicans would give Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin wide discretion over which companies get money and when . Democrats in Congress are saying not so fast — they want some guardrails around what companies can and can not do with the money once checks are cut . Otherwise , they argue , what ’ s to stop an airline from using its bailout money to give its CEO a bonus instead of paying its workers ? Or to prevent a major hotel chain from laying off workers while engaging in stock buybacks ? …
“ Nearly three-quarters of voters say companies receiving bailout money should commit to no layoffs… 82 percent of Democrats , 61 percent of independents , and 70 percent of Republicans agree on no layoffs… In a time like this , it ’ s fair to want to make sure American companies can stay afloat . It ’ s also fair to want to make sure they ’ re taking care of their workers , customers , and consumers instead of lining their executives ’ and shareholders ’ pockets . ”
“ As the Senate is embroiled in contentious negotiations for its third $ 1.8 trillion coronavirus package , House Speaker Nancy Pelosi just unveiled a $ 2.5 trillion bill of her own… Pelosi ’ s bill reads like a mission statement for how Democrats might govern in this crisis if they weren ’ t constrained by a Republican Senate and president . It calls for coronavirus treatment to be free for patients , further bolstering unemployment insurance , directing $ 40 billion to states to help stabilize schools and universities , student loan forgiveness , funding for the homeless , and helping boost states ’ vote-by-mail capacity…
“ It ’ s about giving [ Senate ] Democrats more leverage in negotiations with the White House… We ’ ve yet to see whether any of these provisions will make it into the final product that Schumer is negotiating with Mnuchin and McConnell . But the speaker of the House just made it clear she is part of the equation . ”
“ Democrats should demand much larger checks to individuals that will go out automatically in future crises , an even bigger upgrade to unemployment insurance funded by the federal government , budget backstops for state and local governments who are getting slammed , wartime-style mass state purchasing of medical equipment , and requirements that any company that gets rescued keeps its staff on payroll… `` [ These ] so-called ‘ utopian demands ’ are really just the bare minimum of what is necessary to actually address the crisis , and letting Republicans get their way will lead to a disaster that is only somewhat less bad than what would happen if we do nothing . Moreover , Democrats have all the political leverage in this situation , because Trump will take most of the blame if the economy collapses… Democrats , should they choose to play the same kind of hardball [ as Republicans ] , would be trying to save the American people in the only way it can be done — through politics . ”