Trump and red state governors for weeks have fairly bragged about how large parts of the farm belt have escaped the ravages of the virus without the enforced shelter-in-place policies common on both coasts . It ’ s still unclear whether the states actually “ flattened the curve , ” or if the virus just reached there later . But now , cases are erupting , threatening a local population that doesn ’ t always have easy access to the same health care as more urban areas . And the outbreaks are striking the heart of the nation ’ s farming and meatpacking industry , potentially disrupting the national distribution of food as meat processing plants close down and truckers who move food across the country are sidelined by illness .
Grand Island and surrounding Hall County have 214 confirmed cases of coronavirus , nearly a quarter of the state ’ s total . At least 28 workers at JBS USA beef plant , Grand Island ’ s largest employer , have tested positive .
“ The concern is where we are going , not where we are today , ” said Chuck Haase , a member of the Grand Island City Council .
Nebraska ’ s case count has jumped nearly 30 percent in the last three days , according to the state health department . But even as cases grow in places like Grand Island and Douglas County , home to Omaha , Gov . Pete Ricketts is adamant his plan built around voluntary social distancing is working .
“ This is a program that depends on people exercising personal responsibility and their civic duty , '' Ricketts said Wednesday . `` This is about making that decision , not the heavy hand of government taking away your freedoms . ”
That ’ s why he feels the measures he ’ s put in place — urging residents to stay home , avoid large gatherings and use the six-foot rule as much as possible at work — are doing the trick without the need for a statewide stay-at-home order .
Arkansas Gov . Asa Hutchinson helping Arkansas National Guardsmen unload a truckload of personal protective equipment , said plans for field hospitals in his state will now be shelved “ unless something goes totally haywire. ” | Tommy Metthe/The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette via AP
The seven other holdout states — Arkansas , Iowa , North Dakota , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Utah and Wyoming — similarly say they ’ re not looking at ordering residents to stay at home .
“ We ’ ve avoided the cataclysmic outcomes we ’ ve seen in other countries and other locations , ” North Dakota Gov . Doug Burgum boasted in a press conference earlier this week , noting that hospitalizations in the state are only in the teens and deaths remain in single digits .
But researchers and health experts caution that no state is immune no matter how robust its health system or sparse its population .
“ Perhaps there are governors who believe they have the medical capacity to deal with this [ without a lockdown order ] , ” said Charles Branas , the chair of the Epidemiology Department at Columbia University , who developed a model tracking hospital shortages and virus outbreaks around the country . “ But I don ’ t know if that is wise , because once it gets out it can spread unabated and overwhelm any medical system of any size . Every state is at risk and should have aggressive social distancing policies . ”
Over the last five days , confirmed cases have increased more than 30 percent in North Dakota , 22 percent in Arkansas , 26 percent in Oklahoma , and 260 percent in South Dakota . That compares to roughly 26 percent over the same period in New York , the epicenter of the pandemic .
Trump has repeatedly suggested that these states could lead the way in his plan to reopen the nation ’ s economy in “ beautiful little pieces . ”
“ They have fewer people and have lots of room , ” he said at the White House on Tuesday night . “ There are numerous states that are in great shape right now ... They are set to open practically now . ”
A pork processing plant in Sioux Falls , South Dakota ’ s most populous city , was forced to close after about 240 employees contracted the virus . Republican Mayor Paul TenHaken asked Gov . Kristi Noem this week to issue a stay-at-home order in Minnehaha and Lincoln counties , where more than 800 of the state ’ s 988 positive cases have been confirmed .
Noem refused , prompting the city council to introduce a three-week lockdown ordinance on its own that members lament will take a week just to pass .
“ Whatever we were doing wasn ’ t working , and it ’ s taking off like crazy now , ” Pat Starr , a Sioux Falls City Council member , said of the virus .
He told ███ that the state lacks adequate testing , complicating efforts to mobilize to track the virus .
“ My concern is that we don ’ t flatten the curve and so we overwhelm our medical facilities . We are not to that point yet , but we ’ re approaching it very quickly , ” Starr warned . “ We ’ re gon na continue to see some really high numbers , and we ’ re going to see people that we can ’ t take care of . ”
Iowa on Tuesday reported its single largest daily jump in confirmed cases — roughly half stemming from an outbreak at the Tyson Foods plant in Columbus Junction . Company officials closed the facility , one of the nation ’ s largest pork processing plants , earlier this month .
Meatpacking plants or the egg hatchery in Grand Island , which serves 10 percent of the U.S. egg market , are considered essential to the national food distribution network — meaning workers would gather regardless of a stay-at-home order . And outbreaks at other big agricultural facilities have occurred even in states with lockdowns .
The governors who have held off also argue that their more tailored executive orders , which limit business and encourage people to stay home , accomplish the same goal as stay-at-home orders with less economic pain — and keep the health system from being overwhelmed the way it was in New York and New Jersey .
By that metric , these governors say they are doing well .
“ We ’ re on a good trajectory under the circumstances , ” Arkansas Gov . Asa Hutchinson told ███ on Wednesday . “ We ’ re beating the curve and flattening it . ”
Just a few weeks ago , the state predicted a peak of 1,000 hospitalizations and made tentative plans to build field hospitals . But with just over 1,500 total cases , fewer than 100 hospitalizations and 33 deaths , Hutchinson said those plans will now be shelved “ unless something goes totally haywire . ”
Though it 's still not clear if the virus is just taking longer to reach the state , the governor credits his more targeted approach of closing schools , banning some out-of-state visitors and shutting down some businesses and public spaces — combined with ramped-up testing and contact tracing in nursing homes and prisons — for suppressing the disease . He claims these steps have made Arkansas a potential model for transitioning the rest of the country out of lockdown .
“ We are where other states need to go , ” he said . “ When we have the capacity to do testing and contact tracing and isolation , that allows us , if we ’ re disciplined , to lift some restrictions . In that sense , we can prove to be a way out for other places . ”
Multiple models tracking hospital capacity currently predict that not one county in Arkansas will see its medical system overwhelmed . One of those models , however , assumes that the state will order residents to stay home and close more nonessential businesses , while the other assumes that residents will voluntarily decrease their interactions with others by at least 30 percent .
Some local officials worry that isn ’ t happening , and say the lack of a stay-at-home order may make residents complacent .
“ I do think it would send a clearer message to Arkansans [ to have a stay-at-home order ] , ” said Greg Leding , a Democratic state senator from the Fayetteville area . “ I represent a college town and just this weekend a fraternity held what appeared to be a large party where no one was practicing social distancing . That ’ s really troubling . ”
Leaders in North Dakota and Wyoming , which have some of the lowest number of cases and deaths in the nation , cited their aggressive contact tracing efforts as one reason they felt they did not need a broader stay-at-home order .
“ We can be targeted in our isolation as opposed to these broad-based , shut-down-the-whole-economy approaches , ” North Dakota Gov . Burgum said , describing the state ’ s work sending teams of contact tracers into areas with an outbreak . “ We want these rapid response teams that can do this , so we make sure a mini-hot spot doesn ’ t blow into a big prairie fire . Testing and contact tracing have to be part of our way of life . ”
Burgum is confident the state ’ s voluntary social distancing guidelines are working , but he predicts it will be hard , with a longer , flatter curve , to persuade residents to keep up the restrictions in the months ahead , especially if the president orders other states to reopen . On Wednesday , he ordered the state ’ s restrictions extended for 10 days .