By sharing these images on social media , Mr. McRitchie hopes his work can serve as a buoy for others stuck at home . “ When we see people are celebrating , laughing and having fun , and families that are together , ” he says , “ it 's reminding us of the strength we can find together . ”
Mr. McRitchie is part of a network of photographers using the hashtag # porchraits to inspire one another to get out and document their communities . Many of the images are whimsical , poking fun where they can . One family poses on their porch with rolls of toilet paper around their wrists . Other photos are more stark , revealing the stillness and solitude of the social distance era .
“ People are together in a way they haven ’ t been in a long time , ” says Erik McRitchie , a brand photographer in Calgary , Alberta .
A new phenomenon is sweeping the photography community in Canada : “ porchraits. ” These family portraits , often taken on porches , are one way of marking the physical isolation that many are feeling right now . But they also highlight a renewed embrace of togetherness felt by many families .
The children ’ s hands push into the glass pane as the family of five poses behind their front door . In some photos , family members peer over their fences , only their eyes visible . Many of the portraits play on space and distance – each member hangs a head out of a separate second-story window , for example .
Welcome to a new phenomenon sweeping the photography community in Canada : “ porchraits. ” These family portraits , often taken on porches , are one way of marking the physical isolation that many are feeling right now . But they also highlight a renewed embrace of togetherness felt by many families .
“ We ’ re living through a unique period of time for all of us , ” says Erik McRitchie , a brand photographer in Calgary , Alberta . “ People are together in a way they haven ’ t been in a long time . ”
That ’ s something families are keen to hold onto , judging by Mr. McRitchie ’ s busy calendar . At the middle of last week he had done 25 shoots and had 40 more to go .
Mr. McRitchie is part of a network of photographers inspired by one in Yellowknife , Northwest Territories , who started taking photos of residents through their windows . Using the hashtag # porchraits , photographers have inspired one another to get out and document their communities . And the practice has started to pop up in the United States ; though there ’ s a bit of debate over how to spell the new term and they are sometimes called # doortraits or # isolationportraits .
Courtesy of Erik McRitchie A little girl celebrates her fifth birthday on her porch as part of a family portrait session with Calgary photographer Erik McRitchie .
Many of the images are whimsical , poking fun where they can . One family poses on their porch with rolls of toilet paper around their wrists ; even the dog gets one around its paw . Others dress up in costumes or party attire , taking a break from the stress and worry that the coronavirus pandemic has unleashed around the world .
Other photos are more stark , revealing the stillness and solitude of the social-distance era . And even today , in the midst of it , it ’ s easy to see that these collections , growing across North America and Europe , could easily hang on museum walls the way exhibits of stoic settlers of the Dust Bowl or cities in the Great Depression do a century later .
“ These are really interesting documents at this time , ” says Carol Payne , a professor of the history and theory of photography at Carleton University in Ottawa . While many of the journalistic photographs of the era revolve around barriers – adults separated from elderly parents in nursing homes , or isolated healthcare workers who can only see their children through windows – “ porchraits ” give subjects a sense of agency , she says , and in the end will show how ordinary people coped together .
“ They are telling their future selves what it was like to live through what is really an historic crisis , ” Professor Payne says . “ People are writing their own social histories visually , not the history of politicians and nation-states but the history of individual people and how they got through it . ”
Many of the photographers , like Mr. McRitchie , aren ’ t making money from it . If families can , he is encouraging them to donate to a local food bank . “ It ’ s really just trying to take a moment of difficulty , and turning it into something positive , ” he says , “ and see if it can be replicated and grown into something bigger . ”
Jon Neufeld ’ s family is the one outside the glass door last week in their residential community in Calgary . He says they were “ hamming it up , ” just having a bit of fun about being stuck inside all day . It also happened to be the day they were supposed to have their daughter ’ s 5th birthday party . Instead , she dressed up in pink and they ate birthday cake on the front steps ( Mr. McRitchie was invited , one of four “ front porch birthday parties ” he ’ d celebrated that week ) .
Mr. Neufeld says it ’ s been fun to see the other portraits posted around social media . But collectively it tells a deeper tale . “ The kind of struggle is implicit in the fact that if you look through the collection , we ’ re all on our porches . We ’ re all on the front steps of our houses , ” he says , “ where we are spending 99 % of our time . ”
That ’ s posed technical problems for photographers , who are more used to scenic backgrounds or studios where lighting possibilities are limitless . But through this work , Mr. McRitchie says he has documented something new : a family togetherness and a return to slower living . When he arrived at one house , two little children were sitting at their front window with a “ campfire ” they made from cardboard . They were pretending to roast marshmallows .
In between his shoots he ’ s noticed more teens out walking with their parents .
“ That ’ s weird , right ? ” he says . “ Before , mom or dad would go for a walk , and ask , ‘ you guys want to come ? ’ And the kids are like , ‘ no , not a chance. ’ But now they ’ re out together . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ It ’ s just so easy to be occupied with the negativity right now , and any break from that in a positive way is uplifting , ” he continues . “ When we see people are celebrating , laughing and having fun , and families that are together , it ’ s reminding us of the strength we can find together . ”