A dangerous myth is taking hold in the United States that the country must decide between saving the economy at the expense of risking many additional Covid-19 deaths and a depression leading to double-digit unemployment .
Trump says that the cure for the virus can ’ t be more costly than the virus itself . Others , like former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers , caution that the US must stick with stringent public health measures , but simply can ’ t fix the economy “ until we contain the virus . ”
But this is a false choice . The virus ’ s hit to the economy is real . But beyond the direct hit from the pandemic , the US is experiencing an economy-wide collapse in demand , as job losses lead to income losses , which lead to reduced spending and further job losses . There is a climate of concern , and people who haven ’ t lost jobs and incomes worry that they may do so soon and restrain their spending . There is a pinch on state and local budgets that is causing cutbacks on front-line labor as there ’ s more , not less , work to do .
And despite frantic moves from the Federal Reserve last week and a big stimulus bill from Congress , the steps taken thus far are too small and too timid — like a series of mattresses to cushion the fall when the US needs a trampoline to bounce everyone back to full employment . That ’ s not a job that can afford to wait until after the epidemiological crisis is solved any more than the Allies waited until after defeating Hitler to cure the Great Depression . The US needs to beat the virus in part through a massive , deliberate mobilization that puts people back to work .
Businesses across the country have been forced to either shut down or dramatically curtail their activities because of the virus .
That inevitably leads to job losses and a declining stock market . But if you broaden your set of economic indicators — including currencies ( where the dollar is getting stronger ) , commodities ( where everything from oil to corn to metal has gotten cheaper ) , bonds ( where government interest rates have fallen ) , and inflation ( where expectations are of slower price increases ) — you see a second story , a crisis of falling demand .
And though the measures taken by Congress and the Fed last week led to a clear improvement in the indicators , they weren ’ t nearly enough to address the crisis .
The US needs to take the analogy of wartime mobilization that ’ s been used by many leaders much more seriously and deliver trillions more in tax cuts and spending increases to stimulate demand . Much of that spending should be aimed at mobilizing workers and industry to provide the goods and services the US needs to continue coping with a virus that , even if successfully contained , is not going to vanish soon .
To cope with the twin crises of economics and public health , the US will need substantial investment in the production of personal protective equipment for health care workers , but may also need production of masks and gloves for the public . It will need a huge infusion of funds to state and local governments so they can continue to provide — even expand — needed services . It will need medical research in spades , and we ’ ll need income support for households and businesses as they struggle to adapt to a new world of doing things in less efficient , more socially distant ways . And to support it all , the US needs a creative and flexible Federal Reserve willing to adopt a wartime mentality to finance .
Economic policy can ’ t fix everything , but it can fix a lot
A few years ago , Christina Romer , who served as the chair of the White House Council of Economic Advisers under President Obama , and her husband David co-wrote my favorite paper about macroeconomics .
It ’ s called “ The Most Dangerous Idea in Federal Reserve History : Monetary Policy Doesn ’ t Matter. ” In the paper , the Romers review three tragic episodes in American economic history — the early phases of the Great Depression , the Great Inflation of the 1970s , and the extended Great Recession that began in 2008 and left America with labor market weakness that lingered up until the moment the coronavirus hit .
They show that in each of these episodes , policymakers convinced themselves that because of special unique attributes of the situation , there was nothing more that they could do on the demand side of the economy .
In 1930 , for example , as the Great Depression gathered , George Norris of the Philadelphia Federal Reserve spoke against the idea of extra stimulus . In his view , the real problem was the extraordinary stock market bubble of the 1920s . “ The consequences of such an economic debauch , ” he argued to other Fed officials , “ are inevitable . We are now suffering them . Can they be corrected or removed by cheap money ? We do not believe that they can . ”
In the 1970s , the problem was inflation rather than mass unemployment . And William Miller , then chair of the Federal Reserve , insisted that it wasn ’ t his problem to solve , telling Congress that “ an effective program to reduce the rate of inflation had to extend beyond monetary policy ” and instead focus on deregulatory and anti-union policy “ designed to enhance competition and to correct structural problems . ”
And in the wake of the Great Recession , distinguished economists started coming up with fanciful explanations for why labor force growth was persistently slow , even at one point deciding that advances in video game quality rather than a weak job market were to blame .
But in the first two instances , once policymakers — President Franklin Roosevelt in the case of the Great Depression , Fed Chair Paul Volcker in the case of inflation — actually accepted responsibility for solving the problem , they took action by abandoning the gold standard in the former case and with painful but relatively brief spikes in interest rates in the latter .
The Great Recession never had such a decisive turning point , but exactly as the Romers predicted , over time growing demand just kept pushing the job numbers up steadily throughout both the Obama and Trump presidencies .
So I was alarmed to see something Christina Romer told my colleague Ezra Klein :
“ I feel like we need a new term for the kind of unemployment we ’ re going to have , ” says Christina Romer , the Berkeley economist who led President Obama ’ s Council of Economic Advisers during the financial crisis . “ It ’ s not cyclical unemployment . It ’ s quarantine unemployment . Businesses aren ’ t allowed to operate . People aren ’ t allowed to be out of their home . The idea that if you just give people money it ’ ll somehow prevent the unemployment rate from skyrocketing makes no sense . No amount of demand stimulus will get people to go to restaurants if they ’ re closed . ”
What Romer is saying is that the US needs humanitarian relief to help people who can ’ t work , rather than expecting stimulus to create jobs .
But that ’ s a huge overstatement . She teaches at UC Berkeley in California , which is under some of the strictest lockdown orders in the country . Yet restaurants in Berkeley are not closed — many of them are offering food for pickup or delivery .
The novelists Ayelet Waldman and Michael Chabon announced on Twitter a plan to buy 25 meals a week from local restaurants to give to nearby hospital workers — a nice gesture for the community . And one thing that makes it a nice gesture , of course , is that lots of people are constrained in the number of restaurant meals they can consume by their income .
It ’ s also true that there are plenty of affluent people who eat out frequently who are going to be cutting back for non-financial reasons during this crisis . But it ’ s a big mistake to think that everyone is in that boat , or that the US has to simply give up on the idea of keeping people engaged in meaningful work .
Even in the midst of the current crisis , some companies are hiring . Instacart says it ’ s looking to add 300,000 staff as demand for grocery delivery picks up . Amazon says it ’ s going to hire 100,000 new people , and Domino ’ s Pizza expects to add 10,000 more workers .
A crisis for some is an opportunity for others . And in an appropriately stimulated economy , workers laid off from some sectors would gain new jobs in others . But something I ’ ve noticed in my Washington , DC , neighborhood is that even though supermarkets and hardware stores are still open , they are curtailing hours rather than expanding them .
Prudent people are trying to shop at the least crowded possible times in order to minimize human contact — typically at odd hours . The Whole Foods in my neighborhood is normally open from 7 am to 10 pm . The store has established special hours for people ages 60 and older , from 6 am to 7 am , and it is closing early at 9 pm . In a healthier economic environment , the store would be opening early and closing late — adding shifts to cover those times and adding workers to do extra cleaning and disinfecting .
This might lead to price increases for some retail goods , partially offsetting retailers ’ reduced costs for commodities and the fuel to get things shipped . Nobody likes to see high prices . But that ’ s what you ’ d expect to see from an appropriately stimulated economy — overall stable or slightly rising inflation as total spending levels stay steady even though the virus is disrupting exactly what people spend money on .
Instead , aggregate spending is collapsing . Recode ’ s Peter Kafka reports that even as news consumption is soaring , the advertising market is shrinking . BuzzFeed News announced across-the-board salary cuts . This isn ’ t the virus forcing media companies to shut down or making it impossible to buy laptops . It ’ s the secondary and tertiary demand impacts that are creating a generalized economic crisis .
Congress has declared victory and gone home , but it ’ s important for leaders in both parties to stay engaged . They need to keep monitoring the situation and continue passing new stimulative measures until there are clear indications that things have gone far enough on the demand side .
That ’ s going to mean primarily pushing a lot more money out the door .
Secondarily , the federal government needs to mobilize the country to address the virus — working with private industry , but also plenty of pushing cash out to state and local governments to do things .
Last but by no means least , the Federal Reserve— the American government ’ s premier demand-management agency — needs to commit to allowing a small spurt of inflation if that ’ s what it takes to ride out this crisis , and to extending maximum support to whatever the nation ’ s elected officials decide to spend money on .
Fed Chair Jay Powell ’ s announcements last week pointed in that direction , but everyone would benefit from a clear and consistent statement from the central bank that it supports fully and swiftly returning to full employment , even if it means a temporarily elevated pace of price increases . If people look back on the year 2020 and see that the big problem was 4 percent inflation , rather than mass unemployment or the widespread collapse of hospital systems , that ’ s a victory .
At the very beginning of the crisis , President Trump was said to be interested in a major payroll tax cut .
Eventually he got talked out of that by Democrats who argued that generous unemployment insurance benefits and flat cash transfers to households should be higher priorities . That was the right judgment , but with demand still not fully stabilized , it would make sense to go back and look at the payroll tax issue .
The kind of companies that are still enjoying healthy sales — from giants like Target to the little hardware store across the street from my house — would be more likely to expand staff and rehire some newly unemployed workers if employer-side payroll taxes fell . Employers whose businesses have been hurt by the crisis but who aren ’ t forced into closure by it will , similarly , have an easier time avoiding layoffs if they get a tax break .
Meanwhile , the millions of Americans who haven ’ t lost their jobs but are dealing with unusually difficult working conditions , complicated child care situations , and other problems could use a boost from a worker-side payroll tax cut .
Depending on the market reaction to that , it could also make sense to do more rounds of cutting universal checks . Even while maintaining fairly severe social distancing , reasonable people might want to splurge on home exercise equipment , new toys and activities for kids , better equipment for your home office , or remote consultations with medical doctors or psychotherapists .
The political controversy du jour is Trump ’ s reluctance to invoke the Defense Production Act ( DPA ) and secure critically needed ventilators and personal protective equipment for front-line health care workers . He should do all that . But the government at all levels should also acknowledge that our wartime production needs are broader than the most critical supplies . The acute shortage of N95 respirators facing medical personnel treating Covid-19 patients obviously needs to be fixed first . But instead of managing the shortage by telling the public surgical masks aren ’ t useful , the US ought to make more masks and widen the circle of people who get them .
The gap between our current situation — where front-line health personnel can ’ t get the basic equipment they need — and a realm where everyone is amply provisioned with masks and gloves for routine use is huge . Filling that gap will be hard . But it ’ s the opposite of the problem of having too many workers with nothing left for them to do . The US needs to be looking at all appropriate tools to get newly unemployed people into manufacturing masks and gloves . That probably means some mix of DPA edicts , direct subsidies for production , and guarantees that the government will purchase any “ excess ” supplies if the crisis ends up ending sooner than expected .
But beyond medical equipment , we are looking at a reasonably extended period of time in which people should be consuming more soap , hand sanitizer , disinfecting sprays and wipes , and lotion . Especially once the US is able to move beyond the most severe lockdown measures , we ’ re going to need lots of household cleaning supplies . And that means we ’ ll need more personnel and industrial capacity to make them .
Congress should also directly infuse state and local governments with the money they need to run things properly . Mass transit agencies are being crushed by falling ridership and have started curtailing service . Distancing best practice , however , is that transit agencies should run ample service even as commuter loads fall so that trains and buses can stay as uncrowded as possible , even while vehicles are disinfected frequently . This isn ’ t financially viable for local governments , but the federal government can make it viable , and in doing so support public health and employment at the same time .
More broadly , the one saving grace of the coronavirus pandemic is that the pathogen is fairly easy to kill with soap and other normal cleaning supplies . While surface spread is not thought to be the main vector of the coronavirus , high-touch surfaces in playgrounds , parks , and other public spaces could and perhaps should be routinely disinfected as part of a transitional strategy to getting things partially opened up again . The barrier to doing that is simply cost .
But that ’ s just another way of saying the virus hasn ’ t eliminated our need for labor . There is plenty for workers to do instead of being unemployed , as long as people refuse to accept mass unemployment as inevitable . Rather than it being necessary to completely fix the health situation before the US can heal the economy , mobilizing idled workers should be part of how to get the health situation under control .
But to undergird it all , Americans need a cooperative central bank .
The question of Federal Reserve action is intimately linked to the inevitable question of whether the country can really afford to engage in stimulus on this level . And the answer is yes .
Since the 1951 Fed/Treasury Accord , the Fed has operated independently of the rest of the American government . But as Jessica Romero of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond recounts in his history of the accord , “ during World War II and its aftermath the Federal Reserve did not enjoy such independence. ” Instead , “ at the request of the Department of the Treasury , the Federal Reserve formally committed to maintaining a low interest-rate peg of 3/8 percent on short-term Treasury bills . The Fed also implicitly capped the rate on long-term Treasury bonds at 2.5 percent . ”
The point of this was to make sure it was affordable for the government to borrow the money it would need to fight and win the war . Current interest rates are less than half of where they were set as an emergency wartime finance measure , and the Fed has announced that it ’ s willing to engage in unlimited purchases of government bonds “ to support smooth market functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions and the economy . ”
What ’ s further needed from the Fed is a clearer statement of the goals of its activity . In the past generation , the central bank ’ s overwhelming focus has been on ensuring that inflation stays near but below a target of 2 percent .
To support an adequate recovery , the Fed should state clearly that its goal is to help fiscal authorities fully eliminate any shortfall in demand . That means as long as the virus is with us , we should be willing to see inflation rise above 2 percent levels , as you would expect to see in an economy suffering from a supply-side problem .
A lot of commercial transactions , even when they restart , will have to be conducted in slightly cumbersome ways with more emphasis on delivery , uncrowded spaces , and lots of disinfecting . That will mean a higher cost structure , higher prices , and lower economic output — real economic problems that stimulative policy can ’ t fix and that will ameliorate only as testing , treatment , and vaccination will improve . But it won ’ t have to mean mass unemployment or a chilling choice between overwhelmed hospitals and a depression .
The corners of the economic policy world I follow are spending a lot of time playing armchair epidemiologist and debating various theories about how deadly Covid-19 really is and how useful lockdown-type policies really are in combating it .
Current estimates of the coronavirus fatality rate may be too high by orders of magnitude , write Profs . Eran Bendavid and Jay Bhattacharya from @ StanfordMed https : //t.co/5zIfFWK1Ko via @ WSJ — David Andolfatto ( @ dandolfa ) March 25 , 2020
I reproduced by average-growth-in-last-week graph , but this time for COVID deaths instead of cases .
Can you spot which places had lockdowns ? Because tbh I can not . pic.twitter.com/hnW5AKVbnD — Lyman Expand the House Stone , AKA 石來民 ( @ lymanstoneky ) March 25 , 2020
These are important questions , and in these uncertain times , I am also interested in them . Trump has become personally enthusiastic about the prospects of using hydroxychloroquine , perhaps in combination with azithromycin , as a pharmaceutical treatment for Covid-19 . ( The research so far on the effectiveness of such treatment is preliminary and mixed . )
I hope some of that pans out , too , and it ’ s not unreasonable to try to maintain some optimism on the epidemiological side .
But this also has an air of grasping at straws about it . Both the human mind and the political system rebel at the idea that the current bleak economic picture Americans are seeing is our only alternative to a world with increasing sickness from a new virus .
We need to be clear-eyed , however : That false choice only exists because we aren ’ t thinking big enough about economic policy . Both the virus itself and the public health countermeasures that have been put into place to combat it are costly to the national economy . But the financial market indicators we can see are a clear indication that these costs are being exacerbated by a second wave of problems — demand-side problems — that are actually larger in scale than the problems on the supply side .
And unlike on the epidemiological side , the solutions to a demand crisis are actually very clear .
We are already poised to begin significant fiscal stimulus , and that has helped . But to get to where we need to be , we need to do even more — put more cash into state and local government coffers , cut taxes on individuals and businesses , put money directly into the hands of the American people , and finance increased production of medical and household cleaning supplies .
A program like that won ’ t eliminate the economic costs of coronavirus . Huge amounts of labor will be “ wasted ” on cleaning and re-cleaning surfaces , and manufacturing supplies that are swiftly used up and thrown away rather than building wealth . But it will avoid mass unemployment , cascading waves of bankruptcies , and the other miseries associated with a depression . And since the economic problems will be genuinely virus-related , they will go away whenever the medical situation improves — whether that ’ s because of improved testing , improved treatments , new findings that it ’ s not as deadly as we feared , or whatever else .
The problem with the demand shock is that it is currently bigger in economic terms than the supply-side impacts of the virus itself . And — because it ’ s caused by policy failure rather than RNA strands replicating in our cells — there ’ s no guarantee it goes away , even if there is a totally effective vaccine a year from now .
It ’ s time for economic policymakers to let the doctors , epidemiologists , and other public health officials do their jobs , and to start taking responsibility for doing their own work instead . The virus is a fact we have to deal with . The ongoing collapse in aggregate demand is a policy choice we can avoid .
███ ’ s Ezra Klein and Matt Yglesias analyze the huge but inadequate stimulus bill .
Subscribe to The Weeds wherever you get your podcasts , including : Apple Podcasts , Google Podcasts , Spotify , and Stitcher .