Stocks recovered Friday following a brutal week of selling after President Donald Trump declared a national emergency over the fast-spreading coronavirus , a move that will free up about $ 50 billion in federal aid to combat the global pandemic .
Trump also announced new efforts to expand testing for the virus . Investors were anticipating an aid package from Washington , a move that investors hope can stem the economic damage from the virus .
Stocks accelerated gains in the final half hour of trading in the midst of Trump 's remarks to post their biggest one-day gain since the financial crisis . Traders and analysts said the latest developments removed some uncertainty that was hanging over financial markets .
`` The change in tone shows that the Trump administration is taking this more seriously now , '' says Thomas Martin , senior portfolio manager at Atlanta-based GLOBALT Investments . `` This still is n't over by any stretch , but it 's a better sign . ''
Stocks stabilized after Wall Street 's worst day since the `` Black Monday ” crash of 1987 . The Dow Jones industrial average jumped 1,985 points to close at 23,185.62 , a day after plunging 2,352 points , or 10 % , for its worst loss since its nearly 23 % drop on Oct. 19 , 1987 .
The Standard & Poor ’ s 500 soared 9.3 % to end at 2,711.02 . The broad index tumbled more than 20 % from its February record Thursday , sliding into a bear market and officially ending Wall Street ’ s historic 11-year bull market run .
Even with Friday 's bounce , the S & P 500 shed 8.8 % this week , its worst drop in two weeks when anxiety began to rise over the virus outbreak . The broad index closed either up or down more than 4 % each day this week for the first time since November 1929 , according to LPL Financial .
In just a matter of weeks , U.S. stocks have retreated from records and wiped out all the gains made during 2019 , one of the best for the market in years . All the major indexes are in a bear market , or a drop of at least 20 % from all-time highs .
Can the economy predict the next president ? : Yes , if history is any indication
Stock market : It may feel like 2008 all over again , but here 's how the coronavirus crisis is different
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said the House would move forward with a vote Friday . The bill would include free virus testing for all Americans , including the uninsured , as well as two weeks of paid sick leave for those who have to skip work due to the virus . It would also included expanded federal food assistance , such as seniors ’ meals , student lunches and food banks .
Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin struck a positive tone Friday morning , saying a deal on a virus response package with Congress was imminent .
“ We ’ re very close to getting this done , ” he told CNBC .
The New York Federal Reserve said Friday morning it would ramp up its Treasury bond purchases in a bid to help cushion the financial system . The central bank took steps Thursday to inject more than $ 1.5 trillion into the markets to help calm investors who are fearful of the economic impact of the virus .
The rout has come amid cancellations and shutdowns across the world , including Trump ’ s suspension of most travel to the U.S. from Europe . Worries have grown that the White House and other authorities around the world can ’ t or won ’ t counter the economic damage from the outbreak any time soon , threatening to end the decade-long economic expansion .
The coronavirus has infected around 128,000 people worldwide and killed over 4,700 . The death toll in the U.S. climbed to 39 , with over 1,300 infections .
“ The recent shocks to the global economy are unprecedented , ” Doug Duncan , senior vice president and chief economist at Fannie Mae , said in a note . “ While we are still projecting modest growth in the coming months , the impact of the coronavirus threatens the longest expansion in U.S. history . ”
In both cases in 2020 and 1987 , the economy was at or near full employment and generally healthy going into the crash . After the 1987 crash , there were widespread calls for an imminent recession as there are today , but that didn ’ t play out . The stock market recovered by almost 30 % from its low within the next year and rose to a fresh high within about 18 months .
“ Who knows how the contemporary crisis will play out , but it is worth thinking about its similarity to another quick moving and very scary market collapse when a recession did not occur , ” Jim Paulsen , chief investment strategist for Leuthold Group , said in a note .
Global markets were mixed on Friday the 13th in most markets . In Europe , France 's CAC 40 jumped 1.8 % , while Germany 's DAX rose 0.8 % . Tokyo ’ s Nikkei 225 fell 6 % . Sydney ’ s S & P ASX rose 4.4 % and the Shanghai Composite declined 1.2 % . In Hong Kong , the Hang Seng lost 1.1 % .