“ Some Republicans have suddenly rediscovered their deep passion for guarding the deficit… Is now really the time to worry about the deficit , especially when interest rates are low and the economy is in such disarray ? … Some states have begun to gradually reopen , but their economies aren ’ t bouncing back . It turns out people are not eager to crowd into restaurants and hop on planes while a deadly disease circulates… The Fed has taken extraordinary actions… it ’ s cut interest rates to near-zero and announced a series of sweeping measures to boost the economy and ensure liquidity in the markets . And still , [ Fed chair Jerome Powell ] emphasized , there ’ s a need for more , and a grave risk to underreacting… It ’ s not a time to test the waters , it ’ s a time to dive in. ” Emily Stewart , Vox
“ The Netherlands , France and the United Kingdom have all adopted a form of a paycheck guarantee program to keep workers employed and avoid the costs of displacement . Indeed , Germany 's reaction to the 2008 recession and likewise relatively rapid rebound — without the oxymoronic notion of a ‘ jobless recovery ’ — provides a fine example of what a paycheck guarantee can offer… Paycheck guarantee legislation has a wide range of supporters , including economists , business owners and labor unions… [ It ] is n't included in the latest [ bill ] , but it should be. ” Darrick Hamilton and Kyle Strickland , Salon
Some note that “ When increased funding for food stamps and hazard pay for frontline workers are considered major symbolic bones thrown to the left , you have to wonder about this party 's overall priorities… In early March [ Pelosi ] reportedly walked out of a Democratic caucus briefing after Jason Furman , who served as President Obama 's chief economist , called for direct cash payments to Americans… More than three months into this crisis , House Democrats remain strikingly reluctant to embrace continued cash payments , the simplest and most obvious method of economic stimulus. ” Sophia Tesfaye , Salon
“ As Congress gears up for the next installment of its stimulus package , Mr. McConnell has drawn a line : No more money for anyone until businesses get immunity from liability during the pandemic… The problem is that immunity doesn ’ t just shield the worst actors ; it also punishes the best , by giving a competitive advantage to the businesses that decide to cut corners at the expense of worker and customer health and safety… “ There is no tsunami of litigation coming to engulf the country . As a matter of law , it ’ s already extremely difficult for workers or consumers to succeed with tort claims . In most states , as long as a business shows that it followed regulations or guidelines , or even just took common-sense precautions , it will usually prevail… To reopen safely , companies need good , clear and mandatory guidelines , not immunity from liability . ” Editorial Board , New York Times
“ Americans have relied on low-wage workers to keep essential services running during the pandemic , from harvesting and delivering food to cleaning public spaces . But many of these workers who lack legal immigration status have done so without receiving any financial assistance from the federal government . Unauthorized immigrants make up about a quarter of farmworkers and 8 percent of the service sector and production workers . Many don ’ t have any choice but to continue working despite public health warnings to stay home because they aren ’ t eligible for unemployment benefits or federal stimulus checks . The Heroes Act would at least give them some financial safety net and relieve them of fear of deportation. ” Nicole Narea , Vox
“ Inevitably , the 1,180-page bill—a bare-bones summary takes 90 pages—contains much good and some plain ugly . Its centerpiece is nearly $ 1 trillion in aid to states , localities , and territories , vitally needed to avoid massive layoffs and savage reductions in essential services from police to teachers ... “ It extends enhanced unemployment benefits until January . It offers another one-off cash payment of $ 1,200 per person . Importantly , it would extend sick leave to all workers , correcting the cribbed program of the first rescue package . It provides expanded funding for food stamps and aid to women with children . Hazard pay rewards essential workers . The imperative ramping up of testing and tracing is funded . It would rescue the Post Office from bankruptcy . And $ 3.5 billion is allocated to help states prepare for vote-by-mail in the fall election. ” Robert L. Borosage , The Nation
“ In this bill , Pelosi and the Democrats are advocating deeply unpopular issues… Providing money to people in the country illegally ; Allowing illegal immigrants to work when more than 30 million Americans are out of work ; Providing tax-paid funding for abortion ( Americans opposed tax paid funding for abortions by 55 percent to 29 percent ) ; Blocking voter identification laws ( which 80 percent of Americans favor ) ; Giving state and local governments , which already collect your tax dollars , $ 1 trillion more of your tax dollars ; Giving a tax cut to the richest Americans in blue states… This bill could become a disaster for Democratic candidates if Republicans bear down and focus on it . ”
“ More than $ 1 trillion of the $ 3 trillion package would be in the form of aid to state and local governments , with almost all of that money — $ 915 billion of it — in unrestricted cash . This will be a great boon to states and cities ( largely but not exclusively Democratic ) that have hamstrung themselves financially by promising government workers fat pensions and retirement benefits without actually spending the money necessary to fund those programs…
“ Many states already are spending more on their retirees than they are on current priorities such as higher education . So out of whack are the state pension systems that the Pew Trusts estimated their 2018 liabilities at more than $ 1.5 trillion . That doesn ’ t mean that $ 1.5 trillion would solve the states ’ pension problems… Even with those liabilities gone , the states would be required to continue to make ongoing pension contributions that are heavy today and only getting heavier . The question is : How much do you want to shortchange today ’ s first-graders and college freshmen in the service of tomorrow ’ s retired DMV clerks ? Round your answer to the nearest trillion dollars . ”
“ Employers are now struggling to rehire workers , who , understandably , have no real financial incentive to go back to work . Many perplexed entrepreneurs now find themselves in the odd situation where they want to hire their employees back—but their workers say no…
“ In one glaring example reported by CNBC , Jamie Black-Lewis , a Washington small business owner , was shocked to receive backlash , not gratitude , when she tried to bring her laid-off employees back onto payroll after securing a government loan… This is happening across a wide variety of industries . ‘ When we asked our employees to come back , almost all said , ‘ No thanks , ’ ’ restaurateur Kurt Huffman wrote in the Wall Street Journal . ‘ If they return to work , they ’ ll have to take a pay cut . ’ ”
“ The average state UI benefit nationwide is $ 373 per week . With the addition of the $ 600 weekly federal supplement [ in the previous stimulus bill ] , the average total unemployment benefit is a record $ 973 per week . That $ 973 in unemployment benefits already exceeds the median weekly earnings of full-time workers , which was $ 949 in the first quarter of 2020…
“ When the $ 600 supplement was created in March , supporters suggested its effect of paying bigger benefits than paychecks was a temporary byproduct of acting quickly to make ‘ whole ’ workers displaced by government-mandated shutdowns designed to quell a health crisis… Yet now the Heroes Act would make the $ 600 supplements payable for up to a year , without connecting their continuation to the health crisis , as another recent Democratic proposal did . Especially as the economy reopens , that suggests Democratic leaders see the $ 600 supplements as an increasingly permanent part of the unemployment benefits landscape , independent of the health crisis that spawned it . ”