Coronavirus cases hit a new record for a single day Thursday : nearly forty-thousand .
With states like Texas and Florida posting record numbers of new cases of coronavirus this week health officials warn Americans to continue taking precautions .
Unlike the early months of the pandemic , the majority of new cases are in younger people under the age of 45 .
Most people who die from the virus are over age 80 , but the fear is still that asymptomatic young people will pass it to older Americans .
`` Usually when we see a spike in positive cases two weeks later we often see an increase in hospitalizations , four weeks later is when we see a jump in deaths , '' ███ News Medical Reporter Lorie Johnson told Faith Nation Thursday .
And the CDC estimates that 20 million Americans have been infected – roughly 10 times as many as have been confirmed .
Texas reported more than 17,000 new cases in the last three days and a record of nearly 5,000 hospitalizations .
Gov . Greg Abbott is now pausing the Lone Star State 's re-opening and halting elective surgeries in the state 's biggest counties .
Florida is in a similar situation , reporting more than 114,000 cases total . Gov . Ron DeSantis says part of the uptick is due to increased testing . `` This is mass testing regardless of symptoms , '' he explained .
Wearing masks inside businesses is only mandatory in a handful of states , but health experts say they 're a necessary tool for containing the spread of COVID .
A new model from the University of Washington suggests wearing masks could save as many as 33,000 lives between now and October .
However , in new hot spots like Arizona , Texas , and Florida resistance to masks is heating up .
`` Are you gon na let the government tell you you have to wear a mask ? No ! '' chanted protesters in Arizona .
`` It 's our bodies , it 's our choice whether we 're gon na wear them , or not wear them . You guys are overstepping your boundaries 100 percent , '' said one woman speaking at a public hearing in Florida .
While masks may be inconvenient , Johnson says there 's research to suggest they work .
`` For some reason masks have become political , but the research is clear and overwhelming . Masks prevent transmission by 50 percent , so the overwhelming message is if you go out and you ca n't social distance wear a mask , '' she said .
Teams from the CDC are deploying to hard hit areas to trace new outbreaks and reinforce protective measures .
It 's a strategy officials say helped slow new infections in North Carolina and Alabama .