The extent and severity of the COVID-19 economic shutdowns vary from place to place , but the one thing almost all of them have in common is that they 're not really enforceable .
We may have reached the point where most people are realizing that .
Case in point : The Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation has decided to drop 200 enforcement investigations into barbers and cosmetologists who returned to work in recent weeks , The Dallas Morning News reports . The department is also dropping 180 cases that had not moved past the complaint stage—so stop tattling on your neighborhood salons , Texans—which seems like a clear admission that enforcing the shutdown is simply untenable .
The turning point , in Texas at least , probably came a few weeks ago when a Dallas salon owner , Shelley Luther , was sentenced to seven days in jail for reopening her business on April 24 . The outrage over Luther 's arrest and sentencing eventually convinced Gov . Greg Abbott , a Republican , to remove jail time as a punishment for people who violated the state 's stay-at-home order .
The licensing department has now gone a step farther , saying it will allow `` the reopening of cosmetology and barbering establishments retroactively to April 2 , '' wiping out any violations from the past six weeks .
In Wisconsin , where the state Supreme Court last week struck down a statewide stay-at-home order , counties are lifting their own lockdown orders due to `` mounting confusion '' over their legality . But the bigger question , again , might be their enforcability . I 've seen a lot of coverage of Wisconsinites heading to bars in the wake of the Supreme Court ruling ; I have n't seen much evidence that people are getting arrested for violating local shutdown orders .
And in Washington , more than 25,000 complaints about alleged lockdown violations were filed across the state , but as of May 8 the state had revoked exactly one business license .
As the days go on , expect to see more anecdotal evidence like this :
Update : Just now a local Bellmawr Police Lieutenant walked up to front door & owner of Atilis Gym & said `` You 're all in violation of Governor 's executive order . That being said stay safe & have a nice day . '' And walked away & crowd of supporters let out a loud cheer ⁦ @ FOX29philly⁩ pic.twitter.com/M3XvbHfvV0 — Steve Keeley ( @ KeeleyFox29 ) May 18 , 2020
The government 's role in all of this has always been more limited than either the bureaucrats drafting stay-at-home orders imagine or the protesters shouting about tyranny fear . Since forcibly quarantining 330 million people was never really possible , the lockdowns that have wrecked the economy and slowed the spread of COVID-19 over the past two months were ultimately based on voluntary compliance .
Do n't get me wrong : There 's been plenty of heavy-handed enforcement—in New York , in California , in Wisconsin , and in plenty of other places . But it 's been ineffectual and perhaps even counterproductive , given that cops who get close enough to issue a citation or make an arrest are hardly practicing social distancing . ( Imagine what a public health disaster it might be if they were somehow capable of detaining or fining everyone who broke quarantine . ) It certainly is n't the ███ people have been practicing social distancing . Research from FiveThirtyEight has shown pretty conclusively that most state-level stay-at-home orders came days or even weeks after most Americans were already staying home .
That remains true in places where governments are fighting to maintain lockdowns as compliance frays—like in Pennsylvania , where Gov . Tom Wolf has threatened businesses with the loss of their licenses if they go along with county-level reopening plans that move faster than his state-issued directives . And it remains true in places where lockdowns have already been lifted : In Georgia , restaurant reservations are still 90 percent lower than they were at this same time last year , according to data from OpenTable , even though Gov . Brian Kemp has lifted the lockdown .
The biggest benefit that comes from lifting stay-at-home orders is an end to the charade that such lockdowns can be enforced . Kemp did n't `` reopen '' Georgia . All he did was give people consumers and businesses permission to choose their own acceptable levels of risk—something they 're doing anyway in every state .
Governments at all levels should continue to provide accurate information about what 's relatively safe ( like going to the beach or drinking outside ) and what is n't ( like getting together in big groups or using public transportation ) . But enforcement should be reserved for where it can actually work . An official order closing stadiums and the like seems reasonable . Jailing salon owners does not .