Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
Are marijuana users at an increased risk of suffering serious complications should they contract the novel coronavirus ?
As the COVID-19 pandemic drones on , many are now aware that older adults and people with certain underlying medical conditions are at a higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 . The same is also true for cigarette smokers , according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) . But does that increased risk also apply to those who smoke marijuana , a substance that has become increasingly legal in states across the nation in recent years ?
CORONAVIRUS-INFECTED NEW YORK CITY DOCTOR TALKS BATTLE WITH COVID-19 : ‘ IT WAS MORE SEVERE THAN I ANTICIPATED ’
To find out , Fox News spoke to Dr. Albert Rizzo , the chief medical officer at the American Lung Association . Read on for a look at his answers below .
Fox News : How does smoking marijuana affect your lungs or airways ?
Dr. Rizzo : What happens to your airways when you smoke cannabis is that it causes some degree of inflammation , very similar to bronchitis , [ and ] very similar to the type of inflammation that cigarette smoking can cause .
Fox News : Does this put users more at risk for COVID-19 complications ?
Rizzo : Yes , because you now have some airway inflammation , and if you get the SARS-CoV-2 virus infection on top of that , your risk of complications can go up . The CDC includes smokers and vapers at higher risk of complications from COVID-19 .
Fox News : Are marijuana users and cigarette smokers at equal risk for severe COVID-19 complications ?
Rizzo : Any substance that is combusted and then inhaled exposes the airways and the lungs to particles and toxins that lead to some degree of airway inflammation , similar to inflammation that may be seen in those with chronic asthma or COPD . Those two patient groups have been shown to have an increased risk of complications from COVID-19 , so it would suggest to me that cannabis smokers , like cigarette smokers , may have the potential for more complications if they get infected .
Whether there are similar risks between cigarette smokers versus cannabis users has been hard to determine for a number of reasons . First of all , because of the federal laws around cannabis , it has been difficult to do large-scale cohort studies to study the effects on the airways over time . There is also the confounding effect that many cannabis users are also cigarette smokers so it becomes difficult to see which substance led to a particular finding in the lungs .
There are other distinctions as well . The depth of inhalation and breath-holding of cannabis smokers differs in general from many cigarette smokers . Also , cannabis burns at a much , much lower temperature than a commercially made cigarette , and for that reason , the person is inhaling a certain amount of unburnt plant material . This material can irritate the lungs in the same manner as ragweed , birch and oak pollen does for those allergic to those allergens .
Fox News : Are occasional marijuana users and chronic marijuana users at equal risk for COVID-19 complications ?
Rizzo : `` Chronic '' cannabis smoking , defined as daily use , damages the lungs over a period of time and the end result is a degree of chronic bronchitis , not unlike that seen in patients with COPD or chronic asthma . We do know that [ a ] more intense and longer duration of cigarette usage seems to carry with it more risk of certain diseases , such as lung cancer . There has not been evidence to date that chronic cannabis use leads to chronic lung diseases , [ such as ] COPD or lung cancer . But remember the aphorism , “ absence of evidence is not evidence of absence . ”
Fox News : For those who use marijuana to help with anxiety during these uncertain times , what would you recommend they do instead ?
Rizzo : Some of the same things in this regard apply to cigarette smokers . Cigarette smokers often find that anxiety and stress are [ some ] of the main hurdles that keep them from quitting . Quitting during stressful times means you need to rely on other modalities , [ which may ] include getting into a regular exercise routine , employing relaxation and meditation techniques , and certainly trying to build a support network around you , either with household members or with friends . Discussing options with your health care provider is paramount .
Fox News : Are marijuana users at an increased risk even if they are following social distancing guidelines and being as safe as possible ?
Rizzo : No , the risk of getting the infection is not heightened by the act of smoking itself . The risk of contracting the infection is increased if the smoking is done in a gathering of individuals , especially if there is sharing of any materials that may contain or transfer respiratory droplets from one individual to another . In other words , sharing the joint among friends is a great way to get the infection from one of your friends who may not know they have the disease . Social distancing measures , along with frequent hand washing and avoiding individuals known to be infected , is the best way to prevent getting the infection .
MICHIGAN NURSE DEMONSTRATES CORONAVIRUS SPREAD USING GLOVES IN VIRAL VIDEO
Fox News : How can people keep their lungs as healthy as possible during this time ? Are there any specific tips ?
Rizzo : Good advice for lung health includes the main recommendations for general good health — regular exercise , proper sleep , proper hydration and maintaining normal body weight . Specific to lung health are key behavioral issues , such as not smoking or vaping , avoiding indoor and outdoor air pollution , and getting yearly influenza vaccines as well as pneumococcal vaccines when appropriate .