Japan ’ s theme parks banned screaming when they reopened after the coronavirus pandemic .
A recent video showed Fuji-Q Highland amusement park CEO Daisuke Iwata and his boss , chief executive Koichiro Horiuchi , riding the popular Fujiyama roller coaster in silence while wearing masks , the Wall Street Journal reported . A message was displayed at the end that read , “ please scream inside your heart. ” ( RELATED : Japan To Lift State Of Emergency , Says Economy Is Now Top Priority )
A social media trend , called the “ serious face challenge , ” emerged because of the video , according to the WSJ . People posted pictures of themselves sternly riding roller coasters while wearing masks .
Japanese theme parks released guidelines when they reopened in May that told guests they weren ’ t allowed to yell on roller coasters , citing health guidelines that say coronavirus can be spread more widely by actions like coughing and singing . The theme-park associations also recommended that guests wear masks , according to the report .
Japan ’ s rules , including those for theme parks , are voluntary , per the WSJ . Oriental Land Company , which operates Tokyo Disneyland , said that those who violate the screaming rule won ’ t be punished .
Yuuki Suzuki , who said he spent 12 hours online with his wife to get tickets for Tokyo Disneyland ’ s reopening day , said the rule is “ too strict . ”
“ You don ’ t see Disneylands in other countries asking people not to scream , ” he said . “ If a scream comes out , it comes out . ”
Another park guest , Natsumi Kumasawa , said that it was her 3-year-old daughter Umi ’ s first time at Disneyland , so her screaming “ really couldn ’ t be helped . ”
Japan ’ s voluntary rules for fighting off coronavirus have been largely successful , the Wall Street Journal reported . While optional , mask-wearing is a cultural norm in Japan , and when the government imposed voluntary coronavirus restrictions in April and May the number of new daily cases was drastically reduced .