Before every fashion retailer was selling their own cloth face covering , before a piece of fabric over your nose and mouth became a personal political statement , and before Goldman Sachs was saying a national face mask mandate is as good as a lockdown , Lara Martin was unsure whether homemade cloth masks were even a good idea .
The executive director of the United Methodist Committee on Relief , Martin was one of the people I interviewed back in March for a story about the science of masks . Back then , I found that masks were an excellent example of the scientific uncertainties swirling around the novel coronavirus . Remember , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the surgeon general once told the general public not to wear masks . The data that existed on mask effectiveness largely dealt with medical respirators and surgical masks . It wasn ’ t clear how protective a cloth mask would be , and Martin worried that wearing masks might lead people to feel more safe than they actually were — and make choices that increased their risk of contracting or transmitting COVID-19 .
Today , a lot has changed . But the science around cloth masks hasn ’ t .
Yes , the CDC now recommends cloth face coverings , the surgeon general starred in a video showing how to make them , and many businesses , and even cities , require them . Martin herself owns three and wears one every time she goes outside . But she told me that ’ s not because the evidence has significantly improved . “ I don ’ t know enough , I don ’ t see enough evidence . Nothing has changed except that I care about my neighbors , I care about my colleagues , I care about people I don ’ t even know that I come across at the grocery store , ” she said . “ I am now saying to my community that I care about them , and that actually feels important to me as a scientist . ”
Cloth and DIY face masks sit at the intersection where scientific data , public perceptions , and political opinions crash headlong into each other . Making smart decisions isn ’ t just about having data — it ’ s also about how we interpret the data we have . Safety moves along a spectrum with different relative levels of risk . Behavioral norms also matter , regardless of how much evidence backs them up . In the midst of a pandemic , masks are a reminder that science is seldom as simple , or as certain , as we want it to be — and that reasonable public health recommendations are sometimes based on more than just data .
Do cloth face coverings work ? Probably , to some extent . But just how much they work depends on the material , how they ’ re used , and what you ’ re expecting them to accomplish . And — regardless of what you ’ ve seen in highly shareable memes — we definitely don ’ t know enough to say that wearing these kinds of coverings will reduce risk of transmission by a specific percentage , let alone a high percentage . Those were the conclusions of an expert report published by the National Academies of Sciences on April 8 , and two of the lead authors of that paper recently told me the science hasn ’ t significantly changed since then . Some studies have come out showing a correlation in certain regions between mask mandates and reduced spread of the coronavirus , but several of those not-yet-peer-reviewed studies have turned out to have important flaws — such as failing to account for factors like other behaviors ( such as higher rates of social distancing ) that went along with wearing masks in those places .
Instead , experts say what has changed is how both the public and public health institutions interpret this situation and the data surrounding it .
[ Related : Where The Latest COVID-19 Models Think We ’ re Headed — And Why They Disagree ]
“ Back in March , it was difficult to even have anybody take you seriously when the CDC and WHO said the opposite , ” said Jeremy Howard , a data scientist and entrepreneur who has become a major advocate of universal mask requirements . In response to the lack of support , he launched a bipartisan campaign called Masks4All that lobbied for widespread mask-wearing and argued that masks were a crucial , if not the most important , part of the COVID-19 response .
But Howard has also seen changes in how political actors interpreted his message . Back in March , he told me , before not wearing a mask became a signifier of conservative politics , Howard actually got the most traction talking about the need for masks on conservative news shows . “ Going against the CDC was very on brand , ” he said . “ I was on “ The Laura Ingraham Angle ” talking about important masks were , and she was all for it . ”
[ Related : What To Look For In A Face Mask , According To Science ]
When the political alignments shifted , that support vanished . Although a majority of Americans report wearing masks regularly , those numbers are 16 percentage points lower among Republicans compared to Democrats . In the last week , that ’ s begun to shift again , with Republican leaders advocating for mask use and criticizing President Trump for not wearing one . The politicized landscape has also made it difficult to have a nuanced conversation about mask effectiveness , experts said . Public health officials who issued mandatory mask-wearing orders have found themselves hounded by intense criticism and even death threats . More than two dozen have resigned in recent weeks .
At the same time , Michael Osterholm , a public health and disease expert who is worried that mask effectiveness is being over-hyped , has also found himself threatened and harassed . Osterholm , the director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota , told me he ’ s received vulgar emails from people who read his statements questioning the efficacy of cloth masks . Osterholm said that his position was not that masks shouldn ’ t be worn — he wears one in public , himself — but that there is limited data on how effective DIY cloth masks are at stopping small particles , either from passing through or being forced out the sides of the mask . Without that information , he said , physical distancing and isolation remain the most important tools in stopping the spread of the coronavirus . But as more Republicans say the worst of the coronavirus is behind us , and usage of masks tracks tightly along the partisan spectrum , Osterholm told me he felt like well-meaning people were making him out to be a pandemic denialist .
The on-off , yes-no nature of this debate has also been frustrating for Dr. Marcella Nunez-Smith , a professor of medicine and epidemiology at Yale . Circumstances may mean that for some people the benefits of wearing a mask may not outweigh the risks . “ There are conversations in a lot of Black and brown communities … ‘ [ Does ] the risk and threat in terms of personal safety go up wearing a mask because of police action and being seen as a threat ? ’ ” she said .
[ Related : For Black Americans , Wearing A Mask Comes With Complicated Anxieties ]
At the same time , though , Nunez-Smith said masks might actually be more important for those communities because the distancing and isolation favored by experts like Osterholm hasn ’ t really been possible . Black workers are more likely than other workers to have jobs that are classified as essential . Because of that , reopening means something different for predominantly Black neighborhoods than it does for white neighborhoods . That also applies to the idea of social distancing and how practical that even is — something that could account for why self-reported mask usage is higher among nonwhite Americans , despite the possible police risk . “ These are important contextual conversations , ” Nunez-Smith said .
Ultimately , experts said , all the nuance and complication around masks is a challenge that public health messaging has to face up to . It ’ s difficult to make one-size-fits-all recommendations for situations that don ’ t readily lend themselves to a one-size-fits-all reality .
[ Related : How Americans View The Coronavirus Crisis And Trump ’ s Response ]
The good news is that there ’ s more agreement than disagreement on where to start . Just look at Osterholm and Howard , two experts who might easily be seen as having opposing viewpoints in this battle . Yet they hold similar positions on one issue : They both wish the CDC would have given the public the nuanced information about masks back in March and trusted them to understand it . Granted , that might mean presenting the public with a complex message , such as : “ We don ’ t know how well cloth masks work , so distancing should come first , but masks are likely to work to some extent and not everyone can distance themselves. ” That ’ s a mouthful and harder to fit on a bumper sticker than “ yes , you should , ” or “ no , you shouldn ’ t. ” But it comes down to what builds trust more : certainty or honesty ?
“ We owe it to the public to help them understand what kind of protections they ’ re getting , ” Osterholm said . “ We owe it to the public to tell them what we know . ”
How reports of a promising COVID-19 treatment was found to be fraudulent