Despite new mandatory mask rules , Trump insists it 's everyone 's 'personal choice ' President Trump has resisted pressure to wear a mask throughout the pandemic .
Trump 's ‘ choice ’ is not to wear mask despite mandatory rules : WH
After the city of Jacksonville , Florida , announced that masks will be mandatory for public and indoor locations starting Monday , White House press secretary Kaleigh McEnany would not directly say if President Donald Trump planned to wear one at his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention .
The event , scheduled for August , is expected to bring more than 40,000 people from all over the country to Jacksonville , and while the rules may apply to them , it 's likely Trump will exempt himself .
`` I talked to the president before coming out here , '' McEnany said . `` It 's his choice to wear a mask . It 's the personal choice of any individual as to whether to wear a mask or not . He encourages people to make whatever decision is best for their safety , but he did say to me he has no problem with masks , and to do whatever your local jurisdiction requests of you . ''
White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany speaks during a press briefing at the White House , June 29 , 2020 , in Washington . Evan Vucci/AP
Her rationale comes on the heels of a growing number of health officials urging the public to wear masks as cases rise alarmingly across the southern United States .
At the first public task force briefing in two months last Friday , Vice President Mike Pence spent much of the time applauding the Trump administration 's efforts and emphasizing how much worse the pandemic could have been without their response .
Coronavirus response coordinator Dr. Deborah Birx , meanwhile , stressed the importance of wearing a mask .
When asked by ABC News Correspondent Kyra Phillips why Trump 's campaign continues to hold rallies without mask or social distancing requirement , despite public health advice , Pence cited the Constitution .
`` The freedom of speech and the right to peacefully assemble is enshrined in the Constitution , '' Pence said . `` President Trump and I believe that taking proper steps as we created screening at recent events , and giving people the very best counsel that we have . We still want to give people the freedom to participate in the political process . ''
Pressed about how masks -- or how the decision not to wear one -- has become a political statement , Pence would only say he encouraged Americans to follow state and local leaders .
Rep. Liz Cheney , R-Wyo. , House Republican Conference Chair and daughter of former Vice President Dick Cheney tweeted a photo of her masked father following the task force briefing accompanied by the hashtag `` RealMenWearMasks . ''
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi also shared the sentiment to ABC News Chief Anchor George Stephanopoulos on `` This Week '' Sunday and voiced her support for a federal mask mandate .
`` It 's definitely long overdue for that , '' she said . `` My understanding is that the Centers for Disease Control has recommended the use of masks but not required it , because they do n't want to offend the president . ''
`` Real men wear masks , '' she added . `` It 's not about protecting yourself , it 's about protecting others . ''
By Sunday afternoon , Pence has changed his tune -- somewhat .
Texas Gov . Greg Abbott , center left , greets Vice President Mike Pence upon his arrival at Love Field in Dallas , June 28 , 2020 . Tony Gutierrez/AP Photo
In a trip to the hotspot state of Texas , Pence and his team all arrived wearing masks , as did Texas Gov . Greg Abbott , a Republican , and his team , to greet Pence on the tarmac .
In a later press conference , Pence was more direct in echoing the advice of the health professionals seated beside him : `` Wearing a mask is just a good idea . ''
Birx then stressed the importance of `` 100 % compliance '' with mask orders in several counties as hospitalization rates increase particularly among younger adults with underlying health conditions .
Notably , hours before Pence gave advice alongside Birx , he spoke at a mega-church in Dallas with over 2,000 congregants and a 100-person choir -- standing close and none wearing masks -- though the Centers for Disease Control an Prevention has warned churches can be `` super spreader '' sites , for one , because of singing .
The choir sings as an attendee stands before Vice President Mike Pence made comments at First Baptist Church Dallas during a Celebrate Freedom Rally in Dallas , June 28 , 2020 . Tony Gutierrez/AP Photo
Despite the ramped up warnings , Trump has signaled for months that he does n't view masks as presidential and has resisted any pressure to be photographed in one in public .
`` I just do n't want to wear one myself . It 's a recommendation . I am feeling good , '' Trump said at an April 3 coronavirus task force briefing . `` I just do n't want to be doing -- I do n't know , somehow sitting in the Oval Office behind that beautiful Resolute Desk , the great Resolute Desk , I think wearing a face mask as I greet presidents , prime ministers , dictators , kings , queens . I do n't know , somehow , I do n't see it for myself . ''
Even as Trump 's travels to more states where the coronavirus was spreading , and more Republicans like Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell say people `` ought to '' wear them and Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , said , `` Everyone should just wear a damn mask , '' Trump has resisted the pressure .
Although the White House says the president respects state and local mask mandates , Trump , himself , seems to be the exception to those rules .
At a Fox News `` town hall '' in Wisconsin last week , for instance , all participants were required to wear masks to enter at the event -- except for a socially-distant Trump and Sean Hannity .
But Jacksonville Sheriff Mike Williams said Monday that without a mask , someone may not be allowed into a business or venue . This includes the Vystar Veterans Memorial Arena in Downtown Jacksonville where the RNC is scheduled for August .
The VyStar Veterans Memorial Arena is pictured on Wednesday , June 17 , 2020 , in Jacksonville . Ivy Ceballo/Tampa Bay Times/TNS/Newscom
`` We will continue to work on these plans as we get closer [ to the RNC ] , '' he said .
It seems unlikely come August that the Republican National Committee will force their nominee to wear a mask in the mega-indoor arena .
It seems more likely it 's a `` personal choice '' the president will do the same as he 's done so far .