The question , then , isn ’ t whether the coronavirus is “ airborne ” in the tediously academic way the word has been defined . As the journalist Roxanne Khamsi puts it , the virus is “ definitely borne by air. ” The better questions are : How far does the virus move ? And is it stable and concentrated enough at the end of its journey to harm someone ’ s health ?
A handful of studies have offered preliminary answers . One team of researchers blasted virus-laden fluids into a rotating cylinder to create a cloud of aerosols . They found that the virus remained stable for several hours within that cloud , raising fears about its ability to persist in ambient air . But as the researchers have noted , the study ’ s experimental setup was artificial . It doesn ’ t reflect “ what ’ s occurring when you ’ re just walking down the street , ” says Saskia Popescu of George Mason University , who specializes in infection control and who was not involved in the study . “ It ’ s more akin to medically invasive procedures like intubation , which run the risk of aerosolizing the virus , and are unique to the health-care setting . ”
A second study suggests that the coronavirus can be released into the air in less dramatic ways . Joshua Santarpia and his colleagues at the University of Nebraska Medical Center found traces of the coronavirus ’ s RNA—its genetic material—in rooms occupied by a total of 13 COVID-19 patients , most of whom had only mild symptoms . The RNA was on obvious places such as bed rails and toilets , but also on harder-to-reach spots such as ventilation grates , window ledges , and the floors beneath the beds . The RNA even lingered in the air ; using air-samplers , the team detected viral RNA floating more than six feet away from the patients , and even in the hallways just outside the patients ’ rooms .
This isn ’ t necessarily cause for alarm . Finding viral RNA is like finding a fingerprint at a crime scene—the culprit was once there , but might be long gone . So far , the Nebraska team has failed to detect live , infectious virus in its air samples . Santarpia told me that further tests are under way , and results will be released soon .
If the Nebraska team does find infectious particles , it would mean that even mildly symptomatic people can expel SARS-CoV-2 into the air , and that the virus can travel at least the length of a hospital room—a claim supported by a few other studies . Even that , though , would not guarantee danger . Are those far-spreading virus particles concentrated enough to infect another person in the same room ? How many virus particles does it even take to launch an infection ? How far does the virus travel in outdoor spaces , or in other indoor settings ? Have these airborne movements affected the course of the pandemic ?
These questions have no answers yet . To get those answers , “ you ’ d have to expose animals to different quantities of airborne viruses , see if they get infected , and relate that to measures of the virus [ in places ] where people are infected , ” says Bill Hanage , an epidemiologist at Harvard . “ This is the type of stuff people will work on for years , but no one is going to find out for the moment . ”