A vaccine would be the ultimate weapon against the coronavirus and the best route back to normal life . Officials like Dr. Anthony S. Fauci , the top infectious disease expert on the Trump administration ’ s coronavirus task force , estimate a vaccine could arrive in at least 12 to 18 months .
The grim truth behind this rosy forecast is that a vaccine probably won ’ t arrive any time soon . Clinical trials almost never succeed . We ’ ve never released a coronavirus vaccine for humans before . Our record for developing an entirely new vaccine is at least four years — more time than the public or the economy can tolerate social-distancing orders .
But if there was any time to fast-track a vaccine , it is now . So Times Opinion asked vaccine experts how we could condense the timeline and get a vaccine in the next few months instead of years .
Options to shorten the timeline Start trials early Rely on work from studying SARS and MERS to shorten preparations before clinical trials Click to turn on Don ’ t wait for academic research Skip to clinical phases using what we know about the coronavirus so far
Normally , researchers need years to secure funding , get approvals and study results piece by piece . But these are not normal times .
There are already at least 254 therapies and 95 vaccines related to Covid-19 being explored .
“ If you want to make that 18-month timeframe , one way to do that is put as many horses in the race as you can , ” said Dr. Peter Hotez , dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine .
Despite the unprecedented push for a vaccine , researchers caution that less than 10 percent of drugs that enter clinical trials are ever approved by the Food and Drug Administration .
The rest fail in one way or another : They are not effective , don ’ t perform better than existing drugs or have too many side effects .
Fortunately , we already have a head start on the first phase of vaccine development : research . The outbreaks of SARS and MERS , which are also caused by coronaviruses , spurred lots of research . SARS and SARS-CoV-2 , the virus that causes Covid-19 , are roughly 80 percent identical , and both use so-called spike proteins to grab onto a specific receptor found on cells in human lungs . This helps explain how scientists developed a test for Covid-19 so quickly .
There ’ s a cost to moving so quickly , however . The potential Covid-19 vaccines now in the pipeline might be more likely to fail because of the swift march through the research phase , said Robert van Exan , a cell biologist who has worked in the vaccine industry for decades . He predicts we won ’ t see a vaccine approved until at least 2021 or 2022 , and even then , “ this is very optimistic and of relatively low probability . ”
And yet , he said , this kind of fast-tracking is “ worth the try — maybe we will get lucky . ”
The next step in the process is pre-clinical and preparation work , where a pilot factory is readied to produce enough vaccine for trials . Researchers relying on groundwork from the SARS and MERS outbreaks could theoretically move through planning steps swiftly .
Sanofi , a French biopharmaceutical company , expects to begin clinical trials late this year for a Covid-19 vaccine that it repurposed from work on a SARS vaccine . If successful , the vaccine could be ready by late 2021 .
Options to shorten the timeline Use ‘ pandemic speed ’ timeline Start subsequent steps before previous phases are completed Push to large-scale tests sooner Move more swiftly to Phase 3 trials by combining phases Use emergency provision Vaccinate front-line and essential workers early
As a rule , researchers don ’ t begin jabbing people with experimental vaccines until after rigorous safety checks .
They test the vaccine first on small batches of people — a few dozen during Phase 1 , then a few hundred in Phase 2 , then thousands in Phase 3 . Months normally pass between phases so that researchers can review the findings and get approvals for subsequent phases .
But “ if we do it the conventional way , there ’ s no way we ’ re going to be reaching that timeline of 18 months , ” said Akiko Iwasaki , a professor of immunobiology at Yale University School of Medicine and an investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute .
There are ways to slash time off this process by combining several phases and testing vaccines on more people without as much waiting .
Last week the National Academy of Sciences showed an overlapping timeline , describing it as moving at “ pandemic speed . ”
It ’ s here that talk of fast-tracking the timeline meets the messiness of real life : What if a promising vaccine actually makes it easier to catch the virus , or makes the disease worse after someone ’ s infected ?
That ’ s been the case for a few H.I.V . drugs and vaccines for dengue fever , because of a process called vaccine-induced enhancement , in which the body reacts unexpectedly and makes the disease more dangerous .
Researchers can ’ t easily infect vaccinated participants with the coronavirus to see how the body behaves . They normally wait until some volunteers contract the virus naturally . That means dosing people in regions hit hardest by the virus , like New York , or vaccinating family members of an infected person to see if they get the virus next . If the pandemic subsides , this step could be slowed .
“ That ’ s why vaccines take such a long time , ” said Dr. Iwasaki . “ But we ’ re making everything very short . Hopefully we can evaluate these risks as they occur , as soon as possible . ”
This is where the vaccine timelines start to diverge depending on who you are , and where some people might get left behind .
If a vaccine proves successful in early trials , regulators could issue an emergency-use provision so that doctors , nurses and other essential workers could get vaccinated right away — even before the end of the year . Researchers at Oxford announced this week that their coronavirus vaccine could be ready for emergency use by September if trials prove successful .
So researchers might produce a viable vaccine in just 12 to 18 months , but that doesn ’ t mean you ’ re going to get it . Millions of people could be in line before you . And that ’ s only if the United States finds a vaccine first . If another country , like China , beats us to it , we could wait even longer while it doses its citizens first .
You might be glad of that , though , if it turned out that the fast-tracked vaccine caused unexpected problems . Only after hundreds or thousands are vaccinated would researchers be able to see if a fast-tracked vaccine led to problems like vaccine-induced enhancement .
“ It ’ s true that any new technology comes with a learning curve , ” said Dr. Paul Offit , the director of the Vaccine Education Center at the Children ’ s Hospital of Philadelphia . “ And sometimes that learning curve has a human price . ”
Options to shorten the timeline Make vaccines early Build and manufacture early , anticipating that factories will be useful for a future vaccine and that the product will clear regulatory hurdles Take a bet on a successful mRNA vaccine This experimental technology may be faster to produce than traditional vaccines
Once we have a working vaccine in hand , companies will need to start producing millions — perhaps billions — of doses , in addition to the millions of vaccine doses that are already made each year for mumps , measles and other illnesses . It ’ s an undertaking almost unimaginable in scope .
Companies normally build new facilities perfectly tailored to any given vaccine because each vaccine requires different equipment . Some flu vaccines are produced using chicken eggs , using large facilities where a version of the virus is incubated and harvested . Other vaccines require vats in which a virus is cultured in a broth of animal cells and later inactivated and purified .
Those factories follow strict guidelines governing biological facilities and usually take around five years to build , costing at least three times more than conventional pharmaceutical factories . Manufacturers may be able to speed this up by creating or repurposing existing facilities in the middle of clinical trials , long before the vaccine in question receives F.D.A . approval .
“ They just can ’ t wait , ” said Dr. Iwasaki . “ If it turns out to be a terrible vaccine , they won ’ t distribute it . But at least they ’ ll have the capability ” to do so if the vaccine is successful .
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation says it will build factories for seven different vaccines . “ Even though we ’ ll end up picking at most two of them , we ’ re going to fund factories for all seven , just so that we don ’ t waste time , ” Bill Gates said during an appearance on “ The Daily Show . ”
In the end , the United States will have the capacity to mass-produce only two or three vaccines , said Vijay Samant , the former head of vaccine manufacturing at Merck .
“ The manufacturing task is insurmountable , ” Mr. Samant said . “ I get sleepless nights thinking about it . ”
Consider just one seemingly simple step : putting the vaccine into vials . Manufacturers need to procure billions of vials , and billions of stoppers to seal them . Sophisticated machines are needed to fill them precisely , and each vial is inspected on a high-speed line . Then vials are stored , shipped and released to the public using a chain of temperature-controlled facilities and trucks . At each of these stages , producers are already stretched to meet existing demands , Mr. Samant said .
It ’ s a bottleneck similar to the one that caused a dearth of ventilators , masks and other personal protective equipment just as Covid-19 surged across America .
If you talk about vaccines long enough , a new type of vaccine , called Messenger RNA ( or mRNA for short ) , inevitably comes up . There are hopes it could be manufactured at a record clip . Mr. Gates even included it on his Time magazine list of six innovations that could change the world . Is it the miracle we ’ re waiting for ?
Rather than injecting subjects with disease-specific antigens to stimulate antibody production , mRNA vaccines give the body instructions to create those antigens itself . Because mRNA vaccines don ’ t need to be cultured in large quantities and then purified , they are much faster to produce . They could change the course of the fight against Covid-19 .
“ On the other hand , ” said Dr. van Exan , “ no one has ever made an RNA vaccine for humans . ”
Researchers conducting dozens of trials hope to change that , including one by the pharmaceutical company Moderna . Backed by investor capital and spurred by federal funding of up to $ 483 million to tackle Covid-19 , Moderna has already fast-tracked an mRNA vaccine . It ’ s entering Phase 1 trials this year and the company says it could have a vaccine ready for front-line workers later this year .
“ Could it work ? Yeah , it could work , ” said Dr. Fred Ledley , a professor of natural biology and applied sciences at Bentley University . “ But in terms of the probability of success , what our data says is that there ’ s a lower chance of approval and the trials take longer . ”
The technology is decades old , yet mRNA is not very stable and can break down inside the body .
“ At this point , I ’ m hoping for anything to work , ” said Dr. Iwasaki . “ If it does work , wonderful , that ’ s great . We just don ’ t know . ”
The fixation on mRNA shows the allure of new and untested treatments during a medical crisis . Faced with the unsatisfying reality that our standard arsenal takes years to progress , the mRNA vaccine offers an enticing story mixed with hope and a hint of mystery . But it ’ s riskier than other established approaches .
Options to shorten the timeline Fast-track federal approvals Shorten approval window from a year to six months
Imagine that the fateful day arrives . Scientists have created a successful vaccine . They ’ ve manufactured huge quantities of it . People are dying . The economy is crumbling . It ’ s time to start injecting people .
But first , the federal government wants to take a peek .
That might seem like a bureaucratic nightmare , a rubber stamp that could cost lives . There ’ s even a common gripe among researchers : For every scientist employed by the F.D.A. , there are three lawyers . And all they care about is liability .
Yet F.D.A . approvals are no mere formality . Approvals typically take a full year , during which time scientists and advisory committees review the studies to make sure that the vaccine is as safe and effective as drug makers say it is .
While some steps in the vaccine timeline can be fast-tracked or skipped entirely , approvals aren ’ t one of them . There are horror stories from the past where vaccines were not properly tested . In the 1950s , for example , a poorly produced batch of a polio vaccine was approved in a few hours . It contained a version of the virus that wasn ’ t quite dead , so patients who got it actually contracted polio . Several children died .
The same scenario playing out today could be devastating for Covid-19 , with the anti-vaccination movement and online conspiracy theorists eager to disrupt the public health response . So while the F.D.A . might do this as fast as possible , expect months to pass before any vaccine gets a green light for mass public use .
At this point you might be asking : Why are all these research teams announcing such optimistic forecasts when so many experts are skeptical about even an 18-month timeline ? Perhaps because it ’ s not just the public listening — it ’ s investors , too .
“ These biotechs are putting out all these press announcements , ” said Dr. Hotez . “ You just need to recognize they ’ re writing this for their shareholders , not for the purposes of public health . ”
What if It Takes Even Longer Than the Pessimists Predict ?
Covid-19 lives in the shadow of the most vexing virus we ’ ve ever faced : H.I.V . After nearly 40 years of work , here is what we have to show for our vaccine efforts : a few Phase 3 clinical trials , one of which actually made the disease worse , and another with a success rate of just 30 percent .
Researchers say they don ’ t expect a successful H.I.V . vaccine until 2030 or later , putting the timeline at around 50 years .
That ’ s unlikely to be the case for Covid-19 , because , as opposed to H.I.V. , it doesn ’ t appear to mutate significantly and exists within a family of familiar respiratory viruses . Even still , any delay will be difficult to bear .
But the history of H.I.V . offers a glimmer of hope for how life could continue even without a vaccine . Researchers developed a litany of antiviral drugs that lowered the death rate and improved health outcomes for people living with AIDS . Today ’ s drugs can lower the viral load in an H.I.V.-positive person so the virus can ’ t be transmitted through sex .
Therapeutic drugs , rather than vaccines , might likewise change the fight against Covid-19 . The World Health Organization began a global search for drugs to treat Covid-19 patients in March . If successful , those drugs could lower the number of hospital admissions and help people recover faster from home while narrowing the infection window so fewer people catch the virus .
Combine that with rigorous testing and contact tracing — where infected patients are identified and their recent contacts notified and quarantined — and the future starts looking a little brighter . So far , the United States is conducting fewer than half the number of tests required and we need to recruit more than 300,000 contact-tracers . But other countries have started reopening following exactly these steps .
If all those things come together , life might return to normal long before a vaccine is ready to shoot into your arm .