Update , April 4 : The CDC has announced new guidelines recommending the use of cloth face coverings in public .
During the early days of the coronavirus pandemic , experts and officials cautioned against widespread public use of face masks . US Surgeon General Jerome Adams tweeted , “ STOP BUYING MASKS ! ” He added that masks “ are NOT effective in preventing general public from catching # Coronavirus , but if healthcare providers can ’ t get them to care for sick patients , it puts them and our communities at risk ! ”
But as the outbreak has worsened , experts have increasingly acknowledged that public use of masks could help prevent the spread of Covid-19 , the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , previously resistant to encouraging mask use by the general public , is now reportedly considering it .
The shift in expert guidance has come in the past couple of weeks — as the coronavirus has spread throughout the US . A recent report by public health experts for the conservative-leaning American Enterprise Institute ( AEI ) was unequivocal : “ everyone , including people without symptoms , should be encouraged to wear nonmedical fabric face masks while in public . ”
This all comes with a big caveat : When it comes to traditional medical masks , we still need to address a supply shortage for doctors , nurses , and other health care workers before people buy their own masks . A big public run on masks could make an already critical shortage of masks and other personal protective equipment ( PPE ) for doctors and nurses even worse . The shortage doesn ’ t just hurt health care workers , but all of us — because we need as many doctors and nurses as possible to stay healthy so they can treat and save people who are sick , not just with Covid-19 but with other illnesses too .
“ I am worried that telling people to wear masks will strain already weak supplies that are needed by doctors and nurses , ” Jennifer Nuzzo , an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins University , told me . “ If we are able to fix that supply chain , I ’ d feel less worried about this . But some of the shortages initially were due to members of public and medical staff raiding medical offices ’ and hospitals ’ supplies for home use . ”
There ’ s also a concern that public masks could give people an exaggerated sense of security . Masks don ’ t make you invincible , and they absolutely can ’ t replace good hygiene — Wash your hands ! Don ’ t touch your face ! — and social distancing . Even in Asian countries where widespread mask use is common , good hygiene and social distancing have been necessary to combat Covid-19 . Epidemiological models also suggest coronavirus cases will rise if social distancing measures are relaxed , potentially causing hundreds of thousands , if not millions , of deaths in the US alone .
Still , there is evidence that more mask use by the greater public could prevent the spread of coronavirus . Some studies in households and colleges “ show a benefit of masks , ” Raina MacIntyre , head of the Biosecurity Research Program at the University of New South Wales in Sydney , Australia , told me , “ so it would be plausible that they would also protect in lower intensity transmission settings such as in the general community . ”
It ’ s straightforward : Coronavirus appears to mostly spread when germ-containing droplets make it into a person ’ s mouth , nose , or eyes . If you have a physical barrier in front of your mouth and nose , that ’ s simply less likely to happen .
But the best protection masks offer may be protection from the wearer . While the evidence is thin on how much masks protect the wearer from coronavirus — since it ’ s unclear if the virus spreads much through airborne droplets — it ’ s true that the masks stop people from spreading their own droplets : When you breathe , talk , laugh , sigh , yawn , sneeze , or cough in public , you ’ re less likely to get droplets on a checkout machine , dining table , or anywhere else if you have a mask on . That could stop people , even those who are asymptomatic , from spreading infection .
That ’ s especially important for Covid-19 , since at least some spread happens when people are asymptomatic , when they have few symptoms , or before they develop symptoms . Universal mask use could stop these asymptomatic carriers — many of whom might not even know they ’ re sick — from inadvertently infecting other people .
Some members of the general public would also benefit more . People who know they ’ re sick or interacting with someone who ’ s sick are already advised to use a mask . People who frequently interact with others as part of their jobs , like a first responder or a grocery store clerk , are more likely to get good use out of masks too . The logic is similar to why masks are so important for health care workers : Masks are most useful during prolonged , close interactions involving potentially sick people .
The priority , though , is to ensure health care workers can get masks . In the meantime , people can use cloth masks ( which can be made at home ) . Until the PPE shortage is addressed , it ’ s important to leave as much supply as possible for health care workers who are literally saving lives in the fight against Covid-19 .
Here ’ s the gist of the evidence on public mask use : Masks don ’ t offer full protection — but some protection is better than none .
Masks can ’ t replace all the other approaches needed to fight the coronavirus , like washing your hands , not touching your face , and social distancing . But when paired with all these other tactics — and when used correctly , which may not be as easy as you think — masks offer an extra layer of protection .
The quality of the research on this topic is weak , with a lot of small , underpowered studies . “ There ’ s not this overwhelming body of evidence that says that ’ s exactly what we should be doing right now , ” Saskia Popescu , an epidemiologist focused on hospital preparedness , told me . “ That ’ s why there hasn ’ t been an earlier push from public health agencies . ”
But the studies that do exist generally favor more people wearing masks .
A 2008 systematic review , published in BMJ , found medical masks halted the spread of respiratory viruses from likely infected patients . In particular , studies on the 2003 outbreak of SARS — a cousin to the coronavirus that causes Covid-19 — found that masks alone were 68 percent effective at preventing the virus . By comparison , washing hands more than 10 times a day was 55 percent effective . A combination of measures — hand-washing , masks , gloves , and gowns — was 91 percent effective .
A 2015 review , also published in BMJ , looked at mask use among people in community settings , specifically households and colleges . Some studies produced unclear results , but the findings overall indicated that wearing a mask protected people from infections compared to not wearing a mask , especially when paired with hand-washing . A big issue was adherence ; people were often bad at actually wearing masks , which , unsurprisingly , diminished their effectiveness . But if masks were used early and consistently , the authors concluded , they seemed to work .
Other studies have produced similar results , typically finding at least some protective value from masks as long as they ’ re used consistently and properly .
There are some risks . If people start feeling like masks make them invulnerable and begin acting recklessly — ignoring social distancing or failing to wash their hands — that could actually make wearing masks worse than not wearing them . But if people take all the other precautions and add masks to their repertoire , as other countries ’ experiences suggest people can do , then masks seem to help .
There ’ s no good research on how masks affect people ’ s behaviors . “ It could be good . It could be bad , ” Popescu said . “ But either way , we need to have that knowledge . ”
There ’ s also a risk of improper use actually exposing people to more illness . If people don ’ t put on the masks correctly , they won ’ t be as protective ( though some barrier is likely better than none ) . If people touch the front of their masks and then touch other parts of their face , they can infect themselves with droplets their mask caught . If people reuse masks , they can breathe in virus-containing droplets from the masks while putting them on or taking them off .
The results also vary depending on the type of mask . One kind of mask that ’ s been talked about a lot lately is the N95 respirator , which is a more complex , expensive mask meant to fit more tightly on the face . N95 respirators in theory outperform surgical masks ( which are the more traditional , looser-fitting medical masks ) , but they ’ re genuinely difficult to fit and use properly — to the point that a 2016 review in CMAJ couldn ’ t find a difference among health care workers using N95 respirators versus surgical masks for respiratory infection , likely due to poor fitting . Given how difficult these are to use , and the extra layer of protection they can provide , experts argue these masks should , above all , be saved for health care workers .
Cloth masks , meanwhile , are much less effective than the modern alternatives , as a 2015 study in BMJ found . And they can be extra risky , since they can trap and hold virus-containing droplets that wearers can then breathe in . But they still , in general , offer more protection than no mask at all , several studies concluded .
Experts also offered some advice for proper mask use : Wash your hands before and after taking off a mask — before to avoid getting anything on your face and mask , and after to get rid of anything that was on your mask . Don ’ t fidget with your mask while it ’ s on . If possible , throw away masks after using them . And if you can ’ t throw a mask away , make sure to thoroughly disinfect it with ultraviolet light sterilizers — not something most people have around — or , if using a cloth product , soap and water .
Based on the evidence , masks appear to help both the wearer and other people . The latter is particularly important for the coronavirus , since the disease can spread from those with few to no symptoms . So whether it ’ s for selfish or altruistic reasons , there could be a benefit to everyone , even the asymptomatic , wearing masks — as is standard and recommended by public officials in many Asian countries ( including Taiwan and South Korea , both of which have done a better job containing Covid-19 than the US ) .
George Gao , director general of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention , said as much in an interview with Science magazine :
The big mistake in the US and Europe , in my opinion , is that people aren ’ t wearing masks . This virus is transmitted by droplets and close contact . Droplets play a very important role — you ’ ve got to wear a mask , because when you speak , there are always droplets coming out of your mouth . Many people have asymptomatic or presymptomatic infections . If they are wearing face masks , it can prevent droplets that carry the virus from escaping and infecting others .
But part of persuading people to wear masks in these countries was simply more people wearing masks in public , removing the stigma that only sick people wear masks and making masks more socially acceptable . That ’ s an argument for everyone wearing a cloth mask now — and medical masks once supply shortages are fixed — when we go out . Not only could that help protect ourselves and those around us , it might help instill a healthier norm for the rest of society too .
Masks aren ’ t a cure-all — and doctors and nurses need them more
Despite the evidence for more public use of masks , the CDC , along with the rest of the federal government , has historically avoided recommending the widespread use of masks . I asked the CDC why .
What followed was a frustrating exchange . Why shouldn ’ t the public use masks if they provide some protection ? “ CDC does not recommend that people who are well wear a facemask to protect themselves from respiratory illnesses , including COVID-19 , ” CDC spokesperson Arleen Porcell responded . Okay , but why ? “ The science says that surgical masks won ’ t stop the wearer from inhaling small airborne particles , which can cause infection . Nor do these masks form a snug seal around the face. ” Sure , masks don ’ t stop everything , but isn ’ t some protection better than none ? I got no response after that .
Since I had that exchange with the CDC , the agency has reportedly started to reconsider its stance on masks . Regardless of what the CDC decides , its messaging has backfired : As health care workers have clamored for masks , it ’ s become harder to tell the public that masks wouldn ’ t benefit everyone else . By obfuscating and failing to fully explain the issue , experts told me , officials have likely sown distrust toward their guidance — and the public has rushed to buy masks anyway .
I can ’ t explain the motives behind the CDC ’ s stance . But based on my conversations with other experts and officials , it seems many people are afraid of saying anything that could exacerbate the PPE shortage for health care workers or get members of the general public to think — incorrectly — that they could ease on social distancing if they just wear a mask .
“ I fear that if we tell everyone they should go out and buy masks , it will not only contribute to the PPE shortage , ” Jaimie Meyer , an infectious disease expert at Yale University , told me , “ but it will give a false sense of a ‘ quick fix ’ for protection , whereas people still need to be practicing social distancing strategies that are much more effective , though perhaps socially , psychologically , [ and ] logistically challenging . ”
So as tough as social distancing can feel , it ’ s , unfortunately , a requirement for now that just won ’ t be supplanted by masks .
The PPE shortage is a real problem too . There are reports of doctors , nurses , and other health care workers using bandanas and scarves for masks and trash bags for gowns . Hospitals are considering do-not-resuscitate orders for dying Covid-19 patients out of fear such intensive , close-up procedures could get doctors and nurses without PPE infected with the virus . The CDC , acknowledging the shortage , now recommends homemade masks for health care workers if no other options are available .
Different levels of government are racing to fix the PPE shortage , which is driven by both high demand as the coronavirus spreads and a lack of supply as countries , hospitals , and individuals hoard what they can find . Experts say the shortage reflects poor government preparedness for a pandemic , given that disease outbreak simulations repeatedly found PPE problems in the past .
Whatever the cause , the shortage for health care workers is bad news for all of us .
As coronavirus has spread , experts have talked up “ flattening the curve. ” The idea is to spread out the number of coronavirus cases — through social distancing , testing , contact tracing , and other protective measures — to avoid overwhelming the health care system . Here ’ s what that looks like in chart form :
The PPE shortage could make it harder to flatten the curve of new cases if doctors and nurses get sick . But the line representing health care system capacity also isn ’ t a constant . If we develop more capacity , it can handle more cases at once . If capacity falls — if doctors and nurses get sick because of a lack of protective equipment , or refuse to work without conditions that can ensure their safety — even a flatter curve will be hard for the system to handle .
That ’ s why experts , even those who acknowledge that the public would benefit from using masks , say that doctors and nurses should get priority : This isn ’ t just about keeping people on the front lines safe ; it ’ s about keeping all of us safe .
So until the shortage is fixed , experts say that people should not compete with our health care workers for mask supplies . If you do have masks , consider donating them to hospitals and clinics ( though note that most will only accept unopened packages ) . There ’ s also a new group , Project N95 , trying to connect PPE suppliers and health care workers .
Policymakers could also take steps to fix the shortage : sending out strategic reserves , funding more production , and , in President Donald Trump ’ s case , using the Defense Production Act to better prioritize PPE for hard-hit states in the short term and mandating more production in the medium and long term . And individual companies could shift their production lines to produce more PPE , like some clothing and pillow companies are doing .
For now , the AEI road map gave an alternative for public mask use : cloth . “ Personal protective equipment should continue to be reserved for health care workers until supplies are sufficient for them and abundant , ” the report concluded . “ For this reason , right now members of the general public should opt to wear nonmedical fabric face masks when going out in public . ”
Again , the research suggests cloth masks aren ’ t as effective as medical masks , but they offer some protection . If you want to make your own , people are increasingly offering their own tips on how to do so on social media .