“ The 360 ” shows you diverse perspectives on the day ’ s top stories and debates .
Stay-at-home orders to limit the spread of the coronavirus have been issued by governors in all but a handful of states . These orders have presented difficult decisions for lawmakers as they decide which places should be designated as essential and allowed to remain open . Perhaps the most contentious debate has been around whether places of worship , such as churches , mosques and synagogues , should be forced to close .
More than a dozen governors have included exemptions in their orders for religious gatherings , though some of them limit the number of attendees and mandate social distancing . The majority of religious leaders have complied , either by holding small services or switching to online worship . But some have defied restrictions by continuing to hold regular services to packed crowds .
Law enforcement officials in a number of states have intervened . An evangelical Christian pastor in Florida was arrested for continuing to hold large services last week . The state ’ s governor later issued a stay-at-home order that included an exemption for religious gatherings with no limitations on crowd size .
Advocates for closing all places of worship during the pandemic say public health takes precedence over First Amendment freedoms at the moment . Large crowds of any kind should be banned , they say , but there ’ s also evidence that religious gatherings can be particularly dangerous . Coronavirus clusters in Washington , California and several other states have been directly linked back to religious gatherings .
Many religious leaders make the case that physical attendance is not necessary to practice one ’ s faith and point to online services as a high-quality alternative . Legal analysts say closing places of worship does not violate freedom of religion as laid out in the First Amendment in the specific case of the pandemic .
A vocal group of faith leaders and congregants argue that religion is an essential part of their lives , and the freedom to practice as they see fit — even if it puts them at risk — supersedes public health orders . Others support allowing small religious gatherings that adhere to social distancing , rather than complete bans . Places of worship serve an important role beyond religious services in many communities , some argue . If permitted to safely stay open , they could serve as critical points of support for people with health or economic needs . There are also concerns that some churches , synagogues and mosques , like many other businesses , may not endure financially if forced to close for extended periods .
Orders that force religious institutions to close completely may backfire , some argue , by creating an adversarial stance between religion and government that stokes fears of persecution .
“ When our diocese and our church made the difficult decision to close our church building , we began living into a truth we have long proclaimed : the church is not a building . It is a community of people. ” — Rev . Leslie Hague , South Florida Sun Sentinel
“ In this time of chaos , uncertainty , and gloom , faith and religious gatherings can provide peace , purpose , and fellowship . However , it is for these reasons that church , and religious gatherings in general , are among the highest risk venues , as otherwise isolated older adults come into close contact with socially active younger adults and children who may carry the coronavirus asymptomatically. ” — Eugenia C. South and M. Kit Delgado , Philadelphia Inquirer
Defying stay-at-home orders will hurt public perception of religious people
“ Even if we do practice stringent hygiene and social distancing , coming together as congregations in the face of this pandemic actually mars our witness . Rather than looking courageous and faithful , we come off looking callous and even foolish. ” — Daniel Harrell , Christianity Today
Leaders who refuse to shut down should face legal consequences
“ Good pastors protect their flocks . Pastors who willfully expose their congregations to this deadly virus do not deserve the title . Church leaders who insist on putting lives at risk should be jailed. ” — Editorial , Sacramento Bee