Governors are heading for a clash with their own citizens and local officials as they weigh how and when to reopen the country 's economy amid the coronavirus pandemic .
President Trump Donald John TrumpGOP lawmaker calls McConnell remarks on state bankruptcy 'shameful and indefensible ' Newsom wants to train 10,000 contact tracers in California Biden leads in three crucial Rust Belt states : Poll MORE 's own guidelines for easing social distancing restrictions , unveiled on Thursday , leave the final decisions for those matters with state governors . And those governors are facing growing pressure from the public in states such as Ohio and Michigan , where protests have called on leaders to quickly lift stay-at-home orders and bans on large gatherings and to allow nonessential businesses to open their doors .
Experts say those fights between local stakeholders eager to lift the economic shutdown and governors , wary of losing ground against the virus , will be the next battleground in the nation 's pandemic response .
“ We ’ ve already seen significant conflicts between state and local leaders over the imposition of social distancing restrictions , exceptions to them , and how they should be enforced , ” said Lindsay Wiley , a law professor at American University . `` We ’ ll surely see conflicts over decisions to ease them . ''
And it 's a fight in which Trump appears to be siding with those who want the restrictions to be lifted quickly .
Trump and state governors appeared to reach a truce this week when the White House unveiled guidelines for phasing in a reopening of the economy that seemed to give wide latitude to states .
The federal recommendations came after Trump and several state leaders recently exchanged sharp words over whether public health authority ultimately resides with federal or state governments .
“ You ’ re going to call your own shots , ” Trump told the governors during a conference call , according to The Associated Press . “ We ’ re going to be standing alongside of you . ”
But in a series of tweets on Friday , Trump appeared to back protesters in Minnesota , Michigan and Virginia , where extended stay-at-home orders and other restrictions have sparked a backlash .
“ LIBERATE MINNESOTA , ” Trump tweeted , followed by a tweet that read , “ LIBERATE MICHIGAN . ”
`` LIBERATE VIRGINIA , and save your great 2nd Amendment . It is under siege ! '' read a third tweet , a reference to new gun laws in the state .
Trump ’ s tweets in support of the protesters seemed designed to put pressure on the Democratic leaders of three 2020 swing states .
Washington state Gov . Jay Inslee Jay Robert InsleeWashington state to implement 'rapid-response ' contact tracing workforce in May ███ 's Campaign Report : Florida in play as Biden takes lead in poll OVERNIGHT ENERGY : Trump says national parks to start reopening | Oil prices begin recovery amid pressure to finance struggling industry | Al Gore endorses Biden MORE ( D ) fired back at Trump , accusing him of `` fomenting domestic rebellion . ''
More protests are expected in the coming days in Wisconsin , Pennsylvania and Idaho , giving a public voice to the opposition to social distancing restrictions across the country .
In Michigan , a crowd of demonstrators organized by a conservative group on Wednesday descended on the state Capitol to protest Gov . Gretchen Whitmer 's ( D ) stay-at-home order .
“ When did one size solve everyone ’ s local issues ? '' one unidentified organizer asked local news radio station WWJ . `` Gov . Whitmer will put you out of business before allowing mere citizens to be responsible for their own behavior . That is madness . ”
Whitmer faces two lawsuits over her stay-at-home order , with the plaintiffs — Michigan residents and businesses — claiming the April 9 order infringes on the constitutionally protected freedom of association and due process rights .
Michigan has recorded more than 29,000 cases and 2,000 deaths from the coronavirus . Nationwide , the U.S. has more than 683,000 cases and 34,000 deaths .
In New Jersey , Gov . Phil Murphy ( D ) has been under criticism for his decision to include churches and other houses of worship in his state 's strict social distancing guidelines .
During a tense interview with Tucker Carlson Tucker CarlsonTrump immigration vow stirs serious blowback Texas lt. governor on reopening state : 'There are more important things than living ' Governors headed for messy fight over coronavirus restrictions MORE of Fox News , Murphy was asked about constitutional protections after police broke up a rabbi 's funeral in early April at a synagogue in Ocean County , N.J. , arresting 15 men .
`` That 's above my pay grade , Tucker , '' Murphy replied . `` I was n't thinking of the Bill of Rights when we did this . ... We looked at all the data and the science and it says people have to stay away from each other . That is the best thing we can do to break the back of the curve of this virus , that leads to lower hospitalization and ultimately fatalities . ''
The landmark 1905 Supreme Court decision in Jacobson v. Massachusetts held that constitutional rights can be lawfully restricted when emergency public health measures are in place , though the precise scope of government public health power is not clearly defined .
But there has not been a direct legal ruling yet on mandatory stay-at-home orders , and state and local leaders could find themselves dragged into court fights if they adopt an overly aggressive approach to enforcing mitigation measures , Wiley said .
Governors and local officials may need to walk a tight line in enforcing restrictions .
“ Harsh enforcement would probably trigger lawsuits that could be more difficult for state and local leaders to defend than the suits filed so far by churches , gun shops and health care providers , ” she said .
In addition to citizen protests , another source of conflict could result from states moving on a faster timeline to reopen than cities , where higher population density makes person-to-person transmission of the virus easier .
“ Conflicts between state and local control are a common problem for public health measures , ” Wiley said . “ We ’ ve seen it with gun control and fast food regulation , and now we ’ re seeing it with social distancing . ”
Within states , the division of public health power is based on each state ’ s constitution and statutes , creating a complicated patchwork of authorities across the country .
In a majority of states , the governor , legislature or both have the power to override local governments . In other cases , state constitutions provide so-called home rule authority , giving a degree of autonomy to local leaders .
How these looming health conflicts are resolved will vary state by state , and early signs are of a split among blue and red states , with Republican governors more eager to ease restrictions .
Wiley said governors will face a challenge as they navigate the pressure and decide how to enforce restrictions .
“ Pandemic plans urge leaders to avoid police crackdowns and to rely on enforcement against businesses and organizations — not individuals , '' she said .
`` Maintaining the public ’ s trust and cooperation will be critical over the months to years for which some degree of social distancing is likely to be needed . ''