President Donald Trump announced late Monday he was suspending immigration into the U.S. , saying he would sign an executive order that would help `` protect jobs '' impacted by the coronavirus pandemic .
Earlier in Washington , a deal appeared close to provide an additional $ 300 billion for small businesses crushed by the lockdowns . The agreement would also provide more funding for hospitals and for testing . In New York , the state most impacted by the virus , public health officials kicked off the most extensive antibody testing campaign in the nation . Governor Andrew Cuomo will visit Tuesday with Trump at the White House .
In other news , the nation 's leaders wrangled over bailouts while governors chipped away at lockdowns and hundreds of people gathered to protest the stay-at-home restrictions .
Stocks struggled and oil prices took another nosedive under the weight of the sagging economy . In Pennsylvania 's capital city of Harrisburg , protesters opposed to Gov . Tom Wolf 's restrictive stay-at-home order gathered at the Capitol building .
Similar protests have been springing up across the nation as jobless numbers rise and patience thins .
The U.S. coronavirus death toll rose to surpass 42,000 ; there are more than 786,000 confirmed cases , according to John Hopkins University data . The number of worldwide cases was nearing 2.5 million ; there are over 170,000 deaths .
Our live blog is being updated throughout the day . Refresh for the latest news , and get updates in your inbox with The Daily Briefing . More headlines :
• It 's 4/20 . Legal weed stores are 'essential . ' Will marijuana go mainstream ?
• Bold move.Photos show counter-protesters dressed in scrubs blocking lockdown demonstration in Colorado .
When will a second wave of the coronavirus hit ? What will it look like ?
• Reopening America : What states are relaxing social distancing restrictions ?
• Will coronavirus quarantine mess up my kid for life ? Probably not . But poor kids are at risk .
• Meat shortage ? Coronavirus has led Smithfield , other plants to close and farmers to dump milk .
• Need a mask ? 9 retailers selling fabric face masks that are worth buying .
•Staying Apart , Together . Sign up for our newsletter on coping with a world changed by coronavirus . 📧
President Trump announced he was temporarily suspending immigration to the U.S. , citing the need to protect jobs as the country is dealing with coronavirus pandemic .
`` In light of the attack from the Invisible Enemy , as well as the need to protect the jobs of our GREAT American Citizens , I will be signing an Executive Order to temporarily suspend immigration into the United States ! ” Trump tweeted .
The move by the president comes after immigration bans from China and Europe were put in place to deal with the spread of the COVID-19 .
New York governor Andrew Cuomo , a frequent sparring partner of President Trump during the coronavirus crisis , will visit the White House Tuesday , Trump said during his daily pandemic press briefing Monday .
New York has been the hardest hit by COVID-19 with more than 250,000 cases and 18,000 deaths , according to the Johns Hopkins database tracking the virus , but numbers have been improving .
`` They 're really getting it together in New York , a lot of good things are happening in New York , '' Trump said . `` And I think the governor is coming to see us tomorrow . He 's coming to the Oval Office tomorrow afternoon . Andrew is going to be coming in with some of his people , so we 're looking forward to that . ''
The meeting comes on the heels of a testy exchange Friday between the two politicians . After Cuomo chastised the president for asking governors to take on coronavirus challenges without federal resources , Trump tweeted that the governor should `` spend more time 'doing ' and less time 'complaining . ' '' Cuomo responded that all the president seemed to be doing was `` walking in front of the parade . ''
On Monday , Gov . Henry McMaster of South Carolina and Gov . Brian Kemp of Georgia moved forward with separate measures that ease restrictions on the temporary closures of certain businesses in their states .
McMaster announced a plan called `` Accelerate South Carolina '' that will allow clothing , department , furniture , jewelry and sporting goods stores , as well as florists and flea markets to reopen at reduced capacity . The closure on beaches will be lifted , though it will be up to local officials to decide on the reopening of specific beaches .
The order will go into effect Tuesday and still encourages social distancing directives to be followed . Barbershops , beauty salons , bingo halls , gyms and nightclubs must remain closed for now .
Kemp said he was allowing certain businesses to reopen on Friday , including gyms , fitness centers , bowling alleys , barbers , cosmetologists and massage therapists . They must also adhere to social distancing measures .
Bars , nightclubs and entertainment operations will remain closed , but restaurants and theaters will be able to reopen April , 27 .
New York City cancels Pride Parade , all other big June events
New York City 's Pride Parade , which would have marked its 50th anniversary , and the Puerto Rican Day Parade were among all major events canceled Monday in June by Mayor Bill de Blasio . City hospitalizations and deaths appear to be in a modest decline , but De Blasio has said the city ca n't ease its tight stay-at-home restrictions until extensive daily testing can be worked out .
“ That march is such an important part of life in this city , but this year in particular was going to be something that was a historical moment , ” de Blasio said of the Pride Parade . “ They will be back , and we will find the right way to do it . ”
Hundreds of protesters , many ignoring social distancing rules , rallied at the Pennsylvania Capitol in Harrisburg on Monday in opposition of the state 's shutdown of schools and businesses . Gov . Tom Wolf , a Democrat , released a phase-in plan last week aimed at reopening the state but provided few details and no timeline . Limitations on mass gatherings will remain in place for the duration of the reopening process , and a “ strong testing regime ” must be in place in areas that are permitted to reopen , according to the plan .
In Denver a day earlier , health care workers blocked a parade of protesters who gathered outside of Colorado ’ s Capitol in opposition of the state ’ s stay-at-home orders . Viral photos show counter-protesters in teal scrubs and matching masks with crossed arms standing in front of motorists lined up for several blocks leading to the Capitol building .
Iconic baseball bat brand Louisville Slugger is hoping the coronavirus doesn ’ t strike it out . With the start of Major League Baseball on indefinite hold and no revenue coming in , fifth-generation company Hillerich & Bradsby has been forced to furlough 171 employees , which is most of its workforce . They will receive benefits and health insurance , but no pay . Those still employed got a 25 % pay cut .
“ We ’ re not doing any advertising . We ’ ve cut all our expenses we can . We ’ re just hoping we get back to normal before we run out of cash , ” CEO John Hillerich IV told the Louisville Courier Journal . H & B was sold to sporting goods manufacturer Wilson in 2015 for $ 70 million . It typically makes around 50,000 bats a year , the long-time weapons of choice for everyone from Babe Ruth to Derek Jeter .
H & B tried to access federal aid through its bank , but later found out that Wells Fargo was only applying on behalf of much smaller companies . By the time H & B reapplied for Small Business Administration loans , funds had run out . Adding to the bat-maker ’ s concerns is the fragile nature of its raw material . If not turned into bats soon , the logs currently sitting in the company ’ s warehouses could soon become worthless due to rot .
The head of the World Health Organization warned that “ the worst is yet ahead of us ” in the coronavirus outbreak , a dire prediction coming as many countries and U.S. states are beginning to ease restrictive measures . WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus didn ’ t detail his warning , but global health officials have previously warned that the coronavirus could prove brutal as it sweeps through Africa , where health systems are far less developed .
President Donald Trump has repeatedly accused WHO of failing to provide accurate , up-to-date information on the coronavirus outbreak and has frozen U.S. funding to the agency .
U.S. stocks were traded lower and oil prices plummeted Monday despite indications the nation 's slumbering economy could soon begin to awaken . The Dow Industrials and broader Standard and Poor 's averages were down more than 2 % and 1 % , respectively , although tech stocks were higher . The economic upheaval caused by coronavirus layoffs and stay-at-home orders has softened oil demand to where there is little space left in U.S. storage facilities for what is being pumped from the ground .
Several states , however , have announced plans to begin easing lockdown restrictions . National companies were also beginning to stir – Boeing was set to begin ramping up production in Washington state , where approximately 27,000 people could return to work this week , the planemaker said .
More of us may have had COVID-19 and did n't know it
New research suggests that many people have had the coronavirus without symptoms , fueling hope that it will turn out to be much less lethal than feared . But without widespread antibody testing it would also make it difficult to know who around you may be contagious , complicating decisions about returning to work , school and normal life .
In the last week , reports of `` silent infections '' have come from a homeless shelter in Boston , a U.S. Navy aircraft carrier , pregnant women at a New York hospital , several European countries and California . The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says 25 % of infected people might not have symptoms . Pentagon officials say it may be as high as 60 % to 70 % among military personnel .
New York state kicked off a large-scale antibody testing program to determine what percentage of the population has contracted the coronavirus in advance of reviving the state 's economy . A total of 3,000 people will be randomly selected for testing this week to determine if their bodies have built up an immunity .
Gov . Andrew Cuomo said data metrics of coronavirus cases , deaths , hospitalizations and intubations “ would suggest we ’ re seeing a descent ” of the outbreak in the state . There were 478 coronavirus deaths Sunday , which was down from 507 the day before . The decline has been fairly steady for several days . Cuomo did say that emergency rooms “ are still at or over capacity , but it ’ s better than it was ” and that new hospitalizations of patients with COVID-19 “ were basically flat . ”
Many marijuana stores shuttered by lockdowns are embracing the change , allowing customers to order online and pick up curbside . That 's a major shift from when each buyer had to be personally verified by a licensed store worker . In California , stores have largely switched to an all-delivery model . Regulators in many states have declare cannabis shops essential business on par with groceries , gas and liquor . Some cannabis advocates are optimistic the outbreak is providing an opportunity to move further into the mainstream .
`` In a sea of chaos , this was one of the biggest moments in our industry 's history , '' investor Morgan Paxhia said .
President Donald Trump said he 's `` OK '' with Nevada 's closure of nonessential businesses , which has shuttered Las Vegas casinos , days after the city 's mayor called the shutdown `` total insanity . '' Trump gave qualified support Sunday to Nevada 's Democratic Gov . Steve Sisolak 's closure amid the coronavirus pandemic . Nevada has 3,728 confirmed cases of coronavirus and 155 deaths . Las Vegas Mayor Carolyn Goodman , who identifies as an independent , called on Sisolak to allow businesses to reopen .
`` They closed a big hotel down in Nevada that I have in Las Vegas . It ’ s a very severe step he took . I ’ m OK with it , '' Trump said . `` But you could call that one either way . ''
The White House and Congressional leaders were nearing a deal to replenish a program geared to keeping small businesses from shuttering and their employees from going on unemployment . The agreement would provide another $ 300 billion for the Paycheck Protection Program , which has burned through its initial $ 349 billion for loans to small businesses . The deal would also provide $ 75 billion to help overwhelmed hospitals and $ 25 billion to increase the capacity to test for the virus . But a number of disagreements remain over details , including how those funds will be divided and spent .
Ship wraps up 15-week cruise with no reported virus cases
Several horror stories have emerged in recent weeks from cruise ships struggling to find welcoming ports while battling sometimes deadly waves of coronavirus . Not so the Costa Deliziosa , whose passengers began disembarking in Barcelona on Monday after traveling the globe for 15 weeks while the new coronavirus spread on land .
Owner Costa Crociere , an Italian company , says the ship has no cases of the COVID-19 virus on board . The boat sailed the last five weeks with virtually no human contact with the outside world . Hundreds of the boat ’ s 1,831 passengers , including 168 Spaniards , were expected to get off the boat in Spain and the rest were expected to do so in the next and last stop , in Genoa , Italy .
Queen Elizabeth II ’ s husband issued a rare public statement , praising those tackling the new coronavirus pandemic and keeping essential services running . Prince Philip , who turns 99 in June , applauded the “ vital and urgent ” work of medical and science professionals as well as people working in food production , garbage collection and postal and delivery services .
The shoutout comes as hospital organizations are slamming Britain ’ s government for its failure to give medical staff appropriate clothing and equipment to deal with the COVID-19 outbreak . With so many promises dashed , Chris Hopson of the NHS Providers told the BBC there is “ relatively low confidence ” that a shipment of 400,000 surgical gowns overdue from Turkey will arrive Monday . Culture Secretary Oliver Dowden says he ’ s hopeful “ that later today that flight will take off and we will get those gowns . ’ ’
Shake Shack plans to send back $ 10 million coronavirus stimulus loan
Shake Shack is sending back the $ 10 million it received from the government 's stimulus loans program aimed at saving small businesses ravaged by the coronavirus pandemic . Shake Shack CEO Randy Garutti and founder Danny Meyer said the company sought the loan because it was supposed to be open to all businesses with 500 or fewer employees . The criteria applies to the chain ’ s individual franchise locations . The company secured separate funding last week through a public stock transaction .
`` The 'PPP ' came with no user manual and it was extremely confusing , '' the executives said in a joint statement .