CAMBRIDGE , Mass . ( Project Syndicate ) — Like surfers looking out for the next big breaker before the first one has passed , epidemiologists and public-health officials in the United States are bracing themselves for a fresh surge of COVID-19 infections later this year . The fear is that this second wave will coincide with the peak of the 2020-21 U.S. influenza season , triggering a new flood of hospital patients in dire need of respiratory support .
The fear is justified , based on what we know about coronaviruses and influenza . For both , infections begin rising in November and peak at some point in December , January , or February , before subsiding by April .
“ The United States is not limiting COVID-19 infections enough to avoid a serious second wave of the pandemic later this year . As communities reopen and behavior patterns loosen still further , the country will be forced to face the consequences of its insufficient action to date . ”
What is less certain is how high the waves for each infection will be .
Although we understand influenza infection patterns much better than that of the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19 , influenza remains a known unknown . Its strains vary from year to year in terms of both transmissibility and severity . In some years , the number of lives lost to influenza in the U.S. can be as low as 12,000 . But during the 2017-18 winter , a particularly lethal strain led to the death of an estimated 80,000 Americans — the highest such toll in at least 40 years .
The annual variation in influenza strains means that we need to create a new vaccine each year . But there ’ s a catch : the vaccine needs to be prepared well in advance of peak flu season — and often before the new influenza strain even appears . If the vaccine matches fairly accurately , it limits both the severity of an illness due to infection and the number of deaths due to complications from the disease .
Read this next : Amid coronavirus , one in four Americans project to struggle with hunger
But our 2017-18 vaccine was not a good match . By January 2018 , hospitals were overwhelmed , emergency rooms were turning away ambulances , and medical centers were implementing now-familiar measures such as setting up triage tents in parking lots , restricting visits by friends and family , and canceling elective surgeries .
The severity of the 2020-21 influenza season will therefore depend on how well our vaccine matches the strain of the virus , and on the particular strain itself . But it will also depend on our own behavior and how readily we spread the infection to others .
Compared to influenza viruses , the behavior of SARS-CoV-2 is a much greater unknown . What we infer is mostly based on the behavior of the four cold-causing coronaviruses that have been circulating in the U.S. since at least the 1960s , when they were first discovered .
The seasonal appearance of these viruses closely resembles that of influenza , except that infections do not disappear in the summer months ; instead , they continue at a reduced frequency . Indeed , the notion that heat and humidity will eliminate SARS-CoV-2 is belied by ongoing infections in Singapore and coastal West Africa .
In fact , the seasonality of viral infections overall remains a mystery . Some think that viruses like influenza and coronavirus peak in winter because cold , dry weather dries our mucous membranes , rendering us more susceptible to viral infections . Others observe that , in winter , we gather more closely together indoors , facilitating transmission .
These theories seem plausible until one considers other viruses , like polio and cold-causing rhinoviruses , which peak in summer . And the mystery only deepens when we come to viruses that are seasonal in temperate climates and maintain a near-constant ( albeit lower ) infection rate in the tropics .
With SARS-CoV-2 unlikely to disappear on its own , and absent an effective vaccine or prophylactic drug , the main factor influencing the magnitude of a second wave of infections is how well we control the epidemic between now and then .
The number of people actively infected by the virus in October — the so-called human reservoir — will determine the size and speed of the expected second wave . Limiting the number of infections now will reduce the number of infections later .
Unfortunately , the U.S. is not limiting COVID-19 infections enough to avoid a severe second wave . Our current control measures — limited testing and largely voluntary self-isolation for those known to be infected or exposed — are unlikely to eliminate the virus from the population .
Countries that so far have tackled the disease successfully have much broader testing regimes and have implemented exhaustive contact-tracing programs that identify all those potentially infected and move them to supervised facilities , often at a local hotel , where they are monitored for symptoms .
As U.S. communities reopen and behavior patterns loosen still further , we will be forced to face the consequences of our insufficient action . Come October , I expect that we will be on the brink of another deadly round of COVID-19 infections . And if a significant wave of influenza infections crashes down upon us at the same time , even more people will die .
Having the medical means to prevent SARS-CoV-2 transmission would diminish the size and impact of a second COVID-19 wave . Indeed , with strong support by governments , the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries , and non-profit foundations , efforts to develop a vaccine and drugs that may block the virus ’ s transmission have shifted into high gear in laboratories around the world .
With seven vaccines and at least one drug with prophylactic potential currently in clinical trials , I am confident that we will be able to limit SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the near future .
But the question is when . To have an impact on a second wave of U.S. infections this autumn , a vaccine or prophylactic drug must be widely available by the very beginning of the season . That will require maximum coordinated efforts by researchers , manufacturers , and regulators .
Although such a scenario is possible , we will need to be both smart and lucky to avoid what nature has in store for us come winter . And without a medical breakthrough , we will have to prepare for the worst .