It seems that the steps to address the spread of the Coronavirus are becoming more intense with every hour . The NBA is putting its season on “ hiatus , ” as other sports leagues around the world are doing or have done the same . The president is canceling speaking engagements , and banning certain travel from Europe . Everybody is buying all the toilet paper they can .
With that in mind , it is worth noting that the US is in the midst of its primary election season , with general election candidates of all parties being selected up and down the ballot . Given that elections generally bring together large groups of people in relatively confined spaces like hallways , rec rooms , and gyms—in some cases for hours on end—some have asked whether it ’ s smart to make people gather this way in the current moment .
Enter a proposal from Sen. Ron Wyden ( D-Oregon ) . His bill , introduced Wednesday , would require all states to offer voters a vote-by-mail option , or to allow for the drop-off of hand-marked paper ballots , once 25 percent of states and/or territories declare a state of emergency related to the coronavirus . The bill would kick in $ 500 million in federal funding to help states make this happen .
In a normal environment such a bill would have trouble moving forward . Congressional Republicans are loathe to do anything that makes it seem as though the federal government is telling states how to handle elections . Even though 34 states and the District of Columbia already offer the equivalent of a vote-by-mail option—and some have been doing it for nearly 20 years—when past national vote-by-mail bills have been introduced into Congress , they gained support mostly only from Democrats , and got nowhere .
A spokesperson for Sen. Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) , the Senate majority leader and a leading crusader against federal election mandates , hasn ’ t responded to a request for comment on Wyden ’ s bill . But given this crisis , and with the next major set of state primaries coming up in Florida , Arizona , Illinois , and Ohio on March 17 , it ’ s worth asking if this dynamic—like so many others stressed by the burgeoning pandemic—could change .