When coronavirus cases started exploding on the East Coast in March , there were devastating failures by Democratic leaders . New York ’ s governor , Andrew Cuomo , not only forced nursing homes to take back residents who ’ d been hospitalized for the coronavirus , he barred them from testing the residents to see if they were still infected .
As ProPublica reported , following Cuomo ’ s order , “ Covid-19 tore through New York state ’ s nursing facilities , killing more than 6,000 people — about 6 percent of its more than 100,000 nursing home residents. ” In Florida , which prohibited such transfers , the virus has so far killed only 1.6 percent of nursing home residents .
Given how Cuomo ’ s errors contributed to New York ’ s catastrophe , it ’ s hard to say how much credit he deserves for eventually rising to the occasion . Still , by the time New York ’ s cases got to where Arizona ’ s are now , he at least understood that the state faced calamity and imposed the lockdown that helped bring it back from the abyss .
Arizona , Florida and Texas , by contrast , aren ’ t even doing simple things like mandating mask-wearing . Worse , until last week , the governors of Arizona and Texas prevented cities from instituting their own such requirements .
So far , evidence about the role mass protests over police violence played in coronavirus spikes is mixed , but liberal support for the demonstrations solidified the conviction among many conservatives that strict social distancing rules are a hypocritical tool of social control . The paranoia and resentment that have long been part of the culture of the modern right are now directed at those warning about the ongoing dangers of the pandemic .
Across the country , public health workers have faced death threats , harassment and armed protesters at their homes . No matter how bad things get in red America , it ’ s hard to imagine where the political will to contain the virus will come from .
So while countries with competent leadership haltingly return to normal , ours will continue to be pummeled . In mid-May , when America ’ s coronavirus death toll was around 85,000 , Trump sycophant Lindsey Graham said that as long as fatalities didn ’ t go much beyond 120,000 , “ I think you can say you limited the casualties in this war . ”
By The Times ’ s count , we just hit that number . The war goes on , but Trump has already lost it .