“ We ’ re a gritty city . We come back from adversity , ” Ms. Durkan says . “ But this one is going to test everyone ’ s will , and everybody ’ s mettle . ”
Along with Washington state Gov . Jay Inslee , and King County Executive Dow Constantine , she ’ s determined to rise above blame-game politics and “ speak in one voice as one government , ” as she said in a press conference March 11 .
“ I love this city to my bones . This is so hard , ” she says . “ You know it ’ s going to have such deep , long-term consequences . ”
To Ms. Durkan , getting the local response right isn ’ t just about accountability . Seattle is where she grew up as one of eight children , where she sold linens at JCPenney , where she graduated from law school .
Two months ago , the United States ’ first case of COVID-19 was confirmed just north of Seattle . That discovery set the Emerald City into uncharted waters . The pandemic ’ s double whammy on public health and the economy has been akin to an earthquake , shaking Seattle ’ s foundations .
Seattle Mayor Jenny Durkan , the granddaughter of an Irish Catholic immigrant , sits in her City Hall suite wearing a shamrock pin . It ’ s St. Patrick ’ s Day – but her office , and the city outside , is nearly empty .
It was Monday , March 2 , when Mayor Jenny Durkan took the call at her Seattle home . On the line was Harvard-trained epidemiologist Trevor Bedford , who had caught the mayor ’ s attention with an ominous tweet two days earlier about his Seattle lab ’ s tracking of the new coronavirus .
Dr. Bedford had connected the genetic dots between the first U.S. coronavirus case – a man who tested positive Jan. 20 after returning from Wuhan , China , to Snohomish County north of Seattle – and a teenager who tested positive in the same county on Feb. 28 . “ This strongly suggests that there has been cryptic transmission in Washington state for the past 6 weeks , ” tweeted Dr. Bedford .
Ms. Durkan urgently tracked down Dr. Bedford , who studies infectious diseases at Seattle ’ s Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center , to dig into his predictions . Why did they depart so starkly from what government health officials were reporting ?
“ His modeling , frankly , was very different from what public health was telling me , ” Ms. Durkan recalls .
As the former U.S. attorney listened carefully to the evidence , the shocking revelations sank in .
“ After talking with him , there was little doubt in my mind that the modeling was accurate , ” she recounts , a belief other top experts would confirm . “ We aren ’ t dealing with five cases . We are dealing with hundreds of cases , and our time to act was yesterday . ”
She sketched out the math in a chart on a piece of paper , one she has carried ever since . “ Over 70,000 cases , ” she thought , “ in six weeks . ”
She pauses . “ It was one of the most sobering moments of my entire life . ”
The next day , at 1:33 pm , Ms. Durkan signed a proclamation of civil emergency for Seattle – the blue-collar town where she ’ d grown up as one of eight children , where she ’ d sold linens at JCPenney and later graduated from law school . The city she loves .
Two weeks later , on St. Patrick ’ s Day , Ms. Durkan , the granddaughter of an Irish Catholic immigrant , sits virtually alone in her 7th floor office suite , wearing a shamrock pin . Sunshine glints off the nearby skyscrapers , the deserted streets , and , a few blocks away , the waters of Elliott Bay .
The lobby of City Hall , adorned with a huge , gold seal of Chief Seattle , is eerily empty . Her lone assistant apologetically requests that all the mayor ’ s visitors first wash their hands , and remain several feet apart from her .
But even at a distance , Ms. Durkan ’ s gregarious warmth , quick wit , and no-nonsense demeanor comes through .
Ann Scott Tyson/The ███ Seattle ’ s normally bustling 4th Avenue , outside City Hall , is empty on March 17 , 2020 . Mayor Jenny Durkan signed a proclamation of civil emergency on March 3 amid the coronavirus crisis .
“ Thanks for coming in , ” she greets this reporter , raising one hand and making a “ V ” with four fingers in a Vulcan salute , popularized by Spock in “ Star Trek. ” I bungle the return salute , which , perhaps aptly , means : Live long and prosper . “ It takes practice ! ” she says , flashing a smile .
The heaviness of the moment , though , is unmistakable , as Ms. Durkan presides over a city that has gone from boom to virus-inflicted bust virtually overnight . For the past decade , Seattle has been one of the fastest-growing cities in the country . But the double whammy of the pandemic on public health and the economy is akin to an earthquake , shaking the Emerald City ’ s foundations .
Asked whether this is the biggest challenge of her career , Ms. Durkan doesn ’ t hesitate . “ No question about it , by a magnitude of several factors , ” she says . “ I don ’ t think that our country has dealt with a more impactful and complicated and widespread crisis in many generations . ”
In response , Ms. Durkan is relying not only on top scientists but also her own , well-honed political instincts to guide Seattle through today ’ s uncharted waters . The daughter of a legendary Washington state senator and lobbyist , she learned to stand her ground by tussling with her siblings . When she graduated from the University of Washington Law School in 1985 , she recalls her mother commenting : “ Finally , someone is going to pay you to argue. ” But she also learned the art of compromise and teamwork .
On the Sunday after Dr. Bedford briefed her , she huddled for two hours with Washington state Gov . Jay Inslee , King County Executive Dow Constantine , and other senior officials to ensure they were on the same page .
“ Once we heard the science , I don ’ t think there was anyone in the room that didn ’ t feel the government had to make some significant steps to reduce public gatherings , ” she says . “ It ’ s not either-or . It ’ s really more of a dial , ” she says . “ You try the first step , and if that seems not to be working , you have to accelerate through the dial pretty quickly . ”
On March 11 , Ms. Durkan stepped before the cameras flanked by Governor Inslee , Mr. Constantine , and other officials to unveil that first step – a ban on gatherings of more than 250 people . But first , she set the stage . “ One of the most important things we can do , according to the World Health Organization , is to speak in one voice as one government , ” she said . After a crisp few words , she elbow-bumped with the governor , made the Vulcan salute , and stepped aside .
“ This is something Mayor Jenny Durkan was born to do , ” says a longtime Seattle journalist who spoke on condition of anonymity . “ She ’ s good at centrist , Democratic government . ”
The Washington state team was determined , as Ms. Durkan said later , to rise above the pull of blame-game politics and “ fight the virus instead of each other. ” In contrast , a few days earlier , as Vice President Mike Pence visited the state to bring vital emergency aid , President Donald Trump referred to Governor Inslee as “ a snake ” for alleging the administration had not “ stuck to the science . ”
Robust local leadership has emerged in part amid a weak federal government response , analysts say . There was “ a lack of strong leadership from the feds , ” says Ann Marie Kimball , professor emeritus of epidemiology at the University of Washington . Moreover , she says , “ all epidemics and pandemics are really local , so local officials are in the best position to tailor [ the response ] … and they speak with a voice we recognize . ”
Americans expressed more confidence in their state governments than in President Trump or the federal government in handling the coronavirus , according to a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released this week .
Carrying her hand-sketched chart of future cases , Ms. Durkan has no time to waste on infighting . She knows Seattle and Washington are only about 11 days behind Italy – one of the world ’ s hardest-hit countries – on the steeply rising COVID-19 curve .
“ Every time Italy takes a step because they have reached a crisis point , it sends a signal to us , ” Ms. Durkan says . “ We should take that step now . ”
Yet state and local resources only go so far . What is keeping her awake at night is the lack of protective equipment such as gloves , masks , and gowns for Washington ’ s first responders and medical personnel . Last Friday , she visited Seattle ’ s Harborview Medical Center , only to see medical workers reaching into almost empty bins of masks .
“ If our workers get sick , our health care system fails , ” warns Ms. Durkan , who says she spent dozens of hours last weekend trying to help secure more protective equipment . Washington has already received some supplies from national reserves , but is awaiting approval to get another 180,000 masks and face shields and 65,000 respirators . Hospital surge capacity is also inadequate without federal help , she says .
More shelters for Seattle ’ s most vulnerable population , particularly some 11,000 people experiencing homelessness , are another critical need . And given the expectation hundreds of thousands of people will lose their jobs , “ we need something bigger than the New Deal to put money in the pockets of workers ” and supplement private , local , and state relief efforts , Ms. Durkan says . For example , Amazon executives pledged $ 5 million for small firms such as restaurants and food trucks in the vicinity of the company ’ s downtown Seattle headquarters .
Seattle ’ s vibrant patchwork quilt of neighborhoods is suffering , she says , and she takes such losses personally . She remembers growing up during the “ Boeing bust ” of the 1970s , when the airplane maker cut more than 40,000 workers . In her friends ’ neighborhoods , “ there was empty house after empty house , and dandelions pushing up , ” she recalls .
“ I love this city to my bones . This is so hard , ” she says . “ You know it ’ s going to have such deep , long-term consequences . ”
But Ms. Durkan also has a tough streak that Seattle needs right now . After college , she moved to an Alaskan fishing village and taught English for two years . Then she worked as a baggage handler and dues-paying Teamster to help her pay for law school . The first openly gay U.S. attorney , and the first female Seattle mayor for nearly a century , she speaks her mind and tells it like it is .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ We ’ re a gritty city . We come back from adversity , ” she says . “ But this one is going to test everyone ’ s will , and everybody ’ s mettle . ”