The country is ambling toward a cliff , putting millions of Americans ’ lives and livelihoods in danger and all but ensuring prolonged economic distress nationwide . It didn ’ t have to be this way . Yet here we are , unable to shake out of it .
The Covid-19 pandemic tossed much of the US economy into disarray earlier this year . Millions of Americans lost their jobs , and businesses across the country closed their doors as part of a planned shutdown . In March , Congress passed the CARES Act , an ambitious $ 2 trillion stimulus package to try to stop the bleeding . The plan was to buy the country time to get the virus under control and begin to safely reopen to get the economy on track to recovery .
But things have not gone according to plan . Amid reopenings , coronavirus cases are spiking across the country , and many states and cities are reversing course . There are signs the recovery that was happening is dissipating . And now many of the measures that kept so many American households afloat in recent months are about to come to an abrupt end . It ’ s not clear what , if much of anything , Congress and the White House plan to do about it .
“ It could be cataclysmic , ” said Angela Hanks , deputy executive director of the progressive group Groundwork Collaborative . “ I don ’ t think there ’ s any way to overestimate what happens when you have a pandemic worsening , not improving , when we have an economic crisis that ’ s intensifying , and frankly , there ’ s no response . ”
At the end of the month , the extra $ 600 per week of unemployment insurance benefits put in place under the CARES Act is set to expire , which could affect some 33 million workers . In the coming weeks and months , eviction moratoriums and mortgage and student loan forbearance programs will wind down . Small businesses continue to struggle to stay afloat , and many of those that got loans have used them up already . State and local governments are still in dire need of financial assistance . These issues aren ’ t ones that only plague the parties that are directly affected ; they also have knock-on effects across the economy . Not being able to pay rent isn ’ t just a problem for the tenant — it ’ s also a problem for the landlord .
It ’ s an urgent situation , but many people in government aren ’ t treating it that way . We ’ re sleepwalking toward catastrophe .
“ The cliff is totally visible in front of us , and yet we ’ re not ready , ” said Paul Krugman , a Nobel Prize-winning economist and New York Times columnist . “ It ’ s probably already too late to avoid enormous hardship . ”
“ We designed an economic response that was predicated on a public health response that did not materialize ”
The Coronavirus Aid , Relief , and Economic Stability Act , or CARES Act , signed into law by President Trump in March , was an unprecedented act of fiscal policy by the US government . It entailed measures that would have once seemed unthinkable , including an extra $ 600 in unemployment benefits , $ 1,200 stimulus checks to most Americans , and billions of dollars in forgivable loans to small businesses . As ███ ’ s Dylan Matthews recently laid out , the Covid-19 response was larger than the stimulus policies put in place in response to the Great Recession and , from a fiscal standpoint , bigger than the New Deal .
It made a difference . Personal incomes actually went up in April thanks in large part to unemployment insurance and stimulus checks . Poverty rates didn ’ t increase .
“ We ’ ve basically kept income growth where it was before , ” said George Pearkes , a global macro strategist at Bespoke Investment Group . “ If you take the market income and unemployment insurance , then income from households looks about stable . ”
The stimulus bill was far from perfect . Many unemployed people struggled to get the money they deserved , and some issues , such as state and local budget shortfalls , were not addressed . But in aggregate , the social safety net worked .
“ When incomes get destroyed , people still have certain kinds of liabilities and expenses to pay off , ” said Skanda Amarnath , director of research and analysis at the think tank Employ America . “ This was exactly where we needed different types of fiscal policy measures to replace the lost income . ”
The stimulus bill had with it an underlying assumption that the economy would improve by the summer , and that was predicated on the country getting its outbreak under control . But the country didn ’ t — a series of public policy and leadership failures at the federal , state , and local levels have allowed the virus to thrive .
“ We designed an economic response that was predicated on a public health response that did not materialize , ” said Trevon Logan , an economist at Ohio State University and research associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research .
States such as Texas , Florida , Arizona , and California have begun to close down parts of their economies again as coronavirus cases rise , and other states have paused some reopening plans . And even where lawmakers are ignoring the problem , consumers , workers , and businesses can ’ t .
According to data from Glassdoor , job openings are falling , and JPMorgan ’ s consumer spending tracker has flattened . Data from the team management software provider Homebase shows states that have seen an increase in Covid-19 cases have seen a reversal in hours worked at small businesses . While it appeared jobs lost in May and June were beginning to come back , that ’ s started to stall .
“ Just across the board , there ’ s a litany of indicators that progress has slowed , and that ’ s going to have bad impacts on labor markets , ” Pearkes said .
The US hasn ’ t fixed the coronavirus problem , so the question now is whether the government tries to prop up the economy while it ( hopefully ) tries to do that , or whether it leaves the economic problem as unaddressed as the public health one .
One of the most pressing points of concern is the extra weekly money to the unemployed , which is set to expire at the end of the month . As ███ ’ s Li Zhou recently laid out , if the program is allowed to expire , some 33 million people who have been kept afloat by those benefits will take an enormous hit . Congress is still haggling about it , and the outcome remains uncertain .
“ The loss in payments that we ’ re looking at here is going to be about twice as big as a share of GDP as the Obama stimulus was at its peak , ” Krugman said . “ We ’ re talking about a really big fiscal contraction about to hit an economy that is nowhere near recovered . ”
This would leave millions of workers staring down a dark tunnel . Many would be forced to go back to work in risky situations , putting not only their own health at risk but also their families ’ . And it ’ s not clear that there are enough jobs for them to return to .
“ There ’ s going to be a disruption in a significant amount of income for many households , ” said Damon Jones , an economist at the University of Chicago . “ People are going to be unnecessarily suffering . ”
“ There ’ s going to be a disruption in a significant amount of income for many households . People are going to be unnecessarily suffering . ”
The issue stretches far beyond unemployment . Much of the money given out through the Paycheck Protection Program to keep workers paid has been spent , and many small businesses were locked out of those loans altogether . There is evidence people are already hurting . An estimated one in three people in the US missed their housing payments in June , and while we ’ ve seen a recovery in the aggregate unemployment rate , for Black workers , that progress hasn ’ t been shared .
“ We already know that family food insecurity has increased dramatically with the pandemic and is racially disproportionate . Missed mortgages and rent payments , even with the CARES Act , are substantial , ” Logan said . “ If there ’ s no additional support , we will see a significant number of household balance sheets go to immediate insolvency . ”
The longer the pandemic goes on , the worse the economic fallout gets . Some companies that hoped to weather the storm for a few months are deciding they have no more time to spare . Both United Airlines and American Airlines have signaled they may lay off thousands of workers in the fall . And as compared to the restaurant and retail jobs temporarily lost at the outset of the pandemic , many of the job losses happening now are permanent .
“ Those companies don ’ t have a real plan to bring you back , ” said Betsey Stevenson , an economist at the University of Michigan and former Obama administration official . “ It ’ s thoughtful , these layoffs . And I ’ m not trying to say they ’ re good , I ’ m saying they ’ re not a rushed decision . They are crunching the numbers , they ’ re looking forward , they ’ re doing their best to forecast for the next six months , and then they ’ re saying they can ’ t sustain this level of payroll . ”
It ’ s not just what Congress needs to do again but also what it hasn ’ t done yet . State and local governments are facing enormous shortfalls that still haven ’ t been addressed . There is still no broad plan on what to do about kids and schools , and child care is an economic problem . Even if it doesn ’ t affect everyone personally , all the moving parts create a broader drag on the economy that makes the recovery harder and longer . And all these crises are mounting on top of longstanding systems of racial and economic inequality in the country .
“ There are things we can do now to stem the bleeding , but fundamentally , it ’ s exposed that our economy isn ’ t prepared for a shock of any kind , let alone the scale of economic crisis that we ’ re seeing now , ” Hanks said .
This is not the version of 2020 anyone wanted , including the White House and Congress . But this is the reality we are in : A pandemic has set off an economic calamity , and neither front is under control . The disease is still spreading , and much of the country is struggling to stay above water .
The urgency of the situation feels almost undeniable , and yet in some quarters , it ’ s being denied . The president ’ s strategy seems to be hoping that if you ignore the pandemic , it will just go away , and whenever anyone asks about the economy , just point to the stock market , which has become completely disjointed from reality . Many Republican governors are opting to take the same route , as are many Republicans in Congress . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell wants companies to get liability protections if their workers get sick through 2024 .
“ There are things we can do now to stem the bleeding , but fundamentally , it ’ s exposed that our economy isn ’ t prepared for a shock of any kind , let alone the scale of economic crisis that we ’ re seeing now ”
“ It ’ s been wishful thinking all the way that Trump wanted to preside over a roaring economy spurred on by tax cuts and has simply refused to accept that we have a crisis that requires , at least for the time being , more government , not less , ” Krugman said . “ You can ’ t really have a roaring economy when people are afraid to go out . ”
Hanks made a starker assessment : “ In a moment where we are about to see millions of people go broke and have no recourse , among Leader McConnell ’ s proposals is a corporate liability shield that lasts until 2024 and a capital gains tax holiday . I don ’ t know anyone who would be helped by any of those things , but I do know a lot of people who would be hurt by losing unemployment insurance . ”
There are certainly ideas and proposals out there to continue to support the economy and get people the help they need during the pandemic . House Democrats passed the HEROES Act as an ambitious follow-up to the CARES Act , but so far , it ’ s been untouched in the Senate . And some believe the bill isn ’ t enough . More recently , a group of progressive organizations including Color of Change and the Sunrise Movement sent a letter to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer pushing them to incorporate paycheck guarantees and anti-monopoly measures in legislation .
The clock is ticking , and the hard truth is that on some fronts , it might be too late . It took states a long time to ramp up their unemployment insurance systems to meet the CARES Act ’ s expansion ; ramping down and then up again is going to cost precious time . It ’ s not enough to just pass legislation — it also has to grind through the administrative system to be put into place .
At the outset of the pandemic , Congress rushed to react with three separate pieces of legislation . Lawmakers had time to craft a follow-up bill since then , but Senate Republicans , at least , largely haven ’ t used it . Congress has procrastinated into another urgent situation very much of its own making .
“ They ’ ve had a lot of time to figure this out , and they ’ re just waiting , ” Stevenson said .
It ’ s a failure of astounding magnitude . The US has been incapable of getting the pandemic under control , and now the government is resistant to addressing the resulting economic reality . There were so many ways to not end up here .
“ If this is as bad as it feels like to everyone , how is it possible that our representatives can move forward comfortably ? ” Jones said . “ What does it say about how well-functioning our democracy is ? ”
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .