( CNN ) President Donald Trump declared a national emergency Friday afternoon over the coronavirus outbreak following a week of cancellations , suspensions and growing case numbers that unsettled Americans nationwide .
The move frees up billions of dollars in federal funds , Trump said , and sets the Federal Emergency Management Agency in motion .
The President invoked the Stafford Act , which is the statutory authority for `` most federal disaster response activities . '' The Stafford Act gives access to the funds and the national emergency gives access to authorities , according to a person familiar .
Speaking in the White House Rose Garden , Trump said the action would `` unleash the full power of the federal government . ''
A declaration puts FEMA , which is supporting the Health and Human Services Department and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for coronavirus response , in a position to be a coordinator . In a statement Friday , FEMA said HHS will remain the lead agency directing the federal response .
The declaration makes more federal funds available along with supplies , personnel and other support . FEMA Administrator Peter Gaynor told lawmakers Wednesday that the agency 's warehouses are stocked with commodities across the country .
Trump said Friday he was also urging every state to set up emergency operation centers `` effective immediately '' and asking `` every hospital in the country to activate its emergency preparedness plan . ''
The emergency orders , he said , will also `` confer broad new authorities '' to Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar .
Azar will be able to `` waive provisions of applicable laws and regulations to give doctors , hospitals - all hospitals -- and health care providers maximum flexibility to respond to the virus , '' he said . That includes waivers of some federal licensing requirements , waivers to critical access limits on numbers of beds and lengths of stays , and waivers to rules to bring additional physicians on board at certain hospitals .
When activated , FEMA might also help with logistics , like the transport of residents if needed , and put up temporary medical facilities . Those resources could come from across federal agencies , from stocked warehouses and through contracts . States will likely communicate what they need and where they need it .
Steve Reaves , president of the union that represents FEMA workers , said that during the California wildfires , for example , FEMA came in , put up tents , set up command and control centers , and worked with state and local governments to track casualties .
But during other health crises -- including Zika , H1N1 and SARS -- FEMA maintained a supporting role to HHS and declarations were never issued , according to Michael Coen , a senior adviser for emergency management at IEM and former FEMA chief of staff during the Obama administration .
`` None of those became as big of an outbreak as we 're seeing with COVID-19 . But those were examples of FEMA being in support of HHS in some way , but without the use of a Stafford emergency declaration or major disaster declaration , '' he said .
Requests are generally made by the governor of an affected state . States have been scrambling to sort out what they need to respond to the increasing number of coronavirus cases before they make that request . During the week , FEMA personnel fielded questions from state staff about what support the agency -- which is within the Department of Homeland Security -- can provide to respond to the outbreak , said Reaves .
Washington Gov . Jay Inslee on Thursday requested that the administration declare a national emergency .
`` It is incumbent on all of us to acknowledge the gravity of this public health emergency and take the necessary actions now -- not tomorrow , not next week -- to slow the spread of the virus and save lives , '' Inslee said in a statement Friday . `` By declaring a national emergency , the federal government can provide states with direct assistance to meet our residents ' needs for health care , shelter , food and cash assistance , and more . ''
Additional declarations might also be issued down the line , so the federal government can reimburse state and local governments for the costs incurred during an incident . For example , President Bill Clinton issued an emergency declaration in 2000 over the West Nile virus , authorizing millions of dollars in federal funds to reimburse affected local governments .
Declarations can start as one type of emergency and then change to another in order to access more resources .
Earlier this week , Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , a New York Democrat , in conjunction with Sens . Patty Murray , a Democrat from Washington state , and Gary Peters , a Michigan Democrat , sent a letter asking Trump to `` immediately '' consider disaster declaration requests for the coronavirus .
The reason for the delay in proceeding with a request may have been because states were still assessing their resources and the federal assistance received thus far .
`` It 's possible that a ) the states have the resources it needs b ) that the state has most of the resources it needs and the resources it does n't have it 's getting from HHS and the $ 8.3 billion , '' said Daniel Kaniewski , who previously served as deputy administrator for resilience at FEMA .
`` I think in the future if those -- and that future can be today or a week from now or it could be never -- if they require supplemental assistance beyond what they 're getting from HHS , there would be an obvious time to submit an emergency declaration request , '' Kaniewski , who 's now a managing director at Marsh & McLennan Companies , said .
New Jersey told CNN on Thursday , for example , that it had n't reached that point . `` Due to the recent release of more than $ 15 ( million ) in HHS funding that can be used for these COVID-19 costs , the State thresholds for FEMA assistance certainly have not been met yet , '' according to a statement from the governor 's office Thursday .
As the crisis evolves , states will likely continue to review their needs and the role of federal assistance .