People hold signs and American flags as hundreds protest against the state ’ s extended stay-at-home order at the Capitol building in Olympia , Wash. , April 19 , 2020 . R ( Lindsey Wasson/Reuters )
Being told what to do by epidemiologists and officials wielding SCIENCE as their authority has been enough to bring Tea Party–era liberty back in vogue .
That was when spontaneous , grassroots protests against overweening government sprang up and were widely derided in the media as dangerous and wrong-headed .
The protesters then were inveighing against Obamacare ; the protesters now are striking out against the coronavirus lockdowns .
The anti-lockdown agitation shows that , despite the revolution in Republican politics wrought by President Donald Trump , opposition to government impositions is deeply embedded in the DNA of the Right and likely will reemerge even more starkly if former vice president Joe Biden is elected president .
The Tea Party that was so powerful in the Obama years , roiling Republican Party politics and making stars out of the likes of Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz , sputtered out and was subsumed by the Trump movement in 2016 .
The emphasis on constitutionalism , opposition to deficit spending , and American exceptionalism gave way to an emphasis on American strength , opposition to immigration , and nationalism .
The differences shouldn ’ t be exaggerated — the Tea Party was opposed to amnesty for undocumented immigrants , and Trump has faithfully nominated constitutionalist judges . The Tea Party , like Trump , hated the mainstream media with a passion . But the shift from an overwhelming focus on fiscal issues to Trumpian cultural politics was very real .
The change was exemplified by the House Freedom Caucus , founded in 2015 and defined by its hard line on government spending , reliably lining up behind Donald Trump , who has pursued a notably expansionary fiscal policy — with huge budget deficits — even before the coronavirus crisis .
The intellectual fashion among populists and religious traditionalists has been to attempt to establish a post-liberty or “ post-liberal ” agenda to forge a deeper foundation for the new Republican Party . Instead of obsessing over freedom and rights , conservatives would look to government to protect the common good .
This project , though , has been rocked by its first real-life encounter with governments acting to protect , as they see it , the common good .
One of its architects , the editor of the religious journal First Things , R. R. Reno , has sounded during the crisis like one of the libertarians he so scorns . First , he complained that he might get shamed if he were to host a dinner party during the height of the pandemic , although delaying a party would seem a small price to pay for someone so intensely committed to the common good .
More recently , he went on a tirade against wearing masks . Reno is apparently fine with a much stronger government , as long as it never issues public-health guidance not to his liking .
Reno has published vituperative attacks on the conservative writer ( and my friend and former colleague ) David French , supposedly for having a blinkered commitment to classical liberalism . But it is the hated French who has actually tried to thoughtfully balance liberty and the common good during the crisis , favoring the lockdowns at first and favoring reopening now that the lockdowns ’ goals have been achieved .
What ’ s happened during the lockdowns is that the natural distrust that populists have of experts has expressed itself in opposition to government rules . Being told what to do by epidemiologists and government officials wielding all-caps SCIENCE as their authority has been enough to bring Tea Party–era liberty back in vogue .
We ’ ve also seen a return of the glue that has held moral traditionalists and libertarians together in the conservative coalition for so long — the belief that big government is a threat to traditional institutions . Hence , the focus on resuming church services .
In retrospect , the Tea Party wasn ’ t as much a purely liberty movement as it seemed at the time . A populist anti-elitism was an enormously important factor , which is why it faded into the Trump movement so seamlessly . On the other hand , Trumpian populism has a big streak of liberty to it .
All it has taken to bring it to the fore is extraordinary government intrusion into our lives . If Biden is elected president , there ’ s more where that came from .