Get used to seeing the four walls of your own home : Extraordinary measures to control the coronavirus pandemic , potentially including social distancing , may be necessary for months . It ’ s far from clear that society will be back to normal by the November general election .
And even if the disease is under control , many voters may be cautious about stepping out to a polling place where many people will gather .
When I reached out to a wide array of voting rights advocates , election law scholars , and former election officials , I heard the same three-word solution over and over again : “ vote by mail. ” Mail-in ballots are a major reason turnout did not crater in the Florida and Arizona primary elections held earlier this month . And they are the most straightforward way to ensure that voters can still cast a ballot even if they are stuck at home .
In the ideal regime , which already exists in Colorado , Oregon , Washington , Utah , and Hawaii , voters would automatically receive a ballot in the mail in the weeks before the election . These voters should also be given the option to vote in person , in case they do not receive the ballot or lose it , but no one should have to request a mail-in ballot in order to receive one .
Such a system can be implemented state by state . It also could be implemented in all 50 states by Congress , which has the power to determine the “ times , places and manner of holding elections ” for members of the House .
But voting by mail also isn ’ t a panacea . There are some voters , such as Native Americans without easy access to the postal service and people experiencing homelessness , who may struggle to vote if a mail-in ballot is their only option . This is why it is important to offer in-person voting as a backup option .
Federal law also requires states to provide ballots in the native languages of many voters with limited English skills . To comply with this law , states will need to keep records of which voters need such ballots , and what language each ballot should use .
Many states have not built the infrastructure necessary to handle the crush of millions of paper ballots arriving in a short time . Building that infrastructure quickly might be challenging , and it will require funding — although states that build efficient infrastructure could save a great deal of money in the long run .
And a system dominated by mailed ballots also may require Americans — and , most notably , members of the press — to be patient with a vote-counting process that could take days or even weeks . It is unlikely we will know the winner of the 2020 presidential race on election night if voting by mail becomes the norm .
These problems can be surmounted , but they will require lawmakers to be thoughtful about how they support state officials preparing for Election Day . They will also require lawmakers and those state officials to identify voters who may face obstacles between themselves and the franchise , and to take care to accommodate those voters ’ needs .
How most Americans will cast a ballot in a vote-by-mail regime
Let ’ s start with Americans who will find it fairly easy to cast a ballot from home : fluent English speakers who do not have a disability that requires them to seek assistance filling out a ballot or mailing it , and who have easy access to a mailbox or to a location where they can drop off their ballot .
Even these voters will face some logistical challenges , however , in order to vote by mail . For starters , it ’ s hard to vote if you do not have a ballot . For this reason , “ all voters should have ballots mailed to them and be provided with a list of options as to how to cast their completed ballots , ” according to a letter to policymakers signed by a long list of civil rights organizations led by the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights .
Such an automated process requires the state to keep accurate and up-to-date voter registration records . It is inevitable that some voters ’ registration information will need to be updated from time to time , because states do not monitor voters to automatically determine when someone changes addresses . For this reason , it needs to be easy for voters to update their records if they move .
As Justin Levitt , a professor at Loyola Law School who oversaw much of the Justice Department ’ s voting rights work during the Obama administration , told me , election officials “ got ta know where the people are , and it ’ s got to be accurate . ”
Both the Leadership Conference letter and a similar list of reforms offered by the Brennan Center for Justice ’ s Wendy Weiser and Max Feldman , highlight the need for a robust online voter registration system to make it easy for new voters to register and for already-registered voters to update their information . “ States that do not have ” online voter registration , Weiser and Feldman write , “ should work to set up such a system immediately . ”
To make that possible , Congress may need to provide subsidies to states to help them set up online registration processes as quickly as feasible .
Online registration may also help mitigate the fact that traditional voter registration drives — where activists go door to door or approach voters at public places — may not be possible in an age of social distancing . Registration drives “ are going to be on social media and through direct messaging if folks can ’ t go door to door , ” according to Rick Hasen , an election law professor at the University of California Irvine . And online voter registration “ is going to be a huge help . ”
States should also eliminate policies — and , if necessary , Congress should enact federal legislation preempting state laws — that prevent voters from registering due to trivial errors or inconsistencies on voter registration applications .
In the lead-up to the 2018 election , for example , then-Georgia Secretary of State Brian Kemp , who was simultaneously the Republican candidate for governor , placed about 53,000 voter registration applications on hold because of an “ exact match ” law that required the information on those applications to precisely match information on file with the state ’ s Department of Driver Services and the Social Security Administration . ( Kemp won his governor ’ s race by a very narrow margin . )
As Levitt explained to me , inconsistencies are inevitable and can occur for arbitrary reasons . A government database might omit the hyphen from someone with a hyphenated last name , for example . A data entry clerk may encounter someone with an unusually spelled name ( such as “ Simth ” ) and alter that name ( to “ Smith ” ) out of a mistaken belief that they are correcting an error . A Korean American voter who places his surname before his given name ( “ Kim Jae ” ) may have his name transposed ( to “ Jae Kim ” ) in a government database to correspond with the Western norm . None of these are valid reasons to deny someone the right to vote .
Finally , voters who want to vote by mail must be allowed to do so at no cost . This is a constitutional necessity , as the Constitution forbids poll taxes of any kind . As the Supreme Court held in Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections , the government violates the Constitution “ whenever it makes the affluence of the voter or payment of any fee an electoral standard. “ That means that voters who cast their ballot by mail must receive free postage and may not face any other cost .
In the lead-up to the 2018 election , North Dakota Republicans enacted a law that required voters to present their current residential address in order to vote . The law was widely viewed as a voter suppression measure targeting Native Americans , who were expected to support then-Sen. Heidi Heitkamp , a Democrat , in the coming election .
Many voters who live on Native American reservations do not have a residential address of the kind that the US Postal Service uses to identify homes , and rely on PO boxes to receive their mail .
These voters are one of several reasons none of the voting experts that I spoke with recommended that voting by mail should be the only option on Election Day .
Amber McReynolds , the CEO of Vote at Home , is , as the name of her organization suggests , a vocal advocate of making it as easy as possible for voters to cast a ballot by mail . Yet she emphasized to me that she “ never said we want 100 percent vote by mail. ” Instead , McReynolds pointed me to the system she played a major role in implementing when she was director of elections for Denver , Colorado .
Colorado established “ vote centers ” to supplement mailed ballots . A voter may cast a ballot at any vote center within a given jurisdiction — the center provides them with the appropriate ballot depending on where they live . If one vote center is too crowded , voters have the option of casting their ballot elsewhere .
Such a system eliminates the single-point-of-failure problem where a voter is locked into a specific precinct even if that precinct is unable to process voters quickly . It also allows states to use same-day registration , which will enable voters who do not receive a ballot in the mail for whatever reason to still exercise their right to vote . These centers also may allow voters to cast their ballot early , thus reducing the size of crowds on Election Day .
The alternative of keeping a traditional polling precinct structure in place — where in-person voters must go to a single designated polling place near their home — will be “ very hard ” in a pandemic , McReynolds told me . Poll workers may not show up because they are sick , and at least some voting machines will break down over the course of a day . And when a precinct is short on workers or machines , that can lead to the “ five-hour lines ” that voters endured in the past .
There are other considerations , too . Under the Voting Rights Act , people with disabilities may be assisted by a person of their choice ( other than their employer or an agent of their union ) when filling out a ballot . In areas where a significant number of voters primarily speak a language other than English , the Voting Rights Act also requires states and localities to provide ballots and other voting information in that language . Voting officials will need to comply with these requirements when they set up both in-person and vote-by-mail systems .
Among other things , this means that state voting officials will need to keep records of which voters need to be mailed a ballot in a language other than English — and which language should be used on that ballot .
State officials should also be vigilant about preventing polling places from becoming vectors for coronavirus infection . That means following the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ’ s guidance regarding polling places . It also means special attention needs to be paid to populations that are especially vulnerable to the pandemic . As Weiser and Feldman write , “ polling places are routinely sited in buildings that primarily serve communities identified as high risk for serious Covid-19 illness , like senior care facilities. ” On the one hand , leaving a polling place in such a location could endanger the health of nearby residents . On the other hand , those residents have as much of a right to vote as anyone else , so plans would need to be implemented to ensure they can still cast a ballot .
“ I ’ d want to be sure there is some option for dropping off ballots that allows groups — e.g. , churches and civic organizations — to collect people ’ s ballots and return them , ” said Pam Karlan , a professor at Stanford Law School who also oversaw much of the Justice Department ’ s voting rights work during the Obama administration . That could allow members of the community to ensure that many especially vulnerable voters are able to cast a ballot .
Sens . Amy Klobuchar ( D-MN ) and Ron Wyden ( D-OR ) introduced legislation , the Natural Disaster and Emergency Ballot Act , which would require states to expand access to early and mail-in voting if a quarter of the states declare a state of emergency . Though their bill does not go quite as far as many of the experts that I spoke with suggested it should — it does not require states to automatically mail ballots to all eligible voters — it does make it easier for voters to request and to use absentee ballots .
Their bill also would provide states a total of $ 500 million to help cover the costs of shifting to a system where voting is primarily done by mail .
Most states have the kind of infrastructure that makes sense if you are expecting most voters to show up to a polling place and vote in person . They ’ ve invested in voting machines and polling booths , and their election officials are trained for this kind of election . The coronavirus pandemic will likely require them to make different investments — in printing costs for the absentee ballots , postage and envelopes for voters , and potentially in sorting machines and other technology that helps the state count absentee ballots .
McReynolds emphasized to me , moreover , that many of these costs are likely to be inevitable . The overwhelming majority of states already offer “ no excuse ” absentee voting — meaning that a voter can request an absentee ballot without having to justify that request . So these states are already going to see “ a huge increase ” in the number of absentee ballot requests if voters are still socially distancing on Election Day . ( The Klobuchar-Wyden bill would require all states to offer no excuse absentee voting . )
States could also wind up saving money in the long run if they centralize their process for sorting and counting absentee ballots . Many states currently delegate this task to local officials , which prevents them from taking advantage of economies of scale . “ If you only have 2,000 voters in your county , ” McReynolds told me , “ there ’ s no reason to spend $ 20,000 on a scanner. ” But a centralized operation can afford to invest in technology that makes the voting counting process vastly more efficient .
She told me that she watched poll workers in Detroit individually sort just a few mail-in ballots by hand every hour , when a high-quality machine could have sorted as many as 50,000 ballots per hour . Local voting offices in Michigan probably couldn ’ t afford such a machine — and even if they could , it would be a waste of money to buy one machine for every county in Michigan . But the state as a whole could make that investment if the counting process were centralized .
Of course , all of this talk about election legislation is academic if lawmakers won ’ t pass any bills . Without Republican buy-in , election reforms just aren ’ t happening in many crucial states . Republicans control the Senate and the White House , and state legislatures in the pivotal states of Arizona , Wisconsin , Michigan , and Pennsylvania .
As a general rule , Americans who are financially stable and who have lived consistently in the same home are especially likely to vote . Americans closer to the margins of society are less likely to cast a ballot . This explains why older voters are much more likely to turn out than younger voters , white voters tend to turn out at higher rates than voters of color ( although African American turnout is sometimes the exception to this trend ) , and wealthier voters are more likely to turn out than lower-income voters .
The cohort most likely to turn out — older , white , high-income voters — is largely Republican , while many of the groups that are least likely to turn out will prefer Democrats if they do cast a ballot . So Republicans historically haven ’ t had much incentive to make voting easier . Indeed , Republican lawmakers have spent much of the past decade passing legislation that makes it harder to vote .
Under ordinary circumstances , in other words , Republicans are unlikely to support a reform like vote by mail , as there is evidence that it improves turnout among low-propensity voters .
But Coronavirus could scramble the GOP ’ s ordinary incentives . In 2016 , President Trump won voters over the age of 65 by 7 points , according to a CNN exit poll , even though Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton won the overall popular vote . Similarly , in 2018 , Democratic House candidates trounced their Republican opponents , winning the nationwide popular vote by the largest midterm margin since Watergate , but exit polls still showed Republicans winning voters over 65 by a 2-point margin .
These older voters are especially at risk from coronavirus , and thus may be especially cautious about leaving their home on Election Day . And if these older Americans do not vote , Republican politicians throughout the country are likely to find themselves unemployed .
Will that be enough incentive for Republicans to enact legislation ensuring that all eligible voters can cast a ballot during a pandemic ? That remains to be seen . But the GOP now has a profound incentive to take voter protection seriously in 2020 .