As the global Covid-19 pandemic bears down on cities and towns across the country and the world , municipal and state leaders are scrambling to mitigate the spread and “ flatten the curve ” . To be sure , these social distancing interventions , including closing schools , eliminating mass gatherings – even shuttering small businesses – are necessary right now . Yet policymakers have been reticent to fully enact them because of the sweeping economic and social consequences they ’ ll have for so many in our society .
Yet the very position in which we find ourselves – caught between slowing the outbreak to save lives and slow-walking our interventions to save livelihoods – suggests a deeper truth about our society right now . Indeed , Covid-19 isn ’ t the only epidemic we are suffering . The other is slower and more difficult to identify , though it has laid the groundwork for the coronavirus . It is an epidemic of insecurity .
Coronavirus shows the folly of stripping state and society to the bone | Neal Lawson Read more
As an epidemiologist , considering the spread of a disease , I know to consider not just the pathogen that causes a specific disease – the novel coronavirus pathogen that caused the Covid-19 syndrome , for example – but also characteristics of the host and the environment that make the spread possible .
This is where insecurity comes in . Because of it , we , as hosts , are uniquely susceptible . Nearly 10 % of Americans are uninsured . And for those who have insurance , the average deductible is over $ 5,000 . Because it renews annually , a March pandemic means that fewer people will visit the doctor for the constellation of symptoms for Covid-19 – a fever and cough – so commonly experienced and necessarily ignored by people who can ’ t afford to pay for healthcare . Our lack of healthcare access means that we are less likely to seek healthcare , more likely to unknowingly spread coronavirus .
Too many Americans work gigs – like waiting tables or driving Uber or Lyft – that leave them uniquely vulnerable to the economic interruptions we ’ ll experience trying to slow Covid-19 . With $ 1.5tn in collective student debt , losing a gig may mean defaulting on a loan . And soaring rents may leave millions at risk of eviction and homelessness . Living on the ragged fringe of economic viability leaves Americans insecure – afraid for our future because of the instability of our present . And our insecurity leaves us uniquely vulnerable to the social and economic consequences of this pandemic – and less likely to adhere to mitigation efforts to slow the spread of Covid-19 . Insecurity makes us sick .
We can not tackle the biological epidemic of Covid-19 without tackling the political epidemic of insecurity
But the epidemic of insecurity itself is a function of the environment in which we live – interlocking systems of government and economics that have frozen us out . Gig work is a necessary consequence of a financialized economy that guarantees more rights to corporations than it does to people . Homelessness is a consequence of federal policies that subsidize homeownership among the wealthy rather than housing for the poor . And the capacity for unlimited corporate spending in our elections coupled with direct and indirect voter suppression tactics disenfranchise us at the polls . These have led to failures of basic government infrastructure that Americans have long been able to rely upon . For example , extending work requirements on Snap food benefits will leave more than a million American families food insecure . Indeed , proposed cuts to the CDC and the elimination of the national security council ’ s pandemic response team may even have facilitated coronavirus ’ s spread into the US .
We can not tackle the biological epidemic of Covid-19 without tackling the political epidemic of insecurity lest people have their lives saved by our interventions , only to have their livelihoods ruined by them . That means we have to tackle the epidemic of Covid-19 and the epidemic of insecurity at the same time .
Taking on the epidemic of coronavirus will require bold action to mitigate spread – this means eliminating congregation in restaurants , bars and clubs , as well as potentially locking down communities with major outbreaks . It means mandating work from home for non-essential personnel . It means contemplating a parallel Covid-19-specific health system under the control of the national guard to vastly increase our health system ’ s capacity .
Taking on the epidemic of insecurity will require bold action , too . Congress ’ s bipartisan Covid-19 response bill is a good first step , though like our social safety net more generally , it has far too many holes . First , in the absence of Medicare for All , we must guarantee healthcare coverage for confirmed or suspected Covid-19 cases to remove the paywall for testing and treatment . It should cover all out-of-pocket costs for insured and uninsured people , alike . Second , we need a universal paid sick leave policy that covers all workers , as well as a guaranteed basic income as our economy sags . Third , rather than just focus on major corporations as it has in the past in times of economic downturn , the government ought to focus its financial might on supporting small businesses that are particularly vulnerable during this time .
Though the Covid-19 pandemic threatens our physical wellbeing , the epidemic of insecurity underneath it threatens our social , economic and political wellbeing . We must act to protect Americans suffering from both .