Ariel Brown , a medical scientist , knew that her Arlington neighbor , an ICU doctor , was worried about his residents ’ well-being long before the coronavirus crisis . So in the midst of the pandemic , on March 21 , she sent Dan Saddawi-Konefka , the anesthesia residency program director at Massachusetts General Hospital , a text asking how she could help .
He called her immediately . “ I ’ m thinking the most about supporting their mental health , ” he said . “ Can you think about that ? ”
That evening , Brown distributed a Google form to mental health practitioners via social media and community listservs . “ Front-line medical personnel are in need of increased resources to support their mental health , ” she wrote . “ Can you help by volunteering some of your time ? ”
Less than a month later , Brown has set up a website that lets health care workers find licensed mental health practitioners willing to offer free therapy . Brown calls it “ The Emotional PPE Project ” ( emotionalPPE.org ) .
“ PPE [ personal protective equipment ] is getting thrown around a lot , ” she explained . “ People in hospitals need masks and equipment to protect them from the virus and keep them safe and healthy . We feel there is a gap in [ safeguarding ] people ’ s mental health , and we ’ re providing that protection . ”
Brown has filed for 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) status and assembled a staff of volunteers to help her run the effort , including an attorney as well as engineers and designers who ’ ve worked for Adobe , Facebook , and Wikipedia . After a pilot week with 15 counselors available and Saddawi-Konefka ’ s 80 residents invited to participate , the site opened Wednesday night with 75 Massachusetts-based licensed mental health counselors signed on to offer services . Brown ’ s team designed it to be user-friendly , free of insurance hassles , and entirely anonymous , and she hopes it will eventually provide care nationwide , for as long as it ’ s needed .
“ What we do is connect people , ” said Brown . “ Once they ’ re connected , the therapist and the client manage their own relationship and do whatever work they feel is appropriate . ''
Brown worked for seven years as a postdoctoral researcher at Mass . General ’ s psychiatry department and went on to work in medical writing . She joined her current employer , Cambridge-based Sage Therapeutics , in 2017 . At MGH , she saw firsthand that pandemic or not , a resident ’ s life is filled with serious stressors . “ This is a group of people who works 80 hours per week trying to get used to hospital life , ” she said . “ People are dying around them . It ’ s very high-stress , emotional , and time-intensive . ”
Dan Saddawi-Konefka , anesthesia residency program director at Massachusetts General Hospital , saw a need to support residents ' mental health . Dan Saddawi-Konefka
And now , said Saddawi-Konefka , health care is a career defined by uncertainty . He choked up when he described some of the COVID-related pressures on his residents , including having to send their children to live with relatives to avoid exposing them to the virus ; seeing some patients suffer and die alone ; and worrying about the fate of their colleagues , some of whom have tested positive for the novel coronavirus .
When asked what it ’ s like for him — a board-certified doctor in anesthesiology and critical care medicine who finished his own residency in 2013 — to endure that same uncertainty , he likened it to “ running a code , ” the medical profession ’ s term for providing emergency resuscitative efforts to a patient .
“ When you ’ re actually running the code , ” he explained , “ you ’ re very rational : You do this , and this , and this . You tend not to process things emotionally . And then when the code is done , you take your time to process everything . In the past few weeks , because there ’ s so many planning needs and logistics , so far I feel like I ’ m in running-the-code-mode . If and when I do take a minute to think about it , it ’ s distressing . It ’ s nothing I feel completely overwhelmed by at the moment , but it doesn ’ t feel normal . ”
Some have likened “ running-the-code-mode ” to a wartime mentality , said Saddawi-Konefka , who is now on the governing board of The Emotional PPE Project and wonders if after the pandemic , “ PTSD or anxiety or other wartime illness in health care workers ” will be more prevalent . “ Which is why if we ’ re living it right now and have the opportunity to offer interventions to prevent that , that ’ s all the better . ”