Since the beginning of the coronavirus crisis , nearly one million Illinois residents have filed for unemployment benefits — more than one of every 10 Illinois workers .
We know that those numbers are only a fraction of the families that have been impacted by the virus . Many more are losing income , having hours reduced , getting sick or being forced to choose between getting sick and getting a paycheck .
Magdalena Zylinska , a single mother who works cleaning houses in Chicago , has to choose between continuing to work and put food on the table or staying home to keep her 12-year-old son safe . “ I can ’ t even sleep at night , to figure out which bills to pay or not pay , ” she says .
First-generation college student Arica Kincheloe lost the jobs that she relied on to pay her tuition at the University of Chicago . While many schools have shifted to online classes , students remain burdened with the same tuition costs that many of them already struggled to pay .
At the end of March , Congress passed the CARES Act , providing for a $ 1,200 stimulus payment to most Americans . It is clear that this one-time stimulus is not enough to meet Americans ’ needs . We must establish monthly payments and we must increase the amount of money received to help people like Magdalena and Arica make ends meet for the length of the COVID-19 crisis .
The economic impact of the crisis have been especially bad for people of color who are disproportionately risking their lives in jobs that can not be done remotely . More than half of African Americans under 45 have lost their jobs or seen a reduction in work and wages since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic . Young people , early in their careers and often lacking seniority and the job protections of earlier generations , also are severely affected .
While the new unemployment benefits Congress passed in the first CARES Act are beginning to give millions of people a needed financial boost , we must do more to help Illinois families .
Even before the current pandemic , 40 % of Americans were one missed paycheck away from disaster . No one should ever be one crisis away from poverty , but for a large percentage of American families , that is the reality . We are seeing the impact of this economic vulnerability play out over and over again as our nation struggles through these challenging times .
The fastest and most effective way to help the families in Illinois harmed by economic impacts of COVID-19 is with direct cash payments . Millions of people in Illinois have already received their one-time $ 1,200 CARES Act stimulus check . For many , this stimulus is a lifeline , allowing residents to pay bills that they ’ ve lost sleep over or to purchase groceries , replenishing cabinets that were looking increasingly bare . $ 1,200 is a good start , but it ’ s not nearly enough . The average rent for an apartment in Chicago is nearly $ 2,000 per month . The $ 1,200 stimulus wouldn ’ t even cover one month of rent for most families .
We need bigger , bolder policies to help people — recurring payments that last until the economy recovers and it is safe to return to work . My colleagues and I are pushing for legislation that would establish payments of $ 2,000 a month for adults and $ 1,000 for children . These payments would include college students and other adult dependents , and families with one or more members who file taxes using an Individual Tax Identification Number .
We know that the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will be felt for years to come . Many are predicting the crisis will last well into 2021 , or beyond . Now is not the time for timid solutions . We must take the steps necessary to not only keep our small businesses afloat , but also to keep our families afloat .
Direct payments are an essential tool to help families solve their own problems and to provide resiliency and stability . In the next relief bill , we must step up and ensure that there are no more one-time , Band-Aid solutions for families . Let ’ s make sure that Illinois families receive monthly payments to give them the financial security they need to ride out this crisis .
Jan Schakowsky , a Democrat , has represented Illinois ’ 9th Congressional District , covering parts of Chicago ’ s North Side and suburbs , since 1999 .