Public Holds Broadly Favorable Views of Many Federal Agencies , Including CDC and HHS
How we did this ███ conducted this study to understand how Americans view federal government agencies . For this analysis , we surveyed 1,013 U.S. adults in March 2020 . The surveys were conducted in both English and Spanish over the phone under the direction of SSRS . Respondents to this survey were randomly selected via a combination of landline and cellphone random-digit-dial samples . To ensure that the results of this survey reflects a balanced cross section of the nation , the data are weighted to match the U.S. adult population by gender , age , education , race and ethnicity and other categories . See here to read more about the questions used for this report and the report ’ s methodology .
As the United States confronts the coronavirus outbreak , Americans continue to rate a wide range of federal agencies favorably , including two at the forefront of dealing with COVID-19 : the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Department of Health and Human Services . Other federal agencies , including the Postal Service , the Census Bureau and the Department of Homeland Security , also receive broadly favorable ratings from the public .
The public has long viewed the CDC positively . Currently , 79 % of U.S. adults express a favorable opinion of the CDC , including large majorities of Republicans and Republican-leaning independents ( 84 % ) and Democrats and Democratic leaners ( 77 % ) .
Views of the CDC among Republicans have grown more positive in recent years . Democrats ’ views have shown less change ; the share of Democrats with a positive view of the agency has ticked down slightly since last September , from 82 % .
Republicans feel far more favorably toward the Department of Health and Human Services than they did during Barack Obama ’ s presidency – and substantially more positively than they did seven months ago . Currently , 80 % view HHS favorably , up 17 percentage points since last fall . In 2013 and 2015 , fewer than half of Republicans viewed this agency favorably . Majorities of Democrats have consistently expressed positive views of HHS ( 70 % currently ) .
The national survey by ███ , conducted March 24-29 among 1,013 U.S. adults , finds that more than three years into the Trump administration , larger shares of Republicans than Democrats express favorable opinions of eight of 10 government agencies included in the survey . And for the other two agencies , the Postal Service and the IRS , nearly identical majorities in both parties have favorable opinions .
Republicans ’ views of the Justice Department improved after Donald Trump ’ s election , while Democrats turned more negative . Even so , favorable views of the DOJ have increased sharply since September ; currently , 76 % of Republicans view the DOJ favorably , up from 61 % last fall and the highest positive rating for the department in polling going back a decade . By comparison , 50 % of Democrats feel favorably toward the Justice Department , little changed from the fall and among the lowest ratings in a decade .
Views of Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) remain even more polarized : 77 % of Republicans and Republican leaners view the agency favorably , compared with only 28 % of Democrats and Democratic leaners .
With the decennial census underway – and most Americans saying they plan to participate – 77 % of Americans overall view the Census Bureau favorably , compared with just 12 % who hold an unfavorable view . And while the public holds positive views of several federal agencies , ratings of the Postal Service continue to stand out : An overwhelming 91 % say they have a favorable view of the mail delivery service .
Many agencies , including the IRS , are viewed favorably by majorities in both parties
Of the 10 agencies included in the survey , nine are viewed more favorably than unfavorably by the public . ICE is the only agency for which about equal shares express an unfavorable ( 45 % ) as favorable ( 46 % ) view .
Among the agencies viewed in positive light , the majorities viewing each favorably range from 91 % for the Postal Service to 60 % for the Justice Department .
About two-thirds view Veterans Affairs and the IRS favorably ( both 65 % ) . Slightly more hold favorable views of the Federal Reserve ( 69 % ) and the Department of Homeland Security ( 71 % ) .
For many federal agencies , there are only modest differences in ratings between Republicans and Democrats .
For instance , large majorities of Republicans and Democrats have favorable views of the Postal Service , Census Bureau , CDC and HHS .
A broader majority of Republicans ( 86 % ) than of Democrats ( 60 % ) view the Department of Homeland Security favorably . The partisan gap is similar in views of the DOJ .
The widest partisan divide in the survey by far is in assessments of ICE : Republicans and Republican leaners are 49 points more likely than Democrats and Democratic leaners to hold a favorable view of the agency ( 77 % vs. 28 % ) .
The share of Republicans with a favorable view of ICE has increased 7 points since September 2019 .
Among Democrats , ratings of ICE remain overwhelmingly negative ( 64 % view the agency unfavorably ) , though the share with a favorable view has increased since last fall ( up 9 points ) .
The overall gap in ratings of ICE between Republicans and Democrats remains about the same as it has been over the last few years .
As the Census Bureau launches its decennial census , majorities of both Republicans and Democrats hold positive views of the agency .
Republicans ’ views of the Census Bureau have grown considerably more positive over the last two years . Today , 83 % of Republicans view the Census Bureau favorably , compared with 66 % who held a favorable view of the agency in 2018 .
Among Democrats , views of the Census Bureau have remained relatively stable . About three-quarters of Democrats ( 76 % ) say they hold favorable views of the agency today ; views were similar in 2019 and 2018 .