Christians are responding to the global spreading of the coronavirus with a new fasting and prayer movement .
Lou Engle of Lou Engle Ministries is urging everyone to join a 3-Day global Esther Fast from March 18-20 .
He says the fast will focus on humbling ourselves and confessing our sins , crying out to God for mercy to stop the coronavirus outbreak .
Engle explained that he began praying to God about having a worldwide fast against the coronavirus . `` For the past several days , we 've been asking the Lord , 'Shall we call a three-day Esther Fast worldwide to resist this virus ? ' ''
Religious leaders started reaching out to Engle , prompting him to start a 3-day fast .
`` Evangelist Jean-Luc Trachsel said , 'Do n't miss this moment . Call a three-day fast across the world and shatter this coronavirus ' , '' Engle said .
In a message , Andy Byrd of The Send wrote , `` Lou , would you call a three-day fast in the midst of this 40-day fast and call the Church to stand against and rebuke this coronavirus ? It is threatening the global advance of evangelism and missions and is determined to stop stadium Christianity . ''
By that time , Engle knew it was the word of God telling him to take a stand against the virus .
GET YOUR FREE FACTSHEET Coronavirus : What You Need to Know
Those participating in the Esther Fast will give up food and water for three days as explained in Esther 4:16 when the evil prince Haman tried to kill all the Jews .
All Christians are being encouraged to lean on our Father to find peace and hope during these trying times .
On Sunday 's National Day of Prayer , Dr. James Dobson offered an uplifting prayer .
`` Heavenly Father , we thank you for inviting us to bring our cares and concerns to You because as the Scripture tells us You care about us . We ca n't explain why You 're mindful of us . But we know that nothing escapes Your notice including those in our midst who are suffering and fearful . ''
`` So , Lord , we do call on Your name , not just about our personal concerns but for the entire human family around the world . We want You to give wisdom and guidance to our president and to the international leaders as they do their best to protect the people from the coronavirus . Be with the scientists as they seek to develop a vaccination to bring this epidemic to an end . We are in Your hands today , Lord , and we thank You for loving us . Amen . ''