Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin warned of “ permanent economic damage ” unless the United States begins reopening businesses during the coronavirus pandemic — but cautioned that it must be done in a “ thoughtful way . ”
“ I think there ’ s a considerable risk of not reopening , you ’ re talking about what would be permanent economic damage to the American public , ” Mnuchin said on “ Fox News Sunday . ”
“ We ’ re going to reopen in a very thoughtful way that gets people back to work safely , that has them social distance , ” he continued .
The question of reopening the economy comes as 20.5 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits in April , bringing the unemployment rate up to 14.7 percent .
In all , more than 33 million people have sought benefits in the past three months .
“ These are not large numbers because the economy isn ’ t doing well , these are large numbers because we ’ ve shut down the economy , ” Mnuchin told host Chris Wallace .
He predicted the numbers “ are probably going to get worse before they get better ” but said he expects to see a rebound in the third and fourth quarters as the economy starts to get going .
White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow , during an appearance on ABC News ’ “ This Week , ” said May ’ s unemployment statistics could also be dire .
“ I don ’ t want to sugarcoat it because I think those numbers for May are gon na be also very difficult numbers , ” Kudlow said . “ It ’ s going to take a while for the reopening to have an impact , so there ’ s that . ”
But he said there ’ s a “ glimmer of hope ” because 80 percent of the people filing claims are those who have been furloughed or laid off temporarily .
“ That , by the way , doesn ’ t assure that you ’ ll go back to a job . But it suggests strongly that the cord between the worker and the business is still intact , ” Kudlow said .
Health experts have cautioned that allowing governors to reopen their states ’ economies too quickly without continuing social distancing and reduced crowd size measures could lead to a resurgence of COVID-19 deaths and delay any economic recovery because they would have to shut down again .