In March , Congress passed a law that gave people filing for unemployment benefits an additional $ 600 each week until July . The debate about whether to extend those benefits this summer has touched off fierce debate in Washington over the extent to which continued aid is necessary to stimulate a sagging economy .
Some White House officials and Republicans say the extra payments are creating a disincentive for people to return to the workforce , potentially holding back the economic recovery . But so far there is no consensus over how to proceed , with some calling for phasing out the benefits entirely and others supporting a one-time payment that could encourage Americans to return to work .
“ In certain cases , we ’ re actually paying people more than they made , so we have to fix that , ” Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said in a live stream hosted by the Hill news organization .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) blasted the expanded benefits as a “ crazy policy ” in a private meeting with lawmakers Wednesday , according to a person familiar with the remarks who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to reveal details of the meeting . The party ’ s position is backed by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , which on Thursday joined Republicans in arguing that the extra payments might deter people from returning to work .
The renewed Republican opposition has incensed some congressional Democrats , who instead have sought to maintain and augment federal unemployment aid . During the Great Recession , lawmakers from both parties extended expanded unemployment benefits because so many Americans struggled to find work , particularly when long-term joblessness became a growing problem . The unemployment rate in April hit 14.7 percent , higher than any point during the Great Recession , suggesting that the unemployment benefit challenges could prove even more complicated this time .
Democrats argue along with a stable of economists that the expanded jobless benefits are critical at a time when Americans have lost their jobs through no fault of their own — and desperately need the money to pay their bills and protect their homes .
“ The worst thing Republicans can do to the economy and American families is to allow supercharged unemployment benefits to expire , ” said Sen. Ron Wyden ( D-Ore. ) .
The White House declined to comment for this story . On Wednesday , White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said at a news briefing that the president would not “ rush forward with spending trillions more dollars in taxpayer money . ”
Spokespeople for Mnuchin and McConnell did not immediately respond to requests for comment .
For now , the new unemployment figures released Thursday further illustrate the precipitous economic decline caused by the coronavirus outbreak , which has shuttered many businesses nationwide . The impact on the labor market has been swift and severe , and it ’ s unclear how many newly unemployed will be able to quickly return to their old jobs .
Some Americans had struggled for weeks to obtain the benefits after a flood of applications overwhelmed aging or neglected computer systems in states including Florida , New York and Maryland . These and other states later made immense progress in reducing their backlogs , though delays still remain . More than 200,000 out-of-work Americans are in line for payments in Florida , state data show , while the New York backlog stands at about 44,000 , the state reported Wednesday . About 7,000 claims had been pending review there for roughly a month .
“ The economic need is not going away , ” said Martha Gimbel , a labor economist at Schmidt Futures . “ The fact that we are two months into this , and we ’ re still getting multi-million claims numbers , speaks to how deep and intense the economic pain is right now . ”
The threat of a protracted downturn prompted Federal Reserve Chair Jerome H. Powell to warn that Congress may need to authorize additional stimulus during a hearing with the Senate Banking Committee on Tuesday . Trump and some of his top aides , however , have articulated a contrary view , insisting that business is set to rebound — and jobs will return — much more quickly than experts envision . “ We ’ re opening up ; the states are opening up , ” Trump affirmed again Tuesday . “ It ’ s a transition to greatness . ”
In response to the coronavirus , lawmakers in March extended unemployment support for an additional 13 weeks while granting new benefits to workers otherwise ineligible for jobless aid . That includes self-employed and gig economy laborers , including those who drive for companies such as Uber . But the centerpiece of lawmakers ’ efforts had been the additional $ 600-per-week payments they authorized for out-of-work Americans until the end of July . Mnuchin reached the agreement with Democrats to include payments of that amount , even though some Senate Republicans immediately complained that the payments were too high .
The heightened unemployment benefits had been designed to replace workers ’ wages , unlike unemployment in normal times , which often covers only a small fraction of what people earn while they have a job . “ They feel like they have some breathing room , ” said Michele Evermore , a senior policy analyst at the National Employment Law Project . “ For them to have enough money to know they can stock up on groceries , and finally get caught up on bills , and know their housing is okay — it ’ s a lifeline . ”
But business groups have balked at the payments , fearing they are too high and making it less likely that Americans will quickly look to return to work .
Two-thirds of unemployed workers who are receiving benefits are earning more than they were taking home previously while on the job , according to a May analysis from the University of Chicago ’ s Becker Friedman Institute for Economics . Conservative groups and congressional Republicans have touted the study in recent days , while anecdotally , companies say they ’ re having a hard time persuading workers to return to their old jobs — even though some laborers say their reluctance is the result of unaddressed safety concerns .
“ It absolutely makes sense in this current health pandemic , when businesses are forced to close their doors , to provide a higher level of benefit , ” said Rachel Greszler , a research fellow who focuses on budget issues for the Heritage Foundation . But , she said , the Cares Act program “ introduces a lot of inequities and perverse incentives that damage the economy . ”
Neil Bradley , executive vice president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , told reporters on a conference call Thursday that the business lobby opposes continuing the $ 600-per-week additional unemployment benefit , which he described as an “ across-the-board bonus. ” Bradley said that this enhanced benefit provides more income for many workers than their jobs did .
With an eye on the July deadline , Democrats have put forward a slew of proposals to bulk up unemployment insurance . Last week , House Democrats approved a $ 3 trillion coronavirus relief bill that would authorize enhanced unemployment benefits until the end of the year , arguing that such payments are critical toward keeping hard-hit Americans financially afloat .
But top congressional Republicans instead have signaled support for paring back these benefits , including during a meeting Tuesday attended by Vice President Pence along with Mnuchin , McConnell and House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) , according to a person familiar with the matter who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the private conversations .
“ On a lot of this stuff there isn ’ t a real consensus yet that ’ s formed because some of these programs are just delivering , and we ’ re kind of getting feedback on how they ’ re working , so I think it ’ s going to take a little while , '' Senate Majority Whip John Thune ( R-S.D . ) said Thursday .
Some Senate Republicans , however , publicly maintain that they are unified in their opposition to extending the $ 600 unemployment benefit , said Sen. Rick Scott ( R-Fla. ) , who said he called the president around the time of the passage of the Cares Act to object to the provision .
“ I don ’ t know of anybody that ’ s not onboard , ” he said . “ The government is competing with businesses for workers , and that ’ s the craziest idea ever . … We can ’ t hurt our ability to reopen the economy . ”