Dr. Anthony Fauci Anthony FauciSunday shows preview : As coronavirus spreads in the U.S. , officials from each sector of public life weigh in Trump warns 'there will be a lot of death ' in the coming week How deadly is the coronavirus ? MORE , the government 's top infectious disease expert , said Monday that the White House coronavirus task force aggressively lobbied President Trump Donald John TrumpPelosi eyes end of April to bring a fourth coronavirus relief bill to the floor NBA to contribute 1 million surgical masks to NY essential workers Private equity firm with ties to Kushner asks Trump administration to relax rules on loan program : report MORE to extend social distancing guidelines another month as the U.S. grapples with the fallout of the novel coronavirus pandemic .
`` We felt that if we prematurely pulled back , we would only form an acceleration or rebound of something , which would put you behind where you were before , and that ’ s a reason why we argued strongly with the president that he not withdraw those guidelines , '' Fauci , the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , said on CNN 's `` New Day . ''
Dr. Anthony Fauci says the coronavirus task force “ argued strongly with the President ” to extend federal social distancing guidelines “ and he did listen. ” https : //t.co/O8SG3jMVVM pic.twitter.com/9FC1MiSW2Z — New Day ( @ NewDay ) March 30 , 2020
Trump announced on Sunday that federal guidelines urging Americans to avoid nonessential travel and in-person gatherings of more than 10 people would be extended until at least the end of April . The announcement marked a significant shift for the president , who had earlier this month floated the idea of reopening the U.S. economy by Easter on April 12 .
On Monday , Fauci said that health officials pushed for an extension in social distancing restrictions because data indicated that the spread of the disease was not slowing . He cited the surge in hospitalizations in cities like New York and New Orleans and how the outbreak had showed no signs of leveling off .
`` When you look at the kinetics of the outbreak , the patterns that are going on now , even as we speak , they were not going to reach a peak and turnaround the way we wanted to , within the time frame originally estimated , '' he said , adding that he and Dr. Deborah Birx , the White House coronavirus task force coordinator , showed these models to Trump on Sunday at the Oval Office .
`` He looked at them , he understood them , and he shook his head and said , ' I guess we got to do it , ' '' Fauci continued .
Fauci has become one of the public faces of the U.S. response to the coronavirus outbreak , regularly appearing for interviews about the disease and its implications . He said Sunday that , based on data he 's seeing , the U.S. could eventually have millions of confirmed coronavirus cases .
He also said that the virus could cause 100,000 to 200,000 deaths , noting that projections are subject to change given that the outbreak is `` such a moving target . ''
The coronavirus , which originated in China in December , has infected more than 732,000 people worldwide , including about 143,000 people in the U.S. , according to a Johns Hopkins University database . The disease has caused more than 2,000 deaths in the U.S .