Gov . Andrew Cuomo on Friday ordered the Empire State to shut down and asked local businesses and manufactures to step up as officials mounted a desperate struggle to slow the corona­virus pandemic .
“ I want to be able to say to the people of New York — I did everything we could do , ” Cuomo told reporters at the state Capitol . “ And if everything we do saves just one life , I ’ ll be happy . ”
The restrictions take effect Sunday night at 8 p.m. and will shut down all nonessential businesses across the state , leaving just grocery stores , pharmacies and other essential operations open . All non-solitary outside activities , like basketball and other team sports are also banned .
The lockdown also requires all nonessential government and private-sector employees to work from home .
Cuomo said the MTA will continue to run city subways , buses and Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road trains . The agency announced Friday it will allow backdoor boarding on local buses beginning Monday to help protect bus drivers from exposure .
“ We have to do it , we have to be serious , ” Cuomo said .
“ Everyone has personal freedom , and everyone has personal liberty , and I ’ ll always protect that , ” he added . “ But everyone also has a responsibility to everyone else . ”
Laundromats and gas stations will be allowed to remain open , as will liquor stores and restaurants for take-out and delivery service only .
The new emergency action came as the Empire State ’ s coronavirus case count ballooned .
Officials had tallied more than 7,100 cases across the state by 12 a.m. Friday — more than 4,400 in New York City . That evening , the city Health Department reported the Big Apple ’ s case load had surged to nearly 5,700 as 6 p.m .
Cuomo said nonessential businesses that stay open despite the ban or keep employees coming in will be fined and that he planned to coordinate with New Jersey , Connecticut , Pennsylvania and Delaware .
The directive came just hours after California Gov . Gavin Newsom ordered his entire state to stay home in its own desperate bid to slow the pandemic ’ s spread .
Mayor Bill de Blasio said the NYPD would hit the streets and begin issuing warnings Sunday evening .
“ [ Gov . Cuomo ’ s ] order is the right thing to do , to protect us all , ” said de Blasio during a late Friday press conference at City Hall .
“ It ’ s not going to happen overnight , ” Hizzoner cautioned . “ It ’ s not going to be perfect the first time . ”
Police Commissioner Dermot Shea said summonses and arrests would be issued as a “ last resort . ”
De Blasio also announced a slew of new measures to tighten the Big Apple ’ s shutdown , including suspending all field permits at the city ’ s public parks and reductions in NYC Ferry service on the East River because of plummeting ridership .
City Hall also rolled out plans for 93 “ enrichment centers ” to care for the kids of frontline city employees like cops , firefighters , transit and sanitation workers , and doctors and nurses .
The Department of Education also said it would have 435 city locations where families who depend on public schools for free or reduced-price meals can pick up breakfast and lunch .
And , after intense criticism , de Blasio said that the Department of Transportation will roll out temporary bike lanes to better protect bicyclists in Brooklyn and Manhattan as ridership soars during the outbreak .
Manhattan ’ s new lane will run from 34th to 42nd Street on Second Avenue , while Brooklyn ’ s will run along Smith Street .
The new measures came as city and state officials kept sounding the alarm that coronavirus caseloads could crush hospitals .
New York state only has 3,000 ICU beds and about 6,000 ventilators .
“ I wouldn ’ t be surprised if we get to a day when we have double-digits new people dying every day , ” warned city Health Commissioner Oxiris Barbot .
Cuomo ordered every local health department to contribute unused respirators and asked local businesses to step in and produce badly needed supplies .
“ It ’ s ventilators , ventilators , ventilators . That is the greatest need , ” Cuomo said . “ We ’ re notifying any health department in the state : if you have a ventilator and you are not using it at this time or it is non-essential to your use , we want it . ”
Cuomo also asked New York businesses and factories to examine their equipment and see if they could produce badly needed hospital masks and respirators .
Famed designer Christian Siriano quickly responded his staff of sewers — who are working from home — could make masks for hospitals .
The governor ’ s office confirmed that it is in touch with Siriano is working out the details .