Sen. Kamala Harris Kamala Devi HarrisProgressive advocates propose T 'green stimulus ' plan Juan Williams : Biden 's promises on women are a big deal Why Klobuchar should be Biden 's vice presidential pick MORE ( D-Calif. ) on Thursday asked the Federal Bureau of Prisons ( BOP ) to release low-risk prisoners amid reports that California jail inmates have tested positive for the novel coronavirus .
In a Thursday letter to BOP Director Michael Carvajal , Harris noted a March 13 Mercury News report that two Santa Clara inmates had been quarantined , as had others who were in contact with them .
“ On March 19 , the chief physician of Rikers Island called on state and local judges and prosecutors to reduce the incarcerated population wherever possible , explaining that ‘ the luxury that allows you to protect yourselves , carries with it an obligation to those you detain. ’ We need the same show of leadership at BOP , ” Harris wrote .
“ At this time , BOP — in coordination with the U.S. Department of Justice — can and should request the release of low-risk individuals who are in pre-trial detention because of money bail , ” she added . “ BOP and the Justice Department also have a responsibility to direct federal , state , and local courts to consider the risk of coronavirus in any pre-trial release decision-making . ”
In the letter , Harris asked for information on the current ratio of health care providers to both inmates at BOP facilities and to federal inmates at private prisons , as well as how many testing kits and ventilators BOP has at each facility and the bureau ’ s contingency plans for a potential outbreak .
She further asked whether Carvajal or Attorney General William Barr William Pelham BarrHillicon Valley : Twitter says Chinese official 's virus disinformation does n't violate rules | Hackers target WHO | Senators urge agencies to stop coronavirus robocalls House Judiciary Committee postpones hearing with Barr amid coronavirus outbreak Trump signs executive order to prevent price gouging , hoarding of medical supplies MORE have made any efforts to expedite compassionate release for elderly or pregnant inmates , as well as elderly home confinement programs since the outbreak began .
Potential outbreaks within prisons are an increasing concern due to the risk of the virus ’ s spread in close quarters . Earlier this week , a Wisconsin prison doctor tested positive for the virus and 18 inmates were quarantined , while a staffer at New York ’ s Sing Sing prison was also diagnosed with the virus .