Masks protect us . That shouldn ’ t be a surprise at this point , but since there ’ s been so much confusion about what masks do , and there are a lot of myths floating around about them , it ’ s time for a little refresher .
Masks reduce the spread of droplets coming out of your face
Masks , properly worn , do block most of the larger droplets coming out of your mouth and nose . This is important because droplets carry the virus , and you can be infected and contagious without realizing it . By the time you feel sick with COVID-19 symptoms , you have probably been spreading the virus for a day or so .
That means that even if you feel fine , wearing a mask reduces the chances that you may accidentally make others sick . If everybody wears a mask , the virus has very few opportunities to pass from person to person .
Masks do not block every droplet , because some are small enough to get through the weave of the mask and because the edges of the mask don ’ t usually make a complete seal . Bottom line , masks help , but they do not provide perfect protection for you or for others .
Also : masks do not block carbon dioxide , so you don ’ t have to worry about the mask slowly suffocating you . They do not cause or worsen infections . These are myths un supported by science .
Masks may provide a small amount of protection from other people ’ s droplets
You should not expect a cloth mask to protect you from other people ’ s droplets , but that ’ s a possible bonus of wearing one . If you need extra protection—for example , you ’ re in a high risk group and yet need to be around other people—a surgical mask is a more effective . An N95 , if you can get one , is better still . Whichever mask you wear , combining it with a clear plastic face shield will give you some extra protection from other people ’ s droplets .
If you are infected , which you might not realize until it is too late , you could spread the virus to others through droplets from your breath . You might also ( possibly ) spread the virus from your mouth to your hands and then to another person ’ s hands or to a shared surface . ( Transmission seems to be mainly through respiratory droplets , but the risk of surface contamination can ’ t be ruled out . )
Even if you are not infected , going maskless may slightly increase your chances of catching the virus from someone else . Slightly .
A crowd of maskless people ( say , at a bar ) is like a trading post for viruses . You might pick up the virus , or somebody might pick it up from you . After that , whoever got infected then carries the virus home to potentially infect their family , their friends or the people they meet at the next bar/trading post .
All this is to say , if you must shop or socialize , do it with a mask . Transmission resulting from maskless spread is the kind of thing that shuts businesses down again . If you want things to stay open , do your part and wear a mask .
Masks do a lot for us , but they aren ’ t a magical force field . Remember these caveats :
You have to wear them properly ( that means over your mouth and nose
N95s are better than surgical masks , which are better than cloth masks . But wearing a cloth mask frees up the medical varieties for healthcare workers who need them most .
Even if you wear a mask , e verything else you ’ re supposed to be doing ( hand washing , distancing , staying home ) is still important .