Americans spent Sunday on lockdown as the U.S. toll from the novel coronavirus pandemic surpassed 21,300 deaths and more than half a million confirmed cases over the Easter weekend .
With almost all the country under stay-at-home orders to curb the spread of the disease , many turned to online church services to mark the holiest day in the Christian calendar .
`` Future generations will look back on this as the long Lent of 2020 , a time when disease and death suddenly darkened the whole earth , '' Archbishop Jose Gomez of Los Angeles wrote to priests and parishioners nationwide , urging them to hold steadfast . `` Our churches may be closed but Christ is not quarantined and his Gospel is not in chains . ''
The United States has recorded more fatalities from the COVID-19 disease caused by the coronavirus than any other country in the world . Roughly 2,000 deaths a day were reported for the last four days in a row , the largest number in and around New York City . Even that is viewed as understated , as New York is still figuring out how best to include a surge in deaths at home in its official statistics . ( Graphic : https : //tmsnrt.rs/2w7hX9T )
As the death toll has mounted , President Donald Trump mulled over when the country might begin to see a return to normality .
The sweeping restrictions on non-essential movement that were imposed in recent weeks across 42 states have taken a huge toll on commerce and raised questions over how long business closures and travel curbs can be sustained .
The number of Americans seeking unemployment benefits in the last three weeks surpassed 16 million .
The Trump administration sees May 1 as a target date for relaxing the stay-at-home restrictions , the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration , Stephen Hahn , said on Sunday . But he cautioned that it was still too early to say whether that goal would be met .
`` We see light at the end of the tunnel , '' Hahn told ABC 's `` This Week , '' adding , `` Public safety and the welfare of the American people has to come first . That has to ultimately drive these decisions ''
Most states have issued broad stay-at-home orders that prohibit any large gatherings . In some states , that has sparked legal battles over whether there should be exceptions to attend Easter services in person .
On Saturday , the Kansas Supreme Court upheld an executive order barring more than 10 people from gathering for religious and funeral services . The decision , a victory for Democratic Governor Laura Kelly , followed an attempt by a Republican-led legislative body to overturn the order .
Some religious leaders plan to defy coronavirus bans , saying their right to worship outweighed the warnings .
Reverend Tony Spell told Reuters he expected more than 2,000 to congregate for services on Sunday at his evangelical Life Tabernacle megachurch near Baton Rouge , Louisiana .
U.S. Attorney General William Barr will be monitoring the regulation of religious services , Department of Justice spokeswoman Kerri Kupac wrote on Twitter on Saturday .
`` While social distancing policies are appropriate during this emergency , they must be applied evenhandedly & not single out religious orgs , '' Kupac wrote . `` Expect action from DOJ next week ! ''
In recent days , U.S. public health experts and some governors have pointed to signs that the country is starting to see a turnaround in the fight against the outbreak .
Dr. Anthony Fauci , the country 's top U.S. infectious disease expert , said he was cautiously optimistic and pointed to the New York metropolitan area , which had its highest daily death toll last week but also saw a decrease in hospitalizations , intensive care admissions and the need to intubate critically ill patients .
`` Once you turn that corner , hopefully you 'll see a very sharp decline and then you can start thinking about how we can keep it that way , '' Fauci said on CNN 's `` State of the Union . ''
`` If all of a sudden we decide 'OK , it 's May whatever , ' and we just turn the switch on , that could be a real problem . ''
Fauci and other public health experts say widespread testing will be key to efforts to reopen the economy , including antibody tests to find out who has already had the disease and could be safe to return to work .
The FDA 's Hahn said he was concerned that some antibody tests on the market that had not gone through the FDA scientific review process `` may not be as accurate as we 'd like them to be . ''
`` I can assure the American people that what we 're doing is using data and science to look at those tests to make sure that they 're valid , they 're accurate and they 're reproducible , '' he said .
New government data shows a summer surge in infections if stay-at-home orders are lifted after only 30 days , according to projections first reported by the New York Times and confirmed by a Department of Homeland Security official .
Christians around the world , meanwhile , celebrated Easter at a distance on Sunday , with most churches closed and family gatherings canceled amid wide-ranging coronavirus shutdowns . British Prime Minister Boris Johnson , the first major world leader to test positive for the virus , was released from the hospital after a week but is not immediately returning to work .
Southern Europe and the United States , whose death toll of over 20,600 is now the world 's highest , have been the recent focal points of the pandemic . But coronavirus hot spots have been shifting constantly and new concerns are rising in Japan , Turkey and Britain , where the death toll on Sunday surpassed 10,000 .
Uncertainties loomed about the months ahead , with a top European Union official suggesting people hold off on making any summer vacation plans .
St. Peter 's Square at the Vatican , where tens of thousands would normally gather to hear Pope Francis deliver his `` Urbi et Orbi ” speech and blessing “ to the city and the world , ” was empty of crowds Sunday , ringed by police barricades . Francis celebrated Easter Mass inside the largely vacant basilica , with the faithful watching on TV at home .
Similar scenes played out around the world . With the Church of England 's churches shut , the archbishop of Canterbury , Justin Welby — the spiritual leader of 85 million Anglicans worldwide — celebrated the Easter service from his kitchen in London .
In Europe , countries used roadblocks , fines and other tactics to keep people from traveling over an Easter weekend with beautiful spring weather . As hard-hit countries like Italy and Spain see reduced daily virus infections and deaths , economic pressures are mounting to loosen the tight restrictions on daily life to fight off the pandemic .
German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier told his compatriots in a rare televised address : “ Every one of you has changed his life radically ; every one of you has saved human lives in doing so and is saving more every day . ”
When and how the restrictions are loosened is something that “ all of us have ... in our hands , with our patience and our discipline , ” he said .
Some European nations are starting tentative moves to ease their shutdowns . Spain , which on Sunday reported its lowest daily growth in infections in three weeks , will allow workers in some nonessential industries to return to factories and construction sites Monday .
But much uncertainty remains . Chancellor Sebastian Kurz said in an open letter to Austrians that the virus will “ be with us for months yet . ”
And asked by Germany ’ s Bild am Sonntag newspaper whether people should book summer holidays now , European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen replied : “ I would advise waiting with such plans . ”
“ No one can make reliable forecasts for July and August at the moment , ” she said .
Restaurants and bars have already missed out on holiday business .
“ Sales are zero and we have a series of expenses : rent , stock , and we have even had to increase spending with security personnel to prevent robberies , ” said Pablo Gonzalo , a bar manager in the southern Spanish city of Malaga .
In his Easter address , the pope called for global solidarity to confront the “ epochal challenge ” of the pandemic . Francis urged political leaders in particular to give hope and opportunity to the millions laid off work .
“ This is not a time for self-centeredness , because the challenge we are facing is shared by all , without distinguishing between persons , ” he said .
For most people , the coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms , such as fever and cough . But for others , especially older people and the infirm , it can cause severe symptoms and lead to death .
More than 1.79 million infections have been reported and 110,000 people have died worldwide , according to Johns Hopkins University .
While some nations think about a pandemic exit strategy , others are dealing with alarming rises in infections or deaths .
Turkey took many by surprise in imposing a partial weekend lockdown after previously taking a more relaxed approach . A sudden Friday evening announcement of a 48-hour curfew in 31 cities , including Ankara and Istanbul , prompted crowds to rush to grocery stores .
The country had previously imposed a curfew on those under 20 and over 65 , exempting most of the workforce to keep its beleaguered economy on track .
In Japan , emergency medical groups warned that health care facilities are getting stretched thin , and masks and surgical gowns were running short amid a surge in patients .
The Israeli government approved a tight quarantine of several areas of Jerusalem , including the historic Old City , to slow the spread of the virus in its most susceptible neighborhoods .
Information from Reuters and the Associated Press was used in this article .