In Utah , the governor lifted a statewide lockdown on elective procedures before his medical supply team had finished estimating how quickly hospitals would exhaust their supply of personal protective equipment , according to members of the state ’ s response team .
And plans to ease restrictions on economic activity and public assembly in Tennessee have been met by dread among emergency management officials , who are in “ complete disbelief that we are reopening the state , ” according to a person involved in the planning who , like others , spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of professional retribution .
In these states , among the fastest to jump-start their idle economies , plans are proceeding without the full approval of medical professionals and emergency response officials closest to the ground-level unfolding of the outbreak , which has claimed nearly 50,000 lives in the United States . The quest by certain governors to reopen by May 1 — the date favored by President Trump — has blindsided some of the officials advising them .
Kemp , for example , did not seek consensus among the doctors on his task force before proceeding with his reopening plan , according to one of its members , Andrew Reisman , who is president of the Medical Association of Georgia .
Kemp and other governors pursuing aggressive reopening plans say they are following data-driven strategies in line with White House guidelines that make a downward trajectory of new cases in a 14-day period a condition of a phased reopening .
“ Our next measured step is driven by data and guided by state public health officials , ” Kemp said this week when Trump , after initially cheering efforts to end lockdowns before May 1 , second-guessed Georgia ’ s approach . The governor ’ s office did not respond to a request for comment .
The apparent rush in Georgia and other states has alarmed some local leaders , who fear political considerations are overriding detailed assessments of the data .
“ I have great concerns about federal and some state pressure to reopen the economy without the guidance of the public-health data , ” said Erin Mendenhall , the Democratic mayor of Salt Lake City . “ No one doubts the gravity of this economic crisis , but the cost of human life is also grave . ”
She added : “ I think politics permeates crisis . And this crisis we are in is not exempt from that . ”
Reisman said Kemp ’ s physician task force had grown less active following an initial burst of activity about two weeks ago . Its chairman , Republican state Sen. Ben Watson , who is a physician , emphasized that the state ’ s stay-at-home order continues through the end of the month and until May 13 for vulnerable populations .
Epidemiologists said the Trump administration ’ s guidelines are so vague as to sanction potentially any strategy , no matter how hasty .
In Tennessee , Republican Gov . Bill Lee this week hailed a “ steady decline in the growth rate ” of new cases , explaining why he would begin a phased reopening May 1 .
But arriving at the state ’ s growth rate by dividing new cases by total cases is off the mark , said Joshua M. Epstein , an epidemiologist at New York University . And the calculation has also raised eyebrows internally , according to an official familiar with the state ’ s planning .
Along with metrics such as hospitalizations , states should simply be tracking new cases per day , Epstein said , and looking to see whether they are rising or falling . In Tennessee , it is not yet consistently falling , even if the percentage growth is diminishing .
“ The guidelines are tremendously vague in many respects , but in the cases they ’ re not vague , they ’ re certainly not being satisfied by these states , ” Epstein said .
Gillum Ferguson , a spokesman for the Tennessee governor , confirmed the growth rate — calculated by dividing new cases by the prior day ’ s total — was the figure informing the state ’ s plans .
Tennessee ’ s approach allows local authorities to maintain stricter orders even as statewide restrictions are rolled back . Health officials in Shelby County , which includes Memphis , said the area would not be ready to reopen ­May 1 . That view was shared by Memphis Mayor Jim Strickland ( D ) , whose city is home to the state ’ s largest African American community , which has been disproportionately affected by ­covid-19 , the disease caused by the novel coronavirus .
Some local orders will also still stand in Colorado , where the governor , Jared Polis , is among the Democrats moving fastest to end statewide orders , saying Thursday he was counting on “ personal responsibility ” when businesses gain permission to reopen at limited capacity Monday .
Polis also contradicted his own ­covid-19 incident commander , Scott Bookman , who just days earlier had told reporters the state would not reopen “ until we have the capacity to make everyone safe. ” By that metric , Polis said , “ we would have to be closed forever . ”
Asked for input on the governor ’ s plan last week , Colorado ’ s association of local public health agencies drafted guidance that the reopening should not start until all symptomatic people can be tested and all cases monitored .
Denver Mayor Michael Hancock ( D ) said restrictions in his city could last longer , warning , “ This will be a different summer for those of us here in Denver . ”
In Georgia and South Carolina , by contrast , statewide directives lifting restrictions on businesses preempt local orders , incensing mayors of some hard-hit cities . Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms ( D ) , who has decried the governor ’ s decision , on Wednesday posted a tweet of a text message she received referring to her by a racist epithet and telling her to “ just shut up and re-open Atlanta ! ”
The Atlanta mayor ’ s trepidation about allowing a range of businesses to reopen Friday — and others , including movie theaters and dine-in restaurants , on Monday — was shared by regional health departments .
Officials in two districts said they learned of the governor ’ s plans when he announced them publicly at the start of the week .
“ We found out from the announcement , ” said Dave Palmer , a spokesman for a regional department covering a northeastern expanse of the state . He said the district is committed to following the governor ’ s directive , including to ramp up testing , which has lagged behind other states .
The breakdown in communication and planning runs deeper , according to officials in other Georgia health districts who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they feared losing funding from the state .
An official in one district said there wasn ’ t proper infrastructure for the recent rollout of a testing hotline required by the state , forcing health workers to scramble and use their cellphones , missing a number of calls . Similarly , districts learned only the night before that they were being required to extend their weekday hours at testing sites and add a half day on Saturday .
Reisman , the medical association president , said he understood the governor ’ s impulse to move quickly . He also said the sweeping stay-at-home orders were never taken especially seriously by the public . “ Georgia was never closed for business , in my opinion , ” said the doctor , who recounted a recent visit to a Home Depot in Gainesville , Ga. , where “ none of the employees were wearing a mask , and no one was social distancing . ”
“ So when I hear the governor say , ‘ Okay , you can get your hair cut or your nails done , you can go to the gym , and I have confidence owners of these places are going to do their utmost to sanitize , ’ I don ’ t feel like it ’ s hugely different , ” Reisman said .
In Utah , a spokesman for the state ’ s covid-19 task force acknowledged that “ analysts are still working on what the appropriate 90-day moving average burn rate for PPE should be . ”
“ But because of current supplies and our close monitoring of demand , we feel that it is actually most helpful to relax standards on elective procedures so that flow can factor into our burn rate , ” task force spokesman Paul Edwards said . “ We can always dial this back down if necessary . ”
In South Carolina , reopening plans are being devised by the governor , Republican Henry McMaster , and “ the team they ’ ve assembled with the private sector , ” said Derrec Becker , a spokesman for the state ’ s emergency management division . At McMaster ’ s news conference Monday announcing that he would let certain businesses reopen , the state ’ s epidemiologist , Linda Bell , continued to ask that “ people only participate in essential activities . ”