Trump Says More Testing Makes U.S. 'Look Bad , ' But Its Availability Remains A Concern
The coronavirus has in recent days edged closer to President Trump . At least two White House aides who 've been in proximity to the president and the vice president have tested positive for COVID-19 .
Because of that , three key members of the Trump administration 's pandemic response team are quarantining themselves : Drs . Robert Redfield , Stephen Hahn and Anthony Fauci . Redfield is head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , Hahn heads up the Food and Drug Administration and Fauci is director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and is the nation 's top infectious disease expert .
All three , plus the assistant secretary for health , Dr. Brett Giroir , are slated to testify before a key Senate committee Tuesday . The hearing , which is ironically titled `` COVID-19 : Safely Getting Back to Work and Back to School , '' will now be done via video conference .
The chair of that committee , Tennessee Republican Lamar Alexander , is also self-quarantining . His office announced Sunday night that a member of the staff tested positive for COVID-19 . Alexander will chair Tuesday 's hearing from Tennessee .
In recent days , Alexander has said that the coronavirus testing the United States has done so far is `` not nearly enough , '' and `` there is no safe path forward to combat the novel coronavirus without adequate testing . ''
Trump has touted the overall number of tests that have been conducted in the country — now more than 8 million . But at times he 's read a different message in them .
`` If we did very little testing , [ America ] would n't have the most cases , '' Trump said Wednesday . `` So , in a way , by doing all of this testing , we make ourselves look bad . ''
And Trump 's reservations about testing appear to be rooted in politics . Trump said Friday he believes some Democrats hope the economy does n't bounce back .
`` I will tell you , you look at some cases , some people think they 're doing it for politics , '' Trump said on Fox News Channel . `` Here we go again . But they think they 're doing it because it 'll hurt me , the longer it takes to — hurt me in the election , the longer it takes to open up . ''
But Trump 's focus on how the pandemic makes him and the nation look does n't get the country closer to being prepared and able to live with the coronavirus .
`` We have to figure out how to live with this virus , and that 's what we 're not doing , '' Michael Osterholm , director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota , said on NBC 's Meet the Press Sunday .
On the White House schedule Monday : a press briefing about testing .
1 . Climbing coronavirus death toll : The confirmed number of Americans who have now died from the coronavirus is about 80,000 . At a rate of 1,000 to 2,000 deaths per day , the U.S. would surpass 100,000 deaths from COVID-19 between May 21 and May 31 . The country 's curve has plateaued , but it appears to have a long tail . And that flattening is masked by New York and New Jersey 's daily new cases coming down , because new cases are on the rise in other places .
2 . Those CDC guidelines for reopening : If you 're wondering why — despite access to some of the top scientists in the world — there have n't been clearer and more detailed reopening guidelines for states , businesses and religious institutions coming from the federal government , you 're not alone . And now we know why : The White House buried them . The guidelines from the CDC were shelved , the AP reported .
Following the publication of the report , CDC Director Redfield issued a statement that appeared to run contrary to his published internal emails . He took responsibility and said the document was `` shared prematurely , '' `` was in draft form and had not been vetted through the interagency review process . '' Because of that , Redfield added , he `` was not yet comfortable releasing a final work product . ''
Will the CDC release new guidelines at some point now that this is out there ?
3 . Will the White House push for another relief package — or not ? White House economic adviser Kevin Hassett said on CNN 's State of the Union Sunday that another relief package would be `` premature '' given the others that have already passed and trillions total in aid . `` We think that we have a little moment , the luxury of a moment , to learn about what 's going on so that the next step that we take can be prudent . '' Luxury of a moment ? The country on Friday hit its highest unemployment rate , 14.7 % , since the Great Depression , most economists think that number is actually higher , and Americans lost a whopping 20 million jobs — in one month .
4 . U.S. Supreme Court on religious freedom , Trump 's financial records and faithless electors : People may be home , but the Supreme Court justices are working — even if remotely . On Monday , the court considers arguments about whether lay teachers at parochial schools are protected from discrimination or whether the schools can have carte blanche in hiring and firing .
On Tuesday , it 's Trump 's financial records and whether Congress has the power to subpoena records from when before Trump was president — and whether those can be used in a potential criminal investigation .
Law Toilet Flush Heard During Supreme Court 's Conference Call Toilet Flush Heard During Supreme Court 's Conference Call Listen · 0:25 0:25
On Wednesday , the quirky Electoral College system sees a challenge . Electors are actually people , and sometimes they do n't go the way their state voted . The court considers whether that 's OK .
For everyone 's sake , let 's hope those mute buttons are working better this week , especially close to any toilets .
5 . Will Bright be reinstated ? Rick Bright , the former director of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority , a key agency in vaccine development , will testify before a House committee Thursday . It comes after he filed a whistleblower complaint against the Trump administration for being dismissed from his position , he says , for sounding alarms about the coronavirus early on and expressing opposition to unproven treatments favored by Trump . Bright 's lawyers say the Office of Special Counsel has made a determination that he was dismissed for retaliation and should be temporarily reinstated while the office investigates . Trump has ignored the same office 's recommendations before , but Bright 's case will continue to be in the public eye , especially this week — and as the pandemic fallout continues .
`` It would have been bad even with the best of governments . It has been an absolute chaotic disaster when that mindset — of 'what 's in it for me ' and 'to heck with everybody else ' — when that mindset is operationalized in our government . ''
— Former President Barack Obama on the Trump administration 's coronavirus response . The comments were revealed in a leaked recording of Obama speaking to a group of members of his administration .