Deluge Continues : 26 Million Jobs Lost In Just 5 Weeks
The number of people forced out of work during the coronavirus lockdown continues to soar to historic highs . Another 4.4 million people claimed unemployment benefits last week around the country , the Labor Department said .
That brings the total of jobless claims in just five weeks to more than 26 million people . That 's more than all the jobs added in the past 10 years since the Great Recession .
Still , the pace of job losses is slowing . About 5.2 million filed during the week that ended April 11 and last week was the third consecutive week of declines .
The coronavirus crisis has suddenly ended a decade of remarkable job growth . The unemployment rate , which sank to nearly 50-year lows , is expected to soar into double digits .
The pace of job losses has the broader population worried . A Gallup poll found that a quarter of working Americans believe they will lose their jobs in the next 12 months . That 's a record high .
The wave of job cuts was concentrated at first in the travel and energy sectors , but have increasingly spread to white-collar jobs such as lawyers , accountants and consultants .
`` The lack of precedent means we have no idea how far this will go , but our initial hope that claims would drop below one million per week by the end of May is now touch-and-go , '' says Ian Shepherdson , chief economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics .
To stem the flow of layoffs , Congress created the $ 349 billion Paycheck Protection Act , which gives companies money if they retain or rehire workers .
The fund ran out of money in just two weeks and the Senate approved a bill this week to replenish it .
As more and more workers lose jobs , many states say they are seeing the trust funds used to pay unemployment benefits begin to run low .
Nearly half the states say they have seen double-digit decline in their funds , The Wall Street Journal reported this week .
New York , which has burned through half of its fund , has asked for a $ 4 billion no-interest loan from the federal government to cover unemployment benefits . More than a million people in the state have lost their jobs .
Massachusetts says its fund is also down by half since mid-February , and California has seen a 40 % decline .