As lawmakers neared a deal on a coronavirus rescue package that would include paid sick leave and free virus testing , a few roadblocks emerged . Among them : Republican attempts to wedge anti-choice restrictions into the House 's relief bill , turning—if momentarily—a public health crisis into an abortion debate .
The tensions reportedly revolved around the Hyde Amendment , a decades-old provision that blocks federal funds from going to abortion services , preventing millions of low-income Americans on Medicaid from accessing abortion care .
According to conservative media , some top Republicans believed a stipulation in the House bill requiring the government to reimburse private laboratories doing coronavirus testing could effectively overturn the Hyde Amendment by establishing a government funding stream not subject to the restrictions . In response , anti-choice lawmakers insisted on including language in the legislation that would reaffirm the principles of the amendment .
When Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell announced on Thursday that negotiations over the coronavirus response bill would go into next week , he accused House Speaker Nancy Pelosi of turning the legislation into an “ ideological wish list . ”
“ Instead of focusing on immediate relief to affected individuals , families and businesses , the House Democrats chose to wander into various areas of policy that are barely related if at all to the issue before us , ” McConnell said .
Yet it is often Republicans who use unrelated legislation as a vehicle for their anti-abortion agenda . And it ’ s not the first time they ’ ve used legislation tied to public health emergencies to do it : Amid the spread of the Zika virus in 2016 , anti-choice lawmakers added a caveat blocking Planned Parenthood health care providers from accessing any of the designated emergency funds .
Conservative lawmakers also tried to wedged a sneaky anti-abortion provision into Trump ’ s 2017 tax plan , giving expectant parents the option of creating a college savings account before their child is even born . The measure included fetal personhood language , referring to fetuses as “ unborn children , ” and defining “ unborn child ” as any “ child in utero . ”
And abortion restrictions have been a sticking point in spending bills , which both parties use to push for policies they ’ re having trouble advancing by other means . In 2018 , the White House pushed Republicans in Congress to slip measures that threatened to cut federal funding to Planned Parenthood into a bill to prevent the third government shutdown of the year—even though government dollars never went to funding abortion services at the clinics because of the Hyde Amendment . A little less than a year later , Democrats used their new House majority to pass a spending bill that challenged the one of the Trump administration ’ s most wide-reaching abortion restrictions : the global gag rule , a law that bans U.S. funding from going to international organizations that provide abortion services or even discuss abortion as a form of reproductive health care . ( This version of the spending bill did not make it past Senate Republicans . )
But while government shutdowns can , at a point , become national emergencies , none so far has compared to the scale of the current global coronavirus pandemic , which could leave the U.S. worse off than countries like Italy—which put a quarter of its population on emergency quarantine—the longer it delays decisive action .
The unemployment benefits and free testing that are at the core of the coronavirus rescue package mean preventing further spread of the virus , and making sure that low-wage workers can afford to pay for food , rent , and other necessities if they get sick , or if their workplaces shutter to mitigate harm , or as a result of government mandates .
Neither of those things have to do with abortion—they ’ re urgent health matters that require the fastest possible response from elected officials .