Republican lawmakers in Michigan rejected an extension of the state ’ s coronavirus emergency declaration , instead voting to authorize a lawsuit challenging Democratic Gov . Gretchen Whitmer ’ s authority .
Whitmer had asked state lawmakers to extend the declaration , which expired Thursday , by 28 days .
The House instead opted to approve a lawsuit against Whitmer and a package of bills that would replace the governor 's orders with laws passed through the normal legislative process .
According to House Speaker Lee Chatfield , Republicans support measures to contain the coronavirus outbreak in the state , just not the governor ’ s “ unchecked and undemocratic approach . ”
“ The current status quo relies on one-size-fits-all edicts that unfairly punish millions of people across the state without giving them any recourse or voice in the process , '' Chatfield said . `` The people deserve a better solution , and we can provide it . ”
Chatfield said one bill replaces nearly all of Whitmer 's orders currently in effect without any loss of critical protections , including protections against price gouging and extensions of tax deadlines . The bills include provisions for distance learning while schools are closed and a continued ban on large gatherings . “ The idea we want to put an abrupt end to the state of emergency and go back to normal immediately is a lazy political talking point , ” said Chatfield . “ We all agree Michigan must continue taking strong steps to fight the spread of this disease . But we can both protect the public health and protect the individual people who make up our great state . '' The legislation already passed the Michigan Senate , so the bills will be forwarded to Whitmer . She has promised to veto any legislation that curtails emergency authority for herself or any future governor . Whitmer has said that her emergency authority is not tied to State of Emergency extension , so her orders will continue based on other state laws . ( ABC 12 )
“ By refusing to extend the emergency and disaster declaration , Republican lawmakers are putting their heads in the sand and putting more lives and livelihoods at risk , ” Whitmer said in a statement . “ I ’ m not going to let that happen . ”
Hundreds of people gathered Thursday to protest , seeking a re-opening of the state .
Protesters , many of them armed , storm the Michigan State House in Lansing in protest of Gov . Gretchen Whitmer ’ s lockdown orders
I 'm not a fan of whataboutism , but the # MichiganProtest was lawful .
Compare this to the property damage and violence committed when @ benshapiro speaks at a college . — JD Rucker ( @ JDRucker ) April 30 , 2020
Chatfield said it was `` very disappointing '' that the governor did n't want to work with them .
Today , we offered our hand of partnership to the governor . No politics . We ’ re all in this together and we should all work together . We believe upholding the democratic process is best for MI people . She just said no . Very disappointing . # InThisTogether https : //t.co/thExZnZSsg — Lee Chatfield ( @ LeeChatfield ) May 1 , 2020