The left supports cash payments and argues that even more assistance is necessary to support households .
“ One of the strangest spectacles in the economic scramble to respond to the coronavirus crisis is that Republicans seem more willing than Democrats to just give everyone straight cash aid… The fact that Pelosi had the chance to lead this charge a week ago and demurred , insisting on means testing as a condition , is blinkered and insane , on both the politics and the policy merits…
“ The downside of means testing is that the ‘ testing ’ part takes time and bureaucracy… And in the case of the coronavirus ' economic impact , the speed and scale of the policy response is everything… a much better tool for enforcing [ distributional ] justice is readily available : namely , progressive taxation . Government spending on welfare aid and public programs should be as simple and universal as possible — and then we can tax the rich much more heavily afterwards to flatten out the income distribution . ”
“ It ’ s much more important to get the aid out quickly than it is to target it precisely . Congress needs to worry about people being unable to pay their bills , falling behind on their rent or feeling the need to keep working when they really should be self-quarantined… Besides , the government can always try to claw back some of the money after the crisis ends by making some percentage of it taxable for higher-income households . ”
“ Republicans would have screamed bloody murder if Obama had written $ 500 billion worth of checks and simply added the cost to the federal deficit , but under Trump , they ’ ve stopped warning about debt crises or national bankruptcy or runs on the dollar . So what ’ s not to like ? Direct government payments are hard to steal , hard to screw up and easy to understand . Forget timely , temporary and targeted . Dumping cash on the American people is like those Xfinity ads : simple , easy , awesome… The industry lobbyists begging for bailouts argue that they need help in order to help their workers , but a more reliable way for the government to help workers is just to help the workers directly . ”
Many argue that “ We need a much bigger and much better targeted fiscal stimulus… the government should pay $ 10,000 to every adult and child younger than 40 . They are more likely to go out and spend this money , partly because Covid-19 presents much less of a health risk to them . Second , the government should pay a bonus to each person who gets tested for the coronavirus ( as long as they haven ’ t been tested in the prior week ) . Finally , as was done in the Great Recession , the government should both increase and extend unemployment-insurance benefits beyond the normal 26 weeks . ”