LONDON ( ███ ) - An experimental vaccine being developed by AstraZeneca and Oxford University against the new coronavirus produced an immune response in early-stage clinical trials , data showed on Monday , preserving hopes it could be in use by the end of the year .
The vaccine , called AZD1222 , has been described by the World Health Organization ’ s chief scientist as the leading candidate in a global race to halt a pandemic that has killed more than 600,000 people .
More than 150 possible vaccines are in various stages of development , and U.S. drugmaker Pfizer and China ’ s CanSino Biologics also reported positive responses for their candidates on Monday .
The vaccine from AstraZeneca and Britain ’ s University of Oxford prompted no serious side effects and elicited antibody and T-cell immune responses , according to trial results published in The Lancet medical journal , with the strongest response seen in people who received two doses .
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson , whose government has helped fund the project , hailed the results as “ very positive news ” though the researchers cautioned the project was still at an early stage .
“ There is still much work to be done before we can confirm if our vaccine will help manage the COVID-19 pandemic , ” vaccine developer Sarah Gilbert said . “ We still do not know how strong an immune response we need to provoke to effectively protect against SARS-CoV-2 infection . ”
AstraZeneca shares surged 10 % , but then gave up most of those gains , to close up 1.45 % on the day .
AstraZeneca has signed agreements with governments around the world to supply the vaccine should it prove effective and gain regulatory approval . It has said it will not seek to profit from the vaccine during the pandemic .
AZD1222 was developed by Oxford and licensed to AstraZeneca , which has put it into large-scale , late-stage trials to test its efficacy . It has signed deals to produce and supply over 2 billion doses of the shot , with 300 million doses earmarked for the United States .
Pascal Soriot , Chief Executive of AstraZeneca , said the company was on track to be producing doses by September , but that hopes that it will be available this year hinged on how quickly late-stage trials could be completed , given the dwindling prevalence of the virus in Britain .
Late-stage trials are under way in Brazil and South Africa and are due to start in the United States , where prevalence is higher .
The trial results showed a stronger immune response in 10 people given an extra dose of the vaccine after 28 days , echoing a trial in pigs .
Oxford ’ s Gilbert said the early-stage trial could not determine whether one or two doses would be needed to provide immunity .
“ It may be that we don ’ t need two doses , but we want to know what we can achieve , ” she told reporters .
AstraZeneca ’ s biopharma chief , Mene Pangalos , said the firm was leaning towards a two-dose strategy for later-stage trials , and did not want to risk a single or lower dose that might not work .
The antibody levels generated were “ in the region ” of those seen in convalescent patients , he said .
The trial included 1,077 healthy adults aged 18-55 years with no history of COVID-19 . Researchers said the vaccine caused minor side effects more frequently than a control group , but some of these could be reduced by taking the painkiller paracetamol , which is also known as acetaminophen .