There has been a lot of talk lately about a few COVID-19 studies that use antibody testing to estimate the prevalence of infection across the population . In theory , antibody tests detect evidence that a person has already had and recovered from COVID-19 , which , given the lack of available testing while people are still experiencing symptoms ( or may be experiencing only mild symptoms , if they aren ’ t completely asymptomatic ) , can be a useful tool for estimating the full scope of the pandemic .
In particular , a study of prevalence rates in Santa Clara County , California , has attracted attention for its conclusion that the prevalence of people with antibodies—meaning people who have been infected and gotten better—is much higher than official estimates .
Antibody studies are garnering interest because they might help us estimate who has immunity against COVID-19 , which could be useful as states look to open up again—particularly as we work our way toward potential “ herd immunity. ” But putting too much faith into a study suggesting a low death rate—particularly one that doesn ’ t account for flaws and biases in its data—could lead people to think the disease is less dangerous than it really is .
Herd Immunity Wo n't Save Us If we can not stop COVID-19 , can we at least look forward to the point in time when we are all… Read more
In the Santa Clara study , 3,330 people were recruited through Facebook ads and tested for antibodies against the virus that causes COVID-19 . Out of these 3,330 people , 50 tested positive . Extrapolating from this number , the authors estimate that the prevalence of people who have recovered from the disease in Santa Clara County is 50 to 85 times what the official numbers suggested . Using this number , authors have estimated the death rate from COVID-19 to be between 0.12-0.20 , versus other estimates , which typically range between 1-3 % . Assessing the death rate for this disease is tricky , given how new it is , as well as the lack of widespread testing . But overall , in scenarios where there have been higher rates of testing , the death rate seems to be somewhere in that 1-3 % range .
The Santa Clara study ’ s results were startling , and have not held up to the scrutiny that followed the initial , heartening headlines . From the moment this preprint was released , one issue after another with the data has come to light . And the Santa Clara study is not the only antibody test that has sparked controversy—although in the past week , it has become the most notable .
When it comes to analyzing these studies to determine how much stock we can place in them , these are the factors scientists are considering :
For the Santa Clara study , participants were recruited through Facebook ads . Although the researchers did attempt to correct for oversampling of some demographics , this is a sampling technique that will introduce certain biases , not least of which is the fact that many of the participants might have been motivated by wanting to know if a previous illness they suffered had been COVID-19 or not . This factor may have significantly skewed the results , especially considering the study ’ s conclusions are based on only 50 positive results out of 3,330 .
Then there ’ s the problematic discovery that some participants for the Santa Clara study were recruited by the wife of one of the author sending an email to a middle school ’ s email list alongside the suggestion the testing would determine if they could “ return to work without fear , ” and falsely claiming the test was FDA approved .
A true sampling would be taken at random . In the real world , this isn ’ t always possible , but it ’ s important to note the sampling method a study followed and how it corrected for any possible biases .
What Does 'Peak Infection ' Mean ? We are now at a point where the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the United States number in… Read more
Tests for antibodies against COVID-19 are still being developed , and there ’ s still a lot we are learning when it comes to their accuracy . Complicating all of this is the fact that the FDA has relaxed its rules on letting companies sell tests that haven ’ t been vetted by the government .
When it comes to test accuracy , there is the false negative rate to consider—when the test results say you don ’ t have COVID-19 antibodies when in fact you do—as well as the false positive rate—which is when the test results say you have antibodies against COVID-19 , when in fact you don ’ t .
In an analysis of 14 different antibody tests , performed by a team of more than 50 scientists , only three produced consistently reliable results . And of these 14 different tests , only one didn ’ t generate false positives . False positives are especially problematic , as they could offer those tested a false sense of security—a mistaken belief that one is immune , when in fact the test results were faulty . ( Of course , it ’ s important to note that we don ’ t yet know the degree to which antibodies confer immunity to the virus that causes COVID-19 . )
It ’ s the false positive rate that is especially concerning in the Santa Clara study . The authors ’ conclusions don ’ t account for any false positives , which is especially problematic considering the test they used has a confidence interval of between 0.1 % to 1.7 % false positive rate , while their reported findings were that 1.5 % of their samples were positive . In theory , all of those positive samples could be false positives , a likelihood that the authors didn ’ t account for . Even if the false positive rate is much lower , with such a small sample size , a slight difference could skew the results by quite a bit .
The Santa Clara study uses its findings to estimate a mortality rate between 0.12 to 0.20 percent . However , as Undark points out , if the death rate were only 0.12 to 0.20 , then the number of COVID-19 deaths in New York City would suggest that 12.5 million people were infected , while city ’ s population is only 8.3 million .
Given that NYC is still recording new cases every day and hasn ’ t seen an influx of an extra 4 million people in the last month , this suggests that the death rate is not , in fact , between 0.12 to 0.20 percent .
What Is Contact Tracing ? Contact tracing is a critical tool for containing a disease outbreak . For COVID-19 , it ’ s also a key Read more
Life in a pandemic changes by the day , with new research results being released every hour . Generally speaking , this ongoing research is a very good thing : There is a lot we don ’ t know yet . That said , given the speed at which all this is happening , as well as our desperate desire for more information , more and more preprints—studies that yet to pass through peer review—are being covered as news .
It ’ s doubly important to double-check how a study is being covered when it is new and hasn ’ t been through peer review . What are other scientists saying about the methodology and results ? What are they saying about the limitations of the study ? No study is perfect . If the news coverage hasn ’ t included a diversity of voices—including an analysis by experts who weren ’ t involved in the research , as well as experts who can speak to its limitations—that ’ s a sign you might want to wait it out before deciding whether the results are ones you can rely on .