“ It ’ s not at the crisis level you see in Houston or Phoenix , ” he says .
Californians were “ a little bit cavalier ” after opening up , he says . Still , he believes what the state has done right will allow it to get the virus under control faster than states that have been “ less responsible . ”
California ’ s struggle undercuts the narrative that recent spikes in several Republican-led states can largely be chalked up to “ bad behavior ” by their leaders , says Robert Wachter , chair of the department of medicine at the University of California , San Francisco .
Five other states are now backtracking on reopening because of a surge in new cases , while 13 others are taking a pause . The U.S. leads the world in cases as well as deaths from COVID-19 , with the nation ’ s death toll now at more than 130,000 .
When the novel coronavirus hit the United States earlier this year , California was held up as a model of response . It was the first state to go into lockdown , on March 19 , and it never experienced the heavy death toll of New York . But a recent resurgence of the virus has caused the state ’ s Democratic governor to reimpose restrictions – last week closing indoor spaces such as restaurants , museums , and movie theaters .
Recent orders by California ’ s governor to halt indoor dining in many counties may not impact the Blue Plate Oysterette much . At the Santa Monica seafood eatery , diners lately have been ordering their oysters or king crab legs at an outdoor counter – housed in a vintage VW bus – and feasting at sidewalk tables or across the street overlooking the cliff-side promenade .
Nonetheless , owner Jen Rush has sharp views about Gov . Gavin Newsom ’ s decision to close indoor spaces such as restaurants , museums , and movie theaters for at least three weeks because of a surge in COVID-19 cases . Add to that beach closures over the July Fourth holiday weekend .
“ They should never have opened up , ” says Ms . Rush , complaining that authorities moved too quickly between phased reopenings . She notes that on a recent drive to the restaurant , only about a third of pedestrians on Ocean Avenue were wearing masks . The “ yo-yo ” orders – from full closure , to takeout only , to indoor dining with social distancing , then back to outdoor service – make running a business “ very difficult , ” she says .
When the novel coronavirus hit the United States earlier this year , California was held up as a model of response . It was the first state to go into lockdown , on March 19 , and it never experienced the heavy death toll of New York . But a recent resurgence of the virus has caused the state ’ s Democratic governor to reimpose restrictions – and undercuts the narrative that the spikes in several Republican-led states can largely be chalked up to “ bad behavior ” by their leaders , says Robert Wachter , chair of the department of medicine at the University of California , San Francisco .
Francine Kiefer/The ███ Jen Rush ( right ) , owner of the Blue Plate Oysterette in Santa Monica , California , leaning against the ordering counter of a vintage VW bus , says state authorities opened up too quickly . The restaurant 's manager , Matthew Kretschmer stands next to her , along with management-team members JoAnna Senatore and Damon Murphy .
As in other places , Californians were “ a little bit cavalier and careless ” after opening up , says Dr. Wachter . The virus doesn ’ t care if a state has had a couple of good months if people then let their guard down , he observes .
Still , he believes that because of what California has done right , it will be able to get things under control faster than other states . “ Yes , we ’ re having a surge , but there will be fewer people that die here per capita than in states that have been less responsible , ” he says , adding , “ It ’ s not at the crisis level you see in Houston or Phoenix . ”
Five states in addition to California are currently backtracking on reopening because of a surge in new cases – Florida , Texas , Arizona , Colorado , and Michigan , according to the New York Times tracker . Thirteen other states are pausing their openings , while new cases nationwide could rise to 100,000 a day , Dr. Anthony Fauci told Congress last week . The U.S. leads the world in cases as well as deaths from COVID-19 – with the nation ’ s death toll now at more than 130,000 , according to Johns Hopkins University .
With 40 million people , California is the most populous state and a microcosm of the nation . It has every kind of industry , ranging from tech to agriculture . It has extreme wealth and poverty . Its geography spans rural and urban , coastal and inland , and the state is home to an ethnically and racially diverse population . As such , many of the nation ’ s challenges with the virus are mirrored here .
California has seen , for instance , numerous outbreaks in confined facilities such as nursing homes and jails . In Marin County , roughly a third of the inmates at San Quentin State Prison have tested positive since a May transfer of hundreds of inmates from another prison that had been battling the virus . Six people have died . The top medical officer for the state correction facilities was replaced on Monday .
Last week , the state ’ s health secretary , Dr. Mark Ghaly , characterized some of the causes of the surge throughout the state . Family gatherings in Sacramento County , where guidelines were not followed , likely led to outbreaks in families , which led to a rise in cases and a more than 40 % rise in hospitalizations in three days , he said .
Rural Imperial County , which borders Mexico and Arizona , has the highest rate of positive tests in the state and has had to send hundreds of patients elsewhere because its health care facilities are overwhelmed . Some cases have been linked to cross-border traffic in a county where most of the population is Latino and many are migrant farmers . In California , as in the nation , the virus is disproportionately affecting people of color .
In Los Angeles County , the epicenter of the virus in California , public health officials found last month that of 3,700 restaurants and bars surveyed , more than 80 % were not complying with reopening guidelines – a big problem being lack of face coverings .
As a result , the governor on June 18 made face masks mandatory in most public settings , followed days later by the closing of bars on the state ’ s county “ watchlist , ” and then last week ’ s restrictions on indoor settings for watchlist counties . The governor said California became too fixated on when to reopen and not enough on how .
California officials put together a “ really thoughtful road map ” on how to reopen , “ but we may have gone a little bit fast through these steps , ” agrees Jeanne Ringel , senior economist and director of the Rand Corp. ’ s health care access and delivery program . Livelihoods and mental health were at stake , putting tremendous pressure on officials to reopen . Because California had flattened the curve , cooped-up residents may have perceived the risk of socializing as low , she says .
Like Dr. Wachter , she says the state has also gotten a lot of the response right : ramping up testing , using time gained during the lockdown to build contact tracing and hospital capacity and buy personal protective equipment , and putting in place a transparent monitoring system and triggers to pull back counties if they fail to meet benchmarks .
While California ’ s leaders have been consistent about messaging – wear face coverings , wash hands , practice social distancing – it can be hard to communicate that message effectively to different cultures within the state , says Dr. Ringel . Residents in more liberal Los Angeles County might be more inclined to wear face masks , while less inclined next door in the more conservative Orange County .
Interestingly , several Orange County oceanside communities voluntarily joined Los Angeles County in the temporary July Fourth beach closures – in contrast to strong resistance displayed at earlier forced closures . The COVID-19 surge in their county seemed to spur them on as did , in the case of Newport Beach , two lifeguards who tested positive and the subsequent quarantining of 23 lifeguards . At the same time , many national Republican leaders are now urging everyone to wear face coverings .
People need to get back into “ a frame of mind that recognizes the magnitude of this moment , ” Governor Newsom said last week . If they don ’ t , he added , the state has $ 2.5 billion in funds it can withhold from county recalcitrants and a regulatory arm it can flex with businesses .
That ’ s all right with resident Melissa Longmire , who came to Santa Monica ’ s beach with two family members to celebrate a birthday on July 1 . “ I ’ m in total agreement with the governor , ” she says , emphasizing the need to social distance and wear masks .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
While their original thought had been to have a larger gathering , they ultimately decided to keep it small . “ Health is the most important [ thing ] , ” she says .