Chowkwanyun and Reed note three destructive tendencies . The first is to assume that if black people are getting sicker than white people , the problem is biological—that African Americans may be more susceptible to infection , and more fragile once infected . ( There is no reason to believe that such genetic differences exist . ) Conversely , after I reported that COVID-19 figures were rising more slowly in Africa than they had been in other areas , many tipsters emailed me to suggest that Africans are genetically different , and protected from COVID-19 . None of my correspondents included any genomic data to back up this claim , but the temptation to believe it is epidemic . Cary Gross , the Yale researcher , told me he has heard similar theories . “ No , ” he said , unequivocally . These differences are not because of subtle variations in biology . “ If you drop an anvil on someone ’ s foot , the foot ’ s going to break . ”
Second , Chowkwanyun and Reed say , disparity figures encourage people to assume that groups are afflicted because of their own misbehavior . Yolonda Wilson , a bioethicist at the National Humanities Center , notes that the vocabulary of the pandemic in America changed as the disparities became better known . What started as a public-health issue shaded into a moral one , she told me . “ The language of crisis was replaced by the language of personal responsibility , ” or irresponsibility .
Ibram X. Kendi : Stop blaming black people for dying of the coronavirus
Finally , by emphasizing disparity figures without context , Chowkwanyun and Reed write , we encourage the false impression “ that certain social problems are primarily ‘ racial ’ —and therefore of concern only to supposed minority interest groups. ” Context might reveal , for example , that black people are hit harder because they use crowded public transportation at a higher rate than white people , or because they are more likely to work in jobs that require in-person interaction . Neither of these factors is exclusive to one race or another , and absent this context , it would be easy to dismiss COVID-19 as a “ black disease , ” much as AIDS became a “ gay disease , ” to the detriment of gay and nongay alike .
Chowkwanyun and Reed advocate instead an approach that focuses less on outrage and more on hard data . “ People need to take a breather to parse data in more sophisticated ways , ” Chowkwanyun told me . He warned against a “ pro forma ” kind of racial-disparity research that simply says We have a racial disparity here , and we have to react to it . It ’ s outrageous ! “ Just saying ‘ There ’ s racism here ’ can be counterproductive . We are pushing people to be more precise . ”
That means collecting data that currently do not exist . “ When a patient comes to a clinic , they can self-report their race , but how do they self-report socioeconomic status ? How do you actually gather that information ? ” Most states still aren ’ t collecting the relevant data systematically—not even data on race , let alone other characteristics .