Gov . Gavin Newsom ( D ) on Tuesday warned that , while California will move into the next phase of reopening its economy this week , it is “ not going back to normal ” until there is a vaccine .
Newsom this week announced that the state will move into the next phase of its recovery plan by Friday , May 8 , allowing certain businesses — like bookstores , flower shops , clothing stores , and sporting goods stores — to reopen with certain modifications , which will be provided this week . According to the governor , offices and dine-in restaurants “ will be part of a later Stage 2 opening . ”
The announcement for Friday does not include offices , seated dining at restaurants , shopping malls or schools . As the Governor noted last week , the state is working with school districts and the California education community to determine how best and safely to reopen . That continues to be the case – this May 8 announcement does not move up this timeline .
Newsom ’ s office noted that individual counties “ can choose to continue more restrictive measures in place based on their local conditions . ”
Despite the slow and steady effort to return to a place of pre-virus normalcy , Newsom told Californians on Tuesday that the state will not return to normal until “ we get to immunity and a vaccine . ”
“ We ’ re not going back to normal . It ’ s a new normal with adaptations and modifications , until we get to immunity and a vaccine , ” the governor said during Tuesday ’ s press briefing .
While researchers are working on a vaccine for COVID-19 specifically , no vaccine for other forms of coronavirus have ever been approved , casting doubt on the efforts .
Christopher Whitty , the U.K. ’ s Chief Medical Officer , told a parliamentary committee last month that there are no guarantees in the development of a vaccine .
We need “ to be careful that we don ’ t assume that we are going to have a vaccine for this disease as we have had for , let ’ s say measles , which once you have it you ’ re protected for life , ” he said , according to Business Insider , adding , “ We can not guarantee success . ”
President Trump , meanwhile , remains hopeful , telling reporters over the weekend that America will likely have a vaccine by the end of the year .