House Democrats looking to deliver another round of $ 1,200 relief checks to Americans are encountering skepticism from an unexpected source — fellow Democrats in the Senate .
The $ 3 trillion House-passed measure is not only facing opposition from GOP senators , it ’ s also prompting Senate Democrats to raise concerns about what they see as a huge untargeted expenditure .
Sen. Ben Cardin Benjamin ( Ben ) Louis CardinThis week : Senate reconvenes as protests roil nation amid pandemic Schumer to GOP : Cancel 'conspiracy hearings ' on origins of Russia probe On The Money : Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program MORE ( D-Md . ) , a member of the Senate Finance Committee , said he wants the next round of coronavirus relief to be more focused on the households that have been hardest hit by the economic downturn brought on by the pandemic .
“ I ’ d like to take a look at all that aid we provided and get good economic information on the value for that , from the point of view of our economy but more importantly on fairness to people who are really hurt , ” Cardin said when asked whether he would support another round of checks .
Cardin said the direct payments made more sense in March when Congress wanted to get money out the door as quickly as possible . But now , as states are allowing businesses to reopen around the country , he says lawmakers should look at who will most need relief in the coming months .
“ We wanted to get money out quickly . We used the refund checks to do that , we used the PPP program to do that , ” he said , referring to the Small Business Administration ’ s popular Paycheck Protection Program .
“ I think the next round we ’ ve got to be more targeted to those who are really in need . So I hope we can target this a little bit better to those who have been hit hard because of COVID-19 , ” he added .
Sen. Ron Wyden Ronald ( Ron ) Lee WydenOn The Money : Senate Dems pump brakes on new stimulus checks | Trump officials sued over tax refunds | Fed to soon open small-business lending program Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks Voting rights , public health officials roll out guidelines to protect voters from COVID-19 MORE ( Ore. ) , the senior Democrat on the Finance Committee , earlier this month acknowledged there ’ s “ a little bit of debate ” over whether another round of checks should be included in the next relief bill .
Senate Republicans have panned the $ 3 trillion HEROES Act , which the House passed on May 15 , calling it a non-starter .
While Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison ( Mitch ) Mitchell McConnellThe Hill 's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump tweets as tensions escalate across US This week : Senate reconvenes as protests roil nation amid pandemic For city parks : Pass the Great American Outdoors Act now MORE ( R-Ky. ) now says Congress will “ probably ” pass another relief bill , Republicans say it is likely to carry a much smaller price tag than the House package .
Many Republicans have raised concerns over the increasing federal deficit , which is projected to reach $ 3.7 trillion in 2020 , according to the Congressional Budget Office .
Senators in both parties are now starting to rank their policy priorities . As a result , proposals for ideas other than stimulus checks are starting to gain momentum .
Wyden , a key player in upcoming talks for the next emergency spending bill , said he would back another round of direct payments but that they ’ re not his top priority .
“ I would support additional payments , as well as fixing problems with the first round of payments like the exclusion of dependents and citizen children of immigrants . My top priorities are tying expanded unemployment benefits to economic conditions and providing more help for the smallest of small businesses , ” he said in a statement .
Wyden has proposed extending the weekly federal boost to state unemployment benefits , a key provision of the $ 2.2 trillion CARES Act enacted in late March . That provision is due to expire at the end of July .
Under Wyden ’ s plan , the federal boost to unemployment benefits would remain at $ 600 a week until a state ’ s three-month average total unemployment rate falls below 11 percent .
Weekly federal unemployment compensation would drop by $ 100 a week for each percentage point decline in a state ’ s joblessness , bottoming out at 6 percent . That means workers would receive an extra $ 500 if their state ’ s unemployment rate is between 10 and 11 percent , down to an additional $ 100 where the jobless rate falls between 6 percent and 7 percent .
“ I believe the economic conditions at the end of July workers are going to need another boost , ” he said , citing estimates earlier this month by White House officials that the U.S. unemployment rate is likely to hit 20 percent .
Wyden has also praised legislation sponsored by Sens . Mark Warner Mark Robert WarnerTrump asserts his power over Republicans Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks MORE ( D-Va. ) , Richard Blumenthal ( D-Conn. ) , Doug Jones ( D-Ala. ) and Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersJudd Gregg : Biden — a path to the presidency , or not Biden 's 'allies ' gearing up to sink his campaign Expanding tax credit for businesses retaining workers gains bipartisan support MORE ( I-Vt. ) that would use the Employee Retention Tax Credit as a mechanism to secure paychecks and benefits for workers and provide financial assistance to small businesses to cover operating costs over the next six months .
“ Without additional help many small businesses will not survive this crisis and it will take far longer to climb out of this economic ditch , ” Wyden said .
The skepticism in the Senate surrounding relief checks is familiar territory , though Democrats earlier this year were more in favor of recurring payments instead of one-time checks of $ 1,200 for individuals earning up to $ 75,000 a year , with an extra $ 500 for each child in a household .
“ There are many , many who have lost their jobs and one check , when they may be out of their jobs for three , four , five months , isn ’ t going to be enough , ” Senate Democratic Leader Charles Schumer Charles ( Chuck ) Ellis SchumerJudd Gregg : Biden — a path to the presidency , or not Montana barrels toward blockbuster Senate fight Federal judges should be allowed to be Federalist Society members MORE ( N.Y. ) said in March .
Sen. Debbie Stabenow Deborah ( Debbie ) Ann StabenowSenate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks Democrats warn of 'captured ' GOP court ahead of November election Senate Democrat introduces bill to protect food supply MORE ( D-Mich. ) , a member of the Finance Committee , also wasn ’ t a fan of the checks when the idea was first floated .
“ One-time payments are not what people need . What people need is a paycheck . They need ongoing income until this is done . That ’ s what they need , ” she told ███ during the negotiations for the CARES Act .
Senate Democrats eventually went along with providing the checks because Republicans agreed to provide a weekly $ 600 federal boost to state unemployment benefits .
There was also substantial skepticism among Senate Republicans , but they later rallied around the checks proposal because it was one of President Trump Donald John TrumpFauci says his meetings with Trump have 'dramatically decreased ' McEnany criticizes DC mayor for not imposing earlier curfew amid protests Stopping Israel 's annexation is a US national security interest MORE ’ s top priorities .
Sens . Lindsey Graham Lindsey Olin GrahamThe Hill 's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump tweets as tensions escalate across US This week : Senate reconvenes as protests roil nation amid pandemic Trump asserts his power over Republicans MORE ( S.C. ) and Rand Paul Randal ( Rand ) Howard PaulSecond senator tests positive for coronavirus antibodies Senate Democrats pump brakes on new stimulus checks Tim Kaine tests positive for COVID-19 antibodies MORE ( Ky. ) were among the Republicans who questioned the approach at the time .
“ What I want is income , not one check . I want you to get a check you can count on every week , not one week , ” Graham said . “ Here ’ s what I ’ m focused on : You have unemployment insurance that is totally inadequate , let ’ s beef it up . ''