cwick ( Chadwick Matlin , deputy editor ) : Clare , Kaleigh and Maggie , thanks for joining me to talk about the president ’ s medicine cabinet . Yesterday , President Trump revealed that he ’ s taking hydroxychloroquine , an anti-malarial medication , to help prevent him from contracting COVID-19 . Trump ’ s comments were the culmination of his interest in the drug , which he has hyped for months as a way to help fight the pandemic . Let ’ s talk about what the science says about hydroxychloroquine , what Trump has said about it , and what it says about Trump that he ’ s taking it .
So , let ’ s start with the science , which is about the only thing that can ground us in this frenzied moment . Can hydroxychloroquine prevent someone from getting COVID-19 ?
clare.malone ( Clare Malone , senior political writer ) : ( Readers can , on their own time , imagine what else is in the president ’ s gold-plated medicine cabinet . )
maggie ( Maggie Koerth , senior science writer ) : What we ’ re basically looking at here is a massive lack of evidence for anything , Chad .
kaleigh ( Kaleigh Rogers , science and politics reporter ) : The results from the few studies that have been done are mixed , at best . Some have found hydroxychloroquine reduced the duration of COVID-19 , others have found no difference between using the drug and not , and at least one found there was actually a worse outcome for patients who were on hydroxychloroquine versus those who were not .
maggie : There are ongoing studies of better quality happening — I ’ m particularly interested in one that ’ s looking at COVID-19 incidence and outcomes in lupus patients who were already taking hydroxychloroquine for their chronic illness — but we just don ’ t have evidence to say it does anything .
kaleigh : We do know from past trials of hydroxychloroquine that it can cause abnormal heart rhythms , so the president ’ s claim that there ’ s no harm in trying it is not based on evidence . This isn ’ t like taking vitamin C .
cwick : And are these all studies that test for whether hydroxychloroquine prevents COVID-19 ? Or are they testing whether it improves treatment of the disease ?
kaleigh : Most trials I ’ ve seen are to treat COVID-19 , not to prevent it . ( Though there is at least one trial currently testing it out for preventive use . )
cwick : So Trump ’ s decision to take it preventively complicates things further . We ’ re in the dearth-iest corner of the dearth of evidence .
maggie : You have the science side of things , which is mostly proceeding as it ought to , and you have the political side , which is full of hype and boom-or-bust demand .
cwick : With that said , Clare , why is Trump doing this ? Or maybe the better question : Why is Trump telling us he ’ s doing it ?
clare.malone : On a personal level , Trump is likely taking it because of the recent infections of White House staff and because , well , as we all know , he ’ s a germaphobe !
But I think it ’ s a piece of his public response to the outbreak . He attempted , in a quite pitched way at first , to convince the public that things were not as bad as they were made out to be . He promised a non-entity of a disease at first and compared it to the flu . The idea of taking this drug plays into all that , in a more tamped-down way , because he ’ s offering the public a sort of “ cure ” or hope . I don ’ t think it ’ s a slip of the tongue , but it is a key part of his own thinking about the virus and a key part of how he wants to talk about it in public .
cwick : That ’ s interesting , Clare . One of the defining characteristics of this disease has been its uncertainty . That ’ s in part because we haven ’ t known how to treat those who are sick ( let alone make the rest of us immune ) . Trump seems to be saying : If a medication is good enough to make the president feel safer , it ’ s good enough to make you feel safer .
maggie : I ’ m interested , Clare , in whether we ’ ve seen presidents get so specific in their hope-peddling before . It seems normal for a president to say , “ Oh there ’ s all this research being done and we will have options , let ’ s fund them. ” But it feels to me like Trump has uniquely used the bully pulpit to tout specific products — hydroxychloroquine , that Abbott Laboratories test — when there was more than one option out there . And it ’ s come back to bite him multiple times . Because when science is moving fast , most of the “ good ideas ” are going to fail at first . Pinning hope on specific brands and products seems like a real risk he ’ s taken on .
clare.malone : Right , Chad . The president has gotten A TON of flak for his refusal to wear a mask , but that ’ s also part of his messaging ! It ’ s certainly odd that he ’ s taking this drug and not wearing a mask , but he ’ s a big believer in the sort of traditional displays of “ masculine ” strength that American politicians have thought the public likes to see . His no-mask thing is the pandemic equivalent of presidential candidates not wearing winter coats while campaigning in Iowa in January .
cwick : This isn ’ t about promoting promising research , or the latest trial results . He is , in effect , becoming part of the trial himself .
kaleigh : Except it ’ s not controlled , randomized or blind , so his “ trial ” is scientifically meaningless . I drink coffee every day and haven ’ t gotten COVID-19 yet — maybe that ’ s a prophylactic , too ! This is the logic of anecdotal evidence .
maggie : So this reminds me of the study I saw about how men were significantly less likely than women to take non-pharmaceutical preventive measures in a health crisis , like wearing masks , but were more likely than women to take pharmaceutical measures .
kaleigh : His announcement that he ’ s taking it certainly felt defiant , like he ’ s doubling down in spite of the evidence . He also spent some time yesterday criticizing a Veterans Affairs study , which found that patients on hydroxychloroquine actually had a higher risk of death .
cwick : Kaleigh , your point about the VA study is super interesting . We ’ ve seen how the president can dismiss news and findings that run counter to the narrative he wants to promote , and part of his political struggle during this crisis has been knowing when to embrace the science and when to reject it out of hand . By putting his chips in on one drug , the drug itself becomes a cause to rally behind , and news that disputes its power becomes easier for Trump to critique . Essentially , hydroxychloroquine has become part of the White House policy agenda .
clare.malone : Also , if you ’ ve eschewed a lot of the science in your initial stages of your response , you might as well bet big on a miracle cure , right ? Maybe you ’ ll be right and people will credit with you being early to the party . Americans do love pharmaceutical solutions to their problems .
Shoutout here to former Sen. Bob Dole , the OG American politician-pharmaceuticals spokesman .
kaleigh : It is strange that he got so fixated on this one possible treatment , though . The antiviral drug Remdesivir , by contrast , actually has some promising early results . Why is Trump so interested in hydroxychloroquine ? He has scoffed at questions about whether he , say , owns stock in a company that produces the drug , but he also hasn ’ t provided a lot of explanation about why he ’ s so fascinated with it .
cwick : Some would have you believe that it might be an issue of cronyism . Here ’ s the New York Times from April : “ Some associates of Mr. Trump ’ s have financial interests in the issue . Sanofi ’ s largest shareholders include Fisher Asset Management , the investment company run by Ken Fisher , a major donor to Republicans , including Mr. Trump . A spokesman for Mr. Fisher declined to comment . ”
clare.malone : It ’ s a good question . I ’ m a bit skeptical of the stock interests answer , since what Trump seems to own is quite negligible . But to Chad ’ s point , Trump ’ s personal phone line is always known to be open to friends outside the White House ! In the initial stages of the crisis , there ’ s a sense that he was hesitant to trigger portions of the Defense Production Act because of feedback from the Chamber of Commerce and private industry .
maggie : And meanwhile , his political advocacy has pushed for millions to be spent on it … supplies acquired by the VA and the Strategic National Stockpile .
kaleigh : One thing is clear : When Trump touts a treatment , interest goes up . Not only do Google searches soar , but at least one online prescription service reported a nearly six-fold increase in demand for hydroxychloroquine prescriptions after Trump first mentioned the drug .
maggie : We know there were people from the anti-vaccine movement promoting the so-called ” miracle mineral solution ” to him — a pseudoscience “ treatment ” that basically amounts to industrial bleach — before he spent that one press conference talking about treating yourself with disinfectant .
clare.malone : And we know Trump is susceptible to anti-vaxxers from earlier in his time in public life .
maggie : I can see why the open phone line thing would work in real estate — hot backdoor tips from buddies . But that doesn ’ t really work in science .
clare.malone : But isn ’ t it more politics masquerading as science ? Which might be the whole problem .
cwick : Right , it seems like we ’ re all arriving at the same terminus : The president has long demonstrated a contrarian approach to science , so his taking hydroxychloroquine despite iffy science is as much about the political as it is about the personal .
kaleigh : What is the political motivation to fixate on one drug and also continue to tout it against all current evidence ?
clare.malone : Momentum . You ’ ve already been saying it : Why stop saying it ? ! You ’ ll just look more fallible .
maggie : This politician in particular really doesn ’ t like to be wrong — maybe even more so than others .
clare.malone : It ’ s the spin zone , y ’ all ! Hop on in . It ’ s dark , but that ’ s what it is .
kaleigh : Right , changing your mind based on new and better information is bad in politics , for some reason .
cwick : I ’ d say that I ’ m reconsidering , but then you ’ d think I was weak…