A recent YouGov/Yahoo News survey found that 60 % of respondents oppose the protests . Virginia Governor Ralph Northam , a Democrat , says the protests aren ’ t going to influence him . But the rally ’ s organizer isn ’ t expecting to go away . “ I wanted this protest to be one and done , ” he says . “ But that ’ s not going to be the case . ”
The anti-lockdown protests began in Lansing , Michigan , and spread to Madison , Wisconsin , this weekend . Last week ’ s rally in Richmond offers a flavor of the frustration . There were elements of a Trump rally , but the purpose went beyond supporting the president , bringing together like-minded people to call for a change . “ Was good to remember we ’ re not alone , ” noted a Facebook post .
“ It ’ s time to let us work , ” said one sign taped to a vehicle . “ LIBERATE VIRGINIA ! ” said another .
Like most United States cities in COVID-19 lockdown , Richmond , Virginia , is usually quiet . But on Wednesday last week , 12 blocks of a road leading to the Virginia state Capitol were gridlocked with honking , poster-waving cars . It was a protest calling for the reopening of the state ’ s economy – one of many in recent days .
One side of East Broad Street looked like many downtown roads across COVID-19 America : empty sidewalks , locked restaurants , a handful of cars .
But last Wednesday , the other side of the Richmond street – the lanes leading to the Virginia statehouse – had 12 blocks of bumper-to-bumper honking cars , with passengers waving posters out of sun roofs . The noise was so loud it was hard to hear anyone from three feet away , much less the social-distancing guideline of six .
It was a protest calling for the reopening of America ’ s economy – one of many such demonstrations in state capitals in recent weeks . Most are drive-by only , to stay within the new distancing of the COVID era .
“ It ’ s time to let us work ” reads one sign taped on the side of a vehicle . “ LIBERATE VIRGINIA ! ” says another . “ The state is not God ” reads a third .
“ Operation Gridlock ” began in Lansing , Michigan , on April 15 , with rallies following across the country . This weekend , protesters thronged Madison , Wisconsin , in the latest installment . The Richmond protest offers a window into the mounting frustration and the motivations of those turning up to demand an end to lockdowns .
Overall , the American public does not appear to support the protesters . A YouGov/Yahoo News survey conducted from April 17 to 19 found that 60 % of respondents opposed protests aimed at ending sheltering-in-place . Republicans as a group did not support them , either – a plurality of 47 % of GOP respondents thought they were a bad idea , according to YouGov .
Opponents note that cases of the novel coronavirus haven ’ t peaked in many places , making the lockdown restrictions essential . Many also charge that the protests have been partly organized by conservative business interests .
But many attendees interviewed at # GridlockRichmond on April 22 seemed genuinely frustrated with the lockdown .
“ We have a right to life and liberty and the government can ’ t infringe in that in the purpose of keeping us safe , ” says Marisa Nance , a mother from nearby Glen Allen , Virginia , who circled the statehouse in a gray van with “ Liberty is essential ” written in scrolling cursive across the back window .
“ [ This is ] a great opportunity to demonstrate to our kids what we ’ ve always taught them . As citizens we are responsible , ” Ms. Nance adds .
Perhaps unsurprisingly in today ’ s polarized America , this general frustration blended with an array of political issues that are important to the right , from supporting President Donald Trump to anger about gun control measures , giving the protest an overall air of a MAGA rally .
“ We asked people to not fly the Trump flags , that we just wanted to open Virginia , ” says David Britt , one of the rally organizers . But then he adds , laughing , “ people are going to do what they want to do . ”
Mr. Britt , who works in a mental health facility in Fairfax , Virginia , was growing more and more frustrated with the state ’ s stay-at-home lockdown after Governor Ralph Northam in mid-April extended it until at least June 10 .
But it wasn ’ t until the anti-lockdown protest in Lansing that Mr. Britt started thinking about organizing something similar in Virginia . After a conference call with other interested friends and groups , he created the Facebook group “ Reopen Virginia , ” which soon grew to almost 400 members .
In some ways , the resulting protest resembled a MAGA rally not just in appearance , but in effect . Like Mr. Trump ’ s raucous gatherings , it seemed to become a visible way for like-minded conservatives to feel part of a larger movement .
After it was over , participants left comments and posts on Facebook groups run by “ Reopen Virginia ” to the effect of “ was so great to see everyone yesterday , ” and “ Was good to remember we ’ re not alone . ”
Still , at the rally itself many protesters didn ’ t cite support for the president among their reasons for protesting . They talked about friends who are struggling to pay their bills , or their kids who are struggling with learning from home .
The rules seem unfair and arbitrary , says Jenny Karnes , who drove almost six hours roundtrip from her home in Roanoke , Virginia , to participate in the protest after learning about it from her cousin on Facebook .
“ You can go to Walmart , Target , gas stations , and it ’ s like nothing is happening with these big chain stores , but yet the hairdresser and small business owner have to shut down , ” says Ms. Karnes . “ It ’ s not fair for the others who don ’ t have a choice . ”
Virginia shouldn ’ t have the same guidelines as a hotspot like New York , say protesters . Blanket restrictions for the state neglect economic anxieties and constitutional liberties , they added .
“ We should look at places individually , even northern Virginia should n't be treated the same as us out here , ” says Melissa Hipes , a protest participant from the small town of Greenville in western Virginia . `` The devastation on the economy is going to end up being far worse than the virus . ”
Vycki Midgette is a nurse from the eastern shore of Virginia who joined the 337-member Facebook group “ Virginians Against Excessive Quarantine ” at the invitation of a friend . She thought the group could benefit from a nurse ’ s perspective . She thinks the lockdown should continue as long as it takes to guard Virginians ’ safety .
“ My right to live is more important than your right to assemble , ” says Ms. Midgette , who voted for Mr. Trump in 2016 and plans to support him again in 2020 .
So far , Governor Northam , a Democrat , appears to agree with that assessment . He ’ s said the protests did not influence him . In recent days , he ’ s extended the time that state Department of Motor Vehicles offices will remain closed , among other things . Last Friday , he released a plan for beginning to open some businesses in early May – if new COVID cases and hospitalizations decline for 14 days .
Mr. Britt of “ Reopen Virginia ” says he is not deterred .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ I wanted this protest to be one and done , ” he says . “ But that ’ s not going to be the case . ”