Coronavirus is novel to the world , but the impact on native communities is anything but a new experience
In the first few weeks of 2020 , as president Donald Trump dismissed and mocked warnings about a novel virus killing people faraway in China , Native American leaders were taking the deadly threat seriously .
The infection rate among the Navajo Nation has now surpassed the state of New York , the centre of the pandemic in the US , and on Monday stood at 2,680 cases per 100,000 people compared with 1,890 in New York .
The data emerging from some smaller tribes is even worse . By mid-May , the known infection rate in the Pueblo of Zia , which has a population of 934 people , was 3,319 per 100,000 – ten times the rate of New Mexico where the tribe is situated , and almost double the rate of New Jersey – the second worst hit US state .
Native Americans being left out of US coronavirus data and labelled as 'other ' Read more
The nearby Pueblo of San Felipe , population 3,544 , is also badly affected with 3,301 known cases per 100,000 . Reporting lags mean the actual infection rate for both tribes could be significantly higher .
Coronavirus is novel to the world , but the impact on native communities is anything but a new experience . Native Americans feared the worst because they ’ ve been here before many times .
﻿European colonizers introduced , sometimes deliberately , an array of new infectious diseases including measles , cholera , typhoid and smallpox , which for many decades historians believed were solely responsible for killing more than 70 % of native people who had no immunity to these deadly foreign germs .
“ More than any other population in the country , the shared experience of surviving a pandemic is in our blood , it ’ s not historic , it ’ s current for American Indians , it ’ s our reality . We took it seriously because we had to , ” said Desi Rodriguez-Lonebear , a social demographer at the University of Arizona and citizen of the Northern Cheyenne tribe in Montana .
As a child , Rodriguez-Lonebear recalls being told by her grandfather not to play in certain spots where their relatives who died of smallpox and typhoid were buried .
Now , it ’ s increasingly thought that the cruel conditions of colonization such as forced displacement , enslavement and starvation created the perfect conditions for deadly disease outbreaks , according to Jeffrey Olster , historian at the University of Oregon .
“ The impact of Indian removals like the Cherokee trail of tears forced people into horrific conditions of poverty and destitution . It wasn ’ t just because they weren ’ t immune , it was the conditions of colonization which made them vulnerable , ” said Olster .
This would also explain the lack of population rebound after each epidemic : the same horrific conditions caused low life expectancy and high infant and maternal mortality .
Again , experts say that parallels can be drawn with what ’ s happening today as the coronavirus pandemic rages across the US .
The disproportionately high Covid-19 infection rates in Indian Country are attributed to chronic structural and economic inequalities such as overcrowded housing , understaffed hospitals , lack of running water and limited internet access – resulting from the US government ’ s failure to comply with treaty obligations which agreed adequate funding for basic services in exchange for vast amounts of tribal land .
“ Back then , like today , tribes are trying to tackle a fatal virus without adequate resources . That ’ s a strong historic parallel , the simple failure of the federal and state governments to provide the resources necessary , ” said Ostler .
In addition , high rates of medical conditions like obesity , diabetes , heart and lung disease have contributed to worse Covid-19 outcomes . For instance in Arizona , the death rate for indigenous people is 42.8 per 100,000 – almost six times higher than for white people . In Mississippi , they are dying from Covid-19 at 10 times the rate of whites , according to analysis published last week by APM Research Lab .
Native communities , who rely on their elders for oral history and traditions , are also concerned about the survival of their ancient cultures .
“ We are survivors of genocide , our numbers prove it… for nations with less than a thousand citizens , losing one person is too many , ” said Rodriguez-Lonebear . “ And losing even one of our elders threatens the future of our tribal nations as it means losing our language , oral histories and the cornerstones of our families and communities . ”
In fact , the situation is likely worse as the data currently available is extremely patchy .
In New York , where significant ethnic disparities have emerged , no data is being collected on indigenous peoples . “ This oversight is especially hammering… it ’ s a painful blindspot in New York , ” said Andi Egbert , senior demographer at APMResearch .
More than 70 % of Native Indians and Alaskan Natives live in urban areas , where many use county and state health services where the data black holes exist .
Native peoples with Covid-19 are being “ eliminated from the data ” because their ethnicity is so frequently misclassified or ignored , according to Abigail Echo-Hawk , director of the national tribal epidemiology centre based in Seattle .
“ Without the data , we ’ re going to keep dying and nobody is going to acknowledge that… and resources allocated by congress won ’ t reach the communities , ” said Echo-Hawk .
Over recent weeks , Trump and his supporters have pushed for America to reopen for business , even though scientists are still months from finding a vaccine or treatment .
Yet native communities have demonstrated a greater historical awareness of the experience of pandemics , and tried to protect their citizens through measured emergency responses with limited resources , but which assert their right to self determination and governance .
In South Dakota , tribes set-up roadblocks to protect their citizens after the pro-Trump governor refused to issue a stay at home order . In Washington , the Lummi Nation created the country ’ s first field hospital , while the Navajo Nation , the second largest tribe in the US , has tested over 13 % of those on the reservation compared to 4 % in the US .
“ Indigenous nations have been through so many waves of pandemics and epidemics that they have a well of resilience , stamina and intergenerational knowledge that others just do not have , ” said Jessica Kolopenuk , a political theorist and indigenous studies scholar at the University of Alberta . “ I am of the strong opinion that indigenous knowledge and world views can really help change the course of this pandemic . ”