The boulevard that snakes along the Biloxi coastline marks a crossroads in the city ’ s bid to reopen . To the north , towering hotels and casinos , lights dim , doors shut – a sign of a once-booming tourist industry that evaporated overnight last month . To the south , turquoise sea and white sand , hundreds of sunbathers enjoying recently reopened beaches .
In this medium-sized city , known for its hedonistic nightlife and its seafood , most reopening is being done by halves .
Earlier this week , the Republican governor , Tate Reeves , allowed restaurants to host dining at half-capacity , retail stores to reopen with restrictions and up to 20 people to gather in groups outside .
But one thing that has shown no sign of relaxing is the state ’ s number of Covid-19 cases . Three days before the governor ’ s latest guidance , Mississippi announced its highest number of daily cases and deaths . On Friday the tally stood at 396 deaths – far from the worst in America but certain to rise . Other states in the south , including Georgia , Texas and Florida , have also moved to open despite growing numbers of cases .
Like many conservative governors , Reeves has taken cues from Donald Trump , who has encouraged states to open in the face of White House taskforce guidance , which states that phased reopening should not commence until a 14-day decrease in the number of coronavirus cases has been seen .
reopening restaurants Left : Kayla Hester , bartender at the Blind Tiger , pours a drink for a customer on the day restaurants reopened . Right : Ashley Arnold , Derrick Jones and Michael Jones at the bar at the Blind Tiger . Photographs : Bryan Tarnowski/███
Earlier this week , leaked guidance from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) indicated that the move to open up could lead by 1 June to a daily death toll across America of 3,000 , an increase of 70 % on the current rate .
In Biloxi , as the sun beat down and gulls squawked , some at the beach seemed to care little about the potentially fatal health outcomes associated with reopening too soon . Although many practised social distancing , others queued , unmasked and non-distanced , at the Life ’ s a Beach jet ski rental hut .
Reopening Mississippi : America 's poorest state begins lifting lockdown Read more
“ I just don ’ t think we know enough about the virus , ” said Shannon Carrou , an out-of-work casino worker . “ We can ’ t stay at home forever . ”
Mark Bresset , who works in transportation and had travelled 160 miles from central Mississippi , argued without evidence that the death toll had been “ inflated ” .
“ People are going to die , ” he said . “ Period . I ’ m sorry . That ’ s not being cold or unaffected by it , that ’ s just the way things happen . For people in certain areas to always call on these [ official death toll ] numbers and generate fear just makes people more compliant to do what they ’ re told to do rather than be an individual and make a decision for themselves . ”
A few blocks into the sloped streets that surround the beach front , more nuanced views were easier to come by .
Lee Price , 45 , who moved to the city two years ago to take up stable work as a cook , grimaced as he described the moment a month ago when Reeves announced a stay-at-home order – belatedly in the eyes of many – that led to him losing his job . Tens of thousands in Biloxi , where 25 % of the economy depends on tourism , suffered the same fate .
“ It was a very scary time , a very uneasy feeling , ” said Price . “ They sent us all home with boxes of food . ”
Mississippi is America ’ s poorest state : before the pandemic , 20 % lived below the poverty line and 600,000 of 2.9 million residents had limited access to healthy food .
I have to take care of my family . I just have to lay my faith in God .
Unemployment hit Price , a single father of three living paycheck to paycheck , like a punch to the gut . Having battled homelessness and addiction , he was reminded of such struggles . He has sat on the phone for hours each day , trying in vain to claim unemployment benefits . The state employment department has been overwhelmed by an average of 46,000 new claims a week . Price received a federal stimulus check , a one-off $ 1,200 . It wasn ’ t enough .
He and his 14-year-old son have taken to mowing lawns for $ 20 a go and rely on the kindness of neighbours . Price is frank about his desire to return to work , despite the obvious risks .
“ I don ’ t have time to worry about it , ” he said . “ I have to take care of my family . I just have to lay my faith in God . ”
the beach Right : Residents can now go to the beach in groups of 20 or smaller . Left : A sign at a beach access point explains that groups of 20 or less are permitted . Those not following social distancing rules provided by the CDC can be fined $ 500 or put in jail for six months . Photographs by Bryan Tarnowski/███
Biloxi ’ s mayor , Andrew “ FoFo ” Gilich , a Republican , said reopening was being executed responsibly , and argued that the number of coronavirus cases in the area had already fallen . ( He cited no city-specific data , but the county has reported no new deaths in the past week . )
“ The sun is shining , summer is here , ” he said . “ You know , I ’ ve got things that need to be done in order to maintain our sanity and just our way of life .
“ The cure [ should not ] be worse than the problem , ” Gilich added – echoing a catchphrase Trump has used .
This week , the president acknowledged that reopening was likely to cost more lives .
“ We have to be warriors , ” he said on Wednesday . “ We can ’ t keep our country closed down for years . ”
Not all in Biloxi , which voted 64 % for Trump in 2016 , feel the same .
Lea Campbell , a frontline healthcare worker and community organizer with the Poor People ’ s Campaign , described the decision to reopen as “ an ideological reflection of putting the economy before public health ” .
Campbell is a physical therapist at a hospital , working exclusively with Covid-19 patients , some of whom are recovering from critical illness . She acknowledged the caseload had gone down in recent days , but argued that the lull should reinforce the need to keep the city closed down .
“ People are making a willful decision to put other people at risk , and I have seen the consequences of doing that , ” Campbell said , as a gentle breeze wafted over her garden . “ If they had seen what I have , I think their behaviour would be different . ”