Blood clots clogged lungs of African American COVID-19 victims , study says Autopsies were conducted on 10 African American patients who died from COVID-19 .
A pandemic of the novel coronavirus has now killed more than 358,000 people worldwide .
Over 5.9 million people across the globe have been diagnosed with COVID-19 , the disease caused by the new respiratory virus , according to data compiled by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University . The actual numbers are believed to be much higher due to testing shortages , many unreported cases and suspicions that some governments are hiding the scope of their nations ' outbreaks .
Since the first cases were detected in China in December , the United States has become the worst-affected country , with over 1.7 million diagnosed cases and at least 101,562 deaths .
NYC can do phase 1 reopening 'very , very soon , ' mayor says
Here 's how the news developed . All times Eastern . Please refresh this page for updates .
6:54 p.m. : More cases of child inflammatory illness reported in Texas
A hospital in Texas has reported cases of children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children ( MIS-C ) , a rare illness thought to be linked to the coronavirus .
On Thursday , Texas Children 's Hospital in Houston confirmed it is treating both confirmed and suspected cases of MIS-C , KHOU reported . The number of cases was not specified .
Last week , doctors at Cook Children ’ s Medical Center in Fort Worth announced four cases of MIS-C , Dallas ABC affiliate WFAA reported .
An ABC News analysis has found more than 200 cases of the illness in at least 27 states and Washington , D.C .
MIS-C resembles toxic shock syndrome and Kawasaki disease , a rare inflammatory disease in young children , and can be deadly . Symptoms include fever , rash , eye irritation , swollen lymph nodes and/or swelling of the hands and feet .
Starting June 1 , Georgia residents can resume gatherings of up to 25 people , including to hold small weddings , as long as they stay 6 feet apart , Gov . Brian Kemp said Thursday .
Until this announcement , gatherings of more than 10 people had been banned , but Kemp said , `` Given favorable data ... we feel comfortable incrementally increasing that number to 25 . ''
Pro sports can resume starting June 1 , the governor said .
And starting June 1 bars and nightclubs can reopen if they comply with `` strict sanitation and social distancing rules , '' Kemp said .
The bars and clubs `` must meet 39 mandatory measures to ensure patron well-being , '' Kemp said . Those measures include screening workers for illness , allowing only 25 people inside or 35 % of total occupancy , and thorough and regular sanitations .
Tune into ABC at 1 p.m . ET and ABC News Live at 4 p.m . ET every weekday for special coverage of the novel coronavirus with the full ABC News team , including the latest news , context and analysis .
4 p.m. : France cleared to transition to phase 2 of deconfinement
France will transition to phase 2 of its deconfinement beginning June 2 , Prime Minister Edouard Philippe announced Thursday .
`` We are even a little better than where we hoped to be , '' Philippe said .
With 28,599 COVID-19 fatalities , France has the fourth most total deaths behind the U.S. , the United Kingdom and Italy .
Cafes , restaurants and bars can reopen , but facilities like nightclubs and stadiums remain closed as all gatherings of more than 10 people remain prohibited .
3:33 p.m. : 70 food plant workers test positive including 61 without symptoms
Seventy workers at a Vancouver , Washington , food plant have tested positive for the coronavirus , including 61 employees who do not have any symptoms , said Josh Hinerfeld , CEO of Firestone Pacific Foods , according to ABC Portland affiliate KATU .
After the first employee tested positive last week , the company has worked to test all employees , and about 20 still remain to be tested , KATU reported .
It 's not clear how the outbreak started , KATU said . Hinerfeld said he will work with the local health department before deciding when to reopen .
The 2020 Boston Marathon -- which had been rescheduled for Sept. 14 -- has now been canceled , and will instead be held as `` a virtual event , '' Boston Mayor Marty Walsh announced Thursday .
The Boston Marathon start line in Hopkinton , Mass. , is vacant on the scheduled day of the 124th race , due to the COVID-19 virus outbreak . Charles Krupa/AP , FILE
This is the first time the race has been canceled its 124-year history , The New York Times reported .
`` All participants who were originally registered for the April 20 , 2020 event will be offered a full refund of their entry fee associated with the race and will have the opportunity to participate in the virtual alternative to the 124th Boston Marathon , which can be run any time between September 7–14 , '' said Tom Grilk , C.E.O . of the Boston Athletic Association ( B.A.A. ) . `` The B.A.A . will also offer a series of virtual events and activities throughout September ’ s Marathon Week in an effort to bring the Boston Marathon experience to the constituencies that the organization serves here in Boston , across the United States , and around the world . ''
12 p.m. : NYC can do phase 1 reopening 'very , very soon , ' mayor says
New York state has a set of metrics to reopen each region , but when it comes to reopening dense , hard-hit New York City , Gov . Andrew Cuomo called it a `` more difficult situation . ''
Women wear protective masks during the coronavirus pandemic as they pass the Queens Theatre , May 26 , 2020 , in Queens , New York . Frank Franklin Ii/AP
The governor said he 's putting a big focus on the city 's hot spots . By zip code , Cuomo said the hardest-hit spots are the outer boroughs , minority and lower income communities .
Cuomo said the state is addressing the underlying health care inequality in these most-impacted communities by bringing more diagnostic testing , antibody testing , healthcare services and PPE .
Earlier on Thursday , Mayor Bill de Blasio said the city is `` getting to the point very , very soon where we can take the first step to restart in phase one . ''
Phase one could begin in the first or second week of June , he said , `` if the numbers continue to hold . ''
This first phase includes opening nonessential retail -- like clothing , office supplies , furniture and appliances -- for curbside and in-store pickup only , the mayor said .
Merchandise bought online are ready to be picked up at family owned Long Beach Surf Shop , May 27 , 2020 , in Long Beach , N.Y. Mary Altaffer/AP
He predicts 200,000 to 400,000 New Yorkers will be returning to work .
All industries must keep 6 feet of social distancing , reduce occupancy to under 50 % and limit confined space -- like elevators and cash registers -- to one person . Meetings should be limited and only in large , well-ventilated areas where participants can social distance , the mayor said .
Employees must be provided with free face coverings and proper protective equipment , he added .
Traders wearing masks work , on the first day of in-person trading since the closure during the outbreak of the coronavirus ( COVID-19 ) on the floor at the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) in New York City , May 26 , 2020 . Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters
Businesses also must implement health screenings where necessary , including temperature checks .
The city 's Department of Buildings , Department of Consumer and Worker Protection and Small Business Services will educate , conduct outreach and support all businesses , the mayor said .
New York City 's fire department , sanitation department and Department of Consumer and Worker Protection will conduct random visits to ensure compliance . Summonses will only be issued in `` egregious circumstances or repeat violations , '' the mayor said .
The governor announced on Thursday that he 's signing an executive order authorizing businesses to deny entry to those who do not wear a mask or face covering .
New York City has more than 225 testing sites , Cuomo said . He urged anyone who has a symptom or who has been exposed to someone positive to get tested .
11:15 a.m. : St. Louis County Executive calls Ozarks party 'lack of judgment '
After revelers were seen ignoring social distancing for a Memorial Day pool party at Lake of the Ozarks , Missouri , St. Louis County Executive Dr. Sam Page is calling their actions a `` lack of judgment and lack of understanding of social distancing . ''
Revelers celebrate Memorial Day weekend at Osage Beach of the Lake of the Ozarks , Missouri , May 23 , 2020 in this screen grab taken from social media video and obtained by Reuters . Lawler50 via Reuters
The St. Louis County Department of Health has issued an advisory urging those who recently ignored social distancing guidelines while at the Ozarks to self-quarantine for 14 days or until testing negative for the coronavirus .
`` The Ozarks is a popular destination for St. Louis county residents , so we issued a travel warning to let them know the right thing to do when they returned home , '' Page told ABC News ' `` Pandemic '' on Thursday . `` We want them to know what the right thing to do is when they come home to protect their loved ones in their community . We know that 20 and perhaps 50 % are either asymptomatic or presymptomatic , but the social distancing guidelines are here for a reason and we ’ re working to keep people doing the right thing . ”
Page deemed the Ozarks party `` bad behavior '' and a `` lack of judgment and lack of understanding of social distancing , '' but added , `` it ’ s completely inconsistent with what we ’ ve seen here in St. Louis County . ''
Page said the county is testing over 500 people per day with an aim to reach 1,000 tests per day .
`` We are well on our way , '' he said . `` We are purchasing more tests and that testing and contact tracing is the backbone of our public health response . ”
10:45 a.m. : South Korea tightens restrictions in Seoul after spike in new cases
The Korean Centers for Disease Control reported 79 newly diagnosed COVID-19 cases on Thursday -- the highest increase since early April .
Restrictions will be tightened in Seoul and surrounding areas through June 14 to stem the spread , health authorities said , according to South Korea 's Yonhap News Agency .
A woman wearing a mask looks at her mobile phone amid social distancing measures to avoid the spread of the coronavirus disease ( COVID-19 ) , in Myeongdong shopping district in Seoul , South Korea , May 28 , 2020 . Kim Hong-ji/Reuters
People wearing masks walk at Myeongdong shopping district amid social distancing measures to avoid the spread of the coronavirus disease ( COVID-19 ) , in Seoul , South Korea , May 28 , 2020 . Kim Hong-ji/Reuters
Bars and clubs are advised to close down and public facilities , including museums and art galleries , will be closed . Companies are urged to adopt flexible work systems and follow quarantine rules .
`` If we fail to eradicate the spread of the virus in the metropolitan area at an early stage , it will lead to more community infections , eventually undermining school reopenings , '' Health Minister Park Neung-hoo told reporters , according to Yonhap .
South Korea has reported a total of 11,344 confirmed COVID-19 cases and 269 deaths .
India reported a record spike in coronavirus infections on Thursday , just days before its nationwide lockdown is set to expire .
The Indian Ministry of Health and Family Welfare registered 6,566 new cases of COVID-19 over the past 24 hours , bringing the tally to 158,333 . There were also 194 deaths from the disease reported over the same period , placing the national toll at 4,531 .
Mumbai , India 's financial hub and most populous city , is the epicenter of the country 's novel coronavirus outbreak , with more than 33,000 cases of COVID-19 and nearly 1,200 deaths .
Migrant workers gather for transport to the railway station for their onward journey to their home states , at Dharavi slum in Mumbai , India , on May 26 , 2020 . India 's nationwide lockdown , which was imposed on March 25 to curb the spread of the novel coronavirus , has been extended several times . On May 4 , India eased lockdown rules and allowed migrant workers to travel back to their homes , a decision that has resulted in millions of people being on the move for the last two weeks . Rajanish Kakade/AP
India 's two-month-old lockdown is slated to end Sunday , but Prime Minister Narendra Modi is said to be preparing a new set of coronavirus-related guidelines to be issued this weekend .
Modi 's government began easing restrictions earlier this month , allowing shops and factories to reopen as well as some trains and domestic flights to resume . Hotels , metro services , restaurants and schools have remained closed nationwide .
How it started and how to protect yourself : Coronavirus explained
Tracking the spread in the U.S. and worldwide : Coronavirus map
Russia said Thursday it has registered 174 coronavirus-related deaths over the past 24 hours , bringing the nationwide toll to 4,142 .
It 's the second time this week that Russia 's coronavirus response headquarters has reported that same number of COVID-19 fatalities over a 24-hour period -- the highest daily increase the country has seen so far . However , the overall tally is still considerably lower than many other nations hit hard by the coronavirus pandemic .
There were also 8,915 new cases of COVID-19 registered in Russia over the last 24 hours , placing country 's count at 379,051 .
Vehicles spray disinfectant while sanitizing a road amid the novel coronavirus outbreak in Moscow , Russia , on May 28 , 2020 . Maxim Shemetov/Reuters
The latest daily caseload is down from a peak of 11,656 new infections reported on May 11 , during which Russia registered over 10,000 new cases per day over a 12-day period . Since then , the daily number of new infections has hovered around 9,000 per day .
Russian President Vladimir Putin began easing the nationwide lockdown earlier this month , despite a rising number of cases at the time .
Last weekend , Brazil surpassed Russia as the country with the second-highest number of diagnosed COVID-19 cases in the world , behind the United States , according to a count kept by Johns Hopkins University .
5:12 a.m. : Brazil 's president says Trump is sending hydroxychloroquine tablets
Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro said Thursday that U.S. President Donald Trump is sending over 2 million tablets of the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine .
Bolsonaro , a close ally of Trump , made the comment while speaking to a small group of supporters as well as members of the press outside the presidential palace in the capital Brasilia .
`` [ Trump ] is sending us , here , 2 million hydroxychloroquine tablets , '' Bolsonaro said , without offering further details .
A Brazilian source told ABC News that the deal is still being negotiated .
Bolsonaro , who has come under fire for his handling of Brazil 's novel coronavirus outbreak , keeps promoting hydroxychloroquine as a treatment for COVID-19 , although there 's no evidence the medication works as a prophylactic for the disease .
Trump has also touted hydroxychloroquine as a possible `` game changer '' treatment for COVID-19 and announced earlier this month that he was taking daily doses of the drug as a preventive measure against the virus after two White House staffers tested positive .
However , a recent study of more than 96,000 coronavirus patients in hospitals around the world found that those who were treated with chloroquine or its analogue hydroxychloroquine had a considerably higher risk of death than those who did not receive the antimalarial drugs . The findings , published last Friday in The Lancet medical journal , prompted the World Health Organization to halt global trials of hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID0-19 .
Earlier this week , Trump suspended travel to the United States from Brazil as the South American country emerged as a new hotspot in the coronavirus pandemic . The new rule does not affect trade between the two nations .
Brazil now has the second-highest number of diagnosed cases of COVID-19 , behind the United States .
3:50 a.m. : Blood clots clogged lungs of African American coronavirus victims , study finds
Autopsies on 10 African American patients who died from COVID-19 show their lungs were filled with blood clots , according to a new study .
The autopsies were performed at University Medical Center in New Orleans by a team of pathologists from the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans . It 's believed to be the first autopsy series on African Americans whose cause of death was attributed to COVID-19 , according to the study , which was published Wednesday in monthly scientific journal The Lancet Respiratory Medicine .
`` We found that the small vessels and capillaries in the lungs were obstructed by blood clots and associated hemorrhage that significantly contributed to decompensation and death in these patients , '' Dr. Richard Vander Heide , head of pathology research at LSU Health New Orleans School of Medicine , said in a statement . `` We also found elevated levels of D-dimers -- fragments of proteins involved in breaking down blood clots . What we did not see was myocarditis , or inflammation of the heart muscle , that early reports suggested significantly contributes to death from COVID-19 . ''
The small vessel clotting is a new finding that appears to be specific to COVID-19 , according to the study .
The 10 deceased patients were black men and women between the ages of 40 and 70 , many of whom had a history of hypertension , obesity , diabetes and chronic kidney disease . In all cases , the patients had experienced sudden respiratory decompensation or collapse at home approximately three to seven days after developing a mild cough and fever .
The new findings come after some U.S. states released mortality data based on race and ethnicity that show the novel coronavirus kills black Americans at a disproportionately high rate .
`` Our study presents a large series of autopsies within a specific demographic experiencing the highest rate of adverse outcomes within the United States , '' said Dr. Sharon Fox , another co-author of the study .