How to weigh the risk of going out in the coronavirus pandemic , in one chart
Share All sharing options for : How to weigh the risk of going out in the coronavirus pandemic , in one chart
Since coronavirus lockdowns began in the US , most Americans have drastically changed their patterns : following instructions to stay home , limiting almost all contact with others , and venturing out only for essential trips and exercise .
As states begin to ease social distancing restrictions , people are beginning to have more options . Between those wanting to patronize newly reopened businesses or socialize in person , and more employers calling people back to work , survey and cellphone data suggests people are already starting to trickle out of their homes .
But for many people , it ’ s really not clear which kinds of gatherings are safe and which aren ’ t . And that uncertainty can spark anxiety .
Fortunately , health experts know more about the coronavirus than they did when the lockdowns began , and they can point us to different levels of risk as we begin to reengage . There ’ s also advice on how to minimize harm .
“ There ’ s been a polarization between two purported options of staying home indefinitely … versus going back to business as usual , ” Julia Marcus , an infectious disease epidemiologist at Harvard , told me . “ The idea of harm reduction gives us a way of thinking about risk as a continuum and thinking about the middle ground between those two options . ”
Marcus and Boston University epidemiologist Eleanor Murray created an infographic showing the different scales of risk . We at ███ were inspired by it and , with Marcus and Murray ’ s permission , adapted it :
“ A lot of people , when they hear that you can ’ t completely get rid of your risk , they think , ‘ Well , that means that it ’ s inevitable , and I ’ ll just go and do everything that I was normally doing before , and if I get sick , I get sick , ’ ” Murray told me . “ But there are lots of things you can do in between nothing and everything . ”
First and foremost , the advice that has been repeated for much of the past few months remains true : Your home is still the safest place to be during this pandemic . You should continue trying to stay home as much as possible , because the virus is still circulating at a very high rate in many communities . ( If you want to be extra careful , some resources , like Covid Act Now , help show how much transmission there is in your area . )
But whether you need to for work or you ’ re simply tired of looking at your home ’ s walls , there are ways to mitigate risk when you go out .
For one , outdoors is generally safer , thanks to the open air — where the virus can more easily disperse — and , potentially , the warm , sunny weather . As Duke health policy expert Mark McClellan told me , “ It ’ s a good year for outdoor dining and outdoor shopping and outdoor all kinds of activities . ”
It also matters who you ’ re hanging out with . It ’ s okay to closely interact with people you live with ( unless one of you gets sick ; then whoever ’ s sick should isolate ) . But you should try to keep your distance from people you don ’ t live with . And you should try to avoid interacting with too many people at once ; even if it ’ s theoretically possible to keep 6 feet from others in a crowded space , it ’ s still better to avoid it . That ’ s true for the outdoors , but it ’ s especially true for the indoors .
When you go out , also take the now-familiar precautions : Wash your hands . Don ’ t touch your face . Wear a mask , particularly in indoor public spaces . Avoid shared surfaces and crowded settings , and keep physical distance — at least 6 feet — from people you don ’ t live with . If you ’ re 65 or older or have chronic health conditions that could exacerbate Covid-19 , you should take all of this advice more seriously .
Separately , experts say it ’ s a good idea to space out trips outside your home as much as possible — ideally , by two weeks , to match the virus ’ s incubation period . You could also establish a “ closed circle ” with people you want to regularly interact with , in which both sides agree to minimize contact with anyone else ( although some experts are skeptical of this idea ) .
With these tips , you can ’ t completely eliminate the risk of leaving your home . But you can greatly reduce that risk . For some , that could make the prospects of going out — with the benefits that going out can entail for your physical and mental health — much more feasible .
It all begins , though , with the understanding that risk during the coronavirus pandemic is really a spectrum , not a black-and-white choice .
“ People will take risks , whether we like it or not , ” Marcus said . “ The best thing we can do is give them strategies to reduce harm in those situations . If we don ’ t do that , we ’ re missing an opportunity . ”
For more detailed tips for going out and the explanations for them , read ███ ’ s full explainer .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .