FILE - In this May 27 , 2020 , file photo , a voter drops off their mail-in ballot prior to the primary election , in Willow Grove , Pa . The civic ritual of casting a ballot has been disrupted by a global pandemic and dramatically animated by social unrest . And If the results of a frustrating , chaotic primary in Georgia are a measure , the notion of democracy itself will also be on the ballot in the November election . Congress is now considering sending $ 3.6 billion to states to help facilitate safe and fair elections as part of another round of relief funds to recover from the coronavirus pandemic . ( AP Photo/Matt Rourke , File )
FILE - In this May 27 , 2020 , file photo , a voter drops off their mail-in ballot prior to the primary election , in Willow Grove , Pa . The civic ritual of casting a ballot has been disrupted by a global pandemic and dramatically animated by social unrest . And If the results of a frustrating , chaotic primary in Georgia are a measure , the notion of democracy itself will also be on the ballot in the November election . Congress is now considering sending $ 3.6 billion to states to help facilitate safe and fair elections as part of another round of relief funds to recover from the coronavirus pandemic . ( AP Photo/Matt Rourke , File )
Kentucky and New York had primaries Tuesday , but the winners of the closest races probably won ’ t be known until next week . What ’ s going on ?
Get used to it . Slow vote counts and delayed results are a feature of elections during the pandemic and are likely to continue into the general election in November , when many election officials say that , absent a landslide , it won ’ t be clear who won the presidential election for several days .
“ Americans need to learn a little patience , ” said Josh Douglas , a law professor at the University of Kentucky who studies voter rights . “ The fact of not knowing who won right away is the process actually working . ”
In short , more Americans are voting by mail — heeding health officials ’ warnings that close contact at polling places could spread the coronavirus — and mail ballots take longer to count .
Officials have to process the ballots before they can count them . Election workers must open them , make sure the voter is registered and filled out the correct ballot , and perform any required security checks such as verifying signatures -- all the things that poll workers do when voters show up at neighborhood polling places .
Some states have laws that limit when election officials can even start this process . In New York , election officials don ’ t start processing mailed ballots until after Election Day . Both New York and Kentucky plan to release the results of mail ballots on June 30 , though don ’ t be surprised if there are further delays .
Another factor is the postmark rules . In both Kentucky and New York , ballots are counted as long as they are postmarked by Election Day . That means ballots in Kentucky can arrive as late as Saturday while ballots in New York can arrive as late as a week after Election Day .
Finally , if the signatures on the mailed-in envelopes and ballots don ’ t match the ones on file , voters have the opportunity to “ cure ” them — prove in person that they were the ones who actually sent them in . That also takes time .
The ███ has long declared winners based on partial election results . But with so many outstanding votes in Kentucky and New York , the AP was only able to declare winners in the most lopsided races . Those races included Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ’ s victory in the Republican primary in Kentucky , and New York Rep. Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez ’ s win over a challenger in the Democratic primary there .
But most of the high-profile races in each state were more competitive . That ’ s why the AP did not call a winner on election night in the Kentucky Democratic Senate primary between Amy McGrath and Charles Booker , or in the Democratic primary in New York ’ s 16th Congressional District between the incumbent , Rep. Elliot Engel , and Jamaal Bowman .
DOES IT HAVE TO TAKE THIS LONG TO COUNT BALLOTS ?
No . Some states have specifically tried to speed up the vote count . Some allow workers to process mail ballots well before Election Day , and that often means they can post the results quickly — even faster than it takes to count in-person votes cast at neighborhood polling places .
But adjusting the timing of the count isn ’ t the only issue . Sometimes the holdup is about money . Many states are scrambling to revamp their voting systems to prepare for a flood of mail-in ballots . But spending on new equipment , additional staff , and masks and other protective equipment is hard to come by for states with budgets ravaged by the pandemic . Congress is debating whether to send money to states to help , but it ’ s been tied up and might not arrive soon .
All the factors delaying the count in Kentucky and New York are present in presidential battleground states this November .
Many are expected to go from a relatively low rate of mail voting to the majority of ballots being cast that way . The key swing states of Michigan and Pennsylvania have laws preventing mail votes from being processed early . And Democrats are pushing courts to require states to count ballots that arrive after Election Day , ensuring that a large number of votes wouldn ’ t be in election officials ’ hands when polls close .
That might not matter in a blowout . But the winner in a close presidential race could take days to resolve .
Meanwhile , President Donald Trump has continued to cast doubt on the propriety of elections held by mail — citing no evidence , but still laying the groundwork to claim voter fraud should he be defeated at the polls .
“ This will be , in my opinion , the most corrupt election in the history of our country , ” Trump said on Tuesday . “ And we can not let this happen . ”
That sort of rhetoric from the president , combined with a drawn-out vote count , could sow distrust among voters .