US President Donald Trump has ordered meat processing plants to stay open to protect the nation 's food supply amid the coronavirus pandemic .
He invoked a Korean War-era law from the 1950s to mandate that the plants continue to function , amid industry warnings of strain on the supply chain .
An estimated 3,300 US meatpacking workers have been diagnosed with coronavirus and 20 have died .
The UN last month warned the emergency threatened global food supply chains .
Twenty-two US meatpacking plants across the American Midwest have closed during the outbreak .
They include slaughterhouses owned by the nation 's biggest poultry , pork and beef producers , such as Smithfield Foods , Tyson Foods , Cargill and JBS USA .
`` Such closures threaten the continued functioning of the national meat and poultry supply chain , undermining critical infrastructure during the national emergency , '' says Tuesday evening 's executive order , invoking the 1950 Defense Production Act .
`` Given the high volume of meat and poultry processed by many facilities , any unnecessary closures can quickly have a large effect on the food supply chain . ''
The order designates the meatpacking plants as part of critical infrastructure in the US .
A White House official told US media it will work with the Department of Labor to issue guidance for vulnerable workers , such as over-65s and those with chronic health conditions , to stay at home .
The leadership of large meatpacking companies have faced tough questions over whether they did enough to prepare for the pandemic and protect workers .
On top of the fact that production lines necessitate that workers stand very close together , most are low-income , hourly workers .
Many are immigrants living paycheque to paycheque , like the ones at a Sioux Falls , South Dakota , pork plant who told the BBC that despite the risk , they have no choice but to go to work if plants are open .
Without strict adherence to safety guidelines - which are not currently being deemed `` mandatory '' by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration - it 's not hard to picture new outbreaks at factories , or resurgences of the virus in factories that shuttered but reopen prematurely .
All of this could leave these employees trapped in the same impossible choice they were in when the virus first began spreading in factories in late March : risk my health or lose my job .
John Tyson , chairman of Tyson Foods took out full-page ads on Sunday in the Washington Post and New York Times to warn `` the nation 's food supply is breaking '' .
`` As pork , beef and chicken plants are being forced to close , even for short periods of time , millions of pounds of meat will disappear from the supply chain , '' he wrote .
`` As a result , there will be limited supply of our products available in grocery stores until we are able to reopen our facilities that are currently closed . ''
He said millions of cattle , pigs and chickens will be euthanised because of slaughterhouse closures , limiting supplies at supermarkets .
Pork production has borne the brunt , with daily output slashed by at least a quarter .
Tyson - which employs some 100,000 workers nationwide - has suspended operations at its pork plant in Waterloo , Iowa .
Smithfield Foods shut down production at its plant in Sioux Falls , South Dakota , after an outbreak infected hundreds of employees .
The United Food and Commercial Workers International Union ( UFCW ) , the largest US meatpacking union , demanded the Trump administration compel meat companies to provide proper protective equipment and ensure daily coronavirus testing for slaughterhouse workers .
`` While we share the concern over the food supply , today 's executive order to force meatpacking plants to stay open must put the safety of our country 's meatpacking workers first , '' said the union .
The UFCW said the White House order would provide legal cover to companies in case employees catch coronavirus at work .
`` We 're working with Tyson , '' Mr Trump told reporters in the Oval Office earlier on Tuesday . `` We 're going to sign an executive order today , I believe , and that will solve any liability problems . ''
Richard Trumka , the president of the AFL-CIO union , said : `` Using executive power to force people back on the job without proper protections is wrong and dangerous . ''