World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus attends a news conference on the coronavirus in Geneva , Switzerland , February 24 , 2020 . ( Denis Balibouse/Reuters )
Since its inception 72 years ago almost to the day , the World Health Organization ( WHO ) has been credited with the eradication of smallpox and the near eradication of other devastating illnesses , including leprosy and river blindness .
This record of success makes the current corruption of the organization all the more shameful .
On December 30 , Chinese doctor Li Wenliang warned colleagues about the outbreak of an illness resembling severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) , which sparked a pandemic in 2003 . Public-health officials rely on the acuity of doctors like Li , whose early warnings prevent the spread of deadly diseases . But Chinese authorities didn ’ t reward Li ; they summoned him to the Public Security Bureau in Wuhan on accusations that he had made false statements and disrupted the public order .
The Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) followed up with numerous other arrests , and publicly warned that it would punish anyone spreading “ rumors ” on social media . By mid January , Chinese doctors knew that COVID-19 was spreading between humans , but on January 14 , the WHO stated that there was “ no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus. ” Two weeks later , WHO director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus flew to Beijing for a meeting with Chinese president Xi Jinping , who so impressed Tedros that he lauded Chinese authorities for “ setting a new standard for outbreak control , ” praising their “ openness for sharing information . ”
Dr. Li might have disagreed with that sentiment . Alas , he was never able to voice his objections : He died after contracting COVID-19 .
When the WHO emergency committee discussed whether to declare COVID-19 a public-health emergency on January 23 , international observers had definitively discredited Chinese health data . Yet Tedros relied on those data in arguing against declaring an emergency — over the objections of other committee members . That decision delayed the mobilization of public-health resources around the world . John Mackenzie , a committee member , attributed the delay to “ very poor reporting ” and “ very poor communication ” from the CCP . After finally declaring an emergency on January 30 , Tedros continued to lavish praise on China . As late as February 20 , he argued that Chinese actions were “ slowing the spread [ of coronavirus ] to the rest of the world . ”
Tedros isn ’ t afraid to take on world leaders as a general matter . When President Trump limited travel from China to the U.S. on January 31 — a decision that bought the U.S. precious time — Tedros said it would “ have the effect of increasing fear and stigma , with little public health benefit . ”
The record is clear : The WHO has lent its imprimatur to Chinese disinformation and blessed China ’ s slow response to its domestic outbreak , which likely caused a 20-fold increase in cases , according to a University of Southampton study .
The Chinese government must believe they have invested very wisely . They backed Tedros ’ s bid to run the WHO in 2017 , seeking to plant an ally in the U.N. leadership . Who was better suited for the role than a leftist political operative with a history of covering up health emergencies ? As one of his first actions at the helm , Tedros assured the Chinese that he would adhere to the “ One China ” policy , barring Taiwanese participation . The Trump administration opposed Tedros ’ s campaign to lead the organization but couldn ’ t surmount China ’ s sway .
China ’ s influence over the WHO comes at a bargain price : Beijing only contributes half as much as the U.S. does to the WHO ’ s budget .
Congress should investigate Chinese influence on the WHO , and the U.S. should use its ample funding of the organization as leverage to demand transparency about its dealings with China . Our continued participation in the WHO should be in play . In its moment of testing , the organization kowtowed to Beijing rather than serve the public interest , and the world paid the price .