At one point during his visit to the Mayo Clinic , video of Pence showed him surrounded by 10 people , including a patient , who unlike him all were wearing masks .
Vice President Mike Pence on Tuesday toured the Mayo Clinic without wearing a mask , despite that renowned medical facility telling him that masks are required for visitors and everyone else there to slow the spread of the coronavirus .
In this pool image , Vice President Mike Pence Visits the Mayo Clinic Rochester Facilities , April 28 , 2020 . Pence is surrounded by 9 other people with masks including a patient .
Pence , who leads President Donald Trump 's coronavirus task force , later suggested to reporters that he did not need to wear a mask because he is tested regularly for the virus , and does not have it .
The Mayo Clinic , which is located in Rochester , Minnesota , is requiring all patients , visitors and staff to wear a face covering or mask to slow the spread of Covid-19 . The facility said that the mask requirement is part of its protocol `` for ensuring your safety . ''
The clinic said in a Twitter post that it had informed Pence of its policy mandating masks before he toured the facility .
About a half-hour after that tweet was posted , it was deleted by the Mayo Clinic .
People wearing masks greeted Pence at an airport , video shows .
The vice president was not wearing a mask when he got off his plane and headed to the Mayo Clinic , where he was greeted with applause and cheers by facility workers , most of whom were wearing masks .
While at the facility , Pence participated in a discussion with top doctors there , along with Minnesota Gov . Tim Walz and U.S. Rep. Jim Hagedorn , a Republican whose district includes the city of Rochester .
Pence , who was accompanied on his visit by federal Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Dr. Stephen Hahn , appeared to be the only official who participated in that discussion who did not wear a mask , according to a pool report . Hahn reportedly wore a mask during the tour .
On the same day that Pence visited the Mayo Clinic , the tally of Americans who have been diagnosed with coronavirus infections topped 1 million . At least 57,266 Americans have died from Covid-19 .
Pence was asked about why he did not wear a mask in the first question at a news conference at the facility after he completed the tour and discussion .
`` As vice president of the United States , I 'm tested for the coronavirus on a regular basis , and everyone who is around me is tested for the coronavirus , '' Pence said .
`` When the [ federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ] issued guidelines about wearing a mask it was their recognition that people that may have the coronavirus could prevent the possibility of conveying the virus to someone else by wearing a mask , '' Pence said .
`` And since I do n't have the coronavirus I thought it would be a good opportunity for me to be here to be able to speak to these researchers , these incredible health-care personnel and look them in the eye and say , 'thank you , ' '' the vice president said .
Pence later was asked by another reporter how frequently he is tested , and whether he thought that wearing a mask might send a `` positive signal to the American public . ''
In response , Pence did not directly answer the question about the signal wearing a mask could send .
But the vice president reiterated that he was tested `` on a regular basis . ''
He added , `` And I agree with the CDC guidance that wearing a mask does n't necessarily protect you from the coronavirus , but wearing a mask might prevent you from inadvertently conveying the virus to a loved one , family member or friend . ''
`` So we think they 're very useful in that respect , and we respect that altogether , '' Pence said .
A Mayo Clinic spokesman , when asked for comment , said in email that , `` Mayo shared the masking policy with the VP 's office . ''
The spokesman did not respond to the question about why the facility deleted its tweet about Pence .
But the Mayo Clinic did post a new tweet saying it was `` grateful '' for Pence 's visit .
Pence 's aides last week told The New York Times that he did not wear a mask for the same reasons he gave Tuesday .
But the newspaper noted that Pence could contract the virus between his tests , and that the tests are not always accurate .