A street with less pedestrian traffic than usual as a result of the coronavirus outbreak in Stockholm , Sweden , April 1 , 2020 . ( TT News Agency/Fredrik Sandberg via Reuters )
Unlike other countries , it has so far avoided both isolation and economic ruin .
If the COVID-19 pandemic tails off in a few weeks , months before the alarmists claim it will , they will probably pivot immediately and pat themselves on the back for the brilliant social-distancing controls that they imposed on the world . They will claim that their heroic recommendations averted total calamity . Unfortunately , they will be wrong ; and Sweden , which has done almost no mandated social distancing , will probably prove them wrong .
Lots of people are rushing to discredit Sweden ’ s approach , which relies more on calibrated precautions and isolating only the most vulnerable than on imposing a full lockdown . While gatherings of more than 50 people are prohibited and high schools and colleges are closed , Sweden has kept its borders open as well as its preschools , grade schools , bars , restaurants , parks , and shops .
President Trump has no use for Sweden ’ s nuanced approach . Last Wednesday , he smeared it in a spectacular fashion by saying he ’ d heard that Sweden “ gave it a shot , and they saw things that were really frightening , and they went immediately to shutting down the country. ” He and the public-health experts who told him this were wrong on both counts and would do better to question their approach . Johan Giesecke , Sweden ’ s former chief epidemiologist and now adviser to the Swedish Health Agency , says that other nations “ have taken political , unconsidered actions ” that are not justified by the facts .
In the rush to lock down nations and , as a result , crater their economies , no one has addressed this simple yet critical question : How do we know social-isolation controls actually work ? And even if they do work for some infectious epidemics , do they work for COVID-19 ? And even if they work for this novel coronavirus , do they have to be implemented by a certain point in the epidemic ? Or are they locking down the barn door after the horses are long gone ?
In theory , less physical interaction might slow the rate of new infections . But without a good understanding of how long COVID-19 viral particles survive in air , in water , and on contact surfaces , even that is speculative . Without reliable information on what proportion of the population has already been exposed and successfully fought off the coronavirus , it ’ s worth questioning the value of social-isolation controls . It is possible that the fastest and safest way to “ flatten the curve ” is to allow young people to mix normally while requiring only the frail and sick to remain isolated .
This is , in fact , the first time we have quarantined healthy people rather than quarantining the sick and vulnerable . As Fredrik Erixon , the director of the European Centre for International Political Economy in Brussels , wrote in The Spectator ( U.K. ) last week : “ The theory of lockdown , after all , is pretty niche , deeply illiberal — and , until now , untested . It ’ s not Sweden that ’ s conducting a mass experiment . It ’ s everyone else . ”
We ’ ve posed these simple questions to many highly trained infectious-disease doctors , epidemiologists , mathematical disease-modelers , and other smart , educated professionals . It turns out that , while you need proof beyond a reasonable doubt to convict a person of theft and throw them in jail , you don ’ t need any actual evidence ( much less proof ) to put millions of people into a highly invasive and burdensome lockdown with no end in sight and nothing to prevent the lockdown from being reimposed at the whim of public-health officials . Is this rational ?
When we asked what evidence is available to support the utility of quarantine and social isolation , academics point to the Diamond Princess cruise ship , with 700 COVID-19 passenger cases and eight deaths . But the ship is an artificially engineered , densely packed container of humans that bears little resemblance to living conditions in most countries .
The other major evidence academics often cite is the course run by the 1918 swine flu , which swept the globe 102 years ago and was not a coronavirus . Philadelphia did not practice social distancing during the 1918 pandemic , but St. Louis did and had a death rate lower than Philadelphia ’ s . But how is that relevant to today ’ s crisis ? Apart from the post hoc , ergo propter hoc nature of the argument , a key difference was that the GIs returning from World War I Europe who were carrying the swine-flu virus couldn ’ t fly nonstop from Paris to St. Louis . They had to land at East Coast ports such as Philadelphia . It ’ s therefore not surprising that the sick GIs rested and convalesced while spreading the virus on the East Coast , and they got better before continuing to St. Louis and other interior cities .
Basing the entire architecture of social distancing on the evidence from the 1918 swine flu makes no sense , especially when that architecture causes significant destruction in the lives and livelihoods of most of the American population .
But the social-isolation advocates frantically grasp at straws to support shutting down the world . It bothers them that there is one country in the world that hasn ’ t shut down and that hasn ’ t socially isolated its population . It bothers them because when this coronavirus epidemic is over , they would probably love to conclude that social isolation worked .
Sweden has courageously decided not to endorse a harsh quarantine , and consequently it hasn ’ t forced its residents into lockdown . “ The strategy in Sweden is to focus on social distancing among the known risk groups , like the elderly . We try to use evidence-based measurements , ” Emma Frans , a doctor in epidemiology at Sweden ’ s Karolinska Institute , told Euronews . “ We try to adjust everyday life . The Swedish plan is to implement measurements that you can practice for a long time . ”
The problem with lockdowns is that “ you tire the system out , ” Anders Tegnell , Sweden ’ s chief epidemiologist , told the Guardian . “ You can ’ t keep a lockdown going for months — it ’ s impossible. ” He told Britain ’ s Daily Mail : “ We can ’ t kill all our services . And unemployed people are a great threat to public health . It ’ s a factor you need to think about . ”
If social isolation worked , wouldn ’ t Sweden , a Nordic country of 10.1 million people , be seeing the number of COVID-19 cases skyrocket into the tens of thousands , blowing past the numbers in Italy or New York City ? As of today , there are 401 reported COVID-19 deaths in Sweden .
The really good news is that in Sweden ’ s ICU census , which is updated every 30 minutes nationwide , admissions to every ICU in the country are flat or declining , and they have been for a week . As of this writing ( based on currently available data ) , most of Sweden ’ s ICU cases today are elderly , and 77 percent have underlying conditions such as heart disease , respiratory disease , kidney disease , and diabetes . Moreover , there hasn ’ t been a single pediatric ICU case or death in Sweden — so much for the benefits of shutting down schools everywhere else . There are only 25 COVID-19 ICU admissions among all Swedes under the age of 30 .
Sweden is developing herd immunity by refusing to panic . By not requiring social isolation , Sweden ’ s young people spread the virus , mostly asymptomatically , as is supposed to happen in a normal flu season . They will generate protective antibodies that make it harder and harder for the Wuhan virus to reach and infect the frail and elderly who have serious underlying conditions . For perspective , the current COVID-19 death rate in Sweden ( 40 deaths per million of population ) is substantially lower than the Swedish death rate in a normal flu season ( in 2018 , for instance , about 80 per million of population ) .
Compare that with the situation to Switzerland , a similar small European country , which has 8.5 million people . Switzerland is practicing strict social isolation . Yet Switzerland reports 715 cumulative Wuhan-virus deaths as of today , for a death rate nearly double the number in Sweden . What about Norway , another Nordic country that shares a 1,000-mile open border with Sweden , with a language and culture very similar to Sweden ’ s ? Norway ( population 5.4 million ) has fewer reported COVID-19 deaths ( 71 ) than Sweden but a substantially higher rate of coronavirus ICU admissions .
On Friday , one of us spoke with Ulf Persson in his office at the Swedish Institute for Health Economics . He said that everyone he knows is calm and steady , behaving with more caution than normal , following such government-mandated social controls as a 50-person limit on gatherings and only sit-down service at bars and restaurants . Persson estimates that the Swedish economy will drop about 4 percent because of the global economic shutdowns . But that ’ s nothing compared with the Great Depression unemployment levels of 32 percent that the U.S. Federal Reserve Board of St. Louis recently forecast for the United States .
Nature ’ s got this one , folks . We ’ ve been coping with new viruses for untold generations . The best way is to allow the young and healthy — those for whom the virus is rarely fatal — to develop antibodies and herd immunity to protect the frail and sick . As time passes , it will become clearer that social-isolation measures like those in Switzerland and Norway accomplish very little in terms of reducing fatalities or disease , though they crater local and national economies — increasing misery , pain , death , and disease from other causes as people ’ s lives are upended and futures are destroyed .
John Fund is a columnist for ███ and has reported frequently from Sweden . Joel Hay is a professor in the department of Pharmaceutical Economics and Policy at the University of Southern California . The author of more than 600 peer-reviewed scientific articles and reports , he has collaborated with the Swedish Institute for Health Economics for nearly 40 years .