On Tuesday night , I called to check in on my friends in San Francisco . One is a lawyer ; his grandfather died last week . His partner is a doctor on the front lines of COVID-19 . In short , they ’ ve been through it .
Columnists In-depth political coverage , sports analysis , entertainment reviews and cultural commentary .
Though I moved to the suburbs a few years ago , New York City was my home for 14 years . It ’ s the longest I ’ ve ever lived anywhere . I am a Mets fan , a subway rider , a Fairway shopper , a Daily News reader . I lived through the 2000 Subway Series , the 2003 blackout , the 2007 bed bug outbreak , the 2008 recession and , of course , the attacks on the World Trade Center . On the morning of 9/11 , I walked to my Times Square office to see the first plane hit the Twin Towers on the Jumbotron . I not only lost friends that day , I lost a piece of myself .
Through it all , I was a proud New Yorker , and still consider myself one . But now , the city is the subject of derision and pity as it struggles to manage and contain coronavirus cases — 142,432 as of this writing — and nearly 11,000 confirmed deaths . It ’ s the most anywhere in the country ; New York City accounts for 17 % of U.S. cases , and 30 % of U.S. deaths . For a city used to superlatives , it is a grim one .
Cases and deaths have begun to drop in New York , a very good thing . But the dangers are far from over .
Yet for some reason , the city ’ s mayor , Bill de Blasio , is daydreaming aloud about the next large gathering he can take credit for : a parade for health care workers .
On Tuesday , he tweeted , “ I can ’ t tell you when we ’ ll be able to host cultural events and parades again . But I can tell you WHO our first parade will be for : When the time is right , New York City will honor our health care workers and first responders with a ticker tape parade up the Canyon of Heroes . ”
It ’ s a nice thought . Health care workers deserve our adoration and thanks , something New Yorkers acknowledge en masse every night at 7 p.m. when they take to their windows , fire escapes and balconies to clap and cheer .
But more than thanks , they deserved to be better prepared than they were for this pandemic . And de Blasio shares responsibility for those failures .
Despite years of warnings that a pandemic could cripple the city , despite public campaigns for New Yorkers to be prepared for just such an emergency , despite participating in pandemic simulation exercises with FEMA , hospitals were short of basic medical supplies : respiratory ventilators , face masks , gowns .
For too long , de Blasio resisted the obvious , that this was going to be bad . He told New Yorkers to keep up their routines , and he did the same , going to his gym , going out of his way to take a walk in the park .
He went on television , telling people that coronavirus “ dies in the open air ” and can ’ t live on surfaces for more than minutes , when we know it can live up to several days . He said researchers had only discovered “ in the last 48 hours ” that asymptomatic people could spread COVID-19 , weeks if not months after experts had announced that fact .
He waited too long to close restaurants , schools and playgrounds . Top health officials threatened to resign . Teachers threatened to stay home . One former adviser called de Blasio ’ s obvious lack of awareness “ pathetic , self-involved , inexcusable . ”
Even as we rightly hold President Trump accountable for his many failures , we must not let local officials and Democrats off the hook . You ’ ll forgive me if de Blasio ’ s latest overture to salute our heroic health care workers and first responders , many of whom have been asked to work in horrid conditions without the protection they need and deserve , feels more than a little hollow .
Considering de Blasio ’ s glaring lack of leadership through this crisis , it actually feels like a sick joke .
S.E . Cupp is the host of “ S.E . Cupp Unfiltered ” on CNN .