Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
Currently , there is no known specific medicine to treat the novel coronavirus , but researchers in Italy suggest that the COVID-19 disease is slow to mutate , based on its genetic material .
This finding could aid in helping large swaths of people over an extended period of time once a specific cure is found .
The study , which was produced by two independent teams in the country , used `` a new next-generation sequencing ( NGS ) research assay '' from Thermo Fisher Scientific on Italian COVID-19 patients . The experts then compared them to a sample from the original outbreak to come up with their findings .
`` Had we investigated other viruses we might have expected up to dozens of new mutations after so many infectious cycles in patients , '' professor Stefano Menzo , head of Virology at Ancona University Hospital , said in a statement . `` Our initial data show that this is a very stable RNA virus , with only five novel variants . A virus with a stable genome is good news for vaccine development because it indicates that the effectiveness of vaccines could be more consistent , possibly over many years . ''
CORONAVIRUS : COMBINATION OF ANTIMALARIAL MEDICATION AND ANTIBIOTICS COULD SHORTEN COVID-19 , RESEARCHERS SAY
Dr. Maria Rosaria Capobianchi , head of the Virology Department , Lazzaro Spallanzani National Institute for Infectious Diseases , said the ability to run quick , multiple samples is important in the scientific community 's fight to stay ahead of the virus .
However , Capobianchi cautioned , `` viral genomes are dynamic and these preliminary data need further analysis to determine the biological significance of the gene variants and to investigate the evolutionary path of the coronavirus . ''
The researchers will further analyze the data with Thermo Fisher 's new Ion SARS-CoV-2 analysis solution to better understand the virus and analyze the entire genome .
Scientists are looking at a number of different ways to cure the novel coronavirus , which has affected more than 428,000 people around the globe , including at least 55,000 in the U.S .
Researchers in France detailed how a combination of antimalarial medication and antibiotics could be a vital weapon against COVID-19 , Fox News previously reported .
New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo announced on Tuesday the state will start coronavirus drug trials , as the hard-hit state recently acquired 70,000 doses of hydroxychloroquine , 10,000 doses of zithromax and 750,000 doses of chloroquine .
On Monday , Cuomo also said the state is attempting to fight the outbreak by using the blood plasma of recovered patients .