The U.S. passed 50,000 coronavirus deaths on Friday and is closing in on nearly 1 million infections as several states around the nation begin implementing plans for reopening businesses and easing social distancing .
On Friday the Johns Hopkins coronavirus database listed 51,017 U.S. deaths and more than 890,000 infections . Due to a lack of testing , the actual number of infections is likely to be much higher .
Despite warnings from national health leaders that the country could face a second wave of the virus in late 2020 , states and cities are drafting or implementing plans to get people out of their homes and back into mainstream life .
`` We will have coronavirus in the fall , '' said Dr. Anthony Fauci , head of the White House 's Coronavirus Task force . `` I am convinced of that because of the degree of transmissibility that it has , the global nature . What happens with that will depend on how we ’ re able to contain it when it occurs . ''
Coronavirus live updates : Georgia 's partial reopening , experts push back against Trump on disinfectants
Meanwhile the death toll continues to rise and drop at sporadic rates . On Thursday , for instance , the U.S. followed up four days of decreased death totals with one of its deadliest days yet , with over 3,000 deaths .
The latest milestone comes at an incongruous time when many states , under intense pressure from not only the White House but also their own citizens , announce plans to allow people back to work .
Governors of more than a dozen states in the past 10 days — including California , Florida , Alaska , Tennessee , Colorado and Georgia — have detailed their hope to slowly phase out lockdowns and restrictions on businesses .
Some are only allowing minor reopenings . Gov . Gavin Newsom said that California was not prepared `` to open up large sectors of our society '' but made the first modification to the state 's stay-at-home order with the resumption of `` essential '' surgeries .
“ Tumors , heart valves , the need for people to get the kind of care they deserve , '' Newsom said . `` If it ’ s delayed , it becomes acute . This fundamentally is a health issue . ”
Others are more aggressive . Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp said he was allowing certain businesses to reopen on April 24 , including gyms , fitness centers , bowling alleys , barbers , cosmetologists and massage therapists . Georgia ’ s timetable is one of the most aggressive in the nation .
“ Each of these entities will subject to specific restrictions , including adherence to the basic minimum operations , social distancing and regular sanitation , ” Kemp said .
Much of the push is economic . Even beyond the death tally , the virus has taken unprecedented toll on American life .
Unemployment in the U.S. is swelling to levels last seen during the Great Depression of the 1930s , with 1 in 6 American workers thrown out of a job by the coronavirus , according to new data released Thursday . In response to the deepening economic crisis , the House passed a nearly $ 500 billion spending package to help buckled businesses and hospitals .
More than 4.4 million laid-off Americans applied for unemployment benefits last week , the government reported . In all , roughly 26 million people — the population of the 10 biggest U.S. cities combined — have filed for jobless aid in five weeks , an epic collapse that has raised the stakes in the debate over how and when to ease the shutdowns of factories and other businesses .
Janet Simon , laid off as a waitress at a Miami IHOP restaurant , said she has just $ 200 and is getting panic attacks because of uncertainty over how she will care for her three children . Simon , 33 , filed for unemployment a month ago , and her application is still listed as “ pending . ”
“ I ’ m doing everything to keep my family safe , my children safe , but everything else around me is falling apart , ” Simon said . “ But they see it , no matter how much I try to hide my despair . ”
In northern Colorado , a major meatpacking plant that closed because of an outbreak that claimed the lives of four workers was set to reopen Friday after a two-week disinfection , even as some questioned how employees can maintain social distancing inside the facility .
In the hardest-hit corner of the U.S. , evidence emerged that perhaps 2.7 million New York state residents have been infected by the virus – 10 times the number confirmed by lab tests .
Abroad , there was mixed news about the epidemic . Some countries , including Greece , Bangladesh and Malaysia , announced extensions of their lockdowns . Vietnam , New Zealand and Croatia were among those moving to end or ease such measures .
In Africa , COVID-19 cases surged 43 % in the past week to 26,000 , according to John Nkengasong , director of the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . The figures underscored a recent warning from the World Health Organization that the virus could kill more than 300,000 people in Africa and push 30 million into desperate poverty .
Brazil ’ s health ministry confirmed 407 deaths due to the outbreak in the last 24 hours , a daily high for the country .
While the health crisis has eased in places like Italy , Spain and France , experts say it is far from over , and the threat of new outbreaks looms large .
“ The question is not whether there will be a second wave , ” said Dr. Hans Kluge , the head of the WHO ’ s Europe office . “ The question is whether we will take into account the biggest lessons so far . ''
Contributing : Jorge Ortiz ; Lorenzo Reyes , Grace Hauck , ███ ; Associated Press