Since the beginning of the pandemic , the World Health Organization has stressed that , primarily , Covid-19 spreads through very close personal contact . The virus-laden droplets exhaled from a sick person ’ s mouth and nose , the thinking goes , are heavy , and fall to the ground before they can get much farther than 6 feet .
But as the pandemic has unfolded , contact tracing studies have shown this isn ’ t always the case . In China , an air conditioner pushed virus-laden air across three tables in a restaurant , infecting people seated at each one . Researchers reviewed video from the restaurant and saw many of these patrons were more than 6 feet apart from one another , suggesting that the virus traveled through the air .
In Washington state , one person at a choir practice infected 52 of the other participants ; it ’ s thought the singing could have led more virus to linger in the air . Carefully controlled laboratory studies are also suggesting that under the right indoor conditions , SARS-CoV-2 , the virus that causes Covid-19 , can float in the air and , to a certain degree , spread that way .
Last Thursday , the WHO changed its language to recognize that fact . “ Short-range aerosol transmission , particularly in specific indoor locations , such as crowded and inadequately ventilated spaces over a prolonged period of time with infected persons can not be ruled out , ” the WHO now states . Previously , the organization maintained that airborne transmission was unlikely to occur outside the hospital setting , where some procedures can generate super-small particles that linger in the air longer than large respiratory drops .
This change comes after a letter appeared in the journal Clinical Infectious Diseases , co-signed by 239 scientists and engineers , which implored WHO and other public health agencies that “ it ’ s time to address airborne transmission of Covid-19. ” With the WHO ’ s recognition of this mode of transmission , the authors hope , communities can think more about the ventilation of indoor spaces and perhaps engineer solutions to make these spaces safer .
It turns out scientists have been debating whether respiratory diseases like the flu and coronavirus should be labeled “ airborne ” for a century . More commonly , the “ airborne ” designation is only applicable to extremely contagious diseases , like measles .
A lot of these terms are confusing ( even to the scientists ) , and they don ’ t answer the question laypeople care about : Which air is safe to breathe in during the Covid-19 pandemic , and which air is not safe ?
To answer that question , it ’ s helpful to understand two different scientific perspectives on the matter . One is : What physically happens when a sick person breathes , sneezes , or coughs into a room ? The other is : What patterns have epidemiologists observed in the way people are exposed to the virus and get sick ?
There ’ s a relatively simple , if outdated , way of thinking about how respiratory diseases can spread .
It starts like this : When you exhale , sneeze , or cough , you release a cloud of gas and liquid droplets .
If those droplets are relatively big , they ’ re heavy and fall to the ground before evaporating , like raindrops do . Others are smaller , and made smaller still by evaporation . These smaller droplets can linger in the air longer , drifting on air currents for perhaps hours . If a droplet is small enough , the moisture in it evaporates before it has the chance to reach the ground ( provided the humidity in the room is average ) . If there ’ s stuff like germs in that droplet , they become light enough to float on air currents , like the dust you can see suspended in the air . These particles are often called aerosols .
This framework is old , and it comes from William Wells , a scientist who studied tuberculosis transmission in the 1930s . In a 1934 paper , Wells concluded : “ It appears , therefore , that transmission of infection through air may take one of two forms depending upon the size of the infected droplet . ”
When it comes to Covid-19 , one of the first questions epidemiologists tried to answer was : Is the virus spread in the dust that floats or the big drops that fall ?
If it ’ s the small dust , alarm bells go off . These are the prototypical airborne diseases . They include measles , chickenpox , and tuberculosis , and they are extremely contagious . On average , one person infected with measles will infect 12 to 18 others .
If it ’ s the big drops , it ’ s still concerning . Diseases like the flu , whooping cough , the common cold , and coronaviruses are primarily large droplet-borne . With these diseases , only the closest contacts to an infected person get infected because large droplets quickly fall to the ground ( within 6 feet or so ) . It ’ s also possible for these big drops to fall on surfaces , and those surfaces can become contaminated too . Luckily , in the case of Covid-19 , there ’ s a growing consensus that getting sick from touching contaminated surfaces is rare . But keep washing your hands !
( Interestingly , there ’ s no one reason a new virus , like SARS-CoV-2 , would go one route or the other . It ’ s possible , says University of Leicester virologist Julian Tang , that there may be a difference in the immune response with these airborne diseases that makes saliva and mucous less viscous , leading to more virus in small drops . Also , Tang writes in an email , “ it is possible ( though no one has studied this yet ) that exhaled breath from measles/chickenpox cases may just be shedding much more virus ( maybe millions of virus per minute ) compared to respiratory viruses , which only exhale 100s to 1000s of viruses per minute . ” )
A part of why the terminology here is so confusing , and there ’ s so much debate about it , is that the words “ aerosol ” and “ droplet ” mean different things to different scientific disciplines .
“ An aerosol is a particle in the air , ” said Lidia Morawska , an engineer and the director of the International Laboratory for Air Quality and Health at Queensland University of Technology . “ A droplet is a liquid aerosol. ” To her , the distinction between droplets and aerosols doesn ’ t make any sense . To her , they are all aerosols .
Wells ’ s droplet versus airborne distinction is still used today . It ’ s outdated .
Wells outlined a clear distinction between droplets and aerosols according to their size . Big drops fall , and little aerosolized drops float . It ’ s now appreciated that the actual picture is a lot more complicated .
“ We ’ re always exhaling , in fact , a gas cloud that contains within it a continuum spectrum of droplet sizes , ” says Lydia Bourouiba , an MIT researcher who studies the fluid dynamics of infections . And , as she explained in a March paper in JAMA , the conditions of the cloud itself can affect the range of some of the droplets . If propelled by a cough or sneeze , Bourouiba finds , droplets can travel upward of 20 feet . “ The cloud mixture , not the drop sizes , determines the initial range of the drops and their fate in indoor environments . ”
The speed of the cloud , the temperature and humidity of the environment , and the individual droplet makeup of each cloud determines how long the droplets persist in the air , Bourouiba explained in JAMA .
Which is to say : There are conditions ( coughing and sneezing ) under which large drops don ’ t immediately fall to the floor and can spread more than 6 feet away from a person , and they can linger in the air for longer .
There ’ s growing theoretical evidence for the airborne spread of the coronavirus . Lab studies , in idealized conditions , also show that the virus can live in an aerosolized form for up to 16 hours ( the scientists in this case intentionally created aerosolized droplets with a machine ) .
Another study tracked with lasers the various droplets expelled from a human mouth during speech . It found “ normal speech generates airborne droplets that can remain suspended for tens of minutes or longer and are eminently capable of transmitting disease in confined spaces . ”
Some studies , the WHO reports , have found evidence of the virus ’ s RNA in the air of hospital rooms , but notes “ no studies have found viable virus in air samples , ” meaning the virus was either incapable of infecting others or was in very small quantities unlikely to infect others .
“ What we are trying to say is , well , let ’ s not worry about whether you call it aerosol or whether you call it a droplet , ” Morawska , the co-author of the recent commentary imploring the WHO and others to address airborne transmission of Covid-19 , says . “ It is in the air , ” she says , “ and you inhale it . It ’ s coming from our nose from our mouths . It ’ s lingering in the air and others can inhale it . ”
That the WHO updated its language is a sign that it ’ s starting to appreciate this perspective .
But this perspective is limited . These lab studies can ’ t perfectly generalize to the real-world conditions in which the virus spreads and infects others . Just because a virus travels far in a drop doesn ’ t mean it can infect people across great distances . Viruses can degrade quickly outside the body . Also , dose matters . Small exposures to the virus may not be enough to get a person sick .
So to find out how people actually get sick with Covid-19 , we need contact tracing studies .
Contact tracing studies show airborne transmission may be possible in confined indoor spaces
Lab studies note the theoretical possibility of airborne transmission . But that ’ s only one part of the answer to the question “ which air is safe to breathe ? ” Epidemiologists come at this question from another angle , looking at patterns of virus spread observed in the real world and working backward to determine if airborne spread factors in .
Contact tracing studies show us that while droplets being inhaled by people within 6 feet of an infected person explains most of the transmission of Covid-19 , there are limited times and environments in which SARS-CoV-2 can behave a bit like an airborne virus .
“ So we need to define which types of contact , which type of environments , lead to that type of transmission , ” Muge Cevik , a physician and virology expert at the University of St. Andrews , says . In households , she says , an infected person can be isolated in one room and not spread the virus to others in the home ( if they remain isolated ) . A systematic review of studies in The Lancet of both SARS-CoV-2 and similar viruses found large reductions in risk if people just stay 1 meter ( 3 feet ) away from one another . This suggests a lot of the risk of catching Covid-19 is from the large drops that fall quickly to the ground .
But then there are cases where people are packed together in an enclosed space — like a church , with singing or shouting — where the transmission looks a little more like airborne transmission .
The infamous choir practice in Washington state is an example of where airborne transmission might have happened . But what made this event so risky was the convergence of many risk factors : the singing activity ( during which the infected person released viral particles into the air ) , the time spent together ( the practice was 2.5 hours ) , and the interaction between the choir members in an enclosed space ( not only did they all practice together , they also split up into smaller groups and shared cookies and tea ) .
Another study from China investigated an outbreak that started at a Buddhist temple event , tracing much of the spread to the confines of one of the buses transporting people to the function . The bus had one sick person aboard , and 24 out of 67 people on that bus got sick , possibly indicating airborne transmission . Those who sat by the windows fared better , indicating the importance of ventilation .
“ I think we just need to get away from this terminology and give much more clear definitions , ” Cevik says . For her , it ’ s about getting people to think critically about which situations are riskier than others . “ Risk is a spectrum . It ’ s not only the distance , but it ’ s about timing , what type of activities you ’ re involved in . I know it ’ s a bit complex , but that ’ s the reality . ”
“ Airborne ” transmission means something very specific for doctors and health care workers
Perhaps part of the reason the WHO has been slow to address the airborne transmission of Covid-19 is because in a health care setting , “ airborne ” means a very specific thing .
Though infection prevention experts know there ’ s a fuzzy boundary between drops that fall and specks that float , the dichotomy between airborne and droplet-borne is baked into how health care workers are trained to respond to outbreaks . “ We ’ ve trained [ health care workers ] for decades to say , airborne is tuberculosis , measles , chickenpox , droplet is flu and pertussis and meningitis , ” Saskia Popescu , a hospital epidemiologist in Arizona , says . “ And that ’ s , unfortunately , kind of antiquated . But that ’ s how we ’ ve always done it . ”
They do it because there are very specific sets of guidelines in place to deal with extremely contagious airborne diseases in a hospital setting . For instance , a patient with a dangerous airborne disease often needs to be put in a room with an air pressure lower than the rest of the rooms in the building . That way , no virus in the air of that room can escape it ( since air flows from high pressure to low pressure ) .
For droplet transmission , health care workers can be a little more lax ; they can wear simple surgical masks during routine care and can save high-filtration ( and sometimes scarce ) respirators for the most dangerous procedures and cases .
In this light , it makes some sense that the WHO has been hesitant to label Covid-19 an “ airborne ” infection . It ’ s not an airborne infection like measles is . It is not as contagious . Contact tracing studies consistently find that Covid-19 is spread most readily among people in the closest physical contact to one another . “ Airborne ” means something very specific , very resource-intensive , and very scary for hospitals and the people who work in them . And Covid-19 doesn ’ t match that definition .
“ The debate often isn ’ t very nuanced because of these rigid categories , ” Daniel Diekema , an infectious diseases physician and epidemiologist at the University of Iowa , says . “ As soon as you say ‘ airborne ’ in the hospital infection prevention world , it brings to mind pathogens like tuberculosis , measles , chickenpox . It ’ s clear the respiratory viruses , influenza , coronaviruses , are not airborne in the same way that the measles , varicella [ chickenpox ] become airborne . ”
But at the same time , with Covid-19 and other respiratory viruses , “ there definitely are small-particle aerosols produced , ” he says . “ And in the right setting , where there ’ s poor ventilation , indoors , and a crowded environment , there is a risk for transmission among individuals , even if they may be more than 6 feet apart . ”
Neither contact tracing studies nor lab studies can perfectly answer the question of “ which air is safe ? ” But that ’ s science for you . Scientists use imperfect methods , attacking from many angles , to try to arrive at the truth , which can take a while to nail down precisely .
Overall , the recognition that Covid-19 can spread through the air shouldn ’ t really change how we , individually , protect ourselves and others against it . Six feet of distance between people is still a good barrier to prevent spread via large drops . Mask-wearing could help prevent both large drops and small drops from being released in the first place . Time matters too : the longer we spend in an enclosed , poorly ventilated space with others , the greater the chances of being exposed to an infectious dose of the virus .
The bottom line , as a trio of engineers from Clarkson University writes in the Conversation , is that “ while staying six feet from other people reduces exposure , it might not be sufficient in all situations , such as in enclosed , poorly ventilated rooms . ”
We still need to think about the environments we ’ re in : Indoors is much riskier than outdoors ( where greater airflow can disperse drops and aerosols more quickly , and where the environment is less conducive to SARS-CoV-2 survival ) . And indoors , ventilation can make a big difference . An indoor space where the air is constantly refreshed with air from the outdoors is better than one where the air is stagnant . ( The American Society of Heating , Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers has published extensive guidelines on how to reopen buildings with increased ventilation during the pandemic . )
We also still need to think about the activity we ’ re engaging in . Shouting , singing , and other such activities produce more droplets ( of any size ) than just sitting quietly .
Morawska hopes that in bringing attention to airborne spread of Covid-19 , there can be more attention paid to engineering solutions for indoor spaces to mitigate the spread of the pandemic .
Public health officials have continually stressed social distancing , mask-wearing , and hand-washing as ways to stop the spread of Covid-19 . “ But have you ever heard a restaurant reopening announce they ’ ve improved ventilation or increased ventilation ? No . This is really the point , ” Morawska says . If Covid-19 is in indoor air , we should also be doing something about the air .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .