Pope Francis delivers his blessing as he recites the Angelus noon prayer from the window of his studio overlooking St.Peter 's Square , at the Vatican , Sunday , June 21 , 2020 . ( AP Photo/Andrew Medichini )
Pope Francis delivers his blessing as he recites the Angelus noon prayer from the window of his studio overlooking St.Peter 's Square , at the Vatican , Sunday , June 21 , 2020 . ( AP Photo/Andrew Medichini )
VATICAN CITY — Pope Francis is encouraging grass-roots movements to protect the environment after coronavirus lockdowns have “ revealed once more the beauty of so many places free from traffic and noise . ”
Francis , speaking to a few hundred people gathered in St. Peter ’ s Square on Sunday , encouraged initiatives to care for the planet that began as a result of the pandemic , such as one on Sunday to clean up the banks of the Tiber River in Rome .
Francis has made environmental protection a hallmark of his papacy and just this past week , the Vatican released a guide on implementing his 2015 encyclical “ Praised Be , ” which blamed wealthy countries and corporate interests for destroying the Earth in search of profit .
Scientists around the world are studying the effects of lockdowns and industrial shutdowns on air and sea pollution as well as wildlife .
HERE ’ S WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT THE VIRUS OUTBREAK :
— Tulsa arena hosts thousands for Trump rally amid virus fears
— Trump suggests that US slow virus testing to avoid bad statistics
— Zimbabwe ’ s health minister has appeared in court to face allegations of illegally awarding a multi-million-dollar contract for COVID-19 medical supplies to a shadowy company that sold the government $ 28 face masks and other materials at inflated prices .
— Capt . Brett E. Crozier won ’ t be getting his job back as skipper of the USS Theodore Roosevelt . The Navy has upheld the firing of the aircraft carrier captain who urged faster action to protect his crew from a coronavirus outbreak .
DHAKA , Bangladesh — Bangladesh ’ s state-run airline resumed international flights on Sunday after a suspension of more than two months due to the coronavirus .
Tahera Khandaker , a spokesperson for Biman Bangladesh Airlines , said a flight carrying 187 passengers left Dhaka for London on Sunday afternoon . She said a scheduled flight will leave Dhaka every week on Sundays and another will depart London for Dhaka on Mondays .
Bangladesh has confirmed 112,306 cases of the virus , including 1,464 deaths .
MADRID — Spain ’ s national state of emergency has ended after three months of restrictions on movement to rein in its COVID-19 outbreak .
As of Sunday , 47 million Spaniards will be able to freely move around the entire country for the first time since the government declared a state of emergency on March 14 . The lockdown measures have been rolled back gradually over recent weeks .
“ This freedom that we now have , that we don ’ t have to justify our journey to see our family and friend , this was something that we were really looking forward to , ” 23-year-old Pedro Delgado said at Madrid ’ s airport .
Travelers from European countries , including Britain , can also enter Spain now without having to quarantine for 14 days . That quarantine rule still applies to non-Schengen countries , except for the U.K. Spain is hoping it can save part of its summer tourist season , which provides a huge part of its economic activity .
Spaniards are still obliged to wear face masks both indoors and outside when in public spaces where it is impossible to guarantee a distance of 1.5 meters ( 5 feet ) from others . Regional governments are now in complete charge of putting limits on attendance in public places , from theaters , to weddings , to classrooms .
Spain ’ s lockdown succeeded in stopping the uncontrolled spread of the coronavirus , which authorities say has claimed at least 28,000 lives in the country .
ISLAMABAD -- Pakistan says it will reopen a key border crossing with Afghanistan to allow trade between the neighbors .
Trucks carrying fruits , vegetables and other items will start crossing the Ghulam Khan border in northwestern North Waziristan district from Monday .
On Sunday , Pakistan reported 119 more COVID-19 deaths and 4,951 new cases , raising its total to 176,617 cases including 3,501 fatalities .
Pakistan put its entire population of 220 million in lockdown in March , but the government last month eased restrictions , saying it was necessary to save the economy even though cases went up .
BEIJING — Chinese authorities reported 25 new confirmed cases — 22 in Beijing and three in neighboring Hebei province .
They say 2.3 million people have been tested in an effort to contain the outbreak in the capital that led to the closure of its biggest wholesale food market .
China , where the outbreak began in December , had eased controls on travel and business as new cases fell . But monitoring and some other restrictions have been reimposed following the recent jump in infections .
The Beijing health commission gave no details of where the latest cases might have originated . The Chinese capital ’ s biggest wholesale food market was closed June 13 after dozens of people who worked there tested positive .
The agency in charge of the Ming Tombs , a tourist site northwest of Beijing , said indoor areas will be closed as a safety precaution . Visitors are allowed in outdoor areas but are required to wear masks and be checked for fever .
SEOUL , South Korea — South Korea continues to struggle to contain a resurgence in the coronavirus that has seen some of the country ’ s hard-won pandemic gains erased since social distancing rules were eased in mid-April .
The Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported 48 new COVID-19 cases Sunday , bringing the national caseload to 12,421 infections , with 280 deaths .
The agency says 24 of the new cases are in the Seoul region , which has been the center of the country ’ s outbreak since late May . Ten of the new cases , however , are from the central city of Daejeon , indicating the virus is beginning to spread more broadly .
Some experts say the country should reimpose stronger social distancing guidelines , but officials are reluctant to do so in fear of hurting an already fragile economy .
TULSA , Okla. — President Donald Trump is suggesting to supporters that he has told members of his administration to slow the rate of coronavirus testing in the United States .
Speaking at a campaign rally Saturday night in Oklahoma , Trump said the United States has tested 25 million people , and far more than any other country . He also told the crowd that more testing leads to finding more cases of people who test positive .
Trump said that “ so I said to my people slow the testing down , please . ”
TULSA , Okla.— Teams of people wearing goggles , masks , gloves and blue gowns checked the temperatures of those entering the area where President Donald Trump is to hold a campaign rally in Tulsa , Oklahoma ..
The Trump campaign had pledged to conduct temperature checks as rally-goers entered and to offer face masks . Some of the people entering wore masks while their temperatures were checked with handheld thermometers that appeared not to touch the skin .
Oklahoma ’ s The health department on Saturday reported 331 new virus cases to bring the total number of confirmed cases to 10,037 , with 368 deaths due to COVID-19 . The actual number is likely higher because many people have not been tested .
Tulsa County has both the most confirmed cases and virus-related deaths in Oklahoma . Trump ’ s rally is taking place at a 19,000-seat indoor arena in the city of Tulsa .
Tulsa Health Department director Bruce Dart had said he would have liked to see the rally postponed , noting that large indoor gatherings are partially to blame for the recent spread of the virus in Tulsa and Tulsa County .
JOHANNESBURG — South Africa has announced nearly 5,000 new coronavirus cases for a new daily record .
The country has recorded a total of 92,000 confirmed cases as of Saturday , which is about 30 % of all cases across the African continent . More than half of South Africa ’ s cases are in Western Cape province and centered on the city of Cape Town .
But more than one-fifth are in Gauteng province , home to the economic hub of Johannesburg and to the South African capital of Pretoria .
Even as cases rise , President Cyril Ramaphosa this week announced a further loosening of what once was one of the world ’ s strictest lockdowns .
Casinos , beauty salons and sit-down restaurant service are among the latest businesses to be up and running again as South Africa ’ s feels the pain of the pandemic ’ s economic impact .
ATHENS — Greece has reported one more death from the coronavirus while the small neighboring country of North Macedonia reached a new daily record with 11 virus-related fatalities .
The deaths brought North Macedonia ’ s toll in the pandemic to 233 and confirmed cases to 5,005 as of Saturday . Infections began to climb there early this month after authorities lifted movement restrictions and ended a curfew .
Health Minister Venko Filipce said in a TV interview that cases are increasing because residents ignored recommendations to avoid family gatherings , to wear masks and to maintain social distance .
In Greece , authorities announced 19 new confirmed new cases Saturday from a day earlier . The country ’ s total number of confirmed cases now stands at 3,254 , with 190 deaths .
Greek authorities said the median age of everyone who tested positive is 48 and 76 for those who died .
MADRID — Spain ’ s government is dropping the country ’ s 14-day quarantine requirement for British visitors when citizens of countries that are in Europe ’ s Schengen Area zone will be allowed to freely enter .
Spanish Foreign Minister Arancha González Laya told the BBC on Saturday : “ We are doing this out of the respect for the 400,000 British citizens who have a second residence in Spain . ”
González Laya says she hopes the British government will likewise drop the quarantine requirement for Spanish citizens traveling to the U.K .. Some 250,000 Spaniards have homes in the U.K. , she said .
Spain ’ s three-month-long state of emergency over the coronavirus is ending on Sunday , which is when people from Schengen Area countries will be allowed into Spain without having to quarantine .
Face masks , however , will still be mandatory along with some other rules decided by regional authorities .
British travelers provide a big part of Spain ’ s tourism sector , which has been especially hard hit by the COVID-19 crisis . The U.K. wasn ’ t part of the Schengen Area even before it left the European Union on Jan. 31 .