Trump Wants To Move On , But The Coronavirus Is Surging In Parts Of Red America
While the national number of daily deaths has declined in recent weeks , new confirmed cases are on the rise in almost half the country , including spikes in Florida , Texas and Arizona , where the president is headed Tuesday .
`` We saved millions of lives , and now it 's time to open up , '' President Trump said definitively Saturday night during his campaign rally in Tulsa , Okla .
Trump 's referring to an earlier estimate that found there could be up to 2.2 million deaths if the country did nothing to contain the outbreak . But he spent months downplaying the virus when health experts were imploring more action sooner . And those experts are now warning it 's not time to act as if the pandemic is over .
`` [ T ] hat 's why I think you 're seeing right now increases in a number of states , because everybody 's back to a pre-pandemic mindset , '' Michael Osterholm , director for the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota and author of Deadliest Enemy : Our War Against Killer Germs , said on NBC 's Meet the Press on Sunday . He warned that the coronavirus is like a `` forest fire '' that is showing no signs of slowing down .
Early on , the pandemic was largely affecting `` blue , '' or Democratic-leaning areas , especially New York , but now most new cases are in the South and redder parts of the country . The Trump administration and some Republican governors have been blaming increased testing for the rise in cases , but in many places cases are increasing more than testing — and that certainly does n't explain away rising hospitalizations in places like Texas .
The campaign of presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden is making competence a core part of its argument against Trump , and it hit him again for it because of other remarks he made Saturday night .
`` When you do testing to that extent , you are gon na find more people , you 're gon na find more cases , '' Trump said . `` So I said to my people , 'Slow the testing down , please . ' They test and they test . We have tests that people do n't know what 's going on . ''
The White House says he was being `` tongue in cheek , '' but Trump has repeatedly said testing makes the United States look bad by , in his view , increasing the number of reported cases . A Democratic group has already cut an ad centering on his remarks .
It will be key to watch political reaction on the right if cases and hospitalizations continue to rise in these parts of the country , as things like wearing masks — something the president initially encouraged Americans to do — have become politicized .
So far , though , Trump 's power of persuasion with his base continues to outweigh the coronavirus 's shift toward Red America .
1 . Possible progressive surge in elections : Five states hold primaries Tuesday — Kentucky , New York , North Carolina , Virginia and Mississippi .
In Kentucky , the race between the two Democrats vying for the right to take on Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is coming down to the wire . State Rep. Charles Booker has all the momentum and progressive backing over Amy McGrath , a retired Marine Corps fighter pilot who has all the money and the party endorsement but also lost a congressional race in the 2018 Democratic wave .
Either faces an uphill battle in a general election against McConnell in Kentucky , but a new video from Booker encapsulates a lot of the messages Democrats are trying to push nationally about working class economics , protests and Black Lives Matter .
New York Rep. Eliot Engel Faces AOC-style Challenge To House Seat New York Rep. Eliot Engel Faces AOC-style Challenge To House Seat Listen · 3:55 3:55
In New York , pay attention to progressives going after establishment Democrats , especially in the race between longtime Rep. Eliot Engel and Jamaal Bowman , a former Bronx principal who has won the endorsements of Sen. Bernie Sanders and Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez . Missteps from Engel , who last faced a competitive primary 20 years ago , opened the door for Bowman , who has raised $ 2 million and is surging .
2 . Battleground Arizona , Wisconsin : Speaking of elections , Trump heads to Yuma , Ariz. , on Tuesday to survey part of the border fence with Mexico before heading to Phoenix . Vice President Pence , meanwhile , will be in Wisconsin . It 's no coincidence that they 're heading to those places amid the president 's slipping poll numbers . Wisconsin and Arizona could very well be tipping-point states this November .
3 . Hearing on DOJ independence Wednesday : Like something out of an episode of Showtime 's Billions , Attorney General William Barr announced the resignation of Geoffrey Berman , the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York in Manhattan last week . Problem : Berman , who has been investigating people close to Trump , said he did n't resign . Barr later said in a statement that Berman had `` chosen public spectacle over public service '' and asked Trump to intervene and fire him . Trump did , but added , `` [ T ] hat 's really up to him [ Barr ] . I 'm not involved . ''
House Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerry Nadler , D-N.Y. , is promising to try and secure Berman 's testimony . `` The whole thing smacks of corruption and incompetence , which is what we have come to expect from this President and his Attorney General , '' Nadler said in a statement . Nadler was already slated to hold a meeting Wednesday with two whistleblowers on political interference at the Department of Justice .
4 . Votes on police reform on Capitol Hill expected : The Senate will debate , and possibly vote on , police reform . There 's a key procedural vote scheduled for Wednesday . On Thursday , the House is expected to pass the Democratic police reform bill mostly along party lines . You wonder how many people are tuning in to politics for the first time and watching the meat grinder of Congress work and what their impressions are — do they turn away , thinking politics is futile and not a great way to effect change , or does it make them more likely to vote ?
5 . Trump 's immigration executive order : Following his administration 's loss over the DACA program , Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , at the Supreme Court last week , President Trump is expected to sign an executive order suspending temporary work visas through the end of the year , NPR 's Franco Ordoñez reports . The suspensions are expected to include visas that affect skilled workers like in the tech industry ( H-1B ) , executives at large corporations ( L-1 ) , seasonal workers like hotel and construction workers ( H-2B ) and research scholars and professors ( J-1 ) .
`` I said , 'General , there 's no way I can make it down that ramp without falling on my ass , general . ' ``
— Trump during his Tulsa rally on Saturday , delivering a defense of his walking down a ramp at West Point . The president noted that he had leather-soled shoes on and did n't want to fall like former President Gerald Ford coming out of the airplane .
Trump went on a long tangent to discuss and , at times , reenact , his gingerly walking down the ramp and questions raised about his using a second hand to drink water . He said he did n't want to get any on his tie . Philip Bump at The Washington Post found Trump spent one out of every eight minutes of his Tulsa speech talking about West Point , or 14 minutes and 53 seconds of a speech that lasted one hour and 43 minutes .