Republican Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul criticized Dr. Anthony Fauci during his testimony in front of a Senate panel .
“ It is a fatal conceit to believe any one person or small group of people has the knowledge necessary to direct an economy or dictate public health behavior , ” Paul said Tuesday . “ I think government health experts during this pandemic need to show caution in their prognostications . ”
The senator accused public health experts of “ instilling undue fear ” in school teachers over the coronavirus pandemic , and reiterated his desire to see schools reopen in the fall . ( RELATED : FLASHBACK : Jan. 21 : Fauci Says Coronavirus ‘ Not A Major Threat ’ To U.S . )
“ We shouldn ’ t presume that a group of experts somehow knows what ’ s best for everyone , ” Paul added . “ When are we gon na tell the people the truth ? That it ’ s okay to take their kids back to school . ”
“ We need to not be so presumptuous that we know everything , ” Paul continued . “ But , my question to you is , can ’ t you give us a little bit more on schools , so that we can get back to school ? ”
Fauci responded to Paul , telling him that he agrees with him on the importance of returning kids to school . ( RELATED : ‘ We ’ re Ready To Get Working ’ : Rand Paul Calls For Kentucky And Other Rural States To Reopen )
“ I feel very strongly we need to do whatever we can to get the children back to school , ” Fauci said .
Fauci also added that some of his past comments on the ability of sporting leagues and schools to reopen have been taken out of context .
“ When things get in the press of what I supposedly said , I didn ’ t say , ” Fauci added . “ I never said we can ’ t play a certain sport . ”
“ The only thing that I can do is , to the best of my ability , give you the facts and the evidence associated with what I know about this outbreak , ” Fauci concluded .
Some parts of the U.S. have experienced a surge in coronavirus cases over the past few weeks , and recently recorded 37,000 new cases , breaking the country ’ s single-day record . States such as Arizona and Texas have reimposed some restrictions on businesses in the state to slow the spread , and aovid overwhelming their medical systems .