You may not be driving your vehicle due to shelter-in-place instituted during the coronavirus pandemic , but that doesn ’ t mean you should ignore car maintenance .
Many multicar families are currently limiting their driving trips , which means they may have tucked their extra car into the garage for the foreseeable future . Cars are meant to be driven . Sitting still isn ’ t healthy for them , but there are a few preventive measures you can take that will help ensure your car is in top condition when you start it next .
If at all possible , start the engine once every other week and move the car around a little . Even if it ’ s just up and down your driveway followed by a few minutes of idling to get the engine to operating temperature , you ’ re helping to circulate fluids in the car . A warm engine helps prevent fluids from going bad , and it reduces the risk of various gaskets and rubber parts drying out and failing . Steven Greenspan , an instructor and education manager at Universal Technical Institute as well as an ASE certified mechanic says , “ Today ’ s high-tech vehicles often have multiple computers that are always on and monitoring the car ’ s systems . These computers do absorb energy , and if a car is sitting and not recharging , the battery can die within two weeks . To avoid a dead battery , it ’ s recommended that the owner take the car for a short 5-10-minute drive . ”
Additionally , driving the car a little keeps the drivetrain — those bits underneath that help turn the wheels — from suffering the same consequences , and it helps prevent tires from flattening on the bottom . Tires are a crucial car maintenance item , and flat-spotted tires can be especially expensive to replace .
2 . Add a fuel stabilizer and grab a trickle charger
If you have no plan to drive the car whatsoever , at the very least you ’ ll want to pour some fuel stabilizer into the gas tank and hook the battery up to a trickle charger . Fuel stabilizer helps prevent gas in the tank from going bad . Not doing so will almost certainly mean the fuel system will need to be cleaned , or even that the tank , fuel pump , lines , and injectors will have to be removed and refurbished . That can get very costly , even on a car that has only sat for a few months .
Also see : These 3 EVs are the lowest cost to own over 5 years
Hooking a trickle charger to the battery ensures that the electrical system doesn ’ t lose charge . Trickle chargers do require a power outlet near the vehicle , though many will work with an extension cord . Not only can this help ensure that the car will start every time , newer cars can sometimes require very costly reprogramming if their electrical systems are drained entirely .
If your car is parked outside , invest in a good cover to protect the paint , the interior and all the rubber trim . Don ’ t simply use a tarp , which can quickly scratch paint and trap water underneath , leading to rust . Instead , find a quality soft cover specifically designed to breathe .
Leaving your car out in the sun wreaks havoc on its paint and its rubber trim . An interior that ’ s left locked up and exposed to sun gets very hot every day , which can quickly lead to damaged upholstery and trim .
Now ’ s a great time to perform a few services on your car , many of which are easier than you might expect . They ’ ll also save you time and money when you start driving the vehicle again regularly . Engine air and cabin air filters are easy to change out , and they help both the car and its occupants breathe better .
Next take a look at your maintenance records to see what vital fluids are due for replacement . Flushing the engine oil is easy on most cars , while other fluids such as the transmission and differentials are often overlooked and don ’ t take a lot of effort to replace . A good service manual – or a quick search for videos online – can help you determine whether this work is within your skill set .
Also see:5 important facts about car insurance no one ever tells you
If you ’ d rather let a professional do the maintenance on your car , no contact service is still an option .
With your car parked and not in use , you may find that you have time to give it a good scrub and detail . Go beyond the simple soap and water by using a clay mitt to strip off any accumulated gunk , followed by a wax or a ceramic coating to keep it looking spiffy . Hit up the interior next with carpet and upholstery cleaner as well as leather cleaner and conditioner .
If your headlights have started to turn yellow , you may be surprised at how effective and easy cleaning with a kit is . Just be sure to coat the lights with a protectant afterward to slow any future yellowing .