Over the last two months , since the coronavirus pandemic thrust the world into a collective panic , Minneapolis freelance journalist Ashley Abramson has stocked up on throw blankets , decorative baskets , candles , makeup , and skincare items . Abramson , 31 , said none of the decisions about buying so many small extravagances were particularly thought out or planned through . “ I ’ ve always been more impulsive with purchases , ” she said . “ The pandemic has definitely amplified that tendency in me—the greater perception that I ’ m going through something hard causes me to mentally justify spending on things . ”
Since the coronavirus became a tangible threat to North America in early March , resulting in mass concerns about public health , unprecedented unemployment , and social isolation , many have done their best to cope with the ripple effects of anxiety , depression , and loneliness . Some are taking up running and bread baking , others are finding solace in the virtual worlds of Animal Crossing and Zoom happy hours . Others , like Abramson , are staving off boredom and anxiety with impulsive decisions , like drinking more , doing stick-and-poke tattoos , trimming their bangs , and shaving their heads .
The impact of a global crisis can inspire impulsivity in anyone ( and , in some cases , result in more widely destructive behaviors , like embarking on a poorly-conceived road trip or going through with in-person social plans despite stay-at-home guidances ) . The effects of social isolation and loneliness are playing a role in impulsivity , too : A 2019 study found that people who feel lonely are more likely to feed into impulsive desires , like overspending .
The sudden disruption of our ordinary routines breeds frustration and boredom , which can lead to more impulsive choices , said Petros Levounis , chair of the Department of Psychiatry at Rutgers New Jersey Medical School . According to Levounis , when you add pandemic-induced fear to the cocktail of frustration and boredom , we ’ re prone to react emotionally rather than logically . “ You may take it out on yourself in the case of shaving your head , or you can take it out on other people by exploding in personal relationships , ” he said .
The latter occurred in the heat of a text argument between 28-year-old publicist Katy Cooper and her boyfriend of nearly nine months . Fed up with what she saw as his lack of effort in maintaining communication while the couple quarantined separately in their Brooklyn apartments , Cooper decided to rip off the Band-Aid and dump him rather than agonize over the relationship until she was able to see him face-to-face .
Cooper 's roommate had left New York for California at the outbreak of the pandemic , leaving Cooper to quarantine alone , and she felt social isolation impacted her knee-jerk reaction . “ Normally , I would spitball with my roommates [ about breaking up ] or go out with friends , ” she said . “ I have a strong support system , but I know everyone is going through stuff right now . A phone call or FaceTime is n't the same as sitting on a couch with a bunch of your girlfriends to get everything out and get feedback . Now , I make decisions by myself . ”
At the root of impulsivity is an inability to consider the consequences of our actions : Someone might justify their impulsivity by thinking along a line like , I ’ d rather spend my money and live for the moment than worry about my finances in the future . With no clear plan in sight for restoring the economy and returning to a semblance of normalcy , we may opt for instant gratification , said Shahram Heshmat , associate professor emeritus at the University of Illinois at Springfield , who specializes in the health economics of addiction . “ [ Combating impulsivity is ] all about imagining the future , and some people do n't imagine , especially when it ’ s uncertain , ” he said .
Because virtually every aspect of how the crisis is managed on a broad scale is out of our control , we ’ re grasping at ways we can maintain agency over our lives in the immediate present . Perceived control over our circumstances is biologically hardwired within us as a survival tactic , according to research . However , when we 're under duress , we tend to make riskier decisions without considering the consequences , per a 2017 study .
“ I do n't want to sound like the protesters who are out in the streets— give us our freedom back ! ! — but it 's an expression of that same feeling , ” said Erin Rockfort , a 24-year-old psychotherapist from Ottawa who impulsively shaved her head earlier this month . “ We ca n't do so many of the things we used to be able to do , so any opportunity to use that freedom to actually make a choice is kind of appealing . ”
But so long as our impulsive decisions aren ’ t harming ourselves or others , feeding into our whims could help get us through the monotony of quarantine more joyfully . However , if you ’ re sensing a degree of lawlessness inspiring your impulsivity — such as impulse-purchasing a gun or preying on people ’ s insecurities with a get-rich-quick stimulus scam — it may be cause to take a step back and really think about what ’ s fueling the desire . However , submitting to a bang-trim or hasty throw-rug purchase might not be the worst thing , Levounis said . “ It might be a good thing that we 're not taking ourselves so seriously , ” Levounis said . “ There might be a silver lining , for some people at least , that there are no barber shops and there are no salons. ” Basically : If a patchy buzzcut or a new tattoo helps us cope with our present anxieties , then seize the day ( or scissors , or sanitized needle ) and embrace a moment when you can stand to be a little—but just a little ! —reckless .