Read : Trump ’ s own allies don ’ t want him to quickly reopen the country
I can understand the wavering . The economic damage inflicted by our mass social distancing is enormous . And when the economy tanks , the human consequences are also enormous . But the decisive objection to Friedman ’ s approach , which is now apparently being pondered by the president of the United States , is simple : It would kill millions of Americans .
Estimating how many people will get the coronavirus , and what percentage of infected patients could die , remains difficult . In Germany , the government assumes that six or seven out of every 10 citizens could get it . The World Health Organization has estimated the case fatality rate to be 3.4 percent , meaning that about one in every 33 patients will die .
But let ’ s be unduly optimistic for a moment and imagine that we can somehow achieve “ herd immunity ” without infecting more than one out of every three Americans . Let us further assume that the true fatality rate turns out to be much lower than the current figures suggest—say , about one in 100—and that our hospitals somehow figure out a way to manage the flood of patients that would stream through their doors in need of lifesaving treatment .
Thomas Kirsch : What happens if health-care workers stop showing up ?
In that implausibly sanguine scenario , more than 1 million Americans would succumb to COVID-19 in the next few months . That is about as many people as the country lost in the Civil War , World War I , and World War II—combined .
There is an alternative to either shutting down the economy until we have a vaccine or letting more than 1 million Americans die . If we commit to strict social distancing now , we can radically curtail the number of new cases and buy time—time to put in place the measures we need to contain the pandemic in a less economically destructive way .
First , we need to ramp up testing dramatically . Countries such as Singapore and South Korea have shown that it is possible to tame the outbreak by instituting a thorough test-and-trace regime . Each day , these countries test many thousands of people . Then they isolate those who have been infected and trace their contacts , so they too stop spreading the disease .
Second , we need to expand hospital capacity . The biggest danger posed by the coronavirus is that it will overwhelm the health-care system , leading to a dizzying spike in mortality . But over the coming months , we can increase the number of critical-care beds to deal with COVID-19 . All over the country , gyms and exhibition centers are about to be turned into makeshift hospitals . Companies are ramping up production of urgently needed supplies , including masks and ventilators . Over time , medical students and other volunteers can be trained to perform basic tasks that free up trained personnel to do their lifesaving work .