“ The 360 ” shows you diverse perspectives on the day ’ s top stories and debates .
As the coronavirus has spread throughout the world , checking in on statistics has become something of a daily ritual for many people . Tracking the number of cases and deaths in a specific country or region offers a sense of how quickly the virus is proliferating , or in some cases being contained .
The data is incredibly important . It lets lawmakers and public health officials know if containment measures are working and how many resources need to be sent to hospitals . The figures also inform models predicting the severity and duration of the epidemic .
Despite the intense interest in this data , statistical models can sometimes create more confusion than clarity . Predictions of the number of deaths in the U.S. range from 100,000 to as many as 2.2 million . Expert reports on the virus ’ s mortality rate — the percentage of people who contract the virus who die — have varied from up to 3.4 percent down to less than 1 percent . The gap between these numbers represents millions more possible deaths .
The wide variance in these figures raises questions about how accurate coronavirus data really is and whether numbers may be so flawed that they ’ re not worth paying attention to , let alone setting public health policy by .
A handful of voices in right-wing media have speculated , without evidence , that coronavirus figures in the U.S. are being inflated to make President Trump look bad . Most experts , however , say it ’ s more likely that the number of people who have contracted the virus is dramatically higher than official counts of confirmed cases .
In many places , only the most severe cases ever get tested , which means a potentially large number of people who have manageable symptoms or no symptoms at all never show up in the data . The silver lining of this shortcoming is it could indicate that the fatality rate of infections is much lower than official statistics suggest . At the same time , experts believe some deaths from COVID-19 may be being missed in the counts .
Reporting issues could also be skewing the data . Each state in the U.S. has its own methods of releasing its numbers , with varying information included . Global statistics also rely on figures that are prone to miscounts , either because of errors or because leaders are suppressing the numbers in their countries .
Health experts stress that even flawed statistics can be valuable in combating the virus . When a number of data sets are taken together , rather than individually , they can help control for the variances inside any one set of numbers . Others argue that it doesn ’ t matter much whether the numbers are imperfect as long as they convince people to follow health guidelines like social distancing and hand washing , which they have in many places .
As the volume of data grows day after day , so does our understanding of the virus , experts say . Even with improved statistics and the benefit of time , it ’ s possible that we will never have definitive numbers of the virus ’ s true toll , some experts say .
“ The data collected so far on how many people are infected and how the epidemic is evolving are utterly unreliable . ... We don ’ t know if we are failing to capture infections by a factor of three or 300. ” — John P.A . Ioannidis , Stat
Lack of statistical clarity is hampering the response to the virus
“ What we ’ re experiencing now is the fog of pandemic . The officials tracking COVID-19 are swimming in statistics : infection rates , case-fatality ratios , economic data . But in these early stages of the fight against the coronavirus , these figures each have their own particular limitations. ” — Derek Thompson , Atlantic
The fatality rate may be much lower than testing numbers suggest
“ If the number of actual infections is much larger than the number of cases — orders of magnitude larger — then the true fatality rate is much lower as well . That ’ s not only plausible but likely based on what we know so far. ” — Eran Bendavid and Jay Bhattacharya , Wall Street Journal