WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump called on supporters Friday to `` liberate '' states that have experienced protests over coronavirus lockdowns , a day after he unveiled guidelines aimed at reopening the nation 's economy .
Less than 24 hoursafter declining to name states he felt are prepared to begin easing social distancing guidelines to halt the spread of the virus , Trump named Virginia , Michigan and Minnesota as states that could benefit from what he described asliberation .
`` LIBERATE MICHIGAN ! '' Trump posted in a series of all-caps tweets .
Trump has lurched from slamming Democratic governors , to saying he has developed friendships with them and back to attacking them . In a series of combative tweets Friday , Trump defended his performance on the virus , renewed his criticism of New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo and attacked his predecessor , President Barack Obama .
All three states that Trump called to `` liberate '' are led by Democratic governors , and all three have experienced protests in recent days demanding a rollback of stay-at-home orders . Demonstrators drove thousands of vehicles to Michigan 's state Capitol this week to protest Gov . Gretchen Whitmer 's stay-at-home order , for instance .
It was not clear exactly what Trump meant with the tweets . The only context he offered came with a third `` liberate '' tweet , directed at Virginia , in which he urged supporters to `` save your great 2nd Amendment . It is under siege ! '' The White House did not immediately respond to a request for further information about the president 's intention .
Critics said the president appeared to be encouraging protests in the states , all three of which are also important for the presidential election .
`` He 's encouraging them to attack state authorities in the midst of a health crisis , '' Joanne Freeman , a Yale history professor who has studied anti-government violence , posted on Twitter . `` He 's slashing at states to gain the loyalty of all those who 'like ' him , regardless of the impact . ''
Bradley P. Moss , a national security lawyer , described the tweets as a `` disgusting '' use of the presidential bully pulpit .
Want to talk more about politics ? : Join our Facebook group : ‘ Across the Aisle , Across the Nation . ’
`` Nothing about the president ’ s remarks explain what these states are doing that conflicts with the president ’ s own guidelines for reopening , '' Moss said .
Michigan is a key state to Trump 's re-election bid this year . In 2016 , Trump became the first Republican presidential candidate to carry the Wolverine State since 1988 , though he won it by less than 11,000 votes . Trump narrowly lost Minnesota four years ago but it is one of his top targets this year .
Trump declined to say which states he thought should move toward reopening under new guidelines he announced Thursday . He said that 29 states were `` in the ballgame '' and would `` be able to open relatively soon . '' The new non-binding guidelines recommend that states adopt a phase approach to reopening only after experiencing a downward trajectory of new coronavirus cases for two weeks .
Trump tweeted that Cuomo , also a Democrat , should `` spend more time 'doing ' and less time 'complaining . ' '' Speaking during his daily press conference on Thursday , Trump suggested that governors would be empowered to make decisions on when to reopen their states and ease stay-at-home orders .
`` Over the next very short period of time it 's going to be up to the governors , we 're going to work with , we 're going to help them but it 's going to be up to the governors , '' Trump said . `` I think they 're going to – I think you 're going to see quite a few states starting to open . ''
Cuomo , who was asked about the tweets during his daily news conference Friday , dismissed the comments .
“ First of all , if he ’ s sitting home watching TV , maybe he should get up and go to work , right ? ” he said . “ Second , let ’ s keep emotion and politics out of this and personal ego , if we can . Because this is about the people and it ’ s about our job . Let ’ s try to focus on that . ”