Read : The ancient math that sets the date of Easter and Passover
Easter weekend is usually a celebratory and social time of year , with pastel outfits and egg hunts and elaborate family brunches . The story it marks is one of joy for Christians : Jesus ’ s resurrection , offering the fulfillment of a promise and the hope of human salvation . This year , most people will spend the holiday alone , maybe tuning in to an online worship service or communicating with family members over Zoom . Many Christians will carry sorrow and worry , wondering about the health of their elderly neighbors or friends in big cities . But perhaps there ’ s theological insight to be gleaned from a painful Easter . “ Most of us have taken the shallow way—we want to have Jesus as savior and get to heaven . They ’ re missing the Gospel , ” Dorrell said . “ It ’ s entering the pain , getting off of my place of safety and security , moving in among the poor , working among the broken , suffering with people. ” In a time when many Americans are mourning their usual life , this may be a season of clarity about what it means to be a person of faith .
At the end of March , as the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths was sharply rising , President Donald Trump declared that he wanted “ the country opened up ” by Easter . When a reporter asked why he had selected that date , he replied , “ I just thought it was a beautiful time. ” Public-health officials were quick to caution that lifting restrictions so soon would be dangerous , and the president soon backed off his statements . But his comments illustrate how unthinkable this moment is : Most of the country will be shut down through one of the biggest Christian holidays of the year . It ’ s hard for anyone not to yearn for a different reality .
While Dorrell would never wish a pandemic on the world , in a certain sense he seems to relish the normal ways of religious life getting turned upside down . “ I grew up in that religious culture where we all had to have new clothes , and we all had to sit in the family row together ” on Easter , he said . This is “ the superficiality of most of the Christian Church in America : It ’ s pretty . We have a big building and a gorgeous place with choir robes and stuff. ” Dorrell , who refers to himself as “ a recovering Baptist , ” describes his congregation , the Church Under the Bridge , as nondenominational in every sense of the word : middle-class and poor ; black , white , and brown ; ex-offenders and the homeless . “ I ’ ve got Lutherans and Episcopalians , ” he said , “ and I ’ ve got wild-eyed charismatics . ”
In recent months , the group has been meeting in Waco ’ s Silos—the headquarters of the home-decor empire run by Chip and Joanna Gaines—while the I-35 bridge is under construction . The pandemic has derailed its typical 300-person worship services , however . Now each week consists of cooking burgers for the homeless , calling and visiting congregants who live alone or don ’ t have internet access , and trying to maintain a semblance of normalcy during this unusual Lent . A traditional Palm Sunday celebration for the Church Under the Bridge involves Jesus riding in on a motorcycle—it ’ s a long story involving an intransigent donkey—and it kept that up this year , with a guy on a hog riding around a block away from its socially distanced gathering .