The World Health Organization on Thursday declared the new coronavirus outbreak a global emergency amid the recent jump in the number of infected patients .
`` The main reason is not what is happening in China but what is happening in other countries , '' WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus announced at a news conference in Geneva , Switzerland .
`` Our greatest concern is the potential for the virus to spread to countries with weaker health systems , and which are ill-prepared to deal with it , '' Ghebreyesus added .
HOW CHINA IS BUILDING A CORONAVIRUS HOSPITAL IN A WEEK
An outbreak of the virus -- which has killed at least 170 people as of Thursday and infected a total of 7,834 -- was first reported by Chinese officials after it originated at an animal and seafood market in the city of Wuhan .
Coronavirus , or 2019-nCoV , is now said to be transferable between humans ; 38 new deaths and 1,737 new infected cases have been reported in the last 24 hours .
BRITISH AIRWAYS SUSPENDS ALL FLIGHTS TO CHINA AMID CORONAVIRUS OUTBREAK
Roughly 99 percent of all cases of the virus -- 7,736 infected people -- have appeared in China but it has spread to at least 18 countries .
The number of coronavirus cases in China has surpassed the number of cases of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome ( MERS ) that occurred in mainland China during an outbreak in 2002 and 2003 , but the coronavirus death toll has remained lower .
There now have been 98 cases of the virus outside of China -- including eight cases of human-to-human transmission in four countries : Germany , Japan , Vietnam and the U.S. , WHO confirmed , adding that there have been no deaths outside of China .
`` We must remember that these are people , not numbers , '' Ghebreyesus said .
The United States has seen six confirmed cases of the virus : two in California , one in Arizona , one in Washington state and two in Illinois , health officials said . The sixth case was confirmed Thursday in a Chicago resident , the spouse of the first confirmed travel-related case in Illinois . The new case marked the first in the U.S. that occurred via person-to-person transmission , CDC officials said .
Common symptoms of coronaviruses have resembled those of the common cold . Other strains of the virus such as Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome ( SARS ) and MERS could cause pneumonia and possible death .
Ghebreyesus applauded the Chinese government 's `` speed '' in which it `` detected the outbreak , isolated the virus , sequenced the genome and shared it with WHO , '' and said China set `` a new standard for outbreak response . ''
He emphasized that the emergency declaration was not meant to `` unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade , '' and `` doesn ’ t recommend limiting trade and movement . ''
Ghebreyesus also urged all countries around the world to work together to support weaker health systems , develop and distribute vaccines and prevent transmission of the virus .