The images of thousands of cars , lined up bumper-to-bumper on otherwise-empty freeways , capture the shocking scale of the nation ’ s hunger crisis .
In San Antonio , Texas , 10,000 people waited for hours to receive meal boxes from a regional food bank in April . In Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , hundreds of families have been showing up for weekly food pickups at the PPG Paints Arena . And in Sunrise , Florida , cars stretched for nearly two miles , while people waited at a Feeding South Florida food bank site .
The demand at food banks across the country has skyrocketed in recent weeks — increasing by as much as 600 percent at some — underscoring just how expansive the effects of the economic downturn have been : As of early May , more than 30 million people had filed for unemployment in just six weeks .
Hundreds of cars wait to receive food from the Greater Community Food Bank in Duquesne . Collection begins at noon . @ PghFoodBank @ PittsburghPG pic.twitter.com/94YFaO7dqX — Andrew Rush ( @ andrewrush ) March 30 , 2020
That means growing food insecurity in a nation where millions of people were already struggling to get sufficient food each month .
According to a 2014 Washington Post report , roughly 46 million people — or one in seven US residents — depended on food banks or meal service programs annually prior to the coronavirus pandemic . And in 2019 , about 38 million people used the US Department of Agriculture ’ s Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) , according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities .
“ The need in our state has gone from 800,000 Washingtonians before Covid to 1.6 million people , ” says Christina Wong , the public policy director at Northwest Harvest , a food bank that serves Washington state . States including Texas , New York , and Louisiana have seen applications for SNAP double or more , Yahoo News reports .
It ’ s a trend apparent across the country — and yet another one that reveals the vast holes in the government safety net . With SNAP unable to cover the overwhelming needs that have emerged , food banks ( which have dubious corporate ties of their own ) have stepped in to help support those who fall through .
“ Food banks are the safety net under the safety net , ” Andy Fisher , a food security expert and author of Big Hunger , tells ███ .
SNAP wasn ’ t providing enough money before the crisis — and it definitely isn ’ t now
One of the main problems this crisis has emphasized is just how tenuous America ’ s social safety net really is — and this is certainly the case with SNAP .
Even before the crisis , the amount SNAP was providing to individuals and families receiving benefits was often not enough to cover a month ’ s worth of groceries . This shortage is by design : the help is intended to be “ supplemental ” in nature . Because of this , however , many people have had to turn to food banks in the past to make up the difference . According to a 2016 study from the USDA , almost a third of SNAP recipient families visited a food bank every month . Currently , even more must do so .
“ The biggest weakness in SNAP is the amount of benefits — the degree to which they are inadequate , ” says Ellen Vollinger , the legal director at the Food Research and Action Center . “ It ’ s why food banks report that they serve a lot of SNAP customers . ”
Like other safety net programs , SNAP limits the number of people who can participate in it based on criteria like income and work requirements . To qualify , individuals ’ and families ’ gross monthly income needs to be at 130 percent of the poverty line or below , coming out to $ 1,354 for an individual and $ 2,790 for a family of four .
“ Able-bodied ” individuals without dependents between the ages of 18 and 49 also need to either participate in a job training program or work 20 hours a week , on average , in order to use the program for more than three months , every three years . There is currently a waiver on the three-month limit previously put on these benefits , in light of the ongoing pandemic . And while the Trump administration has tried to make such restrictions even more stringent , these rule changes remain tied up in court .
Because of its limits on benefits and eligibility , SNAP ends up being insufficient to address the needs of some households , while cutting out others completely . According to a 2018 study from Feeding America , a network of 200 food banks across the country , these nonprofits serve as the only recourse for many families who can ’ t afford food — but don ’ t qualify for SNAP .
Benefits vary based on income and household size ; according to CBPP , individuals received an average of $ 127 per month in 2018 , and households overall received an average of $ 256 per month . The maximum amount individuals can currently receive is $ 194 per month , and the maximum amount a family of four can receive is $ 646 per month . On average , people on SNAP in 2018 had just $ 1.40 to spend per meal , CBPP estimates .
Currently , because of a provision lawmakers approved in the Families First Coronavirus Response Act , states are working on automatically providing the maximum benefit to all individuals and families as one way to address income shortfalls they may be experiencing .
Experts tell ███ that SNAP benefits overall have not kept pace with increased living costs — and that this gap is even more evident during the pandemic , when individuals may be relying on SNAP more and people are being told to stockpile groceries for longer periods .
“ It ’ s real hard by the end of the month , ” Joseph , a 59-year-old SNAP recipient in Baltimore , Maryland , told ███ . “ By the time the check comes , it goes . ... I ’ m usually always broke. ” In 80 percent of cases , the SNAP benefits households receive are spent in two weeks .
“ We and many economists and policymakers recommend raising SNAP benefits and modestly expanding eligibility to address the effects of COVID-19 until the economy shows solid signs of recovering from the downturn , ” CBPP senior fellow Dottie Rosenbaum writes in a blog post .
During the pandemic , applications for SNAP have gone more smoothly for many people than similar processes for unemployment insurance , though there have still been delays . Typically , states have to let people know if they qualify for the program within 30 days , and send them an Electronic Benefit Transfer card — which can be used to buy groceries — within seven to 10 days . But , as with other overwhelmed safety net programs , many places are seeing a logjam .
Jennifer , a SNAP applicant in Newark , New Jersey who ’ d been recently laid off , told ███ she was increasingly anxious while waiting for her EBT card , as she also tried to apply for unemployment . “ In the richest country in the world , are we only going to hand out 1,200 [ dollars ] and assure everything is going to be okay ? It is unfair , ” she said .
Because SNAP isn ’ t accessible to all households affected by the economic downturn — and doesn ’ t provide enough money even for those who can use it — food banks are now trying to fill in a much bigger gap than they usually have to deal with . As millions of people grapple with unemployment and business closures , they ’ re using food banks in order to address shortfalls .
“ What ’ s been so challenging for food banks is that we ’ ve had this really dramatic and heartbreaking increase in need , ” says Leslie Bacho , CEO of Second Harvest of Silicon Valley . “ Fifty percent of people haven ’ t gotten help before . ”
Those increases have been staggering at many organizations . Bacho says the group is serving roughly 100,000 more people than before the pandemic . Eric Cooper , president of the San Antonio Food Bank , notes the organization ’ s sites went from serving 60,000 people a week to 120,000 a week . And Anna Kurian , senior communications director at the North Texas Food Banks , says they ’ ve distributed 6 million pounds of food in about a month , compared to 1.5 million pounds in the prior two months .
Such huge amounts of need mean food banks have had to significantly increase the supply of food they have , and purchase much more than they normally would — leading to a massive uptick in their costs .
Wong , of Northwest Harvest , estimates that the food bank went from purchasing 10 percent of its food to 90 percent . This additional cost is putting pressure on food bank budgets , and for some , an uptick in donations isn ’ t enough to cover it . Feeding America expects to see a shortfall of $ 1.4 billion in the next six months , according to the New York Times .
There are several proposals in Congress aimed at improving the existing SNAP program — by making it more comprehensive and flexible . They likely face a roadblock from Republicans , who have expressed little interest in them , and even if they do make it into the next stimulus , that bill could be weeks away . If approved , though , these proposals could provide more comprehensive food aid and relieve some of the demand food banks are encountering .
Boosting SNAP also has noticeable economic impacts , since this money not only helps people afford food they need , but the spending goes right back to retailers , and has a multiplier effect as a result . Moody ’ s Analytics has found that every additional dollar of SNAP funding that people can access translates to a $ 1.70 boost in the economy .
The changes lawmakers are pushing include a 15 percent expansion in the maximum SNAP benefit , which would be a direct and quick way to offer more support to millions of people .
“ During the Great Recession , Congress made SNAP more generous ” using the Recovery Act of 2009 , says Duke University public policy professor Anna Gassman-Pines . “ The evidence is that this helped a lot of people weather the recession and the same thing could be done now . ”
That 13.6 percent increase on the maximum monthly benefit in 2009 was found to have a tangible effect on reducing food insecurity for households near the poverty line . According to FRAC , data also shows that families receiving the expanded benefit didn ’ t use them up until later in the month .
There ’ s a push , too , for more flexibility around how SNAP benefits can be used . Only a few states enable recipients to use SNAP at restaurants , or for online delivery , for example . Expanding both of these options could greatly widen how the program can help families during the pandemic , especially when shopping in person at stores can prove challenging for people who are more vulnerable to the coronavirus .
Democrats have made the expansion of SNAP a key priority for the upcoming stimulus package , though they ’ ve yet to pick up Republican support . If they can , it could prove to be one of the quickest ways to get stimulus help directly to people who sorely need it .
Every day at ███ , we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you , and our audience around the world , with information that has the power to save lives . Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment : to empower you through understanding . ███ ’ s work is reaching more people than ever , but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn . Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation , but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles , videos , and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires . Please consider making a contribution to ███ today .