A mix of legacy drugmakers and small startups have stepped forward with plans to develop vaccines or treatments that target the infection caused by the novel coronavirus .
COVID-19 , which was first detected in December in Wuhan , China , has sickened more than 194,000 people worldwide and killed at least 7,800 . There are no Food and Drug Administration-approved vaccines or therapies for the disease .
In the U.S. , the companies that are initiating development have received funding from two organizations : the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority ( BARDA ) , which is a division of the Department of Health and Human Services , and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases ( NIAID ) , a division of the National Institutes of Health . Some companies have received funding from Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations ( CEPI ) , a global organization based in Oslo . Other companies are funding trials by themselves or through partnerships with other life sciences companies .
Here are some of the companies developing treatments or vaccines in the U.S. for COVID-19 :
Background : On March 17 , Pfizer announced that it would help develop and distribute BioNTech SE ’ s COVID-19 vaccine candidate , though the deal excludes China . BioNTech plans to put the vaccine candidate into clinical trials in late April , in Germany and the U.S . It is testing the vaccine in collaboration with Shanghai Fosun Pharmaceutical Group Co. Ltd. in China . Pfizer and BioNTech for several years have said they would partner to develop mRNA-based influenza vaccines .
Year-to-date stock performances : Shares of BioNTech have soared 104 % ; Pfizer ’ s stock is down 20 % .
Background : Gilead is a longtime drug maker that is best known for developing the first major cure for hepatitis-C in Sovaldi , a therapy that changed the standard of care for that disease but also kicked off the national debate about drug pricing . The company has experience developing and marketing HIV drugs , including Truvada for pre-exposure prophylaxis ( PrEP ) , its preventive HIV medicine . Along with U.S. trials , Gilead is conducting a randomized , controlled clinical trial in Wuhan , testing remdesivir as a treatment for mild to moderate forms of pneumonia in people with the virus . The trial was given the go-ahead by China ’ s Food and Drug Administration in February .
1 . On Feb. 21 , the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases started enrolling patients in a randomized , double-blind , placebo-controlled Phase 3 trial evaluating 394 hospitalized patients with COVID-19 at up to 50 sites worldwide . The trial is expected to conclude April 1 , 2023 . Sites include the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda , Md. , ( not recruiting ) , the University of Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha ( recruiting ) , the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston ( not recruiting ) , and Providence Sacred Heart Medical Center in Spokane ( recruiting ) .
2 . On March 3 , Gilead said a randomized , open-label Phase 3 trial will evaluate remdesivir in 600 patients with moderate COVID-19 . The trial is expected to start enrolling patients in March , with results to come in May .
3 . On March 3 , Gilead said a randomized , open-label Phase 3 trial will evaluate remdesivir in 400 patients with severe COVID-19 . The trial is expected to start enrolling patients in March , with results in May .
Background : GSK is another leading vaccine maker , having brought to market vaccines for human papillomavirus ( HPV ) and the seasonal flu , among others . On Feb. 3 , it said the CEPI-funded University of Queensland will have access to the British drugmaker ’ s vaccine adjuvant platform technology , which is believed to both strengthen the response of a vaccine and limit the amount of vaccine needed per dose . On Feb. 24 , GSK said that Clover Biopharmaceuticals Inc. , a Chinese biotechnology company , is also using adjuvant technology in combination with its vaccine candidate , COVID-19 S-Trimer , in preclinical studies . Dr. Thomas Breuer , chief medical officer for GSK Vaccines , is leading work on vaccines and the adjuvant platform .
Background : Heat Biologics has previously announced that it is developing a vaccine for the novel coronavirus with the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine . It disclosed March 17 in a financial filing that its COVID-19 vaccine candidate had been added to the World Health Organization ’ s “ draft landscape ” of 41 candidate vaccines . The company also recently joined the Alliance for Biosecurity , which may help it “ secure government funding to support its rapid development , production , and distribution ” of its COVID-19 vaccine , according to Maxim Group analysts .
Background : Another CEPI grantee , awarded $ 9 million , Inovio has said it already began preclinical testing and small-scale manufacturing .
Timeline : Inovio develops immunotherapies and vaccines but hasn ’ t yet had a product approved for treatment . For INO-4800 , preclinical testing was performed between Jan. 23 and Feb. 29 . The company plans to begin clinical trials in the U.S. with 30 participants in April . It also plans to launch human trials in China and South Korea that same month , and that it has a total of 3,000 doses prepared for the trials in the three countries . Inovio said it expects to have the first results from the trial in the fall and to have 1 million does of the vaccine ready for additional clinical trials or emergency use by the end of the year . Inovio on March 12 announced a $ 5 million grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to test a delivery device for its vaccine candidate . RBC analyst Gregory Renza recently downgraded the stock to sector perform from outperform on valuation grounds and said he believed in the technology .
Name : TBD ( “ We are still in the process of identifying a vaccine candidate , so no there is no name at this time , ” a spokesman said March 4 . )
Background : On Feb. 11 , J & J said it is working with BARDA to test its vaccine candidate , with both organizations providing funding for research and development and the public-health organization funding the Phase 1 trials . Similar to GSK , J & J ’ s AdVac and PER . C6 technologies are used to improve the development process for a vaccine and were also used to develop J & J ’ s experimental Ebola vaccine . “ We are also in discussions with other partners , that if we have a vaccine candidate with potential , we aim to make it accessible to China and other parts of the world , ” Dr. Paul Stoffels , J & J ’ s chief scientific officer , said in a statement . On March 13 , J & J said it started preclinical testing on multiple candidates in collaboration with Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston , and it aims to have a vaccine candidate by the end of the month . J & J also said in February that it partnered with BARDA on a project that aims to screen existing antiviral medications , including experimental or approved therapies , that may be effective against COVID-19 .
Timeline : The company aims to start a Phase 1 clinical trial by the end of 2020 , “ compared to the typical five to seven years it takes for this milestone in vaccine development , ” Stoffels said on Dr. Paul Stoffels , J & J ’ s chief scientific officer and leader of J & J ’ s global COVID-19 response , said March 2 .
Background : Moderna received funding from CEPI in January to develop an mRNA vaccine against COVID-19 . On Feb. 24 , it said it had shipped the first batch of mRNA-1273 to the NIAID for a Phase 1 clinical trial in the U.S .
Clinical trials : The first patient in the Phase 1 trial received a dose of the vaccine candidate on March 16 . The study is expected to enroll 45 healthy adult patients , between the ages of 18 and 55 years old , in an open-label Phase I clinical trial to test mRNA-1273 as a vaccine for COVID-19 . It ’ s expected to conclude June 1 , 2021 . Participants will be followed for one year . The trial will be conducted at Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute in Seattle . CEPI funded the manufacturing of the investigational vaccine for the first phase of the trial , which is evaluating different doses for safety and immune response .
Background : On Feb. 4 , Regeneron announced it is working on developing monoclonal antibodies as treatments for COVID-19 . The company ’ s VelocImmune platform uses genetically-engineered mice with humanized immune systems in preclinical testing . “ We are aiming to have hundreds of thousands of prophylactic doses ready for human testing by end of August , ” a spokesperson said . Christos Kyratsous , VP of infectious disease R & D and viral vector technology , is running the project .
Background : The FDA previously approved Kevzara , a treatment developed by Regeneron and Sanofi , as a therapy for rheumatoid arthritis in 2017 .
Clinical trial : On March 16 , the companies said they had started a Phase 2/3 trial testing Kevzara as a treatment for patients who have been hospitalized with severe COVID-19 infections . This randomized , double-blind , placebo-controlled trial is expected to enroll up to 400 patients and will take place at 16 sites in the U.S . The aim is to evaluate if the drug lessens patient fevers and their need for supplemental oxygen . The Phase 3 trial will evaluate if Kevzara prevents deaths and reduces need for mechanical ventilation , supplemental oxygen , or hospitalization . Early results from a small 21-person trial in China and that have not been peer-viewed found that COVID-19 patients reported reductions in fever and 7 % of them had a reduced need for supplemental oxygen within days of starting treatment .
Background : Starting Feb. 18 , Sanofi is working with BARDA to test a preclinical vaccine candidate for severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) for COVID-19 using its recombinant DNA platform . It has a long history of producing vaccines in its Sanofi Pasteur business and acquired this candidate through its 2017 acquisition of Protein Sciences for $ 750 million . The French drugmaker previously worked with the organization on flu vaccines . Scientists in Meriden , Ct. , are working on the vaccine ; David Loew , Sanofi Pasteur ’ s EVP , is leading the project .
Timeline : A spokesperson said Sanofi aims to put a vaccine into a Phase 1 clinical trial between March 2021 and August 2021 .
Background : The Japanese drugmaker said March 4 it plans to test hyperimmune globulins for people who are at high risk for infection . As part of its research , which will be performed in Georgia , Takeda said it would need access to plasma from people who have recovered from COVID-19 or those who have received a vaccine if one is developed . Dr. Rajeev Venkayya , president of Takeda ’ s vaccine business , is the co-lead of the company ’ s COVID-19 response team . Like J & J , Takeda plans to examine whether other therapies , both experimental or with regulatory approval , may have treatment potential .
Company : Vir Biotechnology Inc. VIR , +9.83 % and Biogen Inc. BIIB , +8.37 %
Background : Vir said Feb. 25 it is collaborating with Shanghai-based WuXi Biologics to test monoclonal antibodies as a treatment for COVID-19 . If the treatment is approved , WuXi will commercialize it in China , while Vir will have marketing rights for the rest of the world . The preclinical company is run by George Scangos , the former CEO of Biogen . It later announced a partnership with Biogen to help develop and manufacture its monoclonal antibodies as a potential treatment for COVID-19 . Biogen will handle clinical manufacturing of Vir ’ s antibodies , the company said .
Year-to-date stock performance : Vir shares have jumped 324.94 % ; Biogen ’ s stock is up 4.95 % .