Israel ’ s prime minister Saturday said he is ready to step down next year as part of a proposed power-sharing agreement with his chief rival meant to steer the country through the coronavirus crisis and end a year-long political deadlock .
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu made his proposal during a nationally televised interview , calling for the formation of a three-year “ emergency ” unity government with the rival Blue and White Party .
Netanyahu told Channel 12 TV that he would remain as prime minister for the first year and a half , and allow Blue and White leader Benny Gantz to assume the post for a second year-and-a-half term in September 2021 . He said each party would have an equal number of seats in the Cabinet .
“ I will give up the prime minister ’ s post in another year and a half , ” Netanyahu said .
Yair Lapid , a senior Blue and White leader , dismissed Netanyahu 's unity offer as insincere . “ Next week , we will go to choose a new parliament speaker and work to battle coronavirus for the good of the people , ” he said .
Israel is facing a growing threat from the coronavirus pandemic . It has detected nearly 900 cases and on Friday reported its first death . With the public largely confined to their homes , the economy appears to be in great danger , with tens of thousands of people losing their jobs .
Blue and White has accused Netanyahu of using the coronavirus crisis to undermine the country ’ s democratic institutions and try to derail his scheduled trial on corruption charges . Senior members of Gantz ' party have expressed skepticism at previous power-sharing overtures by Netanyahu , concerned that he would not follow through on his promises to cede power .
Israel this month held its third inconclusive election in under a year . Netanyahu ’ s Likud emerged as the largest single party , but fell short of securing a required parliamentary majority . A slim majority of lawmakers has endorsed Gantz as their choice for prime minister , though it is unclear whether he will be able to cobble together a governing coalition either .
Gantz now has just over three weeks to form a new government . In the meantime , he is trying to push through legislation in parliament that would in effect prevent Netanyahu from serving as prime minister in the future . The legislation would impose term limits on the prime minister and bar a politician indicted on criminal charges , like Netanyahu , from being prime minister .
Last week , parliament Speaker Yuli Edelstein , a member of Likud , suspended the parliament ’ s activities , preventing the newly elected legislature from choosing a new speaker and forming the committees needed to push through Blue and White ’ s legislative agenda .
Netanyahu ’ s hand-picked justice minister last week also shut down most of the court system , delaying the prime minister ’ s trial until at least May .
Netanyahu 's opponents have accused him and his surrogates of undermining the country 's democratic institutions . Blue and White planned to file a Supreme Court challenge on Sunday requiring parliament to resume its activities .
With the public ordered to stay at home , tens of thousands of people tuned in on social media late Saturday to a “ virtual protest , ” accusing Netanyahu of endangering the country ’ s democratic foundations . Former directors of the Mossad and Shin Bet security agencies were among the speakers .
“ Benjamin Netanyahu , get yourself together and release us from being your hostages , ” said Yuval Diskin , a former Shin Bet director . “ Do it for the good of the country and the people . ”
More than 275,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus worldwide . The virus has killed more than 11,000 people , while more than 88,000 have recovered .
Most people only experience minor flu-like symptoms from the coronavirus and recover within a few weeks , but the virus is highly contagious and can be spread by those who appear well . It can cause severe illness , including pneumonia , in some patients , particularly the elderly and those with underlying health problems .