The Dow Jones Industrial Average DJIA , +4.17 % and S & P 500 Index SPX , +5.16 % plunged Thursday in the worst drop since the 1987 market crash . The dramatic decline came after President Trump announced Wednesday evening that the U.S. would suspend flights from 26 European countries for 30 days , starting midnight Friday in an effort to slow th silent spread of COVID-19 , the sometimes fatal disease caused by the novel coronavirus .
“ Rather than freaking out about the market ’ s rollercoaster ride , there are several steps you can take to improve your physical and financial health . ”
Hyper-ventilating about every rise and dip isn ’ t time well spent , experts said . Rather than freaking out about the market ’ s rollercoaster ride or the COVID-19 epidemic , there are several steps you can take to improve your emotional , physical and financial health . The World Health Organization has a set of recommendations for how to deal with stress stemming from the virus .
Coronavirus had infected 128,392 people globally and killed 4,728 as of Friday morning , according to data from Johns Hopkins University ’ s Center for Systems Science and Engineering , and 69,607 recoveries . The U.S. had 1,701 confirmed coronavirus cases and 40 deaths .
WHO recommends people limit the amount of time “ you and your family spend watching or listening to media coverage that you perceive as upsetting. ” It also recommends gathering information about the virus from a credible source like the WHO or a local public health agency . Financial advisers say the same is true for those who are worried about their 401 ( k ) or their investments in their favorite stocks , whether it ’ s AAPL , +4.71 % Google GOOG , +1.76 % , Tesla TSLA , -1.52 % or Facebook FB , +2.03 % .
“ Freaking out doesn ’ t help you stay healthy , ” said Catherine Belling , a professor at Northwestern University , Feinberg School of Medicine , who studies the role of fear and anxiety in health care . “ It just makes you feel really bad and keeps you from doing the rational things that actually might help you stay healthy. ” Instead of throwing yourself into a rabbit-hole of panic and anxiety , here are 10 ways to regain your sense of control .
If you ’ re a relatively young , long-term investor , don ’ t even look at your account balance , or the week ’ s stock-market plunge . It is too difficult at this point to predict the market ’ s levels years into the future , when young investors will be cashing out accounts such as their 401 ( k ) s. Money that people are saving for short-term goals shouldn ’ t be invested in the market .
So instead of obsessively checking account balances or worrying about COVID-19 , work out or socialize with friends . Exercise has even been linked to financial health ; a 2016 study from the American Heart Association found that individuals who exercised moderately paid about $ 2,500 less in annual health care expenses related to heart disease than those who did not exercise .
Better yet : Do a job you can earn money for , like babysitting , dog walking or signing up for an app like TaskRabbit . Extra money can go toward debt or savings . Just don ’ t distract yourself through “ retail therapy ” : Anxiety is linked to making financially risky decisions . And shopping to relieve stress and anxiety can leave you in a worse financial state than before .
Many Americans would do well to examine their budgets — if they even have a budget at all , according to Greg McBride , chief financial analyst at the personal-finance website Bankrate.com . About two-thirds of American adults don ’ t even have one , according to the polling firm Gallup . And about the same percentage say they would have trouble coming up with $ 2,000 in an emergency , according to the New York Federal Reserve .
Some obvious places in the budget to make cuts : Cable TV , cellphone plans , video streaming subscriptions , or other monthly subscriptions that you may have forgotten about . Is it time to cut out that extra movie channel that you don ’ t watch ? Can you get a better deal from another operator ? Some people may be reluctant to go to a restaurant , due to fears relating to the coronavirus and being around people who are asymptomatic . Luckily cooking meals at home is generally less expensive than eating out , and for some , it ’ s an effective stress reliever .
Don ’ t miss : ‘ We ’ re going to have more deaths. ’ Coronavirus vs. the flu . Influenza kills more people so everyone is overreacting , right ? Wrong — here ’ s why
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends washing your hands with soap and water for at 20 seconds over using hand sanitizer . But both aren ’ t always readily available , in which case the CDC recommends using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60 % alcohol . Purell , which has been selling briskly , contains 70 % ethyl alcohol . But many hand sanitizers are sold out . ( GOJO , the parent company for Purell , did not respond to a request for comment . )
That said , you can easily make your own hand sanitizer and save yourself some money in the process , given that some hand sanitizer is selling for more than $ 100 for a 12 oz . bottle from third-party sellers on Amazon AMZN , +7.54 % . Anne Marie Helmenstine , who holds a Ph.D. in biomedical sciences , posted a tutorial online for how to make it . It may take your mind off the plunge in the stock markets , although some health experts say homemade versions may not be very effective . Here are the ingredients and equipment you would need :
8-10 drops essential oil , optional ( such as lavender , vanilla , peppermint , grapefruit )
The elderly appear to be more prone to contracting the new coronavirus . “ But some haven ’ t even heard about it , ” said Amy Goyer , a family and care-giving expert for AARP . “ For others , that ’ s all they ’ re listening to. ” It ’ s a good idea to call seniors and get a feel for where they stand , she said . “ As the virus spreads it ’ s more and more important to be in touch with people who are isolated , ” Goyer said . “ They may think this is minor and may not get themselves checked out . ”
At the same time , “ You don ’ t want to act like we ’ re in the middle of a huge crisis , ” according to Goyer , who has written three books on care giving . It is also very important for them to stock up on all the medication they need . Have a conversation with seniors about medication and other supplies they may need in the event that a health aide can not or family members can not assist them .
“ Have a conversation with seniors about medication and other supplies they may need in the event that an aid can not or family members can not assist them . ”
Meals on Wheels , a grassroots organization dedicated to addressing senior isolation and hunger , is often a lifeline for homebound older adults in times of emergency . Many local programs have a telephone reassurance program run by volunteers who can check in with seniors regularly to make sure they have all the supplies they need and are in good health . “ Letting a senior know you ’ re thinking of them from afar in times like this can absolutely provide reassurance and help to combat the negative health effects of social isolation and loneliness , ” said Jenny Young , vice president of communications for Meals on Wheels America .
Misinformation on Facebook FB , +2.03 % or Twitter TWTR , +3.72 % could cause health authorities to expend more effort debunking false theories about coronavirus . Companies like Facebook have brought in third-party fact checkers to cut down on the amount of fake news . Other platforms like Twitter TWTR , +3.72 % . Seek out COVID-19 information from the CDC or WHO , and financial information from trusted news sources rather than online groups . “ You ’ ll feel reassured because you ’ ve done what you can to prevent and prepare , just in case you need to , ” Belling said .
Fully 18 % of people who earn more than $ 100,000 say they live paycheck to paycheck , according to a survey released last month of 8,000 workers by global advisory firm Willis Towers Watson . “ There ’ s a high correlation between high pay — and living in a high-cost area and having an advanced degree , ” Shane Bartling , the senior director for retirement for the firm , explains of why so many people making a chunk of change say they ’ re still living paycheck to paycheck .
Do you have a student loan , or even some credit-card debt ? Currently , Americans have a total of roughly $ 1.5 trillion in student loan debt — and graduate degrees are responsible for a chunk of that debt . Make a payment , instead of worrying about the market . Many credit-card accounts have compound interest rates of 20 % or more . So money spent on that debt can guarantee high returns . Even paying student-loan debt , which typically has lower rates , can guarantee a better return than the market can at times , she said .
Recommended : Will coronavirus spread throughout the U.S. ? We can all learn from the missteps during those critical , early days in China
Have you signed up for a retirement account ? There ’ s no time like the present . Many employed Americans don ’ t have a retirement account at all . If there ’ s room in your budget , you can also amp up the amount you contribute to your 401 ( k ) in order to get a contribution match from your employer , if it offers one . For those who don ’ t have 401 ( k ) accounts at work , it can be fast to sign up online for a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . They allow you to save while receiving tax benefits for doing so .
“ Nearly one quarter of the investors in the 401 ( k ) plans managed by Fidelity Investments said they were overinvested in stocks versus recommended levels . ”
Fidelity Investments , a major manager of company retirement plans , recently estimated that 23 % of the investors in the 401 ( k ) plans it manages were overinvested in stocks compared to their recommended levels , including 7 % who had their entire 401 ( k ) plan in the stock market . Among baby boomers , who are near or in retirement , 38 % were overinvested in stocks , and 8 % were entirely invested in the stock market .
Ideally , you will “ maximize contributions to your IRA , 401 ( k ) , or 403 ( b ) . You can contribute up to $ 19,500 in 2020 to your 401 ( k ) or 403 ( b ) plan , and if you ’ re 50 or older , you can contribute an extra $ 6,500 , ” according to Kimberly Foss , the founder of Empyrion Wealth Management in Roseville , Calif. She adds : “ And don ’ t forget IRAs ; the maximum contribution for 2020 is $ 6,000 , with an extra $ 1,000 catch-up provision in you ’ re 50 or older . The tax-free compounding of these retirement accounts is strong magic for your income at retirement time . ”
Many traditional banks offer low interest rates on savings accounts , but there are several online banks offering higher rates to consumers.Consumers holding an emergency fund in cash could be earning more than they are currently , he said , and setting up an online account can take only a few minutes . Look for a savings account that pays a greater than 2 % annual percentage yield . On that note , some financial writers recommend CIT Bank CIT , -2.99 % and Citizens Access , an offshoot of Citizens Bank , Marcus by Goldman Sachs GS , +2.05 % , Synchrony and Barclays .
Research from TD Ameritrade — which looks at people who save 20 % or more of their incomes , called “ super savers ” — shows that the single biggest difference between what super savers spent less on , as compared with the rest of us , was housing . Super savers spent just 14 % of their incomes on housing , while regular folks dropped 23 % . What ’ s more , more than four in 10 people who fully funded or were very close to fully funding their 401 ( k ) accounts said in another survey that one of the sacrifices they made to save so much was that they lived in a modest home .
In less than 15 minutes , you can find out just how financially healthy you are by taking a financial capability quiz . Questions like : Could you come up with $ 2,000 if an unexpected need arose within the next month ? May prompt you to adhere to a stricter budget , especially if you or your partner has to take time off work because of illness .
One rule of thumb : dedicate 80 % of your spending budget to necessities like rent , utilities and 20 % for fun splurges like concerts and clothing , according to Northwestern Mutual . A fear-driven rush to sell stocks amidst coronavirus concerns may ignore the less obvious underlying problems in your portfolio . “ Are your investments appropriate for your age ? ” or “ Are you sensibly diversified ? ” may help you regain a sense of control over your emotional and financial health .
Closing your eyes and taking deep breaths in through your nose and out through your mouth won ’ t pay your bills , create a magical bump in the stock market , and it certainly won ’ t act as a preventative measure against coronavirus . But it can help you restore a calm mind set to make more rational decisions . There are free apps such as Smiling Mind and one designed by UCLA ’ s Mindful Awareness Research Center . YouTube GOOG , +1.76 % also offers guided meditation tutorials .
One of the most popular paid meditation apps , Headspace , which costs $ 12.99 a month , offers a catalog of 30-day courses on topics such as how to find focus at work and dealing with regret . They also offer single meditation courses that can last three to 10 minutes . “ Our brains have developed to focus on the threat , ” said Megan Jones Bell , a clinical psychologist and chief science officer at Headspace . “ I think it ’ s understandable for people to go down a rabbit hole . ”
Meditation helps people “ deactivate that emotional center of the brain which is sensitive to negative reactions that keep us hooked to news cycles , ” she added . That will hopefully help you process both ongoing news of COVID-19 and the Dow ’ s rough ride .
( Maria LaMagna , Brett Arends and Catey Hill contributed to this article . )