The Wall St. Bull on a nearly empty Broadway in the New York financial district as the coronavirus outbreak continues , March 23 , 2020 . ( Mike Segar/Reuters )
In the face of the coronavirus crisis , our leaders are trying to answer unanswerable questions .
Jonah Goldberg wrote a book arguing that we live in part under a “ tyranny of clichés , ” and one of the most shopworn of clichés — “ The cure is worse than the disease ” — is at the moment at the forefront of our public discourse . Millions of lives and untold trillions in wealth and income may be saved — or lost — as the result of public policies shaped by that cliché .
In the matter of the coronavirus epidemic and our response to it , the question “ Is the cure worse than the disease ? ” is almost useless , because it asks us to judge one discrete thing we know against a half-dozen critical things we do not know .
What we know right now is that the U.S. economy ( and the world economy — which , nationalists note , matters quite a bit to our own national prosperity ) is cratering while the coronavirus still is spreading . This seems , from the point of view of right this moment , intolerable — or “ unsustainable , ” in the antiseptic language of American journalism .
But is it intolerable ? It seems intolerable because it is very painful and because it is very painful right now . As individuals — and , more important , as a polity — we suffer from what is sometimes known as “ present bias , ” meaning that we assign more weight and relevance to things we are experiencing right now . If you were in possession of a crystal ball that could tell you the future with absolute reliability , and you learned that departing from our current course of action would produce both public-health and economic effects that would be much , much worse than what we are experiencing right this moment , then the conditions prevailing at right this moment would not be judged intolerable at all . They would be considered relatively desirable — relative not to the recent past or to our best hopes for the future , but relative to a much worse outcome .
In the same way , we go to doctors and pay them great sums of money to do things to us that would seem intolerable if not for our knowledge that these horrifying experiences — chemotherapy , for example — prevent something far worse . If you were just being forced to undergo chemotherapy with no context , you would believe that you were being tortured by evil men , not treated by men who wish you well . If you were subjected to the rigors of military training and military life with no explanation , you would think you were being abused — not that your apparent tormentors were trying to save your life .
What we know is that there is economic pain in the present , and that this is associated with what is at best an imperfect prophylactic strategy against the coronavirus .
What we do not know makes for a longer list :
We do not know how effective our current practices are going to be at mitigating the effects of the epidemic . It is even possible that our current practices will leave us worse off than some other strategy would have . That is a possibility as a matter of logic ; that does not make it likely , nor does that constitute a case for ignoring the advice of the relevant experts . If we could know with absolute certainty ( or even believe with overwhelming confidence ) that the current course of action is the best one available to us , then there would be no debate about altering the current course of action . It may be that we have a high degree of confidence that we are doing the right thing , but our confidence is not unqualified . We do not know how deep or long-lasting the economic damage will be . It may be that the economy is able to come back like gangbusters once the public-health crisis is under control , that growth will recover quickly , and that the many Americans who are out of work or who soon will be out of work are able to return to work at similar wages very quickly . It may be that the disruption leaves growth stunted for an extended period of time and that many Americans are unable to find suitable work . And while we do not know how our current course of action will work out , we also do not know how any other possible course of action will work out . And if we choose some other course of action , we will then be in a position of never being able to know what would have happened if we had stayed the course . We do not know what the economic consequences of a worsening epidemic would be . The measures we are taking right now impose terrible economic costs , but a catastrophic epidemic — one that is orders of magnitude worse than what we are experiencing right now — would impose terrible economic costs , too , on top of an unthinkable amount of death and suffering .
These problems are present in most political decision-making , albeit usually with lower stakes . We generally misunderstand the relevant questions — or , as often , we misrepresent the question . For example , advocates of higher minimum wages will sometimes point to a time and a place in which a higher minimum wage has been imposed and unemployment either decreased or at least failed to increase . And then they will say , “ This shows that increasing the minimum wage does not increase unemployment. ” But the relevant comparison is not between the labor market before the minimum-wage increase and the labor market after the minimum-wage increase — it is between the labor market before the minimum-wage increase and the future labor market that would have existed without the minimum-wage increase . It may be that a market with 4 percent unemployment before the minimum-wage increase held steady after a 50 percent increase in the minimum wage ; it also may be the case that without that hike in the minimum wage , the unemployment rate would have dropped to 3 percent or to 2 percent . This is the right question , but it is a question that is of no political value , because it can not be answered with any confidence .
People in politics are people in the business of pretending that they have simple answers to complex questions ; they are not in the business of frankly admitting that they do not know what the actual results of their policies are — or even what they were — and that they have no way of knowing .
And so we must approach the cliché of the moment — “ Is the cure worse than the disease ? ” — with a degree of humility . And with a high degree of caution about the incentives that shape the decisions of political actors : The authorities in Beijing tried to cover up the facts of the coronavirus epidemic for reasons of narrow political self-interest — they did not wish to create a crisis that would undermine the economy . President Trump made rosy pronouncements about the epidemic in its early days , contradicting some of his most intelligent advisers , for precisely the same reason . It is worth keeping in mind that the administration ’ s efforts to prevent a stock-market selloff were entirely unsuccessful and that the president ’ s optimistic public-health pronouncements did not come to pass . Which is to say , the effort to stave off present economic pain in the face of some notional future public-health crisis prevented neither the economic pain nor the public-health crisis . It would be a bitter thing to repeat such a mistake in such a short period of time .
When Adolf Hitler was making war on the United Kingdom and Europe , the question that commanded the attention of the American people was whether they could trust President Franklin Roosevelt to make the right decision for the right reason . And the conclusion a great many of them reached was — “ No. ” Antiwar sentiment was by no means restricted to cranks and anti-Semites such as Charles Lindbergh . So intense and widespread was hostility to entering the war that the Republican nominee , interventionist Wendell Willkie , felt the need to court ( if only halfheartedly ) the isolationists , while President Roosevelt himself was obliged , on the eve of the 1940 election , to declare : “ Your boys are not going to be sent into any foreign wars . We will not send our Army , Navy , or air forces to fight in foreign lands , except in case of attack. ” The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor rendered that promise moot . Things might have gone differently : Patrick J. Buchanan has one vision of what might have been , and Philip Roth had another .
The problem for the United States is that there is unlikely to be a coronavirus Pearl Harbor , a dramatic clarifying event that points clearly toward the necessary course of action . What we have is Donald Trump , Nancy Pelosi , and Mitch McConnell meditating upon a half-understood cliché and trying to answer unanswerable questions , and trying to do so with one eye on the ICU and the other on the unemployment office .