Richard Dobbey , a church usher in Chicago , checks on the seniors in his parish , and makes sure food for funerals still arrives . He is starting to look beyond the present crisis . “ Some of these things you ’ re doing now , these are things we should do all the time . ”
Out in the community , many seniors have also become cut off from personal contact with family or friends , adding to the risk of isolation . But there are many creative ways to stay in touch , and community organizations and volunteers are going all out to ease the isolation of a lockdown .
Residents in nursing homes are among the hardest hit by the COVID-19 pandemic . It ’ s not just the immediate threat of a disease that disproportionately afflicts the elderly and vulnerable . In order to slow infection rates , nursing facilities have had to bar visitors and end communal activities , and that exacts its own toll on older people who are struggling with isolation and loneliness .
Julia Adams looked forward to two family outings a week : Thursday dinner and Sunday lunch . That changed last month when the 80-year-old ’ s assisted living home in New Middletown , Ohio , closed to visitors as a COVID-19 precaution .
“ Mom had kept asking about going out to dinner , ” says her son Charley Adams . “ I just had to keep telling her : ‘ Mom , you can ’ t leave , and I can ’ t come in . ’ ”
He could hear her disappointment on the phone . The facility has arranged Skype sessions to help families connect , he says , but he does n't know how to use it . So one Sunday he took matters into his own hands .
Mr. Adams , who owns a tree service business , went home to get his bucket truck . It extends 55 feet into the air , more than enough to reach his mom ’ s 3rd floor window .
“ I called her on her phone – she had her blinds closed – and I said , Look out your window , Mom . ”
“ Oh , it was wonderful , ” says Ms. Adams on a call from her room . She says her son ’ s surprise appearance was a big hit with the other residents , too .
Courtesy of Corrie Adams Charley Adams visits his 80-year-old mom , Julia Adams , at her assisted living home in New Middletown , Ohio , on March 22 , 2020 . Mr. Adams has used his bucket truck to keep connected with his mom during the pandemic .
Senior care organizations are scrambling to stave off the novel coronavirus as related deaths at these facilities mount – more than 3,600 according to the latest count from the Associated Press . Residents in nursing and retirement homes are considered particularly vulnerable because of their age , and many have underlying health conditions .
Staff , too , are affected . Last week , a nursing home in Riverside , California , had to be evacuated because staff were too frightened to work . Dozens of residents , including employees , had tested positive for COVID-19 .
Yet as these facilities bar visitors , group activities , and communal dining , staff and families are finding creative ways to ease the isolation of elderly residents , from virtual pet therapy to window weddings . Ideally , that stream of love and dedication should continue even after the pandemic , say experts , who point out that seniors in an aging nation already struggle with isolation and loneliness .
“ Many , many people across the nation are [ leaning ] into our shared humanity and working hard to be creative about how they remain connected , ” says Lisa Marsh Ryerson , president of the AARP Foundation , the charitable arm of the AARP , which has nearly 40 million members . “ As long as those circles of connection are inclusive of older adults , we ’ ll all benefit . ”
Even before the pandemic , 1 in 4 older adults surveyed said they struggled with social isolation and 1 in 3 with loneliness , says Ms. Ryerson . Now that many seniors have become cut off from personal contact or lost work , isolation is a growing risk . It can bring on loneliness , and prolonged isolation has negative health effects – the equivalent of smoking 15 cigarettes a day , according to research .
“ Vulnerable older people tend to be invisible in communities , or can be . At a time of social distancing , we need to be very wary they don ’ t become more invisible . ”
In California , Gov . Gavin Newsom , the first governor to direct people over 65 to stay home , is asking individuals to call or text five seniors or knock on a door – even while keeping a safe distance . He ’ s urging folks who want to help to call a hotline , 833-544-2374 , to ask about ways to reach out to seniors . The state is also partnering with AARP and a nonprofit phone line that connects people with social services , including meals .
AARP recommends ways to boost your loved one ’ s morale , including letter writing and video calling , care packages with puzzles picturing the family , and virtual meals together .
Roy Bateman , a retiree who lives alone in San Francisco , says he is not the type to ask for help . He was never very social before the virus , though he valued the couple of outings a week to meet friends for lunch or go to a Japanese conversation class . He used to walk a lot – up to 10 hours a week .
Now he ’ s mostly on his computer , watching news and short videos because he can ’ t concentrate , or writing emails , while doing a little remote volunteer work . The former federal grants administrator is anxious about infection , and ventures out only very late at night . He lets his newspaper sit for a day , and without punctuating events in the week , Mr. Bateman is losing track of time – loosely measuring it by how many cans of vegetables are left in his kitchen .
His last grocery shopping trip was to Costco on March 13 and he needs to go soon . But if some unknown good Samaritan called him – as the governor suggests – he probably would say he doesn ’ t need anything , because that 's `` pretty much the case . '' And he ’ d rather pick out his own food . “ I ’ m not interested in getting homemade muffins , ” he says .
Still , he appreciates the weekly call he gets from Openhouse , which serves LGBTQ seniors . “ It ’ s really nice . ”
Pastor D. Darrell Griffin , of Oakdale Covenant Church , an African American church on Chicago ’ s South Side , spends a lot of time calling seniors – phoning about 35 on a recent day . “ They were just so elated to hear my voice , elated that the church was thinking of them , ” he says .
The church also hosts a 6 a.m. telephone prayer line , which has been extended from five to six days a week because of the COVID-19 crisis . It ’ s designed to accommodate the lowest-tech parishioner . The connections are not good and the leader has to remind people to mute their phones . But it works , and more people are joining in .
Glenna Ousley is one of the regulars . She said the pandemic has made her feel cut off , but not isolated . The prayer line has helped . “ It ’ s comforting , ” she said . “ It ’ s uplifting . It ’ s God affirming . It ’ s life affirming. ” She adds : “ We kind of feed off each other . We take comfort in knowing we ’ re not alone . ”
At the Oakdale church , seniors help each other . Richard Dobbey is 71 and head of the ushers , most of them elderly . He ’ s also involved in the church ’ s men ’ s group , and they ’ re checking in on the older seniors .
He is starting to look beyond the present crisis . “ Some of these things you ’ re doing now , these are things we should do all the time . ”
Mr. Dobbey recently helped organize a funeral dinner for a family . Parishioners cooked or picked up spaghetti , potato salad , green beans , three kinds of chicken , and “ four or five ” cakes , he said . They couldn ’ t go to the funeral , so they dropped the food off at the family ’ s house .
The head usher says he isn ’ t in good health and doesn ’ t go out much . But a few days ago , when the weather in Chicago turned warm , he walked to his driveway , sat in his car and rolled down the windows .
“ I just wanted some air . I did that , and listened to music . My wife said , ‘ What are you doing ? ’ It was good for me . I ’ m doing something for myself , ” he says .
Helping themselves , and helping each other – that ’ s true for many seniors during this isolation .
In Los Angeles , Hugo and Elba Corzo used to love going out to see dancers from their native Guatemala , and to dance themselves . Now the couple , in their 60s , dip and sway at their three-bedroom , two-bath home in the now trendy Highland Park neighborhood .
Francine Kiefer/The ███ Handyman Hugo Corzo , who lives in Los Angeles , at the home of a client on April 4 , 2020 . While he is still able to work as a handyman , his wife , Elba , who cleans houses , is sheltering in place . The couple loves to dance , which they are now doing at home because they ca n't go out to dances .
While Mr. Corzo continues to work as a handyman – his car is loaded with hand sanitizer , masks , and wipes – his wife , who cleans houses , is at home , tidying and sorting drawers , video-calling with her extended family , cooking , and working out to Jane Fonda .
She ’ s scared and lonely , but not depressed . He ’ s fine , he says , in an interview in a client ’ s back yard . In the evenings , they watch movies together . “ She wants to be with me , ” he smiles .
Like the Corzos , Bob and Janet Pendoley watch movies after dinner . Retired and in their 70s , they live in San Rafael , just north of San Francisco in Marin County – among the first counties in the nation to get the “ shelter in place ” order , which took effect March 17 .
“ I ’ m very comfortable , but I definitely feel isolated , ” says the former city planner .
Like many baby boomers , the Pendoleys have become “ Baby Zoomers , ” learning to use Zoom , the popular video-conference service . Their first virtual reunion with their two sons and their families was “ humiliating , ” recalls Bob , because he could not get it to work . “ I kept hearing , ‘ OK boomer ! ’ ” from the kids .
Now the Pendoleys are experienced Zoomers , holding a story hour with their granddaughter a couple times a week .
Yes , says Janet , it ’ s “ aggravating ” not to be able to go where you want , or to visit in person . But , she concludes , this is temporary . They do have connections with people . Even as a 10-year-old , she had to find things to do so as not to get bored .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ Bottom line , this makes me much more cognizant and appreciative of the things we do have . ”
Staff writers Francine Kiefer and Sarah Matusek reported from Pasadena and New York . Correspondent Richard Mertens reported from Chicago .