Dr. Anthony Fauci , the government 's top infectious disease expert , warned on Tuesday that “ the consequences could be really serious ” if cities and states reopen the U.S. economy too quickly .
More COVID-19 infections are inevitable as people again start gathering , but how prepared communities are to stamp out those sparks will determine how bad the rebound is , Fauci told the Senate Health , Labor and Pensions Committee .
“ There is no doubt , even under the best of circumstances , when you pull back on mitigation you will see some cases appear , ” Fauci said .
And if there is a rush to reopen without following guidelines , “ my concern is we will start to see little spikes that might turn into outbreaks , ” he said . “ The consequences could be really serious . ”
Fauci was among the health experts testifying Tuesday to the Senate panel . His testimony comes as President Donald Trump is praising states that are reopening after the prolonged lockdown aimed at controlling the virus 's spread .
Sen. Lamar Alexander , R-Tenn , chairman of the committee , said as the hearing opened that “ what our country has done so far in testing is impressive , but not nearly enough . ”
Fauci , a member of the coronavirus task force charged with shaping the response to COVID-19 , which has killed tens of thousands of people in the U.S. , was testifying via video conference after self-quarantining as a White House staffer tested positive for the virus .
Fauci also warned that while the federal government is working to help manufacture a vaccine against the new coronavirus , its development `` might take some time '' to come to market .
As a result , the nation 's efforts to battle the deadline virus and the COVID-19 disease it triggers should be `` focused on the proven public health practices of containment and mitigation . ''
In remarks to The New York Times before the hearing , Fauci warned that moving too quickly to ease restrictions on business and social life will put lives at risk from the coronavirus pandemic and hamper the economic recovery .
`` All roads back to work and back to school run through testing and that what our country has done so far on testing is impressive , but not nearly enough , '' Lamar Alexander , the Republican chairman of the Senate committee , said in an opening statement to Tuesday 's hearing .
Alexander is also self-quarantining in his home state of Tennessee for 14 days after a member of his staff tested positive . Alexander chaired the hearing virtually .
Republican President Donald Trump , who previously made the strength of the economy central to his pitch for his November re-election , has encouraged states to reopen businesses that had been deemed non-essential amid the pandemic .
His administration has largely left it to states to decide whether and how to reopen . State governors are taking varying approaches , with a growing number relaxing tough restrictions enacted to slow the outbreak , even as opinion polls show most Americans are concerned about reopening too soon .
Senate Democrat leader Chuck Schumer , told MSNBC on Monday : `` Dr. Fauci will have the opportunity to testify for the first time with Donald Trump not lurking over his shoulder . ''
Schumer urged Fauci : `` Tell us the truth . That 's your obligation as an administration official and as an American . '' Fauci has taken part in White House task force briefings led by Trump , coordinating Washington 's response to the coronavirus . Others testifying on Tuesday include U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Director Robert Redfield , Assistant Secretary for Health Brett Giroir and Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Stephen Hahn . Each will testify remotely .
Fauci , Redfield and Hahn have been taking self-quarantine steps after coming into contact with someone who tested positive for the virus , which causes the highly contagious respiratory disease COVID-19 .
The shuttering of businesses to fight the spread of the coronavirus has led to mass layoffs of workers , sparking the greatest economic disruption to the United States since the Great Depression nearly a century ago .
But Trump and his task force have faced questions on how U.S. workers will be kept safe , especially after two White House aides tested positive for the virus .
So far , the coronavirus has killed more than 80,000 people in the United States , the highest death toll of any country . Some experts say testing for the virus in most parts of the country continues to fall short of what would be needed to safely reopen .
Senate Democrats , including Patty Murray , her party 's senior member on the Senate health committee , called on Trump to allocate $ 25 billion in funding to ramp up testing .
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi is expected to unveil a sweeping coronavirus-response bill , possibly this week , that would likely provide more money for testing , new state and local government aid and another round of direct payments to help people meet daily living costs .
Congress has already passed trillions of dollars in emergency relief . Senate Republicans , some of whom have expressed doubts about the need for more federal aid , were due to meet with Trump at the White House on Tuesday .
This report contains material from The Associated Press and Reuters .