The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not necessarily represent the views of ███.com .
As the world battles against the coronavirus , humanity is still sharing hope this Easter season . With egg hunts cancelled and large family gatherings postponed , people are finding new ways to celebrate this year , from delivering flowers to their neighbors to surprising children with visits from a social-distancing Easter Bunny . In their efforts , they reveal a piece of the true Easter story – that of God ’ s unconditional love .
Here are five stories of the kindness that others are exemplifying worldwide this Easter , as reported by local and national media :
Bethesda Mission in Harrisburg hosts a sit-down dinner for the city ’ s homeless every Easter . When the shelter realized it couldn ’ t continue its tradition due to the coronavirus and social distancing rules , it decided to adapt . This year , the shelter will offer boxed dinners instead , a local Fox affiliate reported on April 7 .
In addition to the Easter meal , the shelter has been offering daily breakfasts to those in need during the pandemic , thanks to generous donors .
“ Easter should be a joyous time , ” the shelter ’ s executive director , Scott Dunwoody , urged . “ We are celebrating the resurrection of our Lord , Jesus Christ ! ”
2 . Canadian Greenhouse Gifts 10,000 Easter Flowers to Local Residents
In the midst of the current crisis , the owners of Ravensbergen Greenhouses in Ontario made the decision to give away their extra flowers and plants – all 10,000 of them .
`` ( We ) could n't operate as a normal store , ( there was ) no place for our product anymore and we felt we had to get these plants into homes , otherwise they would be thrown into a compost pile , '' general manager William Ravensbergen said , according to CBC on April 7 .
Local residents flocked to the greenhouse ’ s Facebook page to express their gratitude for the unexpected gift .
“ Thank you for your thoughtfulness and for the reminder , ” one woman wrote . “ My husband and I have a family business that ’ s non operational at the moment as well . ”
In her post , she shared a photo of the note that accompanied the flowers .
“ This virus has isolated us socially for a time but we know God is in control of this too , ” the Ravensbergen family wrote . “ We have plants that currently don ’ t have a home and we would like to spread some cheer to you and your family . The message of hope in this time is the message of Good Friday and Easter , which is written down for us in John 3:16-18 . ”
A local company sponsored half of the donation while the Ravensbergen family gave the other half . Volunteers from local churches made the deliveries .
The Exeter City Council recently recognized its residents for supporting their local waste crews by leaving them thank-you notes , clapping during trash collection , and sending encouraging messages on social media .
On April 9 , EastDevonNews.co.uk reported that residents have also left the crews small gifts in the form of Easter eggs .
“ It ’ s really making a difference during this extremely challenging period for them , ” an Exeter City Council spokesperson said of the crews .
Children of the Connecticut National Guard recently received bags of Easter candy , donated by Munson ’ s Chocolates . As the families ’ cars lined up to accept their special packages , little ones waved hello to an Easter Bunny as well as “ military volunteer reserve and other servicemen and women among those deployed throughout the state to help with lifesaving efforts as coronavirus cases spread , ” Middletown Press journalist Cassandra Day reported on April 9 .
Gen. Gerald E. McDonald Jr. , assistant adjutant general of the Connecticut Air National Guard , explained , “ This is a small way for us to demonstrate our appreciation because they are without their military [ family ] members for an extended period of time . ”
The motto at Lucy ’ s Costume Characters in Staten Island right now is “ If you can ’ t visit the Easter Bunny , we ’ ll bring the Easter Bunny to you , ” reported Staten Island Advance on April 9 .
To sign up for a visit , residents just need to call a listed phone number .
“ I wanted to reach as many kids as possible and have them experience time with the Easter Bunny , ” the owner , Christine Diana , stressed . With the help of employees who wanted to pitch in , the Easter Bunny has already visited hundreds of homes .
While keeping a six-foot social distance , the Easter Bunny will chat with children and even pose for a photo .
One 8 year old commented , “ I look forward to seeing the Easter Bunny every year , but because of the virus , we wouldn ’ t be able to see him this year . I ’ m so happy he came to our house and brightened my day. ” His 6-year-old brother chimed in , “ I love seeing the Easter Bunny because I miss my family and he made Easter a little better . He made me happy . ”