WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Senior Democrats and Republicans said on Tuesday they were close to reaching a deal on a $ 2 trillion coronavirus economic stimulus package , raising hopes that the U.S. Congress could soon act to try to limit the economic fallout from the pandemic .
“ At last , I believe , we ’ re on the five-yard line , ” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said , using a football analogy meaning close to scoring , as the chamber opened its session on Tuesday morning .
“ We are very close , ” added McConnell , the top Republican in Congress .
House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi , the top Democrat in Congress , said the two sides had agreed to more oversight provisions of a $ 500 billion fund to help hard-hit businesses , resolving a key sticking point .
“ I think there is a real optimism that we could get something done in the next few hours , ” Pelosi told CNBC .
Steven Mnuchin , President Donald Trump ’ s treasury secretary , told reporters that lawmakers hope to have a draft ready within the next two to three hours . He confirmed the changes to the industry fund . “ There ’ s better oversight , ” Mnuchin said .
Democrats have twice blocked attempts to advance the bill , saying it did not provide enough money for states and hospitals , lacked sufficient aid for unemployed Americans and did not include adequate supervision of a massive fund to aid big businesses .
“ I ’ m very optimistic that there will be a deal announced this morning , ” Democratic Senator Chris Coons said on MSNBC .
Related Coverage McConnell says lawmakers very close to a deal on coronavirus bill
Wall Street jumped at the open on Tuesday as signs that Washington was nearing a deal on the rescue package gave a shot of optimism to markets reeling under the biggest selloff since the global financial crisis more than a decade ago .
Trump ’ s administration has launched a major push for action to try to blunt the economic impact of the pandemic and steep stock market decline , after he spent weeks dismissing the risks .
As talks concluded late on Monday , Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer said the two sides were nearing an agreement and he expected that the legislation would be voted upon on Tuesday .
Republicans , Democrats and top Trump aides had negotiated for days over the package , which would be the third and largest passed to address the crisis if it is backed by both the Republican-majority Senate and Democratic-majority House and signed by the Republican president .
“ Congress must approve the deal , without all of the nonsense , today . The longer it takes , the harder it will be to start up our economy , ” Trump wrote on Twitter on Tuesday .
The coronavirus pandemic has killed more than 550 people in the United States and sickened more than 43,800 , shuttered thousands of businesses , thrown millions out of work and led state governors to order about 100 million people - nearly a third of the nation ’ s population - to stay at home .
Pelosi has introduced her own $ 2.5 trillion counterproposal that also includes $ 4 billion that would allow states to conduct the November presidential and congressional elections by mail .
That legislation would likely be irrelevant if a bipartisan deal is forged in the Senate .
While details of the emerging bipartisan bill were not available , it is expected to provide financial aid for Americans out of work because of the virus and help for struggling industries such as airlines .
Republicans normally hold a slim 53-47 majority in the Senate , meaning they need Democratic support to garner the 60 votes required to advance most legislation .
But the coronavirus has affected their ranks , giving Democrats even more leverage . Republican Senator Rand Paul has tested positive for coronavirus and four other Republicans are also unable to vote because they were exposed to Paul or others with the virus .