“ The mayor of Wuhan sent us a letter expressing their gratitude , ” says Mayor Scarpitti . “ It ’ s a reminder that we live in a pretty big world , but it can get pretty small at times and we can be connected in some pretty powerful ways . ”
When the mayor attended a recent event , he shared a video with guests . In it , dozens of people in the quarantined city lean out of their balconies and shout , “ Wuhan jiayou , ” which is roughly translated , “ Wuhan keep up the fight. ” Markham ’ s mayor recorded a video in which the thousand attendees at the banquet shouted , “ Wuhan jiayou ! ”
In Canada , Markham – sister city to Wuhan , China – is striving to counter negative associations . In February , Markham Mayor Frank Scarpitti launched an Asialicious festival in which more than 100 Asian restaurants in the Toronto area invited customers to tasting events .
From Boston to Johannesburg , customers have been avoiding Chinatowns . There have been news reports of bullying , discrimination , and xenophobia against Asians . But others warn that such isolationist impulses create a sense of alienation in those communities . And some are stepping forward to practice acts of kindness and model support for Chinese businesses .
It ’ s lunchtime at New Golden Gate seafood restaurant in Boston ’ s Chinatown . Amid fears of the new coronavirus , just two of its tables are occupied . In a back corner , two waiters sit as listless as the lobsters inside a nearby tank .
Today they ’ ve had fewer than 20 customers over three hours , says manager May Deng . “ At least a 90 % drop . That ’ s huge . ”
If business doesn ’ t pick up in the next two to three months , she ’ ll have to close . “ How can you survive ? ” says Ms. May , tears rimming her eyes .
From Boston to San Francisco , London to Johannesburg , customers have been avoiding Chinatowns amid unsubstantiated fears that the virus jumped from China via these neighborhoods . There have been news reports , too , of bullying , discrimination , and xenophobia against Asians . But others warn that such isolationist impulses create a sense of alienation in those communities . And some individuals , public officials , and organizations are stepping forward to practice acts of kindness and model support for Chinese businesses .
“ The virus has no nationality . The virus does not practice discrimination . Why should we , being a human being , discriminate against any ethnic group ? ” says Justin Yu , president of the Chinese Consolidated Benevolent Association , a business and community organization in New York City . “ This is a time for everybody to learn we should have sympathy . ”
Deeply ingrained cultural prejudices about Chinese people as supposed carriers of disease date back further than the outbreak of SARS , says Winston Tseng , a research sociologist and lecturer of community health and human development at UC Berkeley ’ s School of Public Health in California . In 1899 , Honolulu forcibly quarantined its Chinatown due to fears of the bubonic plague ; the following year , San Francisco circled its Chinatown with rope for two days .
“ There was an assumption ... of ‘ the yellow peril , ’ ” says Mr. Tseng . “ So Chinese or Japanese back then were [ viewed as ] dirty and carrying a lot of diseases . ”
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff May Deng , the manager of the New Golden Gate restaurant in Boston 's Chinatown , says business is down 90 % because of the coronavirus .
Today , individuals across the world are reaching out to help Chinese and Asian businesses . In Australia , the progressive activist group GetUp ! encouraged its members to dine in Chinese restaurants and also post pictures of meals on social media with the hashtag # IWillEatWithYou . It was a response to news reports such as the closure of Shark Fin House , a three-decades-old restaurant in Melbourne ’ s Chinatown , says the group ’ s media adviser Chandi Bates . The hashtag is now popping up on Twitter and Instagram accounts in other parts of the world .
“ I Will Eat With You is giving people a practical way to take a positive step , show support and solidarity to businesses that need it , all at the same time as eating a delicious meal , ” says Renaire Druery , campaign director for the GetUp ! Human Rights Campaign , via email .
In mid-February , Boston Mayor Martin Walsh started a social media campaign with the hashtag # LoveBostonChinatown . He and other city councilors organized a photo-op dim sum lunch at once-popular eatery China Pearl . In early March , there ’ s not a lot of foot traffic beneath the pagoda-style arch entryway into Chinatown . A nearby outdoor table of tourist trinkets remains untroubled . Atop the lamp posts along Beach Street , American flags flutter in tandem with Chinese flags in the wind .
“ It ’ s important to continue supporting the people that would be perhaps impacted the most right now because they have bills to pay , ” says Andrew , a Massachusetts technology professional who asked that his last name not be used , after coming to Chinatown specifically to support the restaurants .
Another tourist , Fred Brown from Atlanta , was surprised how much busier Boston ’ s Italian North End neighborhood was by comparison , given the news of the outbreak in northern Italy .
“ I would take precautions , but I don ’ t think it ’ s necessarily here in Chinatown in Boston , ” says his daughter , Emily Brown , just prior to entering a restaurant . The Boston resident says she ’ s not fearful about contagion . “ Especially when this place has an acceptable health code . ”
Since the outbreak of COVID-19 , there have also been multiple reports of racist online comments and also some troubling incidents offline .
Dr. Barbara Ferrer , director of public health for Los Angeles County , says the county has dealt with hoaxes related to the virus , including a bogus press release on a fake official letterhead that attempted to target an Asian community .
The letter stated erroneously that five infected patients had supposedly visited five businesses in Asian areas of Carson , including a Chinese restaurant .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff People walk under the gate in Boston 's Chinatown March 2 , 2020 , where fewer people are walking through the neighborhood because of coronavirus fears .
“ None of that was true , ” says Dr. Ferrer . The department responded quickly to stamp out the misinformation , and the case is being investigated by the county sheriff ’ s department and the FBI .
A lot of Asians and Asian Americans live in the county – more than anywhere else in the country – and “ unfortunately and inappropriately ” a “ stigma ” is attaching itself to that community , she says . “ Chinese restaurants are safe , ” she emphasized .
At least two U.S. officials , Rep. Paul Gosar of Arizona and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo – have begun labeling COVID-19 as the “ Wuhan virus. ” This month , the World Health Organization implored people not to attach locations or ethnicity to the disease , including “ Wuhan Virus , ” “ Chinese Virus , ” or “ Asian Virus. ” “ The official name for the disease was deliberately chosen to avoid stigmatization , ” said WHO .
In Canada , the Toronto suburb of Markham – sister city to Wuhan , China – is striving to counter negative associations . When Wuhan Noodle 1950 , a Chinese restaurant across the street from city hall , started losing business due to fears of the virus , officials knew exactly what to do . During the height of the SARS crisis in 2003 , the neighborhood successfully persuaded many people in Toronto to overcome their fear by inaugurating a Taste of Asia festival . In February , Markham Mayor Frank Scarpitti launched an Asialicious festival in which more than 100 Asian restaurants in the Toronto area invited customers to tasting events that included special offers .
When the mayor attended a recent Chinese New Year event , he shared a social media video with guests . In it , dozens of people in the quarantined city lean out of their balconies and , in unison , shout , “ Wuhan jiayou , ” which is roughly translated , “ Wuhan keep up the fight. ” In turn , Markham ’ s mayor recorded a video in which the thousand attendees at the banquet shouted , “ Wuhan jiayou ! ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ The mayor of Wuhan sent us a letter expressing their gratitude for the video and for the fundraising and just generally the support that has been shown to Wuhan , ” says Mayor Scarpitti . “ It ’ s a reminder that we live in a pretty big world , but it can get pretty small at times and we can be connected in some pretty powerful ways . ”
Staff writer Francine Kiefer contributed to this report from Los Angeles .