███ is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power . Sign up to receive our biggest stories as soon as they ’ re published .
Companies owned by West Virginia Gov . Jim Justice and his family received up to $ 24 million from one of the federal government ’ s key coronavirus economic relief programs , according to data made public Monday .
At least six companies from Justice ’ s empire showed up on the list of Paycheck Protection Program aid recipients released by the Small Business Administration .
The Greenbrier Hotel Corporation , Justice ’ s firm that owns and operates the iconic luxury resort , received a loan of between $ 5 million and $ 10 million .
That made it one of only nine companies in West Virginia to receive a loan of that size . Treasury Department officials did not specify the exact amount of the loans , and made public only the identities of companies that received more than $ 150,000 .
In all , Justice companies received between $ 11.2 million and $ 24.4 million in PPP money . The Greenbrier Sporting Club , a Justice company that runs an upscale residential development adjacent to the hotel , received between $ 1 million and $ 2 million .
Blackstone Energy LTD and Bluestone Coke LLC , two coal companies owned by Justice ’ s family , each received $ 2 million to $ 5 million . Ranger Fuel Coal Corp. received $ 1 million to $ 2 million . Justice Energy Company Inc. received $ 150,000 to $ 350,000 .
Justice ’ s companies received PPP money from a mixture of small local banks and regional financial institutions . Previous reporting has shown banks were favoring their existing , regular customers when processing PPP applications .
Justice is ranked by Forbes as a billionaire and West Virginia ’ s richest man . He owns a vast array of businesses , including coal mines , resort hotels and agricultural interests , many of them regulated by the state agencies he now runs .
The Justice business empire has also been sued dozens of times for not paying bills . A ███ investigation found more than $ 128 million in judgments and settlements in such cases .
In the data released Monday , The Greenbrier listed “ 0 ” in a column about the number of jobs that would be retained on account of the loan . Under the PPP , loans don ’ t have to be repaid if businesses follow key parts of the program , mostly using a certain percentage of the money — originally 75 percent , but reduced to 60 percent — for payroll through Dec. 31 .
“ Under the guise of helping mom and pop shops on Main Street , large companies got millions of dollars of government money , represented as loans , but much of it will never be repaid , ” said Aaron Klein , an economist at the Brookings Institution who has been following the PPP .
During a COVID-19 media briefing last week , Justice acknowledged that his businesses likely received PPP aid , though he said he didn ’ t know how much . Like President Donald Trump , Justice said when he took office that he would turn over the management of his companies to those adult children . But , as ███ reported last year , Justice continues to guide his business empire .
Read More An Employee at a Private Sports Club Owned by This Billionaire Governor Tested Positive for Coronavirus After complaints alleging lax reopening practices at Gov . Jim Justice ’ s luxury resort , a kitchen employee has tested positive at the sports club affiliated with the hotel . Officials at the venue are scrambling to be ready for the July 4 weekend .
On Monday , when asked about the newly released data , Justice again said he wasn ’ t sure of the amounts . But the governor added , “ I encouraged all businesses in our state to try to seek anything and everything that they could possibly seek from the federal government in regards to loans . ”
Justice said he believes West Virginia businesses have received nearly $ 2 billion from the PPP program , adding , “ And I welcome every dollar of it . ”
The new federal data shows that businesses owned by two of Justice ’ s recent political rivals also received PPP loans .
The Thrasher Group Inc. , an engineering firm , received $ 5 million to $ 10 million . It is owned by Woody Thrasher , who unsuccessfully challenged Justice in the Republican primary this year . The government data said the loan helped retain 441 jobs .
Democratic gubernatorial nominee Ben Salango ’ s law firm , Preston & Salango , received $ 150,000 to $ 350,000 . On Monday , Salango said the loan — he said the exact amount was $ 183,500 — helped his firm avoid laying off any employees or cutting their salaries or benefits . The federal data said the loan to the firm retained 10 employees .
In addition to The Greenbrier , which listed zero jobs retained , two other Justice companies left the field blank . The data for three of Justice ’ s other companies listed a total of 406 jobs retained .
The Greenbrier and related entities employ about 1,600 people , according to court records . In related court filings , lawyers for The Greenbrier have said the resort had already been pushed to “ near financial insolvency ” because of a devastating flood in 2016 .
The resort suffered additional losses when it was closed for two months because of COVID-19 , and West Virginia ’ s coal industry has been battered by the economic downturn brought on by the pandemic .
Though the program has been criticized for some of the loan recipients , particularly large , publicly traded companies , over all economists praise the PPP for having gotten billions to companies out relatively quickly , amid the sudden economic shock brought on by the pandemic .
Generally , the PPP loans are meant for small businesses , or those with fewer than 500 employees . As of 2018 , there were more than 114,000 such businesses in West Virginia . The data made public with business names listed 2,300 loans to West Virginia businesses . The government also released a list , without company names , of another 15,000 West Virginia businesses that received loans of less than $ 150,000 .
But , there is an exemption to that size limit for businesses in the “ accommodations and food services ” sector .
Through their attorneys , Justice company representatives have not responded to ███ requests for more detailed comments about the PPP loans .