As coronavirus cases dwindle in China , and explode across the rest of the world , Beijing is undertaking a campaign to shift blame for the emergence of the disease to a familiar foe — the United States .
The seemingly coordinated effort to , at minimum , sow doubts about the virus ’ s origin , and , at its most extreme , to directly accuse the U.S. military of creating and spreading the pathogen , has come from Chinese medical leaders , ambassadors and Foreign Ministry spokespersons — not to mention the hundreds of thousands of comments on Chinese social media echoing the conspiracy theories .
The undertaking is part of a broader campaign to deflect blame for the pandemic and China ’ s delay in taking action early in the emergence of the disease , which global experts say began in Wuhan , Hubei Province , potentially as early as November , and has infected more than 160,000 worldwide and killed nearly 6,000 .
The first signs of Chinese skepticism of the virus ’ s origin came from the face of its fight against the epidemic , the celebrated doctor Zhong Nanshan , who was instrumental in the 2003 handling of the SARS crisis and has been featured in numerous televised interviews during the COVID-19 outbreak . At a press conference on Feb. 27 , Zhong stated that the virus “ may not have originated in China . ”
Soon after , numerous Chinese politicians began what appeared to be a coordinated campaign to spread that idea , with several tweeting or uttering nearly identical statements questioning the origin of the virus .
On March 8 , the Chinese ambassador to South Africa tweeted that , “ Although the epidemic first broke out in China , it did not necessarily mean that the virus is originated from China , let alone ‘ made in China . ’ ”
Days later , the clearest salvo in the conspiracy campaign came from China ’ s Foreign Ministry spokesperson , Zhao Lijian , who tweeted : “ CDC was caught on the spot . When did patient zero begin in US ? How many people are infected ? What are the names of the hospitals ? It might be US army who brought the epidemic to Wuhan . Be transparent ! Make public your data ! US owe us an explanation ! ”
U.S. Department of Defense press secretary Alyssa Farah replied to Zhao ’ s tweet by saying , “ As a global crisis , COVID-19 [ should ] be an area of cooperation between nations . Instead , the Communist Party of China has chosen to promulgate false & absurd conspiracy theories about the origin of COVID-19 blaming U.S. service members . # ChinaPropaganda . ”
The State Department then summoned China ’ s ambassador in Washington in protest of the rumor . The assistant secretary of state for the Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs , David Stilwell , expressed “ stern representation ” of the American position to Ambassador Cui Tiankai , who was “ very defensive , ” the State Department later said .
But conspiracy theories about the emergence of the virus aren ’ t limited to Chinese officials .
Last month , U.S. Sen. Tom Cotton insinuated on Fox News that , because Wuhan is home to one of China ’ s leading high-level biosafety laboratories , “ we have to get to the bottom of ” whether the virus emerged from that facility . ( The Arkansas Republican later qualified his comments , saying the bioweapon theory is just one among several possible explanations . )
Meanwhile , three prominent Iranian officials , including former President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , unequivocally asserted that the virus was a manufactured bioweapon . Ahmadinejad wrote a letter to the UN secretary-general , which he posted on Twitter , adding , “ It is clear to the world that the mutated coronavirus was produced in lab . ”
Iran has been one of the hardest-hit countries outside of China by COVID-19 .
China ’ s state media have been equally involved in spreading skepticism of the virus ’ s origin . Official Communist Party publication Xinhua has published several articles questioning COVID-19 ’ s provenance , and the state-run Global Times wrote , “ As the U.S. COVID-19 situation becomes increasingly obscure , the Chinese public shares the suspicion raised by Zhao Lijian that the U.S. might be the source of the virus and that the U.S. is subject [ to ] questioning and is obliged to explain [ its role to ] the world . ”
None of the numerous public figures and media outlets positing the alternative theories has provided evidence for their claims .
President Trump has been less critical of the rumors . On the same day his State Department and Pentagon officials were responding forcefully against the Chinese comments , the president praised Beijing ’ s sharing of information with the U.S. and said the rumors did not comport with his conversations with President Xi Jinping . However , he later told a press conference at the White House , “ They [ the Chinese ] know where it came from . We all know where it came from . ”
China ’ s campaign is targeted at both domestic and foreign audiences , according to Western experts . “ I think both , ” China specialist Bill Bishop told ███ . “ Globally to avoid being blamed for the carnage it is causing in so many countries , domestically to once again [ blame ] an external force as a way to deflect blame . ”
While that may be a hard sell to foreign audiences , especially in America , Bishop , who authors the Sinocism newsletter and is a former ███ executive , believes the rumors could gain much more traction at home in China . “ I think plenty of Chinese will buy it , ” he said .
But he sees this as bigger than simply a public health disaster . “ Might this be the first global recession caused by CCP [ Chinese Communist Party ] mismanagement ? Previous Communist Party–led disasters in China since 1949 never really spread outside the PRC ’ s borders in meaningful ways . Not this time . ”
Several calls and emails to China ’ s Foreign Ministry , and direct messages to spokesperson Zhao , went unreturned .
Tanner Brown is a writer for ███ and Barron ’ s and producer of the Caixin-Sinica Business Brief podcast .