“ As bad and unfortunate and uncertain as this pandemic is , it ’ s renewing a sense of crisis response and urgency that we have been looking for across the whole system , ” says Heidi Marston of the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority .
How California responds now to the needs of homeless people may shape long-term thinking about what has been missing so far in its response to its housing crisis . People who work with the homeless population hope this spirit can be extended after the crisis abates .
Local officials are scrambling to move thousands of homeless people into converted shelters and locate hotel rooms to quarantine the most vulnerable people and those who may already have COVID-19 . It ’ s proving an immense challenge . Still , the crisis is also clearing away barriers that would normally hinder progress : Resources are being freed up , regulations eased , and communities are pitching in .
California has the nation ’ s largest homeless population . Staying in shelters or in cars and parks , they are more likely than residents living in permanent housing to have underlying health problems . That puts them at heightened risk during a pandemic , putting additional strain on medical and city services .
Propelled by the novel coronavirus , California is rushing to shelter thousands of its most vulnerable residents – homeless people who live outdoors and can ’ t “ stay at home ” to protect themselves and others from COVID-19 .
Day One of that unprecedented effort in Los Angeles revealed the daunting struggle that lies ahead across the state . By dinnertime on a recent Friday , a shuttle bus had dropped off only four homeless people at a community center that was being turned into a shelter in the Echo Park neighborhood .
The four clients sat on the curb , waiting to be checked in . But the nurse had yet to arrive . Cots had not been delivered . One of the four , a distraught older woman in gray sweatpants , kept repeating “ food , food. ” When a helper tried to escort her to a restroom across the street to wash up before eating , she would not follow . Eventually , she wandered off and could not be coaxed back .
“ It ’ s tough , ” admits Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti . “ We ’ ve never moved this many people , ever . ”
In a matter of weeks , the city is trying to voluntarily move 6,000 unsheltered people into 42 community and recreation centers that are being converted into shelters . Those who are especially vulnerable , though not showing symptoms of COVID-19 , as well as those who need to be quarantined will be sent to hotels , motels , or care centers .
But the mayor and others deeply involved in this issue are also looking ahead to after the crisis , whenever that comes . And how California responds to the needs of homeless people during a pandemic – particularly the unsheltered – may well shape thinking about what is still needed to address a vexing , complex problem that was a crisis long before the coronavirus hit .
“ It ’ s certainly something we ’ re thinking about now , ” Mayor Garcetti told a press briefing . “ What can we do … to get the homeless , not just out of this crisis , but off the streets ? ”
California is ground zero for America ’ s homelessness crisis . About 150,000 people are homeless here , living in shelters , on sidewalks , in tent encampments , canyon washes , and under bridges in the Golden State , often in highly unsanitary conditions . Many are older and in poor health , which heightens the risk of an explosion in severe virus cases that could further strain medical and city services .
Before the coronavirus hit , Democratic Gov . Gavin Newsom had made homelessness his first priority , devoting his entire State of the State speech to the subject . It polled as the top issue among voters as well . Now COVID-19 has added even more urgency to the issue , underscoring what people who work with the homeless population have known all along – that the challenge is not only in tackling a housing crisis but also a health one .
To slow the growth of the virus , the governor , in a March 18 executive order , directed $ 150 million to localities to help with shelters and hotel and motel rooms . The state also purchased more than 1,300 camper trailers for people who might need to be quarantined .
So far , the effort has been intense but spotty , accompanied by a debate about whether to move people into shared shelters or individual motel rooms .
As of April 1 , Los Angeles had converted 13 community centers to shelters with 565 beds . The shelters are 95 % full . More shelters as well as hotels , motels , and 1,000 quarantine beds are expected to come online in the next few days ; 900 are already available . So far , five cases of COVID-19 have been identified in the homeless community .
Some homeless people are skeptical about the safety of shelters in a pandemic . “ We ’ re safer out here than in a shelter , ” says Ayman Ahmed , who sleeps in a tent at Echo Park Lake , voicing a common sentiment .
Still , the crisis is clearing away barriers that would normally hinder progress . Resources are being freed up , regulations eased , and eviction moratoriums declared in an all-hands-on-deck response that people who work with the homeless population hope can be extended after the pandemic ends . As those who are unsheltered enter temporary accommodation , even gathering data about them could be helpful in the long term , because so little is known about this population .
“ We don ’ t know how many people are disconnected from homeless and health services . We don ’ t know the length of time the unsheltered have been on the streets . Both are predictive factors that show how hard or easy it may be to stably house someone , ” says Gary Painter , an expert on homelessness at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles .
Meanwhile , community support for emergency sheltering – instead of resistance – has been “ pretty fantastic , ” says Heidi Marston , interim executive director of the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority . “ As bad and unfortunate and uncertain as this pandemic is , it ’ s renewing a sense of crisis response and urgency that we have been looking for across the whole system . ”
Bay Area Community Services , based in Oakland , runs programs that provide short-term and permanent housing for homeless residents , with an emphasis on seniors and those with physical or mental health conditions . Outreach workers have fanned out across the San Francisco Bay Area to educate those living on the streets and in vehicles about the coronavirus .
“ What we ’ ve seen is that a lot of people don ’ t know the severity of the crisis , ” says Jamie Almanza , the group ’ s executive director . As workers attempt to shepherd people into shelters and other temporary housing , she adds , “ The question is how to capture this moment and this sense of urgency we ’ re seeing . ”
Damian Dovarganes/AP Homeless people sleep near Los Angeles City Hall on March 27 , 2020 . On Friday , California Gov . Gavin Newsom and Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti said the surge in COVID-19 that health officials warned about will worsen .
Governor Newsom ’ s emergency order has sliced through red tape that can slow down efforts to house those who lack permanent shelter . A pair of hotels in Oakland will provide housing for almost 400 people living in encampments , and in San Francisco , officials have identified some 8,500 vacant rooms in 30 hotels where they will seek to place homeless individuals and families in the days and weeks ahead .
As cities and counties work with state and federal agencies , Ms. Almanza says public officials are releasing emergency funds and relaxing rules on existing spending on homelessness . To locate available housing , officials are relying on local nonprofits . Ms. Almanza hopes the increased cooperation and trust will last beyond the pandemic given that , with or without the threat of COVID-19 , those living on the streets and in shelters face a daily life-or-death struggle .
“ It ’ s becoming crystal clear during this crisis that the nonprofit organizations are the front-line first responders , ” she says . “ And what this could mean for the long term is a better understanding by government funders of what can happen when we all really come together . ”
The 2007-08 housing market crash contributed to a rise in California ’ s homeless population as banks foreclosed on homeowners and large encampments sprouted in cities across the state .
In 2008 , officials in Fresno embarked on a 10-year plan to reduce homelessness , funneling more funding and resources into rapid re-housing , permanent housing , and supportive services . By 2017 , the city ’ s homeless population had fallen almost 60 % , according to the U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness , a much steeper decline than seen elsewhere in California .
The numbers have climbed again over the past few years as Fresno – like the state as a whole – contends with an acute shortage of affordable housing . But city officials assert that , in the same way they learned lessons from the housing crash , the pandemic response can inform policies for aiding the homeless population now and in the future .
“ This is a crisis within a crisis , ” says H. Spees , director of strategic initiatives for Fresno Mayor Lee Brand . “ You have the homelessness crisis being enveloped by the COVID-19 crisis , and with that , you have the opportunity to leverage short-term responses into long-term solutions . ”
Last week , in the span of 72 hours , the city opened up 300 new shelter beds in a vacant hotel and two other buildings and began housing homeless residents . The swift action could serve as a template for the city long after the pandemic passes .
“ We don ’ t have all the answers , ” Mr. Spees says . “ But we are seeing waves of public and private resources come together to speed up the street-to-home transition , and it ’ s demonstrating that moving people off the streets can happen quickly when we have collective effort . ”
In East Palo Alto , south of San Francisco , the Rev . Paul Bains laments that it has taken a pandemic to bring greater urgency to the cause of ending homelessness . At the same time , as the president of WeHOPE , a homeless shelter and supportive services provider , he recognizes that the coronavirus response presents an opportunity .
“ There is so much attention right now on getting people off the streets and out of the elements and giving them a chance to get healthy , ” he says . “ Barriers are being removed because people are realizing what the risks are for someone who doesn ’ t have a place to live . ”
In the past week , Mr. Bains has secured $ 230,000 in funding to expand WeHOPE ’ s fleet of mobile shower trailers and purchase 15,000 face masks to distribute to homeless individuals , outreach workers , and emergency responders . He credits local officials and Governor Newsom for creating momentum to prioritize initiatives on homelessness .
“ What we ’ re seeing is that , with community collaboration and strong leadership , we have the wherewithal to address these systemic issues , ” Mr. Bains says .
But it ’ s not just a spirit of collaboration that will be needed , says Margot Kushel , director of the Center for Vulnerable Populations at the University of California , San Francisco . It also takes a serious , sustained , financial commitment .
“ Homelessness is a catastrophe , ” she says . “ It requires a level of response that is not going to be free and is going to cost money , but is absolutely essential to preserve health . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
That money could be harder to find as the U.S. goes into a recession that will sap state budgets . California has a substantial rainy day fund , but it is likely to be drawn down rapidly in a deep economic downturn .
Dr. Kushel believes that hotels could perhaps play a larger role in a long-term solution to homelessness in California . When the crisis is over , some of the high-end hotels will go back to being hotels , she says . “ There might be others who believe that having full occupancy brings more value to their properties . ”