Joe Biden ’ s sweep of Tuesday ’ s primaries effectively seals the Democratic presidential nomination for the former vice president . As I write , his only opponent , Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders , is “ assessing ” his campaign and is expected to drop out at some point .
For now , though , both candidates are focused on the COVID-19 pandemic , and in live-streamed remarks Tuesday night , expressed their concerns and aspirations for Americans at this challenging time .
Indeed , as James Hohmann of the Washington Post writes , “ many Americans seem far less interested in partisan politics now than the virus ’ s potential impact on their lives and their livelihoods . ”
Still , it ’ s an election year - albeit one filled with uncertainty . Will Senator Sanders work hard to unite his army of disappointed followers behind former Vice President Biden in the effort to defeat President Donald Trump ? Will the national party conventions take place this summer - or at all ? Will the election itself even happen ?
On the first question , Mr. Sanders promised earlier this month to back Mr. Biden if he ’ s the nominee , but the crisis has only highlighted their differences : Mr. Sanders , a democratic socialist , is focused on protecting low-income Americans while the center-left Mr. Biden projects a more holistic approach .
At the same time , Mr. Biden has said he ’ ll adopt plans from both the Sanders and Elizabeth Warren campaigns on education costs and bankruptcy . The Democratic mainstream has most certainly shifted left . Whether that will be enough to energize Sanders supporters remains to be seen .
Which brings the discussion back to President Trump . Even if not inspired by Mr. Biden , Sanders supporters can be motivated by the “ negative partisanship ” of voting against Mr. Trump . The decision Thursday by Hawaii Rep. Tulsi Gabbard to drop out and endorse Mr. Biden ( and not run as an independent , as some feared ) reinforced Democratic unity .
Perhaps the quadrennial conventions won ’ t be needed to ramp up partisan enthusiasm . As things looks now , with all major gatherings off the table for the foreseeable future , a convention-less and rally-free campaign may be in our future . The parties may have to find another way to formally nominate their candidates .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
And what of the election itself ? Senators are pushing for vote-by-mail to keep people safe , as CNBC reports . And as Buzzfeed recently asked , what happens if Mr. Trump tries to cancel or postpone the election because of the coronavirus ? The short answer is , he can ’ t do either . To go to that length would require both an act of Congress and a change to the Constitution , both liberal and conservative experts agree .