The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , an agency that is currently focusing on the core mission reflected in its name , until recently was darkly warning us about a very different kind of `` epidemic '' : an increase in e-cigarette use by teenagers , coupled with an outbreak of vaping-related lung injuries . The first concern did not involve any sort of disease ; the latter did , but unlike COVID-19 , the condition that the CDC dubbed `` e-cigarette , or vaping , product use-associated lung injury '' ( EVALI ) was not a contagious illness caused by a micoorganism . And contrary to the CDC 's misleading nomenclature and dangerously misguided initial advice , the two developments appear to be completely unrelated .
The CDC 's switch from vaping to COVID-19 highlights the moral and practical differences between actual epidemics and metaphorical epidemics of risky behavior , both of which fall under the all-encompassing umbrella of `` public health . '' Even within that framework , which is built around minimizing morbidity and mortality , the CDC 's conflation of EVALI with vaping in general was counterproductive , impeding the harm-reducing shift from conventional cigarettes to nicotine delivery systems that are far less dangerous . By fostering confusion about the relative hazards of smoking and vaping , the CDC damaged its credibility on the eve of a public health crisis in which policy makers and the rest of us are expected to rely on its expertise .
Vaping is something people choose to do . In that respect it resembles many other phenomena that activists , politicians , bureaucrats , and academics have described as epidemics or public health problems , including smoking , overeating , using illegal drugs , riding a motorcycle or bicycle without a helmet , gambling , playing violent video games , and watching violent movies or pornography . COVID-19 , by contrast , is something that happens to people . They do not consciously choose to be infected , although they can do things that increase or decrease that risk .
While there is plenty of room for debate about the legality , propriety , and effectiveness of specific policies aimed at curtailing the spread of COVID-19 , there is a stronger argument for coercive measures when we are confronted by a potentially deadly disease that moves from person to person . That argument is much less compelling when we are talking about self-regarding actions that may lead to disease or injury but do not inherently endanger other people .
The habit of describing nearly anything that large numbers of people do as an epidemic , depending on whether it might compromise their health or whether others view it as pernicious , elides this crucial distinction . If protecting public health is presumed to be a legitimate function of government , an open-ended definition of that term is a prescription for constant political meddling in personal choices through taxes , regulations , and prohibitions as well as state-sponsored propaganda . Likening choices to contagious diseases invites the government to act as if those choices , and the personal tastes and preferences underlying them , morally matter as much as a virus 's evolutionary imperative to survive and reproduce by infecting human hosts .
Once a particular pattern of behavior has been defined as an epidemic , that framing can lead to policies that make no sense even if you accept the collectivist calculus at the heart of the `` public health '' mission . That is what happened with drug prohibition , which is ostensibly aimed at reducing the harm associated with drug use but in practice increases the hazards faced by people who defy it , exposing them not only to the risk of arrest but also to black-market violence , potentially deadly variability in quality and potency , and communicable diseases fostered by a legal environment in which sanitary injection equipment is hard to obtain and risky to possess .
That is also what happened with vaping , which the CDC was predisposed to view as problematic , a prejudice that colored its depiction of EVALI . Even though it was clear early on that vaping-related lung injuries overwhelmingly involved black-market cannabis products , the CDC repeatedly intimated that legal , nicotine-delivering e-cigarettes might kill you . That message endangered public health by implying that people—teenagers as well as adults—would be better off smoking , which is demonstrably not true .
Only belatedly did the CDC recalibrate its guidance to focus on the potential hazards of `` THC-containing e-cigarette , or vaping , products , particularly from informal sources like friends , family , or in-person or online dealers . '' It also foregrounded a warning that `` adults using nicotine-containing e-cigarette , or vaping , products as an alternative to cigarettes should not go back to smoking '' —advice that surely is equally sound for teenagers who are vaping rather than smoking .
We have to hope that the CDC 's COVID-19 recommendations are more scientifically grounded than its initial scaremongering about e-cigarettes . I assume they are . But when public health agencies stray beyond their central mission and allow moral panics to affect their advice , they undermine the public trust that is vital at a time like this .