Plans are now in place in Georgia , Tennessee , South Carolina and Texas to gradually open their state 's economies after indications the coronavirus outbreak is slowing .
Georgia Gov . Brian Kemp says gyms , barbershops , and bowling alleys can reopen Friday . Some restaurants and theaters will also open with social distancing .
South Carolina is set to allow most retail stores to reopen , but only at 20 percent capacity . Merchant Catherine Gouge said , `` We 're just really glad we can have people in the store again . ''
Tennessee is set to reopen most businesses on May 1 .
Industry giants Boeing and Bobcat are also sending people back to work .
And protests continue in other states , as some Americans demand they open up .
In Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , thousands protested the state 's stay-at-home orders . One protester said , `` We 're not subjects , we 're citizens , we 're free people . ''
In Phoenix , protesters faced off with people dressed in scrubs as hundreds say they want their economy to reopen .
But Dr. Anthony Fauci of the Coronavirus Task Force says it could backfire : `` What you do if you jump the gun and go into a situation where you have a big spike , you 're going to set yourself back . ''
So far , 22 million Americans are out of work because of the nationwide shutdowns . Republican and Democratic negotiators have reportedly agreed on the principles for a new financial aid bill , focusing on small businesses .
That comes as the economy is facing serious problems . The lack of demand for oil caused the May contract price of oil to collapse Monday into negative territory for the first time in history .
But President Trump did not seem concerned . `` Much of it has to do with short-sellers . Much of it has to do if you look a month into the future , I think it 's at $ 25 or $ 28 a barrel , '' Trump said .
While some parts of the country are opening up , President Trump is tightening up the borders to prevent more cases from coming into the US . Overnight Trump tweeted that he will be signing an executive order temporarily suspending immigration into the United States because of coronavirus .