California Issues 'Stay At Home ' Order As Coronavirus Infections Rise
Gov . Gavin Newsom has ordered California 's 40 million residents to stay at home indefinitely in the widest-ranging directive so far of any state as it grapples with a growing novel coronavirus epidemic that has killed 150 people nationwide .
Making a major announcement . Tune in now . https : //t.co/Yjet7ojZqf — Gavin Newsom ( @ GavinNewsom ) March 20 , 2020
The order late Thursday called on people to remain in their homes with exceptions only for essential travel . The move follows similar restrictions issued earlier this week for the San Francisco Bay Area .
Speaking at a late evening news conference in Sacramento , Newsom said his directive `` goes into force and effect this evening and we are confident that the people of the state of California will abide by it , will do the right thing . ''
The governor , a Democrat who took office just over a year ago , said Californians would `` step up as they have over the last number of weeks to protect themselves , to protect their families and to protect the broader community in this great state and the world we reside in . ''
No time frame was given for how long the order would remain in place .
After the announcement , California Republican Rep. Kevin McCarthy , the House minority leader , tweeted : `` I hope Governor Newsom consulted with a lot of experts before he decided to shut down 12 % of the nation 's population . ''
I hope Governor Newsom consulted with a lot of experts before he decided to shut down 12 % of the nation 's population . pic.twitter.com/sC7whLz5SN — Kevin McCarthy ( @ GOPLeader ) March 20 , 2020
Despite the seemingly sweeping nature of the governor 's order , there are a number of exemptions , Newsom said .
`` We 're going to keep the grocery stores open , '' he said . `` We 're going to make sure that you 're getting critical medical supplies . You can still take your kids outside , practicing common sense and social distancing . You can still walk your dog . ''
Essential travel includes trips to the grocery , gas stations , farmers markets , food banks , convenience stores , takeout and delivery restaurants , banks and laundromats , according to the Los Angeles Times .
The directive also exempts critical infrastructure such as food and agriculture , health care , transportation , energy and financial services , the newspaper said .
California — which along with Washington and New York is among the states hardest-hit by the burgeoning U.S. outbreak — has some 1,000 confirmed cases of the potentially fatal respiratory infection . Nineteen people in the state have died from COVID-19 .
Earlier , Newsom said that an official projection estimates that up to 56 % of the state 's residents could become infected by the virus — a figure that would equate to more than 22 million people .
However , he said at the news conference : `` The point of the stay-at-home order is to make those numbers moot . ''
According to the latest figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , the total number of cases in the U.S. has surpassed 10,000 . However , officials believe that due to the small number of tests for the virus so far due to a lack of test kits , the number of infections is thought to be significantly higher .
A tally of worldwide coronavirus statistics maintained by Johns Hopkins University , shows the global total of reported cases is nearly 250,000 , with more than 10,000 deaths .