Frustrated Louisville voters banged on the closed doors of the city ’ s lone polling site Tuesday after nearly getting shut out from having their voices heard .
Dozens of residents chanted “ let us in ! ” after they were locked out of the expo center when the doors at the poll site closed at 6 p.m .
The voters waited outside for roughly 25 minutes , when Jefferson County Circuit Judge Annie O ’ Connell stepped in to issue an injunction allowing the poll site to reopen briefly to allow the crowd in , The Louisville Courier-Journal reported .
“ It ’ s our Constitutional right that is being infringed on right now , ” one of the locked-out voters , Don Hardison , told the paper . “ I think it ’ s disingenuous at best that this is the only polling place in Jefferson County . ”
“ It ’ s [ no ] coincidence that this is a large urban population . ”
Kentucky was among three states , including Virginia and New York , that held primaries on Tuesday .
Kentucky ’ s Board of Elections dramatically reduced the number of poll sites — from the typical 3,700 polling locations to just around 200 — in light of massive poll staffing shortages during the coronavirus pandemic . The result left Louisville , a city of 600,000 , with a single location for voters to cast their ballots .
The Kentucky BOE , led by Republican Secretary of state Michael Adams , reached an agreement on the reduction in poll sites as part of a strategy with Democratic Gov . Andy Beshear that also included the approval for mail-in ballots and early voting , which allowed voters to cast in-person ballots beginning Monday .
Despite the shortage in polling locations , voters ’ embrace of mail-in ballots and a tightly contested race among democrats vying for Congress has helped Kentucky reach what appears to be record-setting turnout for a primary election in the state , the Courier-Journal reported .
Adams estimated that total voter turnout would surpass 1 million , including roughly 800,000 from mailed ballots . That figure would shatter the previous record of 922,456 primary voters set in 2008 , when Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton were battling it out in a race for the White House .
This Tuesday , Kentucky Democrats were voting in a close race between state Rep. Charles Booker and challenger Amy McGrath , a former Marine fighter pilot , for the Democratic nomination to run against Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) this November .