Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
President Trump sparked uproar on Twitter Friday with a series of tweets encouraging followers to “ liberate ” amid a growing movement of protests across the country to demand governors reopen “ non-essential businesses ” and send people back to work .
The three states Trump tweeted about -- Virginia , Michigan and Minnesota -- are run by Democratic governors and critics have responded by calling to “ liberate America ” from the president .
The protests -- mainly led by conservative supporters of Trump – are a controversial part of a growing effort to turn around an economy that has been hurt in recent weeks because of the pandemic .
A small group of protesters gathered in Virginia 's Capitol Square in Richmond on Thursday to voice their displeasure with the state ’ s move to extend the state ’ s lockdown orders . Larger protests have occurred in Michigan and an event was scheduled for Friday in Minnesota – and the president has apparently taken notice and took to Twitter to express support .
On Wednesday , hundreds of cars , trucks and SUVs descended on Michigan ’ s state capital for “ Operation Gridlock ” as part of a noisy protest against Democratic Gov . Gretchen Whitmer ’ s social-distancing restrictions that critics say have gone too far .
MICHIGAN PROTESTERS HIT STREETS OVER LOCKDOWN RESTRICTIONS : 'WE 'RE LOST ' WITH LEADERS LIKE GOV . WHITMER
“ Minnesota citizens now is the time to demand Governor Walz and our state legislators end this lock down ! '' the description of a Facebook event titled `` Liberate Minnesota '' scheduled for noon on Friday reads . `` Minnesota 's economy must be reopened for business or destroying the livelihoods of hundreds of thousands of Minnesota citizens and their families may result if we do n't act quickly ! ''
Trump 's tweet caused the word “ liberate ” to quickly become a top trend on social media , with people from both sides of the political spectrum chiming in -- but outspoken liberals were particularly vocal :