Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox . Sign up here .
Mother ’ s Day is going to be very different this year .
The Hollywood Museum is postponing its Mother ’ s Day tribute , which would have exhibited personal photographs from several stars over the years , due to the coronavirus pandemic . However , some beloved TV and movie moms who would have participated in the event still believe there are plenty of unique , fun ways you can say “ thank you ” to the special lady in your life .
Here are some of the ways they suggested to Fox News on how you can make this Sunday an unforgettable holiday , no matter how far away you are :
MARLO THOMAS AND PHIL DONAHUE REFLECT ON THEIR 40-YEAR MARRIAGE : ‘ WE WANTED TO PROTECT IT ’
Joyce Bulifant , who originally signed on to play Mrs. Brady in “ The Brady Bunch ” before having better luck on “ The Mary Tyler Moore Show , '' said her greatest role has been that of mom . “ Seeing the way [ my children ] care for their [ own ] children , for others and for me – that far outweighs any success I have achieved on the screen , ” said the mother of three who shared they all “ fill her heart with love. ” “ For this year , tell your mom all of the advice she has given you and what advice has helped you the most . Also , candy , flowers and a card can be delivered . ”
‘ DALLAS ’ STAR CHARLENE TILTON SAYS FAITH HAS KEPT HER OUT OF ‘ DARK PLACES ’ DURING CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC
Ilene Graff , who famously played Marsha Cameron Owens on “ Mr . Belvedere ” from 1985 until 1990 , revealed she can ’ t imagine what life was like before motherhood came calling . “ I can ’ t even remember what life was like before Nikka came along , ” the actress explained . “ She has brought an entirely new kind of love and commitment that makes life worth living in a whole different way . She has always been interesting and funny . I loved being the chauffer , the dance mom , the musical theater mom , the chorus mom – didn ’ t love being the soccer mom , though . It ’ s something I ’ m so grateful for . Nikka is the best ! ”
“ Motherhood has made me more ‘ real , ’ ” continued the mother of one . “ … It gave me a real depth of love I couldn ’ t even imagine . And it certainly gives you something to do every day ! ” During these unprecedented times , the 71-year-old said it ’ s crucial now more than ever to express your gratitude to mom . “ It ’ s hard living so far away from my daughter and this year the distance feels even farther away than usual , ” she admitted . “ It ’ s the simple things like a phone call , a card call , Zoom – anything… that will make this Mother ’ s Day as pleasant as possible . Keep reaching out to your family and friends on a daily basis . Get in touch with a couple of people each day just to check in and say hi . The contact is important as we year for community and closeness . ”
MEGHAN MARKLE , PRINCE HARRY RELEASE NEW VIDEO OF ARCHIE FOR HIS FIRST BIRTHDAY
Karen Grassle , who starred as Caroline Ingalls on “ Little House on the Prairie , ” suggested now is the perfect time to give your mom the gift of a fun lesson on technology . “ Show her how to use her phone or computer , ” said the actress . “ You can also have a Zoom brunch with the whole family at a prearranged time . No dishes ! If there are a number of members of the family , divide up the week and each one call one day each during the shelter in place , especially if she ’ s in a retirement or nursing home . ”
The mother of one also shared that if teaching isn ’ t your thing , another simple gesture can be just as loving on the matriarch ’ s special day . “ As yourself this : what would make her life smoother now ? A run to the grocery store ? ” For the star , motherhood has been her greatest role . “ It has taught me what unconditional love it , ” she said . “ I ’ m grateful I didn ’ t miss this wonderful to love and grow . Motherhood is a great teacher . ”
VICTORIA ’ S SECRET MODEL LAIS RIBEIRO ON HOMESCHOOLING HER SON : ‘ SOMETIMES I HAVE TO CHEAT AND GO ON GOOGLE '
Dee Wallace , who starred in “ E.T. , ” “ Cujo ” and “ The Howling , ” said this Mother ’ s Day won ’ t be a scary affair for her . “ The specialists all told me I would never conceive , ” said the mother of one . “ I said ‘ God and I have a different plan ! ’ She ’ s 31 and my best friend . She ’ s the best production I have ever starred in ! Gabrielle is the center of everything in my life . She has taught me love , perseverance , understanding , patients and joy . She is my success . ”
The actress said that when it comes to showing mom how thankful you are , it ’ s the thought that counts . “ The great thing about energy is you can connect with it anywhere , ” she explained . “ Send her energetic hugs , love and messages of appreciation . Whether mom is still with you or has made her transition , your energy and connection will reach her energy . Always , always go back to the state of love : for mom , the Earth , your body , your thoughts . If we could be the loving mom to ourselves that the ‘ loving mom ’ represents , we ’ d all be a lot happier . ”
NATALIE WOOD ’ S DAUGHTER CALLS ROBERT WAGNER ‘ COURAGEOUS ’ FOR SPEAKING OUT IN DOC : ‘ I WAS JUST SO PROUD OF HIM ’