As the coronavirus outbreak claims lives , jobs and mental health , Americans are asking big questions about the post-pandemic world . Will we work from home more ? Will it be safe to travel ? To go to theaters and restaurants and gyms ? Should I finally get around to writing my will ?
But just as important are the shifts for businesses and financial markets . The coronavirus trauma will remake everything from national productivity to how much Americans participate in the stock market DJIA , -0.13 % and how much they stash under the mattress . The post-pandemic world will be both jarring and , analysts say , a natural continuation of trends that began in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis .
“ The episode was a reminder that the world is not as safe a place as we thought it was , ” said Karen Dynan , a Harvard economics professor who served as assistant secretary for economic policy and chief economist at the U.S. Treasury Department from 2014 to 2017 .
Dynan and others see an uneasy future landscape : gun-shy U.S. consumers , an even more activist Federal Reserve and businesses that may have to work harder to convince investors of their value .
In past periods of high uncertainty , American households have increased precautionary saving , “ trying to build up financial buffers as a protection against a blow to their income . I think it ’ s quite likely that saving is going to remain high for many people , ” Dynan said in an interview .
The trauma of the coronavirus episode will likely cut more deeply than that , though . It will likely amplify trends that started after the 2008 financial crisis , Dynan thinks . That experience caused Americans to lose trust in institutions and experts , she said .
“ The economy was weak for a long time and the rebound came more slowly for the typical person . It ’ s not surprising , then , that the typical person is asking whether the financial system and the people who regulate it really have their best interest in mind . I ’ m a former regulator , and I can understand why some people feel they ’ ve been ill-served . ”
See : Banks offered homeowners refinances after the crisis , but Americans had stopped trusting banks
Steve Blitz , chief U.S. economist for TS Lombard , thinks it won ’ t just be consumers ramping up their precautionary saving , but firms will adjust behavior as well . And that means relying less on workers .
“ I think we ’ re going to get much more capital investment activity in processes replacing labor because if I ’ m faced with a pandemic and losing workers , I have to shut down my shop , ” Blitz told ███ .
That idea , Blitz acknowledges , is an “ acceleration ” of a trend that ’ s gone on over the past decade or so , also hastened by fallout from the U.S.-China trade war that will redraw supply chains . “ If , instead of relying on a plant in Wuhan , I can put a plant in Idaho with no workers , and the cost is the same , why not ? ” Blitz said .
Read : Housing crisis has to breakdown of the social order , author says
As millions of Americans hunker down , we ’ re likely to see “ a major interruption in innovation and new ideas . Research will slow to a crawl as thousands of companies shut down and then cope with their own revenue decline . That stretch of lost innovation will reduce the nation ’ s future productivity growth , ” wrote Stanford professor Nicholas Bloom , whose field of study is “ uncertainty shocks , ” in a recent blog post .
Dynan agrees : “ People will be more cautious about starting up a small business , ” she said .
See : These small-business owners made their dreams come true — and then the coronavirus hit
Blitz worries that some of the normal dynamism — the ups and the downs — of the free market may be a victim of the desire of the central bank to cushion the economy as much as possible .
“ I worry that we ’ ll live in a world where the capital markets are able to display prices only in a range deemed appropriate by the Fed , ” he said .
Some of that behavior is already emerging , and ruffling feathers . “ What ’ s the Fed ’ s purpose in buying non-investment grade debt ? ” asked long-time investor Howard Marks in early April . “ Does it want to make sure all companies are able to borrow , regardless of their fundamentals ? Does it want to protect bondholders from losses , and even mark-to-market declines ? Who ’ ll do the buying for the government and make sure the purchase prices aren ’ t too high and defaulting issuers are avoided ( or doesn ’ t anyone care ) ? ”
Related : The financial and housing market rescue left many Americans behind
The story of the past two decades , since the dot-com bust and financial crisis , has been “ corporate price-earnings ratios had no link to reality , ” Blitz said . “ It was the Fed creating price-earnings multiples . The Fed ’ s ability to create asset inflation is going to be more limited than in the last recovery because people are going to hold more cash . ”
Investors who are brave enough to venture back into the stock market will go back to basics : evaluating equities on underlying fundamentals . “ We just won ’ t have the froth created by the Fed , ” Blitz said .
And not everyone will be tempted , Dynan said . Past research has shown people become more reluctant to make risky investments after living through a period of volatility or low returns in the financial markets , she noted , while studies have also shown that immigrants who grew up in countries that have experienced banking crises shy away from the banking system .
Now , the “ lower for longer ” environment we entered after the 2008 financial crisis may be better described as “ lower forever. ” With interest rates near zero TMUBMUSD10Y , 0.615 % and households more attuned to the risks of financial markets than before , “ the relative appeal of just sitting on cash ” is higher , Dynan said .
“ Risk was controlled by the Fed , ” Blitz said . “ Now we know there are massive risks over which the Fed has no control . It can mitigate the risk but it can ’ t control it . ”
See:16 million people just got laid off but U.S. stocks had their best week in 45 years