The controversial immigration-reform bill that passed the Senate Judiciary Committee this week is expected to be considered by the Senate in June . Many see measures contained in this bill , such as a strong E-Verify and a “ photo tool , ” as a means to control unlawful immigrants ’ access to unlawful employment . I worry that they go too far .
I think there are better ideas that err on the side of individual privacy while still strengthening our borders . We should scrap a national identification database and pass immigration reform that secures the border , expands existing work-visa programs and prevents noncitizens from access to welfare . These simple ideas will eliminate the perceived need for an invasive worker-verification system and a government citizenship database .
I am against the idea that American citizens should be forced to carry around a National Identification Card as a condition of citizenship . I worry that the Senate is working to consider a series of little-noticed provisions in comprehensive immigration reform that may provide a pathway to a national ID card for all individuals present in the United States — citizens and noncitizens . These draconian ideas would simply give government too much power .
Forcing Americans to carry around an identification card to affirmatively prove citizenship offends our basic concept of freedom . Wanting to avoid a “ papers please ” culture in our country is also why conservatives oppose federal universal gun background checks . We oppose such measures not because we don ’ t believe in common-sense rules or regulation — but because we are wary of giving the federal government this kind of centralized power over our daily lives .
I am against government lists of those who own or have transferred a firearm for the same reason I oppose any pathway to a national ID . I don ’ t think that government should have the awesome power of monitoring the legal activities of American citizens . That is not a proper role of the federal government — or any level of government , for that matter .
I am opposed to immigration reform that contains the photo tool that is contained in the Interior Enforcement and Employment Verification System title of the bill . In the name of preventing the “ unlawful employment of aliens , ” the Senate legislation has a provision that “ enables employers to match the photo on a covered identify document provided to the employer to a photo maintained by the U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services database. ” This , too , is troubling .
This sounds like a national picture database of all citizens , where the states house the picture and the Department of Homeland Security is the clearinghouse for worker verification . A national database of citizens raises the question : What activities will require someone to present their papers ? A national ID allows more power to gravitate to Washington and a greater likelihood that power will be abused .
I will fight to remove the photo tool from this legislation because I think it will become a national ID . We already know the federal government is rife with false positives on the no-fly list and the National Instant Check system for gun buyers . Why would we be foolish enough to think that a massive database of all citizens would not have the same problems on a grander scale ?
We have a Second Amendment that must be protected . We also have a Fourth Amendment that must be protected . Citizenship means that the government is supposed to protect our rights , not take them away . We must have stronger borders , but there ’ s no reason we can ’ t have better security while respecting constitutional limits and liberties .
In the past week , we have witnessed examples of the Obama administration spying on the media and Internal Revenue Service discrimination against Tea Party free speech . People around the world always have dreamed of emigrating to America , the Land of the Free . It is our job to make sure our country stays that way .
Sen. Rand Paul , Kentucky Republican , is a member of the Senate Foreign Relations and Homeland Security committees .