President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE on Monday doubled down on his controversial policy of separating children from parents when families illegally cross the border , while also calling on Congress to change laws to end it .
In a series of tweets , Trump appeared to justify the strategy by claiming criminals are using children in a Trojan horse–style operation to cross the U.S. border .
“ Children are being used by some of the worst criminals on earth as a means to enter our country , ” he wrote . “ Has anyone been looking at the Crime taking place south of the border . It is historic , with some countries the most dangerous places in the world . Not going to happen in the U.S . ”
Children are being used by some of the worst criminals on earth as a means to enter our country . Has anyone been looking at the Crime taking place south of the border . It is historic , with some countries the most dangerous places in the world . Not going to happen in the U.S. — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 18 , 2018
Trump also warned that the U.S. must avoid the migration problems affecting Europe and blasted the policies and government of Germany , a close ally .
The president falsely claimed that crime in Germany is “ is way up ” and said migrants “ have so strongly and violently changed their culture , ” a phenomenon he said is generating backlash overseas .
The people of Germany are turning against their leadership as migration is rocking the already tenuous Berlin coalition . Crime in Germany is way up . Big mistake made all over Europe in allowing millions of people in who have so strongly and violently changed their culture ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 18 , 2018
“ We don ’ t want what is happening with immigration in Europe to happen with us ! ” he wrote .
Trump ’ s policies , however , are facing growing criticism from Republicans and Democrats alike , who say it is inhumane to separate children from their families at border crossings .
The president again blamed Democrats in Congress for the separations , even though it was a Trump administration directive — and not a law — that instituted the policy .
“ It is the Democrats fault for being weak and ineffective with Boarder Security and Crime . Tell them to start thinking about the people devastated by Crime coming from illegal immigration . Change the laws ! ” he wrote .
It is the Democrats fault for being weak and ineffective with Boarder Security and Crime . Tell them to start thinking about the people devastated by Crime coming from illegal immigration . Change the laws ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 18 , 2018
Trump is set to meet on Tuesday with House Republicans , who are grappling with a pair of immigration measures , one of which would address the family separation issue .
He is expected to face criticism from some GOP lawmakers over the policy , which has generated negative headlines for Trump and his party just months before the November midterm elections .