A federal judge ruled Monday that President Trump ’ s phaseout of the Obama-era DACA program is legal , adding heft to the administration ’ s defense but doing little to solve the ongoing court quagmire .
The ruling does not overturn two other federal courts , who had previously blocked the phaseout , which was supposed to take effect Monday . But it does offer a needed boost as the Justice Department appeals those other two rulings .
Judge Roger W. Titus , a Bush appointee to the bench in Maryland , said the judges in California and New York who blocked the phaseout attempted to substitute their own judgments for that of the Homeland Security Department , crossing constitutional lines in order to strike at Mr. Trump ’ s policies .
Judge Titus went even further , praising the Trump administration for the way it handled the situation with a six-month phaseout .
“ This decision took control of a pell-mell situation and provided Congress — the branch of government charged with determining immigration policy — an opportunity to remedy it . Given the reasonable belief that DACA was unlawful , the decision to wind down DACA in an orderly manner was rational , ” the judge wrote .
DACA is the 2012 program Mr. Obama created , using executive authority , to protect hundreds of thousands of “ Dreamers ” from deportation and to give them a foothold in society . Some 683,000 people were being protected as of Jan. 31 .
But the program was always legally questionable , and Mr. Trump last September , facing threats of lawsuits from Texas and other states , announced his phaseout , with a final deadline of March 5 .
Immigrant-rights groups across the country objected , and many of them sued , with at least five cases in California , two in New York , one in Washington , D.C. , and one in Maryland .
The judge in the California case ruled in January , imposing a nationwide halt on the phaseout in an expansive opinion blasting the administration for its handling . A judge in the New York cases last month issued a more carefully crafted ruling but reached the same conclusion that the DACA program itself is legal as Mr. Obama wrote it , and that the Trump administration didn ’ t give a good enough justification for its phaseout , making it arbitrary .
Judge Titus , though , said the administration was facing a credible legal threat from Texas , and the attorney general had doubts about mounting a defense , so the Homeland Security Department ’ s decision was not arbitrary .
He also took on those who said Mr. Trump ’ s past comments about illegal immigrants soured the case .
“ As disheartening or inappropriate as the president ’ s occasionally disparaging remarks may be , they are not relevant to the larger issues governing the DACA rescission . The DACA Rescission Memo is clear as to its purpose and reasoning , and its decision is rationally supported by the administrative record , ” the judge wrote .
Justice Department spokesman Devin O ’ Malley said the ruling was “ good news , ” but said it underscored the judicial overreach of the New York and California courts , who issued national injunctions , making Judge Titus ’ s ruling nearly irrelevant in effect .
Judge Titus did grant DACA beneficiaries one victory , ruling that none of their information they turned over to apply for the program can be used by immigration agents to deport them .
If the administration wants to use information , it must petition the court in each case , the judge said .
Judge Titus said he didn ’ t like the result of his own ruling , but he said judges need to butt out of politics and stick to the law .
“ This court does not like the outcome of this case , but is constrained by its constitutionally limited role to the result that it has reached , ” he wrote . “ Hopefully , the Congress and the president will finally get their job done . ”