How a George Soros conspiracy theory spread from online to cable news ███
Three weeks ago , a caravan of Hondurans began walking nearly 2,000 miles to the United States . Their ranks grew as they inched north and , along with them , falsehoods grew , too . But one stands out : a conspiracy theory that liberal billionaire George Soros , a Jewish immigrant , is paying the migrants to make the journey – or even orchestrating it .
Members of Congress and the president ’ s son both repeated it . Conservative celebrities , too .
It also may have resonated in darker places . Cesar Sayoc , the man charged with mailing pipe bombs to Soros and other prominent critics of President Donald Trump , dwelled at length online about conspiracy theories involving the Hungarian-American philanthropist . Robert Bowers , charged with killing 11 people worshiping in a Pittsburgh synagogue on Saturday , used his social media accounts to post extensively about the caravan , including circulating an image of refugees in Guatemala purportedly climbing into a truck with a Star of David on the side .
But it began with a handful of posts in the caravan ’ s early days .
One of the first was from a North Carolina writer who goes by the screen name “ lorettatheprole. ” Loretta Malakie has more than 6,000 followers on Twitter , to whom she directs frequent posts about “ white genocide , ” Jews and the “ invading force ” approaching the border .
On Oct. 14 , Malakie posted a link to an article about the caravan , with a single word of commentary : “ Soros . ”
That same day , identical posts appeared over the course of 20 minutes in six pro-Trump Facebook groups . Combined , those six groups had 165,000 members . A user who gave the name Philip Balzano , a Trump supporter from Chicago , wrote to the Trump Train group : “ Here Comes ANOTHER Group of Paid for New Demoncratic Voters Just in Time for the Primaries ... The Financier aka ‘ Win at All Costs ’ ‘ Never Let a Good Crisis Go to Waste ’ the Evil George Soros and His 140+ Orgs , Should Be Classified as Terrorist and Terrorist Orgs . ”
Malakie declined to comment , though on Twitter she panned the ███ reporter who called her as “ evil. ” Balzano did not respond to an interview request sent through Facebook .
The Soros theory was not new – it had made the rounds during previous caravans in the spring and again in August . In fact , one Facebook user posting in October provided as evidence a video of Glenn Beck discussing the spring caravan ’ s alleged connections to Soros .
This time , though , the theory snowballed , gaining political purchase as the caravan became a flashpoint in the final weeks of a contentious midterm campaign .
“ It ’ s really significant how these memes can go from feverswamp-ish places to be amplified by lawmakers , even the president , '' said David Carroll , associate professor at The New School 's Parsons School of Design in New York . “ From there , the impact on world events can ’ t be underestimated . ”
Lies , of course , are not new either . But social media can turn a breeze into a hurricane . It carried this falsehood to millions with a few taps on a screen . It also left a distinct trail that makes it possible to follow how lies spread and who told them , a map of their trajectory from the darker corners of the internet to the political mainstream .
███ followed that path by examining tens of thousands of social media posts on three major mainstream social media sites : Twitter , Facebook and Reddit .
Over the next three days , a few louder social media voices weighed in . By Oct. 16 – four days after the caravan departed – the combined following of accounts mentioning both Soros and the caravan had reached 2 million , still a pebble in the flood tide of social media . ( The total includes some duplicates because people follow more than one account . )
On Twitter , someone with the username “ LibertyBell1000 ” warned about 42,000 followers that Soros had “ manufactured yet another immigrant caravan ‘ crisis. ’ ” Another , using the name “ WhoWolfe , ” asked “ Anybody else think Soros and the Dirty Dems are behind this ? ”
More posts spread across Facebook . Trump supporter Randy Penrod posted in a group called “ The Deplorable 's , ” with about 186,000 members , “ Our stable leader just called out the Soros conspired invasion of new Democrat voters in a tweet just moments ago . ”
It took just one more day for the theory to reach critical mass , breaking through into widespread public consciousness .
The evening of Oct. 17 , a Republican member of Congress posted a video on Twitter of what he said was people in Honduras handing out small sums of money to migrants .
“ Soros ? US-backed NGOs ? Time to investigate the source ! ” he wrote .
Rep. Matt Gaetz would later concede that he was mistaken about where the video was shot ( it was Guatemala ) . But by then his message had metastasized , spreading far beyond the 153,000 people who follow the north Florida congressman ’ s tweets .
Conservative commentator Ann Coulter retweeted it to her 2 million followers . So did Sarah Carter , a journalist who ’ s a frequent guest on Fox News .
Jack Posobiec – a correspondent for conservative cable news television channel One America News Network – got more specific , implying Soros was renting RVs for the migrants .
Posobiec was among the early proponents of “ Pizzagate , ” a social-media conspiracy that falsely claimed then-candidate Hillary Clinton and other Democrats were running a pedophile sex trafficking ring from the basement of a Washington , D.C. , pizzeria . It drew a man with a gun to Comet Pizza , where he intended to rescue the children .
One was the president ’ s son , Donald Trump Jr. , who retweeted Gaetz ’ s post to his 3.1 million followers . The younger Trump has been actively campaigning for Republicans on television and the campaign trail in the lead up to the midterm elections . A spokesman for Donald Trump Jr. declined to comment .
On Twitter alone , at least 43,000 accounts with a combined 127 million followers carried some message linking Soros to the caravan over those two days ; most fanning the conspiracy , a few seeking to knock it down .
On Reddit , where users share and comment on news and memes , the lie exploded . Five posts in The_Donald subreddit tied Soros to the caravan . Within a week , there would be 10 times more . The_Donald has 675,000 members .
Ten days after the caravan began in Honduras , police started intercepting what appeared to be pipe bombs – PVC tubes packed with what the FBI later called “ energetic material , ” wrapped with tape and attached to a clock – that had been sent to Soros and other prominent critics of President Trump .
By the time police found the first of those bombs in Soros ’ mailbox in Westchester County , New York , the lie about his involvement with the caravan had been posted by 20,000 more users on Twitter – to a combined audience of 117 million – and more weighed in on Facebook , Reddit and other sites .
Another member of Congress , Rep. Louie Gohmert , R-Texas , said in a Fox News interview that he could n't “ help but think that Democrats , perhaps Soros and others , may be funding this thinking it will help them . ”
By then , the lie also was at an inflection point . Online , the biggest voices were those debunking it . The day before the bomb was found at Soros ’ house , the most prominent people mentioning the theory on Twitter had no longer been conservative commentators but instead New York Times columnist Paul Krugman and Chelsea Clinton .
But researchers say repetition is repetition . Even exposing a lie plays a central role in mutating fantasy into fact , or at least a matter of debate . Here , news coverage – including this story – play a significant role .
“ The choices reporters and editors make about what to cover and how to cover it play a key part in regulating the amount of oxygen supplied to the falsehoods , antagonisms , and manipulations that threaten to overrun the contemporary media ecosystem , ” Syracuse University professor Whitney Phillips wrote in a paper this year on disinformation .
Attention alone can lend credence to the very information critics mean to undermine .
By Oct. 22 , posts debunking the theory also emerged . One from Arizona Christian conservative Joshua Feuerstein was among Facebook ’ s most-viewed videos pushing the Soros-caravan connection . Feuerstein is best known for characterizing Starbucks ’ shift to generic red holiday cups as a war on Christmas .
His video purported to show Honduran migrants on a truck . Accompanying text popularized a direct connection not just to Soros , but to the midterms : “ They are not coming on foot as CNN # FakeNews says ! George Soros is paying for them to show up at the border by mid term elections ! ”
Exactly how far the lie linking Soros to the migrant caravan has traveled is impossible to measure in full . Messages on 4chan and other sites where conspiracies germinate disappear quickly . Gab – a social media site that attracted right-wing figures banished from more mainstream platforms – itself was on the verge of disappearing this week . Even on mainstream sites like Facebook and Instagram , many messages are private .
Still , by the morning of Oct. 27 , it had spread to hundreds of millions of users on mainstream social media , and found its way to many more on cable news .
That morning , federal prosecutors allege that trucker Robert Bowers stormed into the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh and shot 11 worshipers to death . The authorities have offered few details about what might have motivated him to attack , but online Bowers left his own trail of grievance and conspiracy .
Using the handle OneDingo on Twitter , Bowers shared anti-Jewish content and criticized President Trump . Since January , he was a regular on Gab , too , where his bio read : “ Jews are the children of Satan. ” The image on his Gab account referred to a white supremacist meme . His last message read : “ Screw your optics , I 'm going in . ”
In the aftermath , as the news media rushed to cover the killings and to explain the internet conspiracies that might have precipitated such a massacre – the lie spread anew .