When Bill O ’ Reilly got his start on Fox News , he was charmingly irreverent , a moderating factor on a right-leaning news network ; and I liked him for it . I was 14 years old , and would go on , in my teen years , to read one of O ’ Reilly ’ s early books , along with Christopher Hitchens ’ `` Letters to a Young Contrarian , '' and eventually Dinesh D ’ Souza ’ s `` Letters to a Young Conservative '' and Friedrich Nietzsche ’ s `` Beyond Good and Evil . '' I was hashing out a political identity into my 20s , and , as this awkward reading list suggests , it was complicated . It ’ s perhaps a shame that today ’ s O ’ Reilly is not complicated .
In the segment where O ’ Reilly calls ███ a “ hate site , ” and his program ambushes a handful of San Francisco civil servants , I was struck more by the “ talking points memo ” working in conjunction with O ’ Reilly ’ s monologue than with the breach of decorum or even the comparison of ███ to white-supremacist outlet Stormfront . The real danger of that O ’ Reilly segment isn ’ t so much the ambush tactics or the sensationalism as the sloppy thinking O ’ Reilly performs for his viewers , which gives the appearance of justifying that sensationalism .
For this reason I ’ ve decided to work through that O ’ Reilly segment , which ███ ’ s Scott Eric Kaufman has reported on , paying close attention to those moments when O ’ Reilly uses both rhetorical tricks and logical fallacies to convey a provocatively hateful message about undocumented immigrants , a message that , ironically , comes a lot closer to hate speech than the simple act of advocating on either a conservative or progressive media outlet like National Review Online or ███ .
O ’ Reilly kicks off the segment by addressing the “ evil ” of the coldblooded murder of Kate Steinle before airing a clip of an interview with Steinle ’ s parents , who speak of the “ battle of evil and goodness. ” I mentioned Nietzsche ’ s `` Beyond Good and Evil '' above because it ’ s a powerful critique of Manichaeism , the belief in a dualistic moral struggle of good versus evil . Manichaeism makes it easy to oversimplify conflicts and tragedies by defining actors as pure good and pure evil . This is exactly what O ’ Reilly will go on to do in his “ talking points. ” He writes , “ Every sane person knows that gunning down a 32-year old woman in the street is an act of pure evil. ” The memo goes on : “ There are many Americans who will not act to prevent that kind of evil from taking place . ”
Here we can see two important rhetorical moves designed to bring audiences to the conclusion that , despite the culpability of the evil man who murdered Steinle , we are to identify that murderous evil both with undocumented immigrants and with people who don ’ t agree with O ’ Reilly ’ s hard-line immigration views . O ’ Reilly first sets up the scenario as though it ’ s as simple as good people versus evil people ( as opposed to , for example , a more complicated policy nexus of immigration and gun control issues ) . Then he swiftly aligns “ the Americans who will not move to act to prevent that kind of evil from taking place ” with the evil itself . In these steps O ’ Reilly effectively conflates the evil of coldblooded murder with the evil of some Americans who will fail to act on some measure that O ’ Reilly will assign as a cure for that evil .
What , then , is that measure ? O ’ Reilly begins by blaming the media , which “ does not oppose sanctuary cities , ” “ sanctuary city ” being a term with no legal meaning that refers generally to cities that don ’ t spend city funds and resources to enforce certain federal immigration policies . O ’ Reilly claims that the “ sanctuary city policy ” ( it ’ s not a coherent policy at all ) “ is supported by people who believe that poor illegal immigrants should not be held accountable for violating immigration law , ” “ folks cloaking themselves in compassion , thinking they ’ re being humane to the poor who want better lives. ” Crucially , however , O ’ Reilly goes on to re-label these people “ hundreds of thousands of bad people . ”
Here we can see , again , O ’ Reilly invoking the Manichaean framework with which he started , only this time , the “ evil ” one isn ’ t simply the individual who murdered Kate Steinle , but the “ hundreds of thousands ” of undocumented immigrants , whom O ’ Reilly lumps together as “ bad people. ” This is the point of O ’ Reilly ’ s slippage from the evil of murder to the evil of being an undocumented immigrant , to use a negative example of one to stand in for the whole . O ’ Reilly completes the slippage by claiming that “ it is insulting when pro-sanctuary city people equate poor immigrants with violent criminals , ” going on to further conflate all undocumented immigrants with violent criminals with one phrase : he calls them “ brutal undocumented people . ”
From this point , O ’ Reilly moves onto San Francisco city supervisors , holding them up as an example of the next link in a tenuously constructed chain of evil that begins with a murderer , who , by his undocumented status , becomes a stand-in for all undocumented immigrants , and ends with the civil servants of San Francisco and the broader left , presumably the kind of people who “ will not move to act to prevent that kind of evil from taking place. ” O ’ Reilly states unequivocally that Kate Steinle “ is dead because of policies that endanger the public , ” conflating once again the act of murder with the refusal to support O ’ Reilly ’ s specific vision of border security . O ’ Reilly ’ s closing judgment is that “ it ’ s a damn shame that all Americans can not support a policy that would protect people like Kate Steinle … if you saw the heartbreaking interview with her parents last night , how could you not support tough measures against criminal illegal aliens ? ”
In all of this we should note three tactics of distortion . First , by framing the entire issue of Steinle ’ s murder as a Manichaean problem of good versus evil , O ’ Reilly is able to pretend for his viewers that there can only be one problem ( lax immigration law ) , which is itself a manifestation of evil . Both gun control and wider issues of how to distribute limited city funds and resources ( O ’ Reilly isn ’ t exactly a fan of higher taxes ) are as significant factors in this tragedy as immigration law .
Second , O ’ Reilly ’ s entire argument relies on the fallacy of composition , which presumes that if something is true of a part of a whole , it must then be true of the whole . This is why , because an undocumented immigrant is alleged to have committed a murder , O ’ Reilly goes on to call all undocumented immigrants things like “ bad people , ” “ brutal undocumented people , ” “ violent criminals ” and “ criminal illegal aliens . ”
Third , O ’ Reilly avails himself of the fallacy of false equivalence in two ways . He equates the culpability for murder with the politically mainstream disagreement between San Francisco city officials and O ’ Reilly on immigration policy ; and he equates sites like ███ and MediaMatters with the self-proclaimed white-supremacist outlet Stormfront , confusing yet again mainstream , partisan media outlets with neo-Nazis . A simple test to reveal the fallaciousness of the comparison would be to ask yourself how long a site like ███ or MediaMatters would exist , drawing articles from prominent policymakers , politicians , artists , academics and journalists , if any of these sites regularly proclaimed white supremacy as its reason for being .
Though it ’ s a little laborious to go through talking points like O ’ Reilly ’ s in this manner , it ’ s important to reverse-engineer them from time to time to expose what lies at the heart of the machine . In this case we find that the source of hatred isn ’ t a side of a mainstream political debate about immigration policy , but a desire to paint all undocumented immigrants as murderous villains , “ bad people , ” “ brutal undocumented people ” on the side of evil who threaten to put out the white light of America .