The left criticizes the decision , arguing that it will deprive colleges of vital funding and harm the US economy .
“ According to the 2019 Open Doors Report on International Education , there are more than 1 million international students in the United States . These students typically pay full tuition , which subsidizes the costs of enrolling more U.S. students . For public colleges and universities , the revenue generated from international students also helps moderate the effects of federal and state education budget cuts…
“ It isn ’ t only universities that would feel the gaps in their budgets : In 2018 , international students contributed $ 45 billion to the U.S. economy through consumption and federal , state and local taxes . Small college towns and cities reliant on revenue from the student population would be hit the hardest if international students — who are more likely to continue living in the areas where their schools are based while learning remotely — are forced to leave . ”
“ Ken Cuccinelli , the acting deputy secretary of Homeland Security , told CNN that the policy change was meant to ‘ encourage schools to reopen ’ — part of the Trump administration ’ s goal of forcing American life to resume even as Covid-19 continues to spread and the death toll mounts . Foreign students who have made significant sacrifices and commitments , both financial and personal , to study in the US are thus being used as political leverage . ”
“ To be clear , the students now at risk of deportation are already studying and living here ; they have received visas and passed all security and other protocols . We would kick out these students with no benefit to the United States while striking an immediate blow to our economy and lasting damage to the reputation of American higher education . No family and no country will forget if their students are summarily banished during a pandemic ; it is the opposite of hospitality and decency , and it will stain us for years to come . ”
“ Let 's look around us . Who are our doctors ? Who are our medical researchers ? Who are the country 's top scientists ? Ask yourself -- who works to make America stronger than she already is ? The fact is , immigration is a mutually beneficial and beautiful relationship… President Donald Trump may think that with this new guidance he is just hurting foreigners and immigrants , but as with most Trump-related policies , ultimately it is America who he is hurting the most . ”