The administration announced a new policy Friday to detain nearly all illegal immigrant families nabbed at the border , offering the latest bold ante in an ongoing battle over President Trump ’ s attempt to stop a new surge of migration .
The policy will be controversial not only with congressional Democrats and immigrant-rights activists , but also with a federal judge who had ordered that children could be held no longer than 20 days in immigration detention .
Government lawyers , though , said yet another judge ’ s ruling earlier this week making most family separations illegal supersedes the 20-day rule and other restrictions , and gives the government the ability to hold families together until their immigration cases are completed .
“ The government will not separate families but detain families together during the pendency of immigration proceedings when they are apprehended at or between ports of entry , ” the Justice Department said in a filing with Judge Dolly M. Gee .
The arguments come as lower courts are increasingly asserting control of the immigration system — leaving the executive branch struggling to carry out its own policies amid potentially competing rulings and judges working at cross purposes .
In Friday ’ s filing the Justice Department said it was getting caught between a 2015 ruling in the so-called Flores settlement , which governs the treatment of illegal immigrant children caught at the border , and this week ’ s ruling in a case known as Ms. L v. ICE .
The Flores settlement says children must be released from immigration detention within 20 days , and turned over either to a Health Department dorm or to relatives or sponsors living in the U.S .
For nearly 20 years that ruling only applied to children who arrived at the border unaccompanied by parents . Judge Gee in 2015 updated the ruling to apply to all illegal immigrant children , saying they need to be released — and so should their parents .
That created what critics call a “ catch-and-release ” policy , which they blamed for the new surge in families streaming to the border .
On Wednesday another federal judge ruled in the Ms. L case that children should be kept with their parents .
The Trump administration says the only way that can happen — without a full-scale release of all illegal immigrant families — is to detain the families together .
“ The Ms. L ruling addresses reunification of children with their parents , and specifically requires reunification “ when the parent is returned to immigration custody ” after a release from criminal custody , ” the government said . “ But this aspect of the Ms. L ruling would make little sense if that reunification would necessitate an immediate release of the parents from immigration custody under the Flores Agreement . ”
The Trump administration said after this week ’ s ruling , the only way children can generally be released is if a parent agrees to a separation .
The Justice Department said in a statement it believes its hands are tied .
“ We are beholden to a broken immigration system that Congress has refused to fix and that courts have exacerbated , ” the department said in a statement . “ While Congress has recessed for the 4th of July holiday , we continue to urge them to act decisively in order to solve the crisis at our border and end ‘ catch and release . ’ ”