Donald Trump 's `` big , beautiful '' border wall might turn out to be like so many other things he fixates on—a figment of his imagination . Although the White House had wanted Congress to fold an initial outlay for Trump ’ s wall into a government funding bill , the GOP 's governance meltdown has necessitated Democratic help in keeping the government funded by the April 28 deadline . Democrats , in turn , have threatened to withhold their votes if any funding for the wall is included in that bill .
“ Senate Democrats are prepared to fight this all the way , ” Sen. Chuck Schumer told attendees of a National Council of La Raza event Tuesday .
In order to avoid yet another GOP # fail in the form of a government shutdown , Republican leadership is weighing the idea of separating money for the wall from the government funding bill . Politico writes :
While no decision has been made by GOP leadership , Republican lawmakers may decide to decouple the two to avoid a confrontation with Democrats . If they do , the chances of getting Trump ’ s wall funding passed this spring become slim . “ It remains to be seen , ” said Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn ( R-Texas ) in an interview . “ What I would like to see is a plan for how the money would be spent and a good faith discussion about what border security is really composed of . We haven ’ t had that. ” Asked about the prospects for a lapse in government funding , Cornyn was definitive : “ There ’ s not going to be a shutdown . ”
Trump had aimed to get about $ 1.4 billion for the wall out of the initial funding bill with more to follow in a subsequent funding measure . But it turns out building the $ 20- to $ 50-billion wall is equally as unpopular as the man who insists on building it , with only 35 percent of American taxpayers supporting the wall , especially if taxpayers are footing the bill . That leaves very little incentive for Congressional Republicans to supply funding for an unpopular project being pushed by a pr * sident with abysmal approval ratings .
This little funding snafu is going to absolutely tweak Trump , who 's been obsessed with building the wall since the day he announced his candidacy . Trump put his weight behind health care mostly because he was desperate to get a win—any win—under his belt , but the wall is his baby . If Congress stiffs him on it , there 'll be hell to pay on Capitol Hill .