Mark Zuckerberg and other tech leaders in Silicon Valley are banding together to push for comprehensive immigration reform , the Facebook co-founder announced this week . But Zuckerberg has dabbled in politically charged matters in the past .
In September 2011 , the social media company created a political action committee geared for last year 's election cycle , which could help Facebook gain legislative ground on privacy and patents .
According to The New York Times , Facebook has had a Washington , D.C. , office since 2007 , and employs more than a dozen workers .
Just recently , Zuckerberg hosted a fundraiser for Republican New Jersey Gov . Chris Christie in Zuckerberg 's Palo Alto , Calif. , home . He 'd been in contact with the governor since 2010 regarding Newark schools — Zuckerberg donated $ 100 million to them .
And although Zuckerberg does n't voice his political inclination , he 's had dinner with President Obama and hosted a town hall at Facebook headquarters for him . Later , Christie also attended a town hall at the company . The Wall Street Journal 's Heather Haddon wrote :
`` In the past , Zuckerberg has n't been overtly public about his political leanings . His electoral registration lists him as having no party preference , though he voted in the 2008 and 2012 general elections , according to the Santa Clara County 's registrar of voters . ''
In December , Zuckerberg donated 18 million shares of Facebook — then worth about $ 500 million altogether — to the Silicon Valley Community Foundation , an organization that matches donors with charitable causes . It was his second and biggest gift yet , according to the Huffington Post . His first was that Newark schools donation .
Zuckerberg 's official step into advocacy for immigration reform does n't come as a surprise though .
About 52 percent of Silicon Valley startups began with immigrant leaders , according to 1995-2005 data from the Kauffman Foundation .
For years , many tech giants have sought to bring in science , technology , engineering and math ( known as STEM ) talent through H-1B visas — temporary work permits for specialized fields . And in early April , the Associated Press reported the Department of Homeland Security received more applications for the desirable visas than available . Officials will be using a computer-based lottery method to issue the work permits .
Zuckerberg and other tech leaders like LinkedIn 's Reid Hoffman , Dropbox 's Drew Houston and Yahoo 's Marissa Mayer are uniting behind FWD.us , the organization that will promote immigration and education reform . ( And , of course , it has a Facebook page . )
In his Washington Post op-ed , he wrote about his experience with immigration , and the push FWD.us would incorporate :
`` We will work with members of Congress from both parties , the administration and state and local officials . We will use online and offline advocacy tools to build support for policy changes , and we will strongly support those willing to take the tough stands necessary to promote these policies in Washington . ''
AnnaLee Saxenian , dean of UC Berkeley 's School of Information , says Zuckerberg has shown interest in a high-skilled workforce and he 's struck while the iron is hot on the immigration debate front .
But it 's also not unusual for tech companies to stick their noses into in politics .
Remember when Google , Wikipedia and friends protested against SOPA and PIPA in 2012 ? They blacked-out some of their content to promote awareness of Senate bills that were taking on websites that tip-toed around online piracy and counterfeit items .
So saying Silicon Valley is maturing into politics is not new , Saxenian says , but Facebook has definitely become one of the biggest companies to step up .
In earlier times companies mobilized through lobbying in Washington , but now they 've added social media to their arsenals .
`` It 's a new model of political influence and it 's very fitting to the [ Silicon ] Valley , '' Saxenian says .