“ We know this is the year , ” said Mr. Cabrera , who came here illegally when he was 4 years old and was recently granted a deportation deferral by the Obama administration . “ I have put as much effort in as I can and even more . If they just keep pushing it back and back , a lot of activists will be very frustrated . ”
The gulf between the expectations of advocates and the reality they face in Washington is widening every day . As they feel momentum slipping away , their anger is likely to intensify this fall .
And time is not on their side . In June , the Senate passed a bipartisan plan to overhaul border security and grant illegal immigrants a chance to earn citizenship . If the House does not take up the immigration issue until 2014 , members will face the prospect of voting on a highly contentious issue in the middle of a Congressional election year .
Republican primaries will begin in the spring , and many lawmakers may be reluctant to overhaul the immigration system just before facing their conservative constituents . If Congress does not complete action early next year , Congressional aides said , the issue could be delayed until after the November elections .
But leaders of groups supporting an immigration overhaul say they do not plan to let up .
The organizations plan a mobilization in early October , with rallies in at least 40 cities on Oct. 5 followed by a march and rally in Washington on Oct. 8 . Convinced that a majority exists in the House for the legislation , they will press for Mr. Boehner to allow a vote before the end of the year . Leaders said the Syria debate and the fiscal fight should not become “ excuses ” to set aside immigration .
“ We ’ re gearing up for late October — we ’ re going to push really hard for votes this fall and negotiations with the Senate , ” said Frank Sharry , the executive director of America ’ s Voice , an advocacy group . “ We never figured we ’ d have an opportunity in September because of the budget stuff and with the debt ceiling . ”
The government ’ s authority to spend money under the existing budget will run out on Oct. 1 unless lawmakers reach a budget deal or agree to a temporary delay . And officials say the debt limit must be raised by mid-October or the nation will risk defaulting on its debts .