Well , it ’ s great to hear that at least some publications are saying that we should probably rethink the sanctuary city policy . Leah has all of them right here . In light of the tragic death of Kate Steinle , who was killed by an illegal immigrant , USA Today ’ s editorial board said that the policy “ violates common sense . ”
San Francisco is one of nearly 300 cities and counties across the country with sanctuary laws or policies aimed at separating federal immigration enforcement from local policing , in order to build trust between immigrant communities and local police . The reasoning goes like this : If immigrants , including millions of undocumented ones , see local police officers as a tool for deportation , they will not report crimes or come forward as witnesses , even when they are victims , and public safely will suffer . In that context , there 's a certain logic to the `` sanctuary '' idea , but not when carried to extremes . Sanctuary policies set by cities , counties and states differ from place to place , but San Francisco 's violates all common sense . Protecting a hard-working undocumented immigrant charged with a misdemeanor is one thing . Putting a long-term felon and serial illegal entrant on the street is the antithesis of ensuring public safety . That 's especially true when there is a more reasonable approach , one used , according to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement , by many police departments under sanctuary laws . Officers pick up the phone to call immigration when they plan to release potentially dangerous immigrants wanted for deportation . Immigration comes to pick them up . Kathryn Steinle 's death ought to be a cause for sober reevaluation of sanctuary policies . Without a cease-fire and a working agreement in this war that has pitted local law enforcement against federal immigration authorities , there will be more innocent casualties .
Now , there has been some reaction to this incident from Congress and the 2016 presidential field . Donald Trump has made illegal immigration a cornerstone of his 2016 campaign , and the Steinle tragedy has only bolstered his narrative that the border is insecure and out of control . Granted , he ’ s not wrong on that issue . We don ’ t know how secure the border is ; what we do know is that the enforcement of the rule of law regarding immigration policy is explicitly absent . That is something to be angry about , especially since illegal aliens are reportedly eligible for back tax refunds . Regarding President Obama ’ s executive actions on immigration , a federal judge has tied up those orders in the courts ( for now ) . Nevertheless , the rule of law is arguably being cannibalized for political gain . No–that ’ s absolutely the truth !
At the same time , I hope more serious candidates are able to take charge of this issue and bring some common sense back into discussion . Fox News ’ Charles Krauthammer aptly noted that Trump is a “ waste of time , ” given that his campaign is grounded in “ know-nothing xenophobia. ” Trump did say that illegal immigrants are bringing in “ tremendous infectious diseases across the border. ” If he ’ s referring to the measles outbreak , that was actually caused by anti-vaccine bastion of wealthy white liberals from Marin County , California .
In Washington , Department of Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson was at a loss regarding the news about Kate Steinle ; he didn ’ t even know whom she was when asked by Rep. Steve Chabot ( R-OH ) . Whereas House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-CA ) said that sanctuary cities aren ’ t to blame . It ’ s Congressional inaction on immigration :
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi on Thursday defended so-called sanctuary cities , even after the shooting death of a San Francisco woman at the hands of an illegal immigrant set free under the policy . While the Department of Homeland Security has blamed San Francisco 's policy for that death , Pelosi said she blames Congress for failing to pass immigration reform . `` I support the sanctuary '' policy , said Pelosi , a Democrat who represents San Francisco . She was referring to a broad policy implemented by some local governments that rejects federal immigration laws . In San Francisco 's case , the city refused to cooperate with federal requests to keep the shooter detained , or to inform the government once he was released . [ … ] Pelosi said Congress should have passed a comprehensive bill addressing illegal immigration , `` which is the answer to many of the questions on this subject . ''