Now that Donald Trump delivers scripted remarks , one of his more amusing mannerisms is reacting to some of the lines as if he ’ s a listener himself , rather than the person who , in theory , came up with them . For instance , on Wednesday night , when Trump said about recent immigrants that “ many of these arrivals have greatly enriched our country , ” he added . “ So true. ” That ’ s a perfectly natural reaction if you don ’ t read your own speechwriter ’ s draft first—or , more likely , you just skim it . Some of the lines will likely be of as much interest to you as to anyone in the audience .
Nevertheless , Trump had a good day on Wednesday , and , whether you like it or not , he ’ s also had a good week . Only seven days ago , Hillary Clinton delivered a scorching speech linking Trump to white nationalism and some of the nuttiest voices in American public life , and even many people on the right seemed to agree that it hit home . But Clinton ’ s remarks seem to have done less lingering damage than people thought , and they already appear to be fading from the conversation . Meanwhile , Trump has suffered no major scandals and injured himself in no serious way . He took a trip to Mexico and met with its president , at best showing himself to be capable of polite behavior as a guest in a foreign country , and at worst making no difference at all . And Trump ’ s numbers have only gone up this week . Some polls even show him ahead of Clinton .
If there ’ s any other clue that Trump poses a threat once more , it ’ s that the temperature has risen , once again , at The New York Times . On Wednesday night , its editorial board denounced Trump for “ relentless lies , ” “ police-state bluster , ” and “ vicious talk. ” It added that Arizona ’ s harsh immigration policies made the state a “ perversely appropriate ” setting for the speech , returning five lines later with the thought that Arizona ’ s harsh immigration policies made the state a “ fitting backdrop ” for the speech . Not to be outdone , columnist Charles M. Blow called Trump a “ frightening type of man , whose basic character is vile but not inviolable , who springs from darkness and bends toward anything that casts light , ” whatever that means . And Nicholas Kristof offered up a column mentioning Hitler , ISIS , Russia , the American Nazi Party , North Korea , and the Ku Klux Klan . One pictures everyone in the office coming in this morning , hung over , rubbing their temples , reading what they wrote , and quietly asking if anyone remembers what happened .
So how did Trump ’ s speech , delivered at a Phoenix rally , really go ? No one can yet say . Ultimately , the only relevant measurement is whether it moved his numbers up or down relative to those of his opponent , and we lack such numbers . But we can say this much : it reassured Trump ’ s followers—and we ’ ve seen this pattern with Trump before—that , despite recent rhetoric about softening , Trump remains a hard-liner on enforcement .
It also laid out more specifics than ever before . Contrary to the assertion from the Times that Trump offered “ not so much a policy as empty words strung together and repeated , ” the speech was concrete about many measures : entry/exit biometric data systems , a wall , and so on . ( The Times also quoted Trump as calling for a “ deportation force , ” when in fact he called for a “ deportation task force ” —which is like conflating a police force with a police task force . )
There ’ s one other thing we can say : immigration speeches don ’ t usually move people on the topic , because convictions run too strong . Immigration is about identity , and few things carry more emotional weight . Most of us are also inclined to sacralize our how-we-got-here origin stories , whether we descend from passengers on the Mayflower or from migrant farmworkers in California . So , if your ancestors came as refugees , then you tend to insist that the United States take in more refugees . If your ancestors came to the U.S. illegally as workers and later got amnesty , then you tend to insist that people coming to the United States illegally as workers should similarly have a chance at amnesty . ( Of course , those Americans who are descendants of slaves do not want their origin story to be experienced by others , but the historical memory of it plays its own important role . ) The intensity of feeling makes even wonky people get decidedly unwonky . Spotted on my Twitter feed yesterday was speechwriter Michael Cohen announcing , “ As the child of immigrants I tend to think immigration is good for America. ” O.K. , then .