DOUGLAS , Ariz.—Sen . Ted Cruz made a visit to the U.S.-Mexican border on Friday to criticize the state of border security and to make the case that he , not Donald Trump , is the best candidate to tackle illegal immigration .
Standing at a low-slung barrier , Mr. Cruz said that “ my 5-year-old could climb this in about 3 seconds . ”
Mr. Cruz said Mr. Trump has supported “ open-border Democrats ” in the past . Opposition to illegal immigration has helped propel Mr. Trump to front-runner in the Republican presidential campaign .
The March 22 Arizona winner-take-all primary , where 58 delegates are at stake , is Mr. Cruz ’ s best shot to blunt Mr. Trump ’ s growing momentum . Utah also votes the same day , and Mr. Cruz is headed to Provo and Draper this weekend for a campaign swing .
Ohio Gov . John Kasich , whose more moderate position on immigration makes Arizona a tougher target , is focusing more on Utah ’ s caucuses .
The two Western contests are also the first Republican votes since Sen. Marco Rubio left the presidential race after losing his home state of Florida to Mr. Trump last week . After Arizona and Utah , the contest moves to Northern states that are considered less hospitable to Mr. Cruz .
Arizona—ground zero in the contentious national debate over how to deal with the illegal immigrants living in the U.S.—is fertile ground for a fight between Messrs. Trump and Cruz over immigration policy . The state was the site of the 2010 fight over SB 1070 , a bill allowing local police to enforce immigration law that was partially invalidated by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2012 .
Mr. Trump has also been endorsed by two popular figures in the state known for their tough stance against illegal immigration , former GOP Gov . Jan Brewer and Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio .
Mr. Cruz on Friday visited near the site where an American rancher was killed under mysterious circumstances . Authorities believe Robert Krentz was killed in 2010 by an illegal immigrant or drug traffickers . His death on his own ranch along the border has become a rallying cry for proponents of stricter border security and a crackdown on the flow of illegal immigrants into the U.S .
Mr. Cruz toured the border with former Texas Gov . Rick Perry , who has endorsed him , and Steve Ronnebeck , an Arizona man whose son was allegedly killed by an illegal immigrant last year .
Mr. Cruz has long called for additional border security , including a wall and extra border patrol agents . A standard applause line at his rallies is his vow to end so-called sanctuary cities—municipalities that tolerate illegal immigration or refuse to cooperate with federal immigration authorities .
But Mr. Trump has dominated on the issue . His signature policy position is to build a border wall and make the Mexican government pay for it . He has also called illegal immigrants “ rapists ” and “ criminals , ” and proposed the mass deportation of the roughly 12 million illegal immigrants currently in the U.S .
The only recent poll of Arizona shows Mr. Trump with a comfortable but not insurmountable lead in the state . The Phoenix-based Westgroup Research poll from March finds Mr. Trump in the lead with 31 % of the vote to Mr. Cruz ’ s 19 % of the vote . The poll was conducted before Mr. Rubio bowed out of the presidential race . He and Mr. Kasich each drew 10 % .
Mr. Trump is scheduled to campaign in Arizona on Saturday with an event in Fountain Hills .