As the unaccompanied child crisis along our southern border with Mexico continues to overwhelm the system , an internal Border Patrol email obtained by ███ shows Tucson Sector Chief Border Patrol Agent Manuel Padilla Jr. calling the situation `` unprecedented , '' comparable to humanitarian disasters like hurricanes and confirms illegal immigrant children are being treated and processed as refugees .
`` Ladies and Gentlemen , I wanted to provide you with information regarding the Nogales Placement Center ( NPC ) . I believe that it is important for all of us to have an understanding of the humanitarian effort that is ongoing nationwide as it relates to unaccompanied children , primarily from Central America . There has been an influx of unaccompanied children that have been detained throughout the southwest border , primarily in South Texas , to a level that has overwhelmed the Office of Refugee Resettlement ( ORR ) transition sites . This dynamic has caused the Border Patrol to hold these children at different locations while the transition to ORR takes place . In Tucson Sector , we are using the NPC as a transition point , '' Padilla wrote in a June 6 email to Tucson Sector Border Patrol . `` As of this writing , there are hundreds of children being cared for at the center . This is an unprecedented mission for agents and mission support personnel at the Tucson Sector . ''
Padilla added that children are being medically screened and processed to ensure their well being . Children are being constantly monitored .
`` Throughout the years , I have had the opportunity to be involved in missions that are outside the scope of border security . It is reassuring to see that when our agency is confronted with a non-traditional mission , our personnel is quick to learn the role , adapt to the situation , and perform in admirable ways , '' Padilla wrote . `` This humanitarian effort if reminiscent of the hurricane relief efforts , humanitarian search and rescue missions during floods and other disasters where the Border Patrol has lived up to his legacy . ''
Because of the large number of children overwhelming the system and needing processing , Border Patrol agents have been pulled off the border to help with paper work and oversight at detention facilities , leaving wide gaps of the border without patrol .
Yesterday CBS News Dallas reported that nearly half of Border Patrol agents are doing paper work rather than patrolling the border in Texas .
“ Almost 40 percent of the Border Patrol Agents are not at the border they ’ re actually filling out paperwork , transporting , feeding , moving these folks around , '' Democrat Texas Congressman Henry Cuellar told the news outlet .
`` We have all of these juveniles so they 're pulling agents out of the field to come in and babysit them basically , '' a source said last week . `` They 're cancelling some of our specialty details for our crews who go out and work the mountains , calling them back in and telling them they have to work the processing center because there are so many people in there . ''
Arizona Senator Jeff Flake plans to question Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson about the ongoing crisis when he testifies on Capitol Hill Wednesday .
`` Clearly , these events are disturbing and the situation unacceptable , '' Flake said in a statement to ███ . `` I am pressing the issue this week in Washington forward to getting some answers from Secretary Johnson when he testifies before the Senate Judiciary Committee Wednesday . ''