The Senate Judiciary Committee debated the Secure and Protect Act of 2019 on Thursday , a bil that was introduced earlier this summer by Chairman Lindsey Graham . The legislation aims to stop the current border security crisis and rampant asylum fraud . Republicans voted to get the bill out of Committee before the Senate adjourns for August recess later today .
? ? Asylum applications from residents of the Northern Triangle or countries that border it would be filed at refugee processing centers – not in the United States . These centers would be established in Central America and Mexico . — Lindsey Graham ( @ LindseyGrahamSC ) August 1 , 2019
? ? Unaccompanied minors ( UAC ) from Central America would be treated the same as minors from Canada and Mexico . This would allow the United States to return all UAC to their country of origin after screening . — Lindsey Graham ( @ LindseyGrahamSC ) August 1 , 2019
Democrats objected to the move and argued the legislation should be held over for Committee consideration until September when lawmakers get back into town . In other words , they 're happy to head home for a five week long vacation without solving the ongoing crisis at the border . Graham was having none of it . The final vote was 12-10 .
Today , Chairman @ LindseyGrahamSC ’ s legislation to fix asylum abuse , the Secure and Protect Act of 2019 , was reported out of Committee by a vote of 12-10 .
Read more : https : //t.co/5xHlNEAzsN pic.twitter.com/MoS58QmGZR — Senate Judiciary ( @ senjudiciary ) August 1 , 2019
“ I will no longer allow our asylum laws to be exploited by human traffickers , smugglers and cartels , ” Graham released in statement . “ Cartels , smugglers and human traffickers are profiting off immigrants and helping them take advantage of our broken asylum laws . I will no longer allow the loopholes in our laws to be exploited . I will not aid and abet these horrific practices . My bill fixes these problems . ”
“ Someone has to lead on this issue to repair broken laws . This is a national security imperative and a humanitarian necessity . It ’ s just a matter of time until these loopholes are used by dangerous people to hurt us . I ’ m willing to do more to help Central America , but I ’ m not willing to walk away from changing our laws to stop the massive flow of immigrants coming from Central America and now , throughout the world . Our immigration officials have told me that this legislation , if enacted , would reduce approximately 80 percent of the flow overnight , '' he continued . “ I have tried to work with my Democratic colleagues to find a win-win solution , but have failed thus far . My hope is to always achieve bipartisanship , but the current crisis at the border has become a disaster . To do nothing is to maintain the horrific situation we find ourselves in today . That ’ s unacceptable . ”
Sen. Lindsey Graham moves controversial asylum bill through panel ; Democrats charge he 's broken the rules https : //t.co/xi0KzqsPYl pic.twitter.com/uOr2uHc8ea — The Hill ( @ thehill ) August 1 , 2019
It ’ s not a “ Right Wing Talking Point ” that if you decriminalize illegal entry into the US we will be even more overrun than we are today .
If you don ’ t understand that you don ’ t understand what is going on at the border . — Lindsey Graham ( @ LindseyGrahamSC ) August 1 , 2019
Meanwhile , Border Patrol agents are working overtime to do their jobs in overwhelming conditions .