A senior administration official said the speech was the start of a concerted campaign to force Republicans to follow through on the bipartisan proposal . He predicted that given the president ’ s popularity with Hispanic voters , they would find it hard vote down a bill with his name on it .
Mr. Obama offered a familiar list of proposals : tightening security on borders , cracking down on employers who hire illegal immigrants and temporarily issuing more visas to clear the huge backlog of people applying for legal status in the country .
His speech , on the heels of the bipartisan Senate proposal , sets the terms for one of the year ’ s landmark legislative debates . These are only the opening steps in a complicated dance , and both the politics and the policy can be treacherous ground , as shown by the failed effort to overhaul immigration laws in the George W. Bush administration .
But the flurry of activity underscores the powerful new momentum behind an overhaul of the system , after an election that dramatized the vulnerability of Republicans on the issue , with Mr. Obama piling up lopsided majorities over Mitt Romney among Hispanic voters .
“ Most Americans agree that it ’ s time to fix a system that ’ s been broken for way too long , ” Mr. Obama said to an audience of about 2,000 high school students , many of them Hispanic . They applauded loudly when he mentioned the Dream Act , which offers amnesty to children of immigrants who are in the United States illegally .
In scrambling to present their blueprint on Monday , the day before Mr. Obama ’ s speech , the senators stole a march on the president . But their intent appeared less to undermine his efforts than to stake out their own role in drafting a comprehensive bill .
“ It is a fascinating Washington horse race that you don ’ t always see , and a signal of the seriousness to get across the finish line , ” said Angela Kelley , an expert on immigration at the Center for American Progress , a liberal research group .