The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com .
During a presidential campaign , candidates are known to promise everything under the sun to win . You name it , someone has promised it to voters , and more . It ’ s a trade-off we ’ re all come to accept and expect . But every candidate , buried under the avalanche of campaign BS , does have a few core things they really will work to accomplish . With Donald Trump , one of those things , perhaps THE thing , was a wall on our southern border to stop the illegal alien invasion . Now , that wall is looking a lot more like “ If you like your doctor , you can keep your doctor , ” than something that will actually happen .
This is not just me talking . On my podcast yesterday , I spoke with Ann Coulter , who was an early , eager , and vocal supporter of Donald Trump ’ s candidacy – even writing the book , “ In Trump We Trust. ” It doesn ’ t seem like she trusts President Trump as much anymore .
The border wall was the priority of Coulter , whose book “ Adios , America , ” helped inform the Trump campaign ’ s immigration policy . So when the President was unequivocal about this demand for $ 5 billion to build some of the wall last week with Chuck Schumer and Nancy Pelosi or he ’ d allow the government to shut down , those of us concerned with our country ’ s sovereignty saw it as a line in the sand we could get behind .
It was refreshing to hear a politician speak plainly , to say they want to fulfill a campaign promise and are willing to go to great lengths to do it .
White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders , in an interview with Fox News , started to walk back that rhetoric , to blur the line . She seemed to indicate that the White House would be willing to forego a straight $ 5 billion in exchange for avoiding a shutdown and a willingness from Democrats to work to find a way to shift money around from elsewhere to pay for construction .
We ’ ve heard this song before – Democrats get what they want now ( avoiding a shutdown without having to take a tough vote ) and Republicans get a promise of some future action on their priorities . It ’ s the “ Wimpy Rule ” – I ’ ll gladly pay you Tuesday for a hamburger today . Only Tuesday never comes .
Coulter was not buying it . Without a wall , she told me she would not vote for Donald Trump ’ s reelection in 2020 . “ No . Nor will , I think , most of his supporters . Why would you ? To make sure , I don ’ t know , Ivanka and Jared could make money ? That seems to be the main point of the presidency at this point , ” she said .
Without a wall , “ Trump will just have been a joke presidency who scammed the American people , amused the populists for a while , but he ’ ll have no legacy whatsoever , ” she said .
That coming from Donald Trump ’ s biggest cheerleader in 2016 should serve as a wake-up call for the White House .
We all expect politicians to break their promises , it ’ s what they do . And even though the Trump wasn ’ t a politician before being elected , it ’ s tough to make the case that the President of the United States is not a politician . So when the tax cuts weren ’ t as large as promised , it was fine – that ’ s part of the negotiating process . But we did get tax cuts . The economy is booming , unemployment is at near-record lows . Promise kept . But to truly get “ tired of winning , ” there needs to be a victory on THE promise of his campaign , and we do n't see it .
The threat of a shutdown was the only leverage the White House had to force Democrats to go on record opposing what the American people want and voted for . Yet , it seems like they gave it away without a fight . Getting creative with the accounting and pledging to look into freeing up money elsewhere to accomplish your goal later is not the same as $ 5 billion earmarked for the express purpose of building a wall .
We ’ re 2 years into the Trump administration and the economy is rolling , but not one brick has been laid on the President ’ s signature campaign promise . Now we ’ re watching the clock tick down to Democrats retaking control of the House , which means there is zero chance for any money in the near future . It ’ s now or never . If the White House doesn ’ t make this not only a priority but THE priority , it simply will not happen . And if Ann is right , Donald Trump won ’ t get a second bite at this apple .