For those reading the tea leaves on Capitol Hill , Tuesday provided a potentially startling message : Maybe immigration reform is n't dead , after all .
In the months since the Senate passed comprehensive immigration reform in June , the House has not done much of anything except say that the Senate bill is n't going anywhere . House Republicans have vowed to take up immigration reform , piece by piece , as opposed to in a single bill , like the Senate .
But when will that happen ? Not any time soon , it seemed .
Then came the news Tuesday that House Speaker John Boehner ( R ) of Ohio had hired Rebecca Tallent as his policy adviser on immigration .
Though not well-known outside the Beltway , Ms. Tallent is a known quantity on the Hill – and that at least appears to make her hiring a statement of intent from the speaker .
Before moving a few blocks to Mr. Boehner ’ s shop , Tallent directed the immigration task force at the Bipartisan Policy Center think tank . Yes , bipartisan . She served as chief of staff for Sen. John McCain ( R ) of Arizona and also helped him draft measures to overhaul immigration when he and the late Sen. Edward Kennedy ( D ) of Massachusetts tackled the issue in 2007 . Before that , she worked for former Rep. Jim Kolbe ( R ) of Arizona , another longtime advocate of immigration reform .
She is a potential bridge-builder whose political experience with immigration is extensive . Moreover , her recipe for moving immigration reform forward is hardly a secret . Her November commentary for the Monitor , titled “ Immigration reform : the politics of the possible , ” is a virtual road map on how to revive an effort that many consider dead – certainly not possible in this political climate or as Congress heads into an election year .
First , she lays out the political realities . This conservative House will not respond to conventional political pressure . It won ’ t respond to pressure from the Senate ( which it sees as too patronizing , too Democrat , and mistaken in a bill that numbers in the thousands of pages ) . Neither will it respond to the much-heard cry that the House must act if it wants to win the Hispanic vote . Most House Republicans represent gerrymandered districts with small Latino populations . They are more concerned about getting “ primaried ” by tea partyers than pilloried by Latinos .
Immigration reform in the House must be “ sold on its merits ” as an urgent need , she says .
Interestingly , that is exactly how House Budget Committee Chairman ( and former Republican vice presidential candidate ) Paul Ryan recently described it .
Last month , when Mr. Ryan appeared at a Wall Street Journal forum , he stated that the House is “ serious ” about immigration reform because it ’ s a “ pro-growth ” strategy that , if left unaddressed , denies the country of its “ intellectual capital. ” The issue has been pushed aside not for lack of interest , he said , but for lack of time , given the government shutdown and budget and other negotiations this fall .
Rep. Greg Walden ( R ) of Oregon says Republicans will most likely take up reform “ later next year. ” It 's a significant statement – as chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee , Representative Walden 's job is to make sure Republicans win as many House seats as possible in 2014 .
What Tallent suggests in her opinion article is a step-by-step process rather than a comprehensive reform – an approach President Obama has recently said he would consider . Then she suggests agreeing on a structure for that reform , presumably what the pieces would be and in what order they would come .
Republicans and Democrats actually agree on three broad principles “ that the United States needs to secure its borders , that future immigrants must have legal avenues to enter the country , and that the nation must deal with the status of undocumented individuals who are already here , ” she writes .
Of course , the reasons for Congress to fail are legion . The House speaker has a hard time herding his cats , and getting them to line up on this topic will be difficult . Likewise , Mr. Obama would have a tough time moving Democrats to compromise further .
A House road map to reform could crash over the details to be worked out , especially the core disagreement over the Senate ’ s “ path to citizenship ” for America ’ s 11 million undocumented immigrants . Fox News greeted the news of Tallent 's hiring with the headline : `` Boehner accused of tilting toward 'amnesty ' with new hire . ''
But in his Wall Street Journal appearance , Ryan outlined a road map on that topic that , while considerably longer and more laborious than the Senate version , is not “ no ” to eventual citizenship .
Last , the closer Congress gets to the midterm elections in November 2014 , the harder it will be to reach a deal .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Both Republicans and Democrats have experienced a traumatic political setback : the GOP with the government shutdown and the Democrats with the botched rollout of the Affordable Care Act . They will each be looking for an accomplishment to run on .