The man at the center of President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE 's controversial new midterms ad who was convicted of the murder two police officers was readmitted to the U.S. during President George W. Bush 's tenure , not under Democrats , as the ad says .
The Sacramento Bee reports that Luis Bracamontes , who was sentenced to the death penalty after his 2014 rampage , returned to the U.S. after being deported under a Republican presidency .
The ad , which Trump tweeted and pinned to the top of his Twitter account , shows clips of Bracamontes spewing profanities and threats while at trial , followed by the message , `` Democrats let him stay . ''
It is outrageous what the Democrats are doing to our Country . Vote Republican now ! https : //t.co/0pWiwCHGbh pic.twitter.com/2crea9HF7G — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 31 , 2018
Bracamontes first entered the country illegally in 1993 , when he was 16 . The Maricopa County Sheriff 's Office told the Bee that he was arrested in 1996 on marijuana possession related charges and deported on June 3 , 1997 .
Arizona records show he was arrested on drug charges again in Phoenix in 1998 , then released “ for reasons unknown ” by then-Sheriff Joe Arpaio 's office .
He was arrested again on similar charges in May of 2001 and deported .
The Bee was unable to ascertain his exact re-entry date , but records show Bracamontes getting married in Maricopa County on Feb. 28 , 2002 , meaning he re-entered the country under the Bush administration . He was not deported again before the murder of two police officers in 2014 .
The ad , directed at building support for Republican midterm candidates , has received harsh criticism , even from some in Trump 's own party .
Sen. Jeff Flake Jeffrey ( Jeff ) Lane FlakeFlake tells GOP : Trump 'does not deserve reelection ' Republicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump Cindy McCain : I can see Arizona 'going Democrat ' in 2020 MORE ( R-Az . ) called the ad `` sickening '' and said Republicans should denounce it .
Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez Thomas Edward PerezClinton ’ s top five vice presidential picks Government social programs : Triumph of hope over evidence Labor ’ s 'wasteful spending and mismanagement ” at Workers ’ Comp MORE blasted the ad as a divisive `` dog-whistle . ''