The Director of U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services resigned from his post Friday at President Donald Trump 's request , according to his resignation letter .
Francis Cissna will be replaced by former Virginia attorney general Ken Cuccinelli , according to a person familiar with the situation .
Cissna emphasized that during his tenure , he was committed to enforcing the rule of law and laying the groundwork for effective immigration reform .
`` We are the government servants charged with lawfully , efficiently and fairly adjudicating requests for immigration benefits , while protecting Americans , securing the homeland , and honoring our nation ’ s values , '' Cissna wrote . `` I have always been and will remain keenly aware of these charges and your diligence in fulfilling our mission . ''
Cissna 's ouster has been in the works for weeks as Trump has sought to shake up his immigration officials . Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen and Ronald Vitiello , who was acting director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement , also left their posts last month . Republican lawmakers had urged the president to keep Cissna on board , but White House adviser Stephen Miller had sought to boot him weeks ago .
Rumors of Cuccinelli 's selection to a top immigration post raised eyebrows earlier this week . Cuccinelli led the charge among the Republican National Convention to back Sen. Ted Cruz 's nomination in 2016 . But members of Trump 's inner circle told ███ earlier this week that the president had gotten over their bitter past and has come to admire Cuccinelli .
USCIS oversees legal immigration and has traditionally defended it . But under the Trump administration and Cissna 's leadership , the agency has been a key element in the hardline crackdown on immigration . Cissna has overseen the dramatic shrinking of the country 's refugee program , the creation of a `` denaturalization task force '' charged with stripping citizenship from those who committed fraud and a change in policy to make it easier for visas to be denied .
Cissna told ███ Magazine in September that he was not driven by anti-immigrant sentiment but rather a `` strong commitment to the law , and to the rule of law . ''