WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. President Donald Trump will not necessarily insist on including funding for a border wall with Mexico in legislation to address protections for children brought to the United States illegally , a senior aide said on Tuesday .
White House legislative director Marc Short , speaking to reporters at a Christian Science Monitor breakfast , said the administration will lay out its priorities for a fix for the Deferred Action on Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program in the next couple of weeks .
While Trump remains committed to his campaign promise to build the wall along the U.S. border with Mexico , “ whether or not that is specifically part of a DACA package or a different legislative package , I am not going to prejudge here today , ” Short said .
“ I don ’ t want to bind ourselves into a construct that makes reaching a conclusion on DACA impossible , ” Short said .
Short ’ s comments were the latest signal that the Republican president wants to see if he can engage Democrats as well as Republicans in trying to enact his agenda .
On Tuesday evening , he is scheduled to have dinner with a bipartisan group of senators whose support he hopes to win on legislation to overhaul the tax code .
Democrats welcomed Short ’ s DACA comments , saying they cleared away a major stumbling to legislation to help DACA recipients , known as Dreamers .
Democrats have insisted they will not allow border funding to be part of any legislation and would likely have the votes in the Senate to block a provision to which they objected .
“ That ’ s an important position because we can not make a 2,200 mile ( 3,540 km ) wall a condition for passing the Dream Act and we ’ ve been very clear from the start , ” said Senator Dick Durbin , a senior Democrat who has been working for the past 16 years to legislate protections for the Dreamers .
Democrats are willing to work with the White House and congressional Republicans on other border security measures as part of the legislation , Durbin added .
But Mark Krikorian , executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies , which seeks to limit legal and illegal immigration , criticized the potential shift on DACA , saying the White House forfeited leverage it needs to tighten border enforcement .
Krikorian said the administration seemed to be looking for an “ escape hatch ” on the controversial DACA program . “ It does suggest how much Trump wants this DACA issue to go away , ” he said .
Trump said last week he was ending an Obama-era program that protects from the deportation of immigrants brought illegally into the United States as children , but he gave U.S. lawmakers six months to act on the issue .
The move put the onus on Congress to address the nearly 800,000 Dreamers now facing uncertainty about their status in a country that for many is the only one they have known .