WASHINGTON—President Donald Trump urged House Republicans to pass broad immigration legislation in a Tuesday evening meeting , but he stopped short of telling them he would immediately reverse a widely condemned policy that has separated thousands of migrant children from their parents .
In the private meeting , Mr. Trump discussed taxes , tariffs and the Russia probe before endorsing two different Republican immigration bills , according to lawmakers in the room . On the controversy over immigrant families , Mr. Trump said : “ We have to take care of separation , ” according to a lawmaker in the room . “ It ’ s too nasty , it ’ s too nasty . ”
Mr. Trump took no questions and engaged in no discussion on a day when family separations engulfed nearly every other issue . Many Republicans had come to the meeting prepared to press Mr. Trump to halt his administration ’ s “ zero-tolerance ” policy of detaining adult immigrants at the southern border , which has split more than 2,000 children from their parents in less than two months .
A decades-old court settlement bars the jailing of migrant children . Past administrations had opted to let families be released while their cases were pursued .
“ We certainly want to support our president , but most of us have to support our district first , ” said Rep. Mark Meadows ( R. , N.C. ) , who is close to the president , as he headed into the meeting . “ It has not only got my attention but requires action , ” Mr. Meadows said about the issue , which he said has sparked more constituent mail than any in recent memory .
The meeting set the stage for House Republican leaders to begin lining up votes for a compromise bill that is seen as having the best chance of passing later this week . But the president ’ s performance did little to give momentum to bills that are tentatively set for votes on Thursday , because he didn ’ t line up behind one and sell it . As a whole , Republicans remain divided over how to treat young immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children .
“ His message to us was we ’ ve got to pass something , ” said Rep. Warren Davidson ( R. , Ohio ) . “ If he spends the week very publicly embracing the compromise bill…I think that will generate a lot more support than this meeting just generated . “
Raj Shah , a spokesman for Mr. Trump , said both bills meet Mr. Trump ’ s requirements , because they “ build the wall , close legal loopholes , cancel the visa lottery , curb chain migration , and solve…the family separation issue by allowing for family detention and removal . ”
The meeting at the Capitol had originally been envisioned as a chance for the president to rally Republicans around immigration legislation and for lawmakers to air their concerns on family separations .
But earlier Tuesday , Mr. Trump had defended his policy . In remarks at a National Federation of Independent Business meeting , Mr. Trump said he considered there to be only two options : “ totally open borders or criminal prosecution for lawbreaking. ” He said he wanted to see Congress “ give us a third option , ” describing it as the legal authority to detain and remove families “ together as a unit . ”
Also earlier on Tuesday , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R. , Ky. ) said that Republicans would quickly craft legislation that aims to address family separations . Sen. John Cornyn ( R. , Texas ) said he hopes to introduce a bill this week that would place detained families into a “ humane ” and “ safe ” facility together while they wait for their cases to be processed .
The administration ’ s new policy of detaining adults attempting to cross into the U.S. at the southern border , which has resulted in separating children from parents or other adults , has sparked explosive debate in recent days . As Democrats and some Republicans have called for an end to the policy , Mr. Trump and his administration officials have dug in and sought to blame Congress for not having passed a broader immigration overhaul that might have ameliorated the problem .
Current policy prevents migrant children from being held with adults in criminal detention , and the Trump administration policy , by arresting more adults and charging them with border-crossing offenses , has meant more children are separated and moved to separate facilities run by the Department of Health and Human Services .
The House is poised to consider the two broader GOP immigration measures this week that would address issues including border security , funding for the wall and a way to protect Dreamers , undocumented immigrants who were brought to the U.S. illegally as young children . House Republicans , buffeted by a weekend of escalating criticism over the separation issue , plan to include a provision to measures to address the family separations .
But neither broad GOP immigration bill is seen as likely to pass amid intraparty divisions , and House Republican leaders haven ’ t said whether they would allow a vote on a standalone bill related to family separations if the two separate immigration bills fail to pass .
Mr. Trump said at the NFIB meeting that he planned to “ make changes ” to any package that House Republicans put before him . “ We have one chance to get it right , ” he said .
Mr. Trump also leveled another attack at Democrats Tuesday , alleging in a tweet that they “ don ’ t care about crime and want illegal immigrants , no matter how bad they may be , to pour into and infest our Country , ” saying they view such immigrants “ as potential voters ! ”
Democrats argue that because Mr. Trump started the family-separation policy , he should be the one to stop it , and not tie it to broader immigration legislation .
“ Infest ? We ’ re not talking about insects , these are children ! ” tweeted Sen. Bob Casey ( D. , Pa. ) . “ You are talking about kids who are scared , alone and being held in cages . You have the power to stop it , do it . ”
The entire 49-member Senate Democratic caucus has signed on to legislation , from California Sen. Dianne Feinstein , that prohibits using separation of parents and children as a deterrent to crossing the border into the U.S .
Meanwhile , the Department of Homeland Security said Tuesday that it had registered 2,342 children as unaccompanied minors between May 5 and June 9 , after detaining 2,206 adults .
DHS had previously said it had separated 1,995 immigrant children from 1,940 adults as of the end of May .
Other congressional Republicans sought to get ahead of potential political fallout by pushing the Trump administration to put on hold the policies .
Sen. Orrin Hatch ( R. , Utah ) circulated a letter among senators that asks the Justice Department to pause its “ zero tolerance policy ” resulting in separating families at the border until Congress passes legislation . Sen. Lamar Alexander ( R. , Tenn. ) added his name to the list of concerned Republicans , saying that Mr. Trump should reverse the policy .
“ The White House could change it in five minutes , and they should , ” he told reporters . “ It ’ s a mistake . It ’ s a change in policy by this administration . ”
GOP leaders were working to change one of the broader immigration bills after concerns escalated about children being split apart from their parents . According to a House Republican familiar with its drafting , the measure would allow families to stay together while parents go through criminal proceedings . That is a change from an earlier version , in which families would have been permitted to stay together in immigration-detention facilities . Critics worried that wouldn ’ t amount to a safeguard against family separations if parents were sent into criminal detention centers .
That immigration bill was developed with support of both GOP centrists and conservatives , while the other is a more conservative measure sponsored by Rep. Bob Goodlatte ( R. , Va. ) .
On Tuesday , the White House also came under new pressure from outside groups , with the Business Roundtable and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce issuing statements against the separation policy .
The Faith and Freedom Coalition , headed by Trump administration ally Ralph Reed , called for “ immediate legislative action ” to end the family separation and called for House lawmakers to pass either of the two immigration bills on the table .