Former Trump chief strategist Steve Bannon joined the group ’ s board and Trump ally Kris Kobach became its general counsel . Kobach is now seeking the Republican nomination for U.S. Senate in Kansas .
The company that built the private section in January , North Dakota-based Fisher Industries , has since won a $ 1.3 billion border wall contract from the federal government , the largest award to date .
The section in question is a roughly 3-mile ( 5-kilometer ) fence of steel posts just 35 feet ( 10 meters ) from the Rio Grande , the river that forms the U.S.-Mexico border in Texas . That ’ s much closer to the river than the government ordinarily builds border barriers in South Texas because of concerns about erosion and flooding that could violate U.S. treaty obligations with Mexico .
Trump tweeted Sunday in response to a ProPublica-Texas Tribune report that the riverbank has started to erode . A federal judge on Wednesday ordered attorneys for Fisher Industries and opponents of the private wall to set a schedule for experts to visit the site and inspect any erosion .
“ I disagreed with doing this very small ( tiny ) section of wall , in a tricky area , by a private group which raised money by ads , ” Trump wrote . “ It was only done to make me look bad , and perhsps it now doesn ’ t even work . Should have been built like rest of Wall , 500 plus miles . ”
Tommy Fisher , CEO of Fisher Industries , said Sunday that he thought the president “ just got some misinformation on this stuff ” and that he had “ complete respect ” for Trump .
Fisher acknowledged that there had been some erosion on the land in front of the fencing caused by rain and the natural flow of the river . He said his crews planned to install more organic material to fill the gaps or insert rock if erosion continues , but that other parts of the wall remained untouched .
“ The wall will stand for 150 years , you mark my words , ” Fisher said .
Experts and people who live and work near the property have warned that building so close to the river would cause flooding or a break in the fence . And a binational commission earlier this year found that the project violates U.S. treaty obligations and called on Fisher to make changes .
Marianna Trevino Wright , executive director of the nonprofit National Butterfly Center , has long opposed the project and warned it could damage the center , which is adjacent to where the private wall was being built .
“ It is troubling that President Trump admits to prior knowledge of this project — one he should have insisted comply with U.S. law , rather than proceed in violation of it , ” she said Sunday .
Originally promoted by We Build the Wall , the private section instead became a showcase for Fisher , who has promoted his company heavily on Fox News and conservative media . We Build the Wall ultimately provided about $ 1.5 million for the project and Kobach said in a previous court hearing that his group was mostly providing “ social media cheerleading. ” We Build the Wall ’ s founder , Brian Kolfage , did not return a phone message Sunday .
In May , Fisher Industries won a $ 1.3 billion contract to build 42 miles ( 68 kilometers ) of wall in Arizona . The wall will be painted black because “ that ’ s what the president wanted , plain and simple , ” said U.S. Sen. Kevin Cramer , a North Dakota Republican , in May . Cramer said then that he personally pitched the company to Trump .
Another $ 400 million contract Fisher won last year was placed under review by the defense department ’ s inspector general .