President Trump doubled down Thursday on his desire for a border wall with Mexico , arguing it ’ s a necessity for the country .
“ The Wall is the Wall , it has never changed or evolved from the first day I conceived of it . Parts will be , of necessity , see through and it was never intended to be built in areas where there is natural protection such as mountains , wastelands or tough rivers or water , ” he wrote .
“ The Wall will be paid for , directly or indirectly , or through longer term reimbursement , by Mexico , which has a ridiculous $ 71 billion dollar trade surplus with the U.S . The $ 20 billion dollar Wall is “ peanuts ” compared to what Mexico makes from the U.S. NAFTA is a bad joke ! ” he added .
The Wall is the Wall , it has never changed or evolved from the first day I conceived of it . Parts will be , of necessity , see through and it was never intended to be built in areas where there is natural protection such as mountains , wastelands or tough rivers or water ..... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 18 , 2018
.... The Wall will be paid for , directly or indirectly , or through longer term reimbursement , by Mexico , which has a ridiculous $ 71 billion dollar trade surplus with the U.S . The $ 20 billion dollar Wall is “ peanuts ” compared to what Mexico makes from the U.S. NAFTA is a bad joke ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 18 , 2018
The president ’ s latest comments come after his Chief of Staff John Kelly appeared on Fox News Wednesday seeming to make the case that Trump ’ s views on the border wall—and who will pay for it—were not `` fully informed . ''
“ There 's been an evolutionary process that this president has gone through ... and I pointed out to all the members that were in the room that they all say things during the course of campaigns that may or may not be fully informed , ” Kelly said .
Trump also clarified that there will be no deal with Democrats unless there ’ s funding for a wall .
“ We need the Wall for the safety and security of our country . We need the Wall to help stop the massive inflow of drugs from Mexico , now rated the number one most dangerous country in the world . If there is no Wall , there is no Deal ! ” he said .
We need the Wall for the safety and security of our country . We need the Wall to help stop the massive inflow of drugs from Mexico , now rated the number one most dangerous country in the world . If there is no Wall , there is no Deal ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 18 , 2018
The tweets come amid efforts on Capitol Hill to avert a government shutdown .