The left opposes increased deportations , and condemns the mistreatment of migrants in custody .
“ Undocumented or not , rousing a family out of bed at 6 a.m. to abruptly end their lives in the U.S. seems heartless . We don ’ t do that in America , or at least we shouldn ’ t… Before we ’ re called naive , we are not saying that undocumented criminal immigrants shouldn ’ t be removed . They are a public menace and should be deported . Yes , go after criminals . And yes , people should not have overstayed their tourist visas , which a fair amount of the undocumented have done . But the round up is a Gestapo tactic unworthy of us… Let ’ s hope [ Trump ’ s ] correction is a return to some sanity and a show of compassion . ”
Regarding migrant detention centers , “ Trump essentially dismissed the plight of migrant children while speaking with Chuck Todd on Meet the Press . ‘ This has been happening long before I got there , ’ the president said when pressed about the conditions . ‘ We ’ ve ended [ family ] separation . Under President Obama , you had separation . I was the one who ended it. ’ ‘ We ’ re doing a fantastic job , under the circumstances , ’ he added . None of this is true . Families attempting to cross the border under President Obama were separated only in rare circumstances , such as when there was concern for the safety of the child , or when the adult could not be confirmed to be the child ’ s parent…
“ Though Trump signed an executive order to suspend his own administration ’ s zero-tolerance policy , children are still being separated from their parents if authorities deem the parent poses a risk to the child . Such separations are on the rise , often for reasons as petty as the parent having a traffic violation on their record . ”
“ US Border Patrol is holding many children , including some who are much too young to take care of themselves , in jail-like border facilities for weeks at a time without contact with family members , regular access to showers , clean clothes , toothbrushes , or proper beds . Many are sick . Many , including children as young as 2 or 3 , have been separated from adult caretakers without any provisions for their care… The Trump administration wants more money to build more child detention centers to hold even more children… But that ask glosses over the fact that more children are in immigration custody because over the last several years the government has slowed down the rate at which children are reunified with their families…
“ Based on our interviews , officials at the border seem to be making no effort to release children to caregivers -- many have parents in the US -- rather than holding them for weeks in overcrowded cells at the border… Congress should take action -- not by approving more money for detention -- but by requiring immigration agencies to cease separating children from family members unless that 's in the interest of the child , release and reunify children as soon as possible and cease using them as bait to arrest family members . ”
Some point out that “ The government ’ s ‘ safe and sanitary ’ argument did not arise from a new case generated by Trump-administration policies . It arose in 1985 , during the Reagan administration , when a 15-year-old Salvadoran child named Jenny Lisette Flores was detained after entering the United States illegally , hoping to escape her country ’ s vicious civil war . Flores spent two months at a facility in California , confined with adult strangers in poor conditions and strip-searched regularly…
“ It is right and fit to condemn the Trump administration for its argument and its treatment of children . But… this administration is merely the latest one to subject immigrant children to abusive conditions . It ’ s been 35 years since Jenny Flores was strip-searched in an adult facility . Before Sarah Fabian defended concrete floors and bright lights for President Donald Trump , she defended putting kids in solitary confinement for President Barack Obama… This stain on America ’ s soul will not wash out with an election cycle . ”
“ The summary , released this morning , is a wild look into the president ’ s mind-set and approach to his job . It shows a commander in chief consumed by conspiracy theories , strong-arming a foreign government to help him politically , and marshaling the federal government in his schemes… The call is bizarre on several levels . First , the United States has legitimate interests in Ukraine , but Trump is using his conversation with that country ’ s president to pursue his pet , unsubstantiated conspiracy theories . Second , Trump appears—as has been alleged—to be engaging in a quid pro quo , asking Zelensky to assist him in pursuing those conspiracy theories , in exchange for help to Ukraine . Trump never puts it in plain terms—he ’ s too smart , and too experienced in shady business , to do that—but it requires willful blindness to miss what Trump is asking… Third , the call shows how Trump enlists the might of the U.S. government in his weird , personal , political schemes . ”
“ Trump ’ s defenders will say this evidence is all circumstantial . But circumstantial evidence is not weak evidence : it ’ s simply evidence based on the circumstances in which an act of wrongdoing is committed — such as the license plate of a car that speeds away from a bank just after that bank is robbed . Criminals are convicted on such evidence all the time . They will also say that there ’ s no explicit quid pro quo proposal here . But… ‘ even when a corrupt deal is struck implicitly , the government can still prosecute extortion on a quid pro quo basis . Circumstantial evidence can be enough to prove a criminal exchange. ’ … ‍ “ In the absence of an explicit quid pro quo over restarting aid , the context and circumstances are what will become the focus of the investigation . There is enough here to support impeachment . Whether it is also enough to convince Republicans and lead to removal is another matter . ”