Border security is a key sticking point in this year ’ s immigration debate , but only a little more than one-third of senators have been to the southwestern border during their time in office to get a firsthand look at the security situation , according to a survey of the chamber ’ s members by The ███ .
Of 100 senators , 34 said they have been down to observe the border , 64 senators have not , and two — the Democratic chairman of the Judiciary Committee , which is writing the bill , and the chamber ’ s Republican leader — refused to answer .
Those on all sides of the immigration debate agree that chances for passing a bill legalizing illegal immigrants and overhauling the legal system hinges on whether voters think the border is secure .
President Obama and Homeland Security Secretary Janet A. Napolitano have said the border is secure and that the only way to improve it is to legalize illegal immigrants , which they argue will help authorities focus on illegal crossings and major criminals .
But lawmakers journeying to the border to see for themselves often come back with a different impression .
“ It doesn ’ t help when you have the Department of Homeland Security secretary testifying that the border is already secure , and yet you have senators returning from weekend visits to the border as recently as this weekend and telling us that they personally witness people crossing , including people from as far away as Afghanistan , ” said Sen. Marco Rubio , a Florida Republican who made a high-profile visit to the El Paso , Texas , segment of the border this year .
SEE ALSO : Border Patrol : Rules hinder effort to oust drug spotters
“ There is a real concern about those things and we ’ ve got to address that . If we can address that , we will have immigration reform . If we can not , this will be another failed effort , ” he said .
Those who have been to the border say they have seen both successes and challenges — and in many instances have shared their findings with the public through messages or photos on social media .
In one incident , Sen. John McCain , Arizona Republican , was showing colleagues the border in March when they saw a woman climb over a border barrier right in front of them .
“ Just witnessed a woman successfully climb an 18-ft bollard fence a few yards from us in # Nogales , ” Mr. McCain tweeted . “ Border Patrol successfully apprehended her , but incident is another reminder that threats to our border security are real . ”
The border begins at the Gulf of Mexico and runs 1,951 miles to the Pacific Ocean , along the way tracking rivers , cutting through ecologically fragile deserts and going over rugged mountains .
Border communities say they have seen dramatic changes over the past two decades as illegal immigration surged , then began to drop as first the Bush administration and now the Obama administration have boosted patrols and added technology .
Those who go come back with stories both good and bad .
Ranches that have been owned by the same family for five or six generations are struggling to survive , and some national parks along the border have been overrun by illegal activity and law enforcement . But the border also generates billions of dollars of commerce a day and is home to some of the safest communities in the U.S. in terms of crime rates .
Sen. Thomas R. Carper , Delaware Democrat and chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee , has made visits this year to several border hot spots and said they have been eye-opening .
“ Tell me , I ’ ll forget . Show me and I may remember . Involve me and I ’ ll understand , ” Mr. Carper told his committee colleagues Tuesday . “ That ’ s why I ’ ve tried to visit as much of the border region as I can . ”
Mr. Carper said he has seen firsthand the technology that has helped reduce illegal crossings in the Arizona desert , but it is not clear that those methods will transfer to the thickly vegetated areas along the Rio Grande in Texas .
He said one thing he learned is that the flow of illegal immigrants from Central American nations is growing and that the Senate bill doesn ’ t sufficiently address that problem .
All eight senators from the four southwestern border states have visited the border .
Sen. Martin Heinrich , New Mexico Democrat , said his border visits — including one last week — remind him that border security is just one of many elements in the complex immigration debate .
He said it is helpful for lawmakers to tour a port of entry and to get a sense of cross-border commerce , and to sit down with the families that have been torn apart by the current immigration policy .
“ The more real it is for legislators , the better we are going to be able to come up with a set of policies and laws that are more functional than they are today , ” Mr. Heinrich said . “ I think it makes you better understand the situation and get away from the rhetoric and ideology and get into the details of how we actually ” face the issue .
The Times surveyed members and their offices to ask whether they had visited the border during their time in office . The Times received responses from almost all of them .
Of the 34 who said they have been to the border , 18 are Republicans and 16 are Democrats .
Sen. Patrick J. Leahy , the Vermont Democrat who heads the Judiciary Committee that begins voting on the bill this week , told The Times that he doesn ’ t “ do polls. ” A spokesman for Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell , Kentucky Republican , said he doesn ’ t answer surveys .
Of the eight senators who wrote the Senate immigration bill , The Times survey found that seven have visited the border . They include Sen. Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat , who made his first trip this year and saw the woman cross the fence .
He said the political pilgrimage was a “ revelation ” and “ you can read and you can study and you can talk , but until you see things it doesn ’ t become reality . ”
“ I ’ ll be able to explain this to my colleagues . Many of my colleagues say , ‘ Why do we need to do anything more on the border ? ’ and we do . We should do more , ” he said at the time .
The one senator involved in writing the bill who hasn ’ t visited the border is Sen. Robert Menendez , New Jersey Democrat .
Some senators seemed fine with having missed out on taking a look .
“ I haven ’ t , and I don ’ t especially want to go , ” said Sen. Tim Johnson , a South Dakota Democrat who will retire next year at the end of his third term in the chamber .
Sen. Barbara A. Mikulski , Maryland Democrat , was more creative in answering the question . Citing her experience on the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and her support of strong borders , Ms. Milkulsi said she has been there “ by proxy . ”
A number of lawmakers , meanwhile , said that they have been to the U.S.-Canada border , which they said also poses security threats and deserves attention .
Sen. Carl Levin , Michigan Democrat , pointed to a 2010 report from the Government Accountability Office that said “ the terrorist threat on the northern border is higher , given the large expanse of area with limited law enforcement coverage . ”
Several lawmakers made the trip before they were elected to Congress .
Sen. Bob Corker , Tennessee Republican , said he traveled there during the 2006 election campaign . Sen. Kelly Ayotte , New Hampshire Republican , said she traveled to the southern border during her 2010 Senate race .
Sen. Joe Manchin III , West Virginia Democrat , visited the border as governor to see his state ’ s National Guard troops whom President George W. Bush had deployed to help assist the Border Patrol in building fencing and other infrastructure .
Others had been to the area , but not for border security reasons .
Sen. Sherrod Brown , Ohio Democrat , traveled to Texas in the 1990s as a member of the House to show his opposition to “ fast track ” authority for trade agreements . Sen. Bernard Sanders ’ office said the Vermont independent traveled to “ Juarez to visit maquiladora factories , but not specifically to look at border security . ”