A democracy dies by a thousand cuts . A particularly deep one may come later this week , administered by none other than Barack Obama .
As has been widely reported for months , the president plans to make `` changes to the immigration enforcement system '' that `` could offer legal documents to as many as five million immigrants in the country illegally . '' And as New York Times columnist Ross Douthat has provocatively and persuasively explained — often in painstaking and illuminating exchanges with Obama 's defenders — those changes would constitute an unprecedented and quite likely unconstitutional power grab , in which the head of the executive branch claims `` prosecutorial discretion '' to ignore and even actively contravene laws passed by Congress .
Now let me be completely clear : I 'm all in favor of immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship for immigrants already living in the United States . I think the refusal of the House Republican majority to pass an immigration reform bill — or , really , to do much of anything at all — over the past two years is a disgrace . I fear that with the GOP now in control of the Senate as well , Washington may well grind to a standstill — and that this heightened level of dysfunction in the nation 's capital may well redound to the benefit of Republicans , who use disgust at Washington as fuel for their anti-government furies .
The rule of law is far more about how things are done than about what is done . If Obama does what he appears poised to do , I wo n't be the least bit troubled about the government breaking up fewer families and deporting fewer immigrants . But I will be deeply troubled about how the president went about achieving this goal — by violating the letter and the spirit of federal law .
To grasp precisely what 's so galling about Obama 's proposed actions , it 's necessary to reflect on the nature of executive power and its permanent potential to become despotic .
Executive power can be reined in , as the U.S. Constitution attempts to do . But there are always limits to how much a president can be restrained , and not just because , or not simply because , executives are prone to maximize their own power . As political thinkers from Aristotle to John Locke and the American constitutional framers have recognized , there will be situations in which the common good demands and requires that the executive go beyond the letter and even the spirit of the law . In these extreme or emergency situations — situations in which an existential threat poses a grave danger , with the survival of the political community itself at stake — the executive 's extralegal decisions effectively become the community 's higher law .
Probably the clearest example from American history is Abraham Lincoln 's 1861 suspension of habeas corpus , defiance of the chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court ( who denounced Lincoln 's actions as unconstitutional ) , and subsequent arrest ( without charge ) of pro-secessionist Maryland state legislators who appeared poised to condemn the suspension and vote to join the Confederacy .
Was Lincoln acting like a tyrant , as Maryland native John Wilkes Booth and many other critics of the time contended ? You bet he was . And it 's a good thing , too . Had Maryland seceded , Washington would have been surrounded by enemy armies and the South almost certainly would have won the Civil War quickly and decisively . Extralegal action was required to keep that from happening .
The willingness to break the law in order to preserve the common good is a mark of statesmanship at its peak . But it is also perilous for everyone involved — not least the statesman himself , who relies on his own judgment alone to determine whether the circumstances are grave enough to justify his transgressions .
Was the judgment correct ? Or might the crisis have been averted without it ? Those crucial questions are often unanswerable until the emergency has ended and executive law-abidingness has been restored . At that point , the statesman will either be judged a hero for his temporary embrace of despotic tactics — or he will be condemned as an enemy of ordinary decency who used the crisis as a pretext to aggrandize his own power . There is often no way to reach a final judgment while the crisis is still underway .
That 's what makes it so hard to judge the extralegal actions of George W. Bush and other senior members of his administration . After the Sept. 11 attacks , the administration claimed that the nation faced potentially mortal threats to its national security from sub-state actors who might seek to detonate weapons of mass destruction in American cities . That threat — a perpetual ticking-time-bomb scenario — was then used to justify extralegal actions ( including torture of terrorism subjects ) to thwart those potential attacks .
Critics have demanded that senior Bush administration officials be brought up on war crimes charges for authorizing torture . But such judgments can only be fairly rendered once the state of emergency has come to an end . Only then will we be capable of judging if the threat to the common good was sufficiently grave to justify breaking the law .
But what if the war or terror — and the state of emergency that goes along with it — never ends ? That prospect should send a chill down the spines of civil libertarians everywhere , because it suggests that we may have entered an era in which circumstances demand that the executive be granted extralegal authority on a semi-permanent basis .
It is within this ominous context that President Obama 's proposed actions on immigration need to be evaluated . Compared with torture , rendition , and the extrajudicial use of surveillance and even deadly force against American citizens , Obama 's efforts to help illegal immigrants can seem benign and even trivial . But that 's precisely the point . No matter how you feel about Bush 's actions , up until now , executive transgressions of the law have been made in the name of protecting the common good from a grave threat in a time of emergency .
What is so galling about the president 's pending circumvention of federal immigration law is that the White House has n't even attempted to justify it on grounds of necessity — no doubt because any effort to do so would be risible . The nation obviously faces no immigration emergency that could possibly justify the kind of extralegal action that Obama is contemplating . Cultivating a new constituency for the Democratic Party certainly does n't rise to that level , but neither does a big-hearted attempt to stop often cruel deportations of individuals and families residing in this country illegally .
Have we really gotten to the point where the executive can ignore and even violate , on the absurdly open-ended basis of `` discretion , '' the express intent of a federal law he is constitutionally empowered to execute — not because of an emergency , not because of a national threat , but merely because he wants to be a nice guy ?
As Douthat notes , such discretion could easily be used by a future Republican president to rewrite the federal tax code by fiat . But really , it could be used by any president of either party to do anything at all .
Maybe that 's not a problem . Maybe the rule of law is passé . Maybe democracy 's more trouble than it 's worth . Maybe we 'd be happier with an elected monarchy in which the legislature merely played an advisory role in making and execution of laws .
I just wish that we 'd be honest about the fact that our system appears to be evolving in that direction — and that liberals , in particular , would admit that Barack Obama appears prepared to make an important contribution to bringing it about .