Washington ( CNN ) President Donald Trump , concerned his travel ban could be stopped cold in the judicial branch after a less-than-stellar rollout , is leaning into fear , attempting to ratchet up terror concerns by telling audiences that he has learned considerably more about terror since taking office last month .
Trump and his top aides are well aware that his travel ban would benefit from public approval , so Trump made the case Wednesday that he knows more about terrorism than most . He suggested that Americans -- at least those who do n't get classified briefings -- do n't understand the terror threat against the United States .
`` Terrorism is a tremendous threat , far greater than people in our country understand , '' Trump told a gathering of sheriffs in a Washington hotel .
Seemingly hinting at information gleaned from his classified briefings , the President added : `` Believe me . I 've learned a lot in the last two weeks , and terrorism is a far greater threat than the people of our country understand . ''
Ari Fleischer , who served as Bush 's White House press secretary during 9/11 , said all presidents use `` realistic , worse-case scenarios '' to push their agendas .
He cautioned the tactic could be abused and result in undermining an administration .
`` Like anything , you can go too far . You can exaggerate , you can get facts wrong , you can hype it to a degree where you lose credibility , '' he said . `` But it is been a time honored tradition in American politics to use a worst-case scenario to drive an agenda . ''
JUST WATCHED Appeals court weighs Trump 's travel ban Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Appeals court weighs Trump 's travel ban 02:12
It 's also a tactic that 's worked for Trump . Throughout the 2016 campaign , Trump urged his supporters to worry about terror and pushed them to do so by painting the world as an increasingly dangerous place .
`` People are scared , '' Trump said in his June Republican National Convention acceptance speech . `` The attacks on our police , and the terrorism in our cities , threaten our very way of life . Any politician who does not grasp this danger is not fit to lead our country . ''
More Americans said terrorism was a pressing concern in 2016 than any point since 2003 .
According to a CNN poll released in 2016 , 71 % of Americans said further acts of terrorism are very or somewhat likely in the United States over the next several weeks , a number that has not been that high since March 2003 .
Alarmist language could help sell the travel ban to a skeptical public .
Trump is also suggesting he knows more about the need for the ban than the judges overseeing the legal challenges , who are not privy to confidential briefings .
Americans are largely split on Trump 's executive order , which bars citizens of seven Muslim-majority countries from entering the US for 90 days , all refugees for 120 days and indefinitely halts refugees from Syria .
Voters generally disapprove of key aspects of Trump 's order , according to a Quinnipiac University poll out Wednesday . It found 51 % of the public oppose suspending travel to the US for 90 days from seven countries , 60 % oppose suspending all refugee immigration for 120 days and 70 % oppose indefinitely suspending the Syrian refugee program .
Trump 's order went before a 9th Circuit Court of Appeals three-judge panel on Tuesday where lawyers from Trump 's Justice Department squared up against the states of Washington and Minnesota . The court is expected to rule on Trump 's order by the end of the week .
JUST WATCHED Judges grill lawyers during travel ban hearing Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Judges grill lawyers during travel ban hearing 02:45
The President knocked the arguments against his travel ban Wednesday , telling the same group of sheriffs that `` even a 'bad high school student ' `` could understand the language of his order and find in his favor .
In contrast , after high-profile attacks in San Bernardino and Paris , President Barack Obama said : `` the threat from terrorism is real , but we will overcome it . ''
`` Let 's be vigilant , but not afraid , '' Obama said in his final speech as President . `` ( ISIS ) will try to kill innocent people . But they can not defeat America unless we betray our Constitution and our principles in the fight . ''
Even George W. Bush , whose administration did , at times , stoke fear in the run up to the Iraq War and around homeland security , was measured in the face of the 9/11 attacks .
`` Now , the American people have got to go about their business . We can not let the terrorists achieve the objective of frightening our nation to the point where we do n't conduct business , where people do n't shop , '' Bush said after 9/11 , the deadliest terrorist attack in US history .
Bush , in his final speech as president , said the United States was a nation `` that inspires immigrants to risk everything for the dream of freedom . ''
`` This is a nation where citizens show calm in times of danger , and compassion in the face of suffering , '' he said .
A good example of Bush using fear : His push to establish the Department of Homeland Security in 2003 .
At the time , Fleischer said , Bush would regularly read his morning `` threat matrix '' -- a document about produced by the Department of Homeland Security on possible threats -- and use it publicly at times to push his plan to fight terrorism .
`` With a vast nation to defend , we can neither predict nor prevent every conceivable attack , '' Bush said before establishing the new government agency . `` And in a free and open society , no department of government can completely guarantee our safety against ruthless killers , who move and plot in shadows . Yet our government will take every possible measure to safeguard our country and our people . ''