Ever since the Trump administration announced in September that it was winding down the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , there ’ s been a ton of confusion about what is actually going on .
Politicians and the press have repeatedly cited March 5 — the date Trump picked in September , as a warning to Congress to finally find a solution for the 690,000 undocumented immigrants protected from deportation under DACA — as an “ expiration date ” for DACA recipients themselves .
And after the Supreme Court has rejected a highly unusual request from the Trump administration in a lawsuit over their attempt to end the program , many have concluded that DACA recipients are “ safe . ”
But neither of these is really true , in terms of how DACA actually works . The important dates for DACA recipients themselves are the ones on the work permits issued by the government . They were never going to expire en masse on March 5 , and the Supreme Court ruling doesn ’ t automatically extend them , either .
Now that the deadline Trump said has passed , DACA is anything but safe . But it ’ s not dead either . The political debate might have moved on , but the clock is still ticking for immigrants themselves .
March 5 represents an inflection point , not an off switch . And the Supreme Court didn ’ t change that .
The way some people talk about the March 5 “ expiration , ” you ’ d be forgiven for thinking that the hundreds of thousands of unauthorized immigrants protected under DACA would all lose their protections — or , worse , that they ’ d all be rounded up for deportation . But that ’ s not the case .
Politically , March 5 was important : a clear deadline that President Trump gave Congress to deal with the fate of DACA recipients . It ’ s all but official that Congress has failed to meet it .
But as policy — in terms of what DACA meant for immigrants — March 5 just marked an inflection point , at which the unraveling of DACA , up to then relatively slow , would get faster .
DACA ’ s end really started on September 5 , 2017 , when the Trump administration stopped accepting new applications for the program . From October to March , approximately 122 immigrants each day had their DACA-issued work permits expire because they were unable to apply in time for renewals .
After March 5 , that number might be as high as hundreds of immigrants a day . Estimates from the Migration Policy Institute suggest that over the two years starting on March 5 , 2018 , an average of 915 work permits issued under DACA will expire daily . US Citizenship and Immigration Services data suggests that the pace will start slow , with 425 immigrants losing work permits daily in March , but will pick up aggressively a few months later .
But due to some recent court decisions , it might not end up being that many .
A pair of federal court orders — one issued in California in January , and one issued in New York in February — have slowed DACA ’ s unraveling by allowing DACA recipients to apply for two-year renewals again . As a result , it ’ s actually impossible to tell how many immigrants are losing work permits on March 6 — and how many will have new ones that last through March 2020 or later .
The courts have probably kept DACA alive for months — but probably won ’ t be able to keep it alive forever
In January , a federal judge in California issued an injunction against the Trump administration ’ s wind-down of DACA , and told US Customs and Immigration Services ( USCIS ) to make a reasonably timely plan to resume accepting renewal applications . The Trump administration is appealing the judge ’ s order — but because it ’ s not seeking a stay , there ’ s no chance for the order to be overturned in the immediate future .
In the meantime , a second judge , in New York , also issued an injunction — meaning that even if one of the two orders got overturned , USCIS would have to keep accepting and processing renewals .
A week before the March 5 “ deadline , ” the Supreme Court rejected a request from the Trump administration to review the California order directly . Instead , it will go through the normal process , appealing the California order to the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals ( which has agreed to expedite the appeal ) and presumably appealing the New York order to the 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals . Ultimately , it ’ s probably going to have to go back to the Supreme Court if it wants any hope of getting the California order overturned .
In the meantime , DACA won ’ t be fully operational as it was before Trump ’ s September 2017 decision . Unauthorized immigrants who turned 15 after September 5 of last year still won ’ t be able to apply , and neither will immigrants who would have qualified for DACA but couldn ’ t afford a $ 495 application fee ( or who didn ’ t apply for some other reason ) . But immigrants who had DACA and lost it , or are in danger of losing it , will be able to apply for renewals — and those renewals will , theoretically , be processed and granted normally .
And even if the Supreme Court ( or a lower court ) fully overturns the judges ’ orders and allows the administration to shut down DACA again , the permits it ’ s handed out in the interim will still be valid .
No matter when exactly DACA is officially closed off ( again ) , it will die slowly , a thousand deaths a day . There won ’ t be any handy ( if artificial ) “ deadline ” to point to as the date that Congress needs to act . Congress will need , if it acts , to somehow act on its own .
Approximately 122 immigrants each day , from October to March , had their DACA-issued work permits expire because they were unable to apply in time for renewals ( after the Trump administration suddenly shortened the application window in September ) . Some of them have since gotten 2-year renewals .
As many as 534 immigrants are currently set to lose their work permits each day from March 5 to March 31 , as of January 31 . That pace could rocket up to over 1,000 a day starting in August . But ...
Any immigrant who has a current work permit under DACA — as well as immigrants whose DACA expired after September 5 , 2016 — can apply for a two-year renewal ( thanks to the court order issued in January ) . An unknown number of them have already applied .
USCIS has started approving renewal applications and sending out two-year work permits to DACA recipients who applied after the renewal window opened in January . But we don ’ t know how many of those applications have been approved , or how long USCIS is taking to process applications . Even when DACA was in full swing , USCIS recommended that applicants give them 90 to 120 days to process a renewal application . So it is likely that some DACA recipients are watching their work permits expire while their renewals wait in the processing queue .
As many as 622,000 immigrants have work permits issued under DACA that won ’ t expire until August 1 or later . At this pace , it would take until February 2019 for more than half of DACA recipients to lose their protections — and that pace doesn ’ t reflect any of the renewals that could be issued under the court order .
Immigrants whose existing DACA permits have expired haven ’ t been rounded up en masse by ICE . However , some have been turned over to ICE agents and put in deportation proceedings .
The Trump administration has said clearly that ICE won ’ t actively target people whose DACA work permits have expired en masse . But it ’ s said just as clearly that if ICE agents happen to come across immigrants who have lost DACA protections , they ’ re just as vulnerable to arrest or deportation as anyone else .
Hundreds of thousands of immigrants have been in a state of uncertainty and anxiety since September 2017 — and even earlier , as DACA recipients wondered what President Trump would do to them . Congress still has the power to alleviate that uncertainty . But if it couldn ’ t do so without the impetus of a deadline , it may feel even less urgency without one .
UPDATE : This article has been updated to reflect estimates from USCIS and the Migration Policy Institute as to the timeline of work permit expirations .