The Obama administration said Friday it will stop deporting most illegal immigrant students and young adults in a campaign-year move that escalates the immigration debate to the fore .
For years the administration had said it didn ’ t have the authority to make such a move , saying it couldn ’ t decide to stop deporting wide categories of people on its own without approval from Congress .
But on Friday President Obama says administration now interprets the law to give it the discretion .
“ Effective immediately , the Department of Homeland Security is taking steps to lift the shadow of deportation from these young people , ” Mr. Obama said in an appearance in the White House Rose Garden . “ Over the next few months , eligible individuals who do not present a risk to national security or public safety will be able to request temporary relief from deportation proceedings and apply for work authorization . ”
Mr. Obama said the action was meant to be a temporary fix for our “ broken immigration system ” and urged Congress to pass a more permanent solution such as the DREAM Act .
“ This is not amnesty , ” Mr. Obama said . “ This is not immunity . This is not a path to citizenship . It ’ s not a permanent fix . This is a temporary stopgap measure that lets us focus our resources wisely , while giving a degree of relief and hope to talented , driven , patriotic young people . It is the right thing to do . ”
Mr. Obama angrily shot down a reporter for the conservative Daily Caller who interrupted his remarks with the question , “ Why do you favor foreigners over American workers ? ”
Later in the remarks , the president seemed to address the reporter : “ In answer to your question , this is the right thing to do for the American people . ”
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said she would institute the law with discretion .
“ Our nation ’ s immigration laws must be enforced in a firm and sensible manner , ” she said in a statement announcing the move . “ But they are not designed to be blindly enforced without consideration given to the individual circumstances of each case . Nor are they designed to remove productive young people to countries where they may not have lived or even speak the language . Discretion , which is used in so many other areas , is especially justified here . ”
Her move grants “ deferred action ” — meaning the department will no longer pursue deportations for those who qualify .
The decision is an effort to go around Congress , which has repeatedly failed to pass a bill granting legal status to this category of illegal immigrants . That type of legislation is usually called the Dream Act , though details vary depending on the version .
House Judiciary Committee Chairman Lamar Smith , Texas Republican , said the new amnesty will become “ a magnet for fraud , ” and will end up letting jobs go to current illegal immigrants .
“ How can the Administration justify allowing illegal immigrants to work in the U.S. when millions of Americans are unemployed ? ” Mr. Smith said . “ President Obama and his administration once again have put partisan politics and illegal immigrants ahead of the rule of law and the American people . ”
But Sen. Richard Durbin , an Illinois Democrat who has been among the most vociferous supporters of legalization , called the decision “ an historic humanitarian moment . ”
“ These young people did not make the decision to come to this country , and it is not the American way to punish children for their parents ’ actions , ” he said .
Indeed , illegal immigrant youths have long been the toughest cases in the illegal immigration debate . Often they were brought to the U.S. as children and in some cases babies or toddlers , and have no knowledge of the countries where they were born .
In her statement Ms. Napolitano said her department will stop deporting those illegal immigrants who are under 30 years of age , have graduated from high school , gotten an equivalency diploma or joined the U.S. military and don ’ t have a felony or major misdemeanor on their record .
The exact number of people who would qualify is unclear , though the Migration Policy Institute has calculated that at least one version of the Dream Act introduced in Congress could have granted status to 2.1 million people .
That ’ s also a lower bar than some in Congress had envisioned for granting legal status to illegal immigrants .
Ms. Napolitano ’ s decision doesn ’ t automatically put these illegal immigrants on a path to citizenship , which is what immigrant-rights advocates call for . But it does grant them temporary leave to remain in the U.S .
Mr. Obama has been under pressure for years to take this step , but he had repeatedly said he didn ’ t have the authority .
“ The fact of the matter is there are laws on the books that I have to enforce . And I think there ’ s been a great disservice done to the cause of getting the Dream Act passed and getting comprehensive immigration passed by perpetrating the notion that somehow , by myself , I can go and do these things . It ’ s just not true , ” Mr. Obama said last year .
And Ms. Napolitano last year specifically rejected the kind of categorical move she made on Friday , telling senators she only had the authority to examine cases individually .
Friday ’ s move comes just a week before Mr. Obama is scheduled to speak at a major gathering of Hispanic-rights activists in Florida — the beginning of a summer series of conferences among different Hispanic groups .
Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney has said he would veto the Dream Act . He said he only favors a path to citizenship for illegal immigrant young adults who join the military .
Hours after the Obama announcement , Mr. Romney said the move could make it harder to find a long-term fix .
“ I believe the status of young people who come here through no fault of their own is an important matter to be considered , and should be solved on a long term basis so they know what their future would be in this country , ” he said in New Hampshire to reporters . He walked away when asked whether he would reverse the executive order if elected president .
The Dream Act last came before Congress in 2010 when it was defeated on a bipartisan filibuster .
Democrats have introduced their own legislation again this year , and called for the GOP to work with them on it .
Sen. Marco Rubio a Cuban-American and rising star in the Republican Party , is working on his own version of a Dream Act .
And Rep. David Rivera , Florida Republican , introduced a version several weeks ago that would grant a multi-tier path to citizenship to a much narrower category than the administration . His legislation would apply only to students who have graduated high school and are attending a four-year college , and they would only earn a path to citizenship if they earned a degree from the college .