After decades of steady growth , immigration-enforcement spending has dropped slightly under President Obama — though the amount is still more than the budgets of the FBI , the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives , and all other federal law enforcement agencies combined , according to a report released Monday .
The Migration Policy Institute said Congress has built up a “ formidable machinery ” of enforcement over the past 25 years and last year spent 24 percent more on immigration than it did on all other federal police branches .
MPI said immigration spending likely will drop amid budget pressures and that ’ s all the more reason to evaluate what works , and to look at solutions outside of enforcement . The think tank said that should set up a broader immigration debate in Congress that would rewrite the legal immigration system .
“ An immigration-law bulwark is in place , ” said Doris Meissner , a former head of the now-defunct Immigration and Naturalization Service who is a senior fellow at MPI . “ It ’ s an imperfect system . It would benefit from a recalibration in many areas , but it is a sound , lasting structure . ”
President Obama has promised to write his own immigration legislation this year , and all sides say there is an appetite to at least begin taking up some legislation — though major sticking points remain , such as how to handle future guest workers .
Critics say there are enforcement holes to be plugged before Congress moves to legalization .
Steven A. Camarota , research director at the Center for Immigration Studies , said E-Verify , the government ’ s system for businesses to check new employees ’ work status , is still voluntary .
He also said the government ’ s entry-exit system still can ’ t track when visitors leave the country .
Mr. Camarota said that if the 1986 immigration amnesty law is any guide , Congress will promise both legal status and better enforcement , but deliver only on the legalization . He said there are too many well-connected pressure groups that could block stricter E-Verify or entry-exit checks .
“ It can all be done , but there ’ s no plans to do it . Experience would suggest enormous bureaucratic hurdles would have to be overcome , and political opposition would be fierce , ” he said . “ Once the amnesty goes through , all the illegal immigrants get legalized , but the enforcement always languishes . ”
After the last bruising congressional immigration fight in 2007 , when legislation fell to a bipartisan filibuster , Republicans emerged to say the lesson they learned was that voters wanted enforcement first .
The Bush administration poured money into enforcement and began construction of border fencing and vehicle barriers , and Mr. Obama followed suit . The illegal immigrant population has dropped from 12 million in 2007 to about 11 million now — though analysts debate how much of that is a result of the slumping economy .
In Mr. Obama ’ s four years in office , his administration has set records for immigration prosecutions and deportations , which topped 400,000 last year . That has drawn fire from immigrant rights advocates , who say the president has been too harsh .
On the other side of the ledger , the Obama administration levied more than 300 civil fines against businesses that hired illegal immigrants in 2011 — far higher than the Bush administration ’ s top year .
With those statistics in hand , Mr. Obama and his top aides argue that they have checked the box on enforcement , and that it ’ s time to tackle legalization .
But MPI found that when controlled for inflation , spending on border and interior enforcement and the US-VISIT system has begun to drop from its peak .
In 2009 , spending neared $ 20 billion when calculated in present-day dollar values . But it dropped to $ 17.9 billion in fiscal year 2012 , which ended Sept. 30 .