Sen. Ted Cruz ’ s stock is rising among members of President Trump ’ s base who feel double-crossed after the president offered amnesty to illegals in the immigration debate . Some who opposed Mr. Cruz in his 2016 run for the White House are even clamoring for the Texas Republican to mount a primary challenge to Mr. Trump in 2020 .
The newfound esteem for Mr. Cruz , whom Mr. Trump dubbed “ Lyin ’ Ted ” when they battled for the 2016 Republican nomination , is coming from people who were die-hard supporters of the president .
“ Ted Cruz has kept his word to the American citizens , and we are watching this very , very carefully , ” said Sue Payne , a conservative activist in Washington ’ s Maryland suburbs who in 2016 championed Mr. Trump and reviled Mr. Cruz . “ I ’ m getting very sick of Donald Trump right now . He ’ s turning his back on the people who put him in office . ”
The moves by Mr. Trump that have alienated supporters include the budget deal that threatens more skyrocketing debt and a tax cut law that could make people pay more in high-tax states .
For many , however , the biggest double-cross was the offer of an immigration deal with a path to citizenship for 1.8 million Dreamers who came illegally to the U.S. as minors .
Mr. Cruz distinguished himself on that front last week by casting the only vote against opening the Senate immigration debate in which all three competing proposals included amnesty for Dreamers .
The effort collapsed when all three immigration plans failed to garner the 60 votes needed to survive . Mr. Cruz voted against every plan .
The president ’ s framework fell by a 39-60 vote , with 14 Republicans including Mr. Cruz opposing it .
William Gheen , president of Americans for Legal Immigration PAC , accused Mr. Trump of “ dereliction of duty ” by abandoning the get-tough policies that put him in the White House .
“ This betrayal destroys his credibility and opens up a huge window of opportunity for Sen. Cruz or another GOP presidential primary challenger in 2020 , ” said Mr. Gheen , whose group advocates zero tolerance for illegals .
Mr. Cruz insisted that he is focused only on his run for re-election to the Senate in November , though he didn ’ t rule out another campaign for the White House down the road .
“ My focus in the Senate has been to not worry about the political circus that is Washington and instead to focus on substance , ” Mr. Cruz told The ███ .
For the past year , he said , the top four priorities for Republican majorities in Congress and the Trump administration have rightly been tax reform , regulatory reform , Obamacare repeal and judicial confirmations . He said the amnesty debate , as he termed it , was a serious mistake .
“ I do not believe we should be granting a pathway to citizenship to anybody here illegally . I can not for the life of me understand why so many Republicans are galloping to the left of Barack Obama on immigration , ” he said . “ Granting citizenship to people here illegally is inconsistent with the promises we made to the men and women who elected us . ”
Shrugging off the Trump supporters moving in his direction , Mr. Cruz said , “ My focus is on substance . The politics will take care of itself . ”
Still , some of Mr. Cruz ’ s Republican colleagues were cheering the party ’ s embrace of amnesty for the Dreamers , who now face a March 5 phaseout of the Obama-era temporary protection from deportation known as DACA .
“ The Republican Party has moved a long way — 1.8 million Dream Act-eligible people on a path to citizenship . That is a big change for our party , ” said Sen. Lindsey Graham , a South Carolina Republican who spearheaded a bipartisan push for amnesty measures .
Kevin Madden , a Republican Party strategist who was a senior adviser to Mitt Romney ’ s 2012 presidential campaign , discourages Mr. Cruz from becoming too confident after hearing chatter about his presidential potential .
Mr. Trump might have tested his base on immigration , but he hasn ’ t lost it . The president ’ s approval rating among Republican voters is above 80 percent , he said .
“ Any primary challenge is going to be very difficult , ” Mr. Madden said .