Immigration advocates , who had been eagerly awaiting the hearing for an early hint of the tenor of the debate on immigration as it unfolds in the House , said the use of the word “ amnesty ” would most likely be a bad sign for those in favor of a comprehensive overhaul .
Representative John Conyers Jr. , Democrat of Michigan , tried to set the tone early — “ I hope no one uses the term ‘ illegal immigrants ’ here today , ” he said in his opening remarks . But the a-word , as immigration advocates have called “ amnesty , ” came up twice . In addition to Mr. Bachus , Representative Trey Gowdy , Republican of South Carolina , also used the phrase : “ This is not our country ’ s first foray into amnesty. ” He expressed concern for “ respect for the rule of law . ”
Meanwhile , Representative Eric Cantor of Virginia , the No . 2 House Republican , used a speech on his legislative priorities beyond the fights over deficit reduction to try to soften his party ’ s position on immigration . Speaking at a research group downtown , he explicitly embraced offering illegal immigrants brought to the United States as children a pathway to legal residency and citizenship , a position he had opposed . And he endorsed in broad terms a comprehensive overhaul of the nation ’ s immigration laws .
“ I ’ m pleased these discussions make border security , employment verification and creating a workable guest worker program an immediate priority . It ’ s the right thing to do for our families , for our security , and for our economy , ” Mr. Cantor said . But he warned , “ There are some who would rather avoid fixing the problem in order to save this as a political issue . ”
Representative Raúl R. Labrador , Republican of Idaho , also challenged immigration advocates on the question of a political versus policy victory .
“ If we want a political solution , you guys are going to insist on a pathway to citizenship , ” he said . “ You ’ re going to beat Republicans over the head on this issue . But if we want a policy solution , I think there ’ s good will here in the House of Representatives for us to come together , actually pass a pragmatic solution to the current problem that we have , and solve and modernize the immigration system for years to come . ”
In a flurry of immigration legislation offered in recent days in the House , a bipartisan group of lawmakers , led by Representative Jerrold Nadler , Democrat of New York , introduced a bill on Tuesday that would allow American citizens with foreign-born same-sex spouses or partners to obtain permanent resident visas , known as green cards , for them . Mr. Nadler ’ s proposal would allow a well-established same-sex couple to apply for a green card , avoiding any direct challenge to a federal law that bans recognition of gay marriage .