Centrist Republicans are within striking distance of forcing immigration votes in the House , setting the stage for a dramatic election-year clash .
More than 200 lawmakers — including 20 Republicans — have now signed a discharge petition to circumvent leadership and trigger a series of votes on the floor dealing with immigration .
As of Tuesday evening , petition proponents needed just 15 more signatures to reach the magic number of 218 , but it will be this last group that will be hardest to get with GOP leaders trying to defeat the effort .
If all 193 Democrats sign the petition , as they are expected to , the centrists would need only five more Republican signatures for the petition to succeed .
Rep. Filemon Vela Filemon Bartolome VelaFish and Wildlife Service working with Border Patrol to protect animal refuges amid border wall construction : report Majority of Hispanic Caucus votes against spending bill with wall funds A dozen House Democrats call on EU ambassador to resign amid Ukraine scandal MORE ( D-Texas ) is withholding his support , but may change his tune if he ’ s the last lawmaker blocking the effort .
“ We ’ re having more and more members sign on . ... We ’ ve always been confident we have the votes , so it ’ s just signing more members up this week , ” Rep. Jeff Denham Jeffrey ( Jeff ) John DenhamBottom line Ex-Rep. Duffy to join lobbying firm BGR Former GOP Rep. Walters joins energy company MORE ( R-Calif. ) , who is leading the insurgent effort with Rep. Carlos Curbelo Carlos Luis CurbeloRepublicans ca n't exploit the left 's climate extremism without a better idea Progressive Latino group launches first incumbent protection campaign The Memo : Bad polls for Trump shake GOP MORE ( R-Fla. ) , told ███ on Tuesday . “ We have a strategy all week long . ”
Rep. Josh Gottheimer Joshua ( Josh ) GottheimerThe Hill 's 12:30 Report : Pelosi plans to send impeachment articles next week The lawmakers who bucked their parties on the war powers resolution House passes measure seeking to limit Trump on Iran MORE ( D-N.J. ) , a co-chairman of the Problem Solvers Caucus , a 48-member bipartisan group of centrists , said this week is a now-or-never moment for the discharge petition . The House is leaving town next week for the Memorial Day recess .
“ We ’ re working incredibly hard to help get over the hump , here . … I ’ m cautiously optimistic that we can get there , but I know it ’ s a big hill to climb , ” Gottheimer said . “ I believe it ’ s this week or it ’ s not going to happen . … But I think we ’ ll know [ Wednesday ] if this is happening . ”
Rep. Tom Reed Thomas ( Tom ) W. ReedTrump 's Dingell insults disrupt GOP unity amid impeachment House votes to temporarily repeal Trump SALT deduction cap Trump shocks , earns GOP rebukes with Dingell remarks MORE ( N.Y. ) , the Republican co-chairman of the Problem Solvers group , said time is running out for leaders to act , suggesting he ’ s close to endorsing the petition .
“ Obviously , everything ’ s coming to a head . ... Friday was another step in this process demonstrating where we ’ re at , in my opinion , and we ’ ve got to break this gridlock , ” Reed said . “ So , we ’ ll see what happens over the next couple of days . ”
Frustrated lawmakers are desperate for action on legislation providing a permanent solution for the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , which provides protection from deportation for some immigrants who came to the country as children , that President Trump Donald John TrumpDem lawmaker says Nunes threatened to sue him over criticism Parnas : U.S. ambassador to Ukraine removed to clear path for investigations into Bidens Five takeaways from Parnas 's Maddow interview MORE is ending .
But Republican leaders have been scrambling to quell the discharge petition , which they say will hand over power to the minority .
Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanEsper 's chief of staff to depart at end of January Latinos say they did n't benefit from Trump tax cuts — here 's why Conservative commentator rips Trump 's signature tax overhaul : 'It was a big mistake ' MORE ( R-Wis. ) , who was supposed to stay in Wisconsin through Tuesday evening for his son ’ s junior high school graduation , flew back to D.C. early to address the GOP conference on Tuesday morning . During a closed-door meeting , Ryan urged unity among Republicans and expressed frustration over the discharge petition and last week ’ s failed farm bill vote , according to lawmakers who attended the meeting .
“ He said we need to start acting like we ’ re in charge of the place , and being divided doesn ’ t help , ” said Rep. Mark Amodei Mark Eugene AmodeiBillboards calling on House Republicans to 'do their job ' follow members home for Thanksgiving Trump 's defenders are running out of options Avoiding the snake in the grass : Let 's not allow impeachment to divide us MORE ( R-Nev. ) . “ He was frustrated … I think he used the word ‘ crap ’ once . For Paul Ryan , ‘ crap ’ is pretty blue language . ”
Leadership has floated an alternative plan to the discharge petition that would allow a series of immigration votes of their choosing during the third week in June , but the details of the process are still being worked out .
“ I ’ m sure we ’ ll have a number of come-to-Jesus meetings when we get back from the break , ” said Rep. Joe Barton Joe Linus BartonEx-Tea Party lawmakers turn heads on K Street Longtime GOP aide to launch lobbying shop Katie Hill resignation reignites push for federal 'revenge porn ' law MORE ( R-Texas ) , a co-sponsor of the Dream Act who has not yet signed the petition . “ They ’ ll try to figure out where the sweet spot is on the DACA population and some of the things that conservatives want . ”
One of the measures that would get a vote under leadership ’ s plan is a hard-line measure from House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte Robert ( Bob ) William GoodlatteUSCIS chief Cuccinelli blames Paul Ryan for immigration inaction Immigrant advocacy groups should n't be opposing Trump 's raids Top Republican releases full transcript of Bruce Ohr interview MORE ( R-Va. ) , which is favored by conservatives but has struggled to get 218 supporters .
With a floor vote on the horizon , Goodlatte has been proposing changes to his conservative immigration bill this week to attract more support .
One idea being circulated to moderate Republicans and other offices , according to a copy of the text obtained by ███ , is to make the legislation more generous for DACA recipients .
The original measure would have provided DACA recipients with a temporary , three-year legal status that could be renewed indefinitely . But the modified version would lengthen their legal status to six years , though immigrants would still not be offered a path to citizenship under the plan .
Goodlatte , on Monday , met with the leaders of the four main Republican groups in Congress — the Republican Study Committee , House Freedom Caucus , Tuesday Group and Republican Main Street Partnership — to gather feedback on the proposed changes .
Leaders also agreed to allow a vote on more moderate immigration legislation , the details of which have not yet been hammered out . But reaching a deal on that second bill is likely to be challenging .
Moderates are also concerned that the far-right Freedom Caucus would take down a rule allowing a moderate immigration bill to come to the floor , especially if the legislation grants citizenship to so-called Dreamers . That ’ s why Denham is pushing for a single rule to set up floor debate on both the Goodlatte measure and whatever centrist bill they come up with .
Freedom Caucus Chairman Mark Meadows Mark Randall MeadowsTrump , Democrats set for brawl on Iran war powers Overnight Defense : Iran crisis eases as Trump says Tehran 'standing down ' | Dems unconvinced on evidence behind Soleimani strike | House sets Thursday vote on Iran war powers Democrats 'utterly unpersuaded ' by evidence behind Soleimani strike MORE ( R-N.C. ) , however , said he wouldn ’ t be supportive of bringing up a rule that also includes the legislation being worked on by Denham , arguing they don ’ t know what the final product will look like .
“ I think it ’ s two separate votes . I mean , the truth of the matter is , you know , we ’ ll vote on the Goodlatte bill as it was promised some seven months ago , ” Meadows said . “ Let ’ s vote on that , and then if we know the parameters of the other bill with Mr. Denham or anybody else , I don ’ t envision any bloc of votes voting against the rule from our side . ”
Meadows called on leadership to do everything in their power to stop the discharge petition from moving forward , adding he believes bringing up the Goodlatte bill is the easiest way to derail moderates ’ efforts .
“ When I voted against a rule they threatened to take away all travel , they threatened to take away any [ National Republican Congressional Committee ] contributions , ” he said . “ You know most of those people that were on the discharge petition are much closer to leadership than members of the Freedom Caucus — so I don ’ t see them voting against the rule . ”
With concerns growing among moderates about leadership ’ s alternative plan , more Republicans could back the petition .
Some Republican lawmakers say they ’ re reserving the right to endorse the discharge petition but want to give Ryan and GOP leaders more time to find a solution .
Rep. Daniel Newhouse ( R-Wash. ) , who spearheaded a December letter urging immediate action on DACA , falls into that category , saying he ’ d sign on only “ if there is no other alternative . ”
“ It ’ s the nuclear option , ” said Newhouse , who sits on the Rules Committee . “ If we could work through regular order on this , that ’ s my preference . ”
Rep. Thomas Rooney ( R-Fla. ) , who ’ s retiring at the end of the year , said he ’ s sympathetic to the discharge petition supporters , but he ’ s sticking by Ryan .
“ We have to have a semblance of a chain of command and order . So I ’ d be more deferential to Paul , and what Paul wants me to do . … But I respect and appreciate what their urgency is , ” Rooney said . “ This is why this is so hard , because you don ’ t want to undermine Paul . I want him to be able to finish his job strong . ”