“ Unfortunately you 've grown up hearing voices that incessantly warn of government as nothing more than some separate , sinister entity that 's the root of all our problems , even as they do their best to gum up the works ; or that tyranny always lurks just around the corner . You should reject these voices . ”
-- President Obama addressing graduates at The Ohio State University .
A high-pressure vote on generally popular legislation that arouses deep passions among ideological activists and is doomed to failure in the House : Not a recipe for success in the U.S. Senate .
But that ’ s where we ’ re headed this week as the bipartisan “ Gang of Eight ” gets ready to roll out the full version of their compromise immigration package , now almost six months in the making .
Call it the “ jam and slam. ” First , jam the legislation through the Democrat-controlled Senate and then Slam House Republicans for resisting progress . But if you can ’ t jam , you sure can ’ t slam .
America saw the result last month on a gun-control package backed by President Obama as ideology and political pragmatism teamed up to squelch the president ’ s second big policy push of his second term . Like they did on blocking the automatic reductions to increases in federal spending , Senate Democrats declined to fight for the president ’ s agenda when faced with their own political mortality .
One might think that the approach would have fallen out of favor , but here we go again .
If ever the approach was going to work , it would be on this subject . Americans generally support broad immigration reforms at the heart of the deal in which legalization for existing illegal immigrants is married with safeguards against new border jumpers . And Republican resistance to the idea of legalization is at a low ebb as the party faces demographic oblivion without the ability to attract non-white voters .
Obama has established this legislation as a one-shot deal for Republicans . Either this comprehensive legislation will pass , or he will unveil his own , more-liberal bill , effectively ending any chance for compromise . The president says either Republicans will assent to this compromise or he will rally Hispanics and liberals around the banner of a more permissive , faster legalization and make sure Americans know it ’ s Republicans who are to blame . It ’ s now or never , says Obama .
Many Republicans , led by Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida , are working to slow things down . Rubio , one of the eight , is proposing the legislation as a starting point for a deliberative Senate process resulting in final passage of a comprehensive bill that then would be merged with a version from House Republicans , setting off a final round of negotiations .
The Democrats in the gang are looking for the more traditional ( of late ) approach to the legislation . This style brews up a bill behind closed doors and then offers it to the rest of the Senate like plea bargain to a criminal defendant on “ Law and Order ” : take it or leave it .
What we ’ re seeing is the biggest collision yet between the old school of the Senate and the reform movement born with Obama ’ s 2010 health law . Conservative Republicans took offense at the means of passing what the president calls “ Obamacare ” almost as much as they dislike the ends .
And “ read the bill ” still stands as one of the best rallying cries for the Tea Party movement . While Americans may disagree about how much to tax , how much to spend and how big the magazine on your rifle should be , it ’ s very hard to make a principled case against thoroughness and deliberation when it comes to major legislation .
Obama , who shows increasing impatience with divided government , is strongly backing the Jack McCoy approach here . Either the Senate will swiftly pass the compromise bill , or he is going to send the GOP up the river with Hispanic voters .
This is logical since following “ regular order ” on this legislation would help conservatives sink or shrink the legislation , with the most likely outcome being a lengthy battle that stretches into an election year . If that happens , Obama either gets no bill or a much-reduced version .
And for Obama to make “ jam and slam ” work on immigration , he needs to get it done before the Senate has to take up the issue of a full-year federal budget . Once that starts , with all the talk about entitlements , taxes , etc . there ’ s not going to be room or appetite enough for anything else comprehensive and complicated .
So can the Senate be done with immigration by July ? If so , Obama has a chance to increase the pressure on House Republicans and get off the lame-duck pond . If his fellow Democrats in the Senate , though , can ’ t take care of the “ jam ” part of the strategy , Obama will have a tougher time on the budget and everything else that ’ s still left on his second-term wish list .
Chris Stirewalt is digital politics editor for ███ , and his POWER PLAY column appears Monday-Friday on FoxNews.com . Catch Chris Live online daily at 11:30amET at http : live.foxnews.com .