The pattern of illegal immigration appears to be shifting yet again as families traveling together — usually mothers and their children — surge across the southwestern border at a record pace , posing more challenges for an Obama administration still struggling to figure out how to handle them .
They are increasingly coming into remote areas of Texas and Arizona where Border Patrol officials thought they had licked the problem . Analysts say it signals that new cartels are involved in trafficking .
Pushed from their homes by poor economies and violent communities , encouraged to come to the U.S. by friends and relatives who have made the crossing , and enticed by lax enforcement , more than 32,000 family members were apprehended at the border through the first six months of the fiscal year . That was more than double the rate of 2015 .
This year ’ s total has well surpassed the number of children traveling without parents , whom the Border Patrol calls unaccompanied alien children , caught at the border during the same period last year .
While the majority are still coming through the Rio Grande Valley in Texas , the Border Patrol ’ s Yuma Sector , which covers remote western Arizona and eastern California , has reported a 1,000 percent increase compared with 2014 . Laredo and the Big Bend areas of Texas have also seen massive spikes .
Jessica Vaughan , policy studies director at the Center for Immigration Studies , said the cartels that control the approach on the Mexican side of the border in those regions appear to have taken up human smuggling .
She said the fact that families have surged ahead of unaccompanied children suggests Central Americans , who make up most of the new crossers , have learned to game the U.S. immigration system .
“ They ’ re not dissuaded from coming by the fear of being detained and sent back — they know that they ’ re still going to be released , ” she said . “ The fact that it ’ s families coming now tells me that this may be people seeking to establish a foothold in the United States and taking advantage of this opportunity . When this surge was mostly kids , it was clear it was a family reunification phenomenon . Now it ’ s starting to look more like an opportunistic flow of people . ”
State officials in Texas and Arizona referred questions to the Border Patrol , which didn ’ t respond to a request for comment .
The flow of Central American children and families — chiefly from Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador — began rising in 2013 and seemed to peak in early summer 2014 . That was when Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson announced get-tough policies , including opening family detention centers to hold illegal immigrants , quickly put them through hearings and send them back home .
But a federal judge last year ruled that sort of treatment in many cases violated a legal agreement that the government reached with immigrant rights advocates . Homeland Security officials told the court that relaxing their policies would spur another surge , but they agreed to abide by the judge ’ s order even as they appealed the case .
The 32,116 family members apprehended from Oct. 1 through March 31 set a record for the start of a fiscal year .
Meanwhile , the 27,793 unaccompanied children is just beneath the record pace set in 2014 . Still , that is an improvement — through the first few months , the Border Patrol was on a record-breaking pace .
Homeland Security officials say the number of people apprehended is a good proxy for the total flow : If fewer people are caught , then fewer people are trying , and succeeding , to sneak into the U.S .
The numbers for children and families were running well above record pace in November and December , dropped over the cold months of January and February , and are climbing again . In March alone , some 4,240 children traveling alone , and 4,452 people traveling together as families , were caught at the border .
James Phelps , a professor who studies border security at Angelo State University in San Angelo , Texas , said the November and December spike was likely in response to the Republican presidential race and the promise by leading candidate Donald Trump to build a border wall . More could be on the way , he predicted .
“ Who gets elected in November will determine if the numbers will decline to a ‘ normal ’ influx or a massive surge in illegal border crossings . Basically , if a Republican with an anti-illegal-immigration platform wins , then everybody that can will cross the border so they will hopefully be grandfathered under the current administration ’ s policies , ” he said in an email . “ Should that happen , it ’ s important to note there is no infrastructure to process or hold the numbers of people that will arrive . ”
For now , the number of unaccompanied children from Honduras , El Salvador and Guatemala is down significantly from its peak in 2014 , Mr. Phelps said .
“ This is expected , ” he said . “ The countries are running out of a whole generation of youth to send north . ”
But there has been an uptick in the flow from Nicaragua , he said , noting that the Nicaraguan numbers climbed when the price of oil dropped , causing a chain reaction that cut off aid from oil-rich ally Venezuela , harming Nicaragua ’ s economy .
Still , he said , the numbers generally appear to track the usual seasonal patterns .
“ You can expect to see a decline in overall numbers and those of [ unaccompanied alien children ] in July and August , then an increase in September . This is typical of migrant movement over the longer periods of study . There are permutations , but they tend to be driven by other factors we haven ’ t yet ‘ officially ’ narrowed down , ” he said .
Under the Obama administration ’ s interpretation of the law , unaccompanied children are required to be processed and released as quickly as possible — usually to family or friends .
Congressional investigations found that some have become prime targets for recruitment by gangs , while others are used for forced labor or by sexual predators .
The Associated Press last week reported that 80 percent of unaccompanied children coming to the U.S. are placed with parents or relatives who themselves are in the country illegally . The Obama administration has said its goal is to find the children safe spaces , no matter the legal status of those who accept them .