With the federal government ’ s funding running out on Friday , Sens . John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) and Chris Coons ( D-Del . ) will introduce immigration legislation Monday with the hope of reaching a budget deal in time to avert another government shutdown .
The bill gives Dreamers , the recipients of the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , a legal status and path to citizenship . The measure would also order a study to determine what border security measures are necessary .
But President Trump and conservative Republicans will likely balk at the plan , as it fails to meet a number of the White House ’ s demands—most notably , it does not include funding for the border wall .
Trump last month called for $ 25 billion aimed at the border wall between the U.S. and Mexico , a DACA fix , beefing up border security and enforcement , including the number of deportations , limiting chain migration , and an end to the visa lottery program .
The senators ’ bill would provide legal status and a path to citizenship for young immigrants who have lived in the U.S. since Dec. 31 , 2013 , aides said Sunday . That is expected to be a larger group than would be covered by Mr. Trump ’ s proposed 1.8 million people . Aiming to tighten border security , their bill calls for the Homeland Security Department to devise a strategy for situational awareness and operational control of the border by 2020 . The bill would provide a $ 110 million annual grant for five years to improve coordination between border-patrol agents and state and local law-enforcement officials . It wouldn ’ t , however , direct any funding for border technology or the more-controversial barriers or wall that Mr. Trump wants . The legislation also calls for clearing a backlog in the immigration-court system by hiring 55 new judges per year , as well as dozens of staff attorneys , for three years . The bill would also direct the State Department to submit a three-year strategy aimed at addressing the underlying causes of immigration from Central America to the U.S . Many Central Americans try to enter the U.S. illegally because of severe drug gang violence in their home countries . ( WSJ )
“ It ’ s time we end the gridlock so we can quickly move on to completing a long-term budget agreement that provides our men and women in uniform the support they deserve , ” Mr. McCain said in a statement Sunday .
“ While reaching a deal can not come soon enough for America ’ s service members , the current political reality demands bipartisan cooperation to address the impending expiration of the DACA program and secure the southern border , ” he added .
Update : Trump on Monday said any proposed solution that does n't include border wall funding is a `` total waste of time . ''