These may seem like straightforward questions : How many new permanent residents of the United States will there be every year , if the Senate ’ s bipartisan legislation on immigration reform becomes law ? And how many new workers would the plan inject into the American economy , exactly ?
The problem , at least for the moment , is that even those involved in crafting the immigration reform legislation don ’ t know the answers .
“ Nobody has a number that is based on the bill right now that ’ s accurate , ” said Lynn Tramonte , deputy director of America ’ s Voice Education Fund , a group that supports the reform effort , in a conference call with reporters . “ This bill is extremely sophisticated ... it ’ ll take a bit more [ analysis ] to get a specific number about how things will change . ”
A Senate Democratic aide involved with the drafting of the bill echoed that assessment , as did a Senate Republican aide outside the process .
It ’ s a fundamental issue , yet to be resolved , even as Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy ( D ) of Vermont looks to move the bill through his committee in as little as two weeks ' time .
Supporters and detractors agree that that , should the bill become law , they expect legal immigration to boom over the next 10 years .
Pro-reform analysts say that ’ s a good thing : The bill is replacing illegal workers with legal ones , these advocates argue , thus allowing American employers legally to meet legitimate business needs and uniting families kept apart by poorly fashioned immigration laws .
“ You ’ re having to play catch-up for 20 years of neglect of this system , ” says Mary Giovagnoli , director of the Immigration Policy Center and a former aide to the late Sen. Edward Kennedy ( D ) of Massachusetts during the 2007 immigration reform effort .
Without creating a functional ( and larger ) legal immigration system , they say , the lures for illegal immigration will remain .
But the only hard numbers being thrown around are from immigration reform critics like Sen. Jeff Sessions ( R ) of Alabama and low-immigrant advocacy groups like Numbers USA , who believe the current Senate bill could double the number of foreigners who gain legal residence over the next decade and add scores of low-skilled workers to an economy with persistently high unemployment .
“ Wages have not gone up for the working American over the last 15 or 20 years . My Democrat colleagues have hammered that for a long time , not so much lately , ” Senator Sessions said at a hearing earlier this week . “ So we have high unemployment , particularly among low-skilled workers , and we have these highly capable people ... arguing for more low-skilled workers . And I do n't see how that can be justified at a time we have high unemployment . ”
Today , the US allows about 1 million foreigners to become legal , permanent residents every year . The majority of those come by way of family connections , with about one-fifth entering for employment reasons and one-tenth coming to the US as refugees or for asylum .
The nation also admits roughly 600,000 more foreigners on temporary work permits , according to an analysis from the Migration Policy Institute of 2012 immigration data .
During the next decade , the Senate bill would completely clear the more than 4.5 million children , parents , and siblings of current American citizens who are waiting in backlogs for family-based immigration . This is a key requirement , said a Senate Democratic aide involved in drafting the legislation , in order to assure that no illegal immigrants gain permanent status in the US ahead of anyone who attempted to enter the country legally .
While the vast majority of the estimated 10 million to 12 million undocumented immigrants in the country now will have to wait at least 10 years to become permanent residents , most will become eligible to work as soon as the secretary of Homeland Security submits a report on how to secure the nation ’ s southern border – and there are some groups who could become permanent residents sooner .
Some 2 million “ DREAMers , ” or immigrants brought to the US illegally before age 16 , would have a special path to permanent status in five years . Some of the roughly 1 million agricultural workers in the US illegally would also have a path allowing them permanent status between three and seven years .
The bill would also exempt wide swaths of people currently counted against immigration caps from any limits : The spouses and children of legal permanent residents would be allowed to come to the country on an unlimited basis , for example .
Thus , some combination of , perhaps , 7 million DREAMers , agricultural workers , and the newly legalized family members of current US citizens will be able to petition for their family members , further swelling legal immigration by an indeterminate amount .
And beginning five years after the bill is enacted , the Senate measure would create a new “ merit based ” immigration category with 125,000 initial visas ( a figure that could rise to as many as 250,000 over time ) that includes a path to a green card and citizenship , adding more than half a million potential new permanent US residents before the decade is out .
A new low-skilled worker program that would offer some of those in the program a path to permanent residency would begin with 20,000 visas in the year 2015 and gradually scale up to 75,000 visas during the next four years .
This is in addition to a beefed-up agricultural worker program and expanded visas for high-skilled workers ( from 65,000 to 110,000 ) and exempting many extremely high-skilled foreigners – those with doctorate-level education , certain physicians , and business executives , among others – from immigration caps altogether .
On the other hand , the bill closes some avenues of immigration , such as the 55,000 annual visas available in the diversity visa lottery and the 65,000 visas available for siblings of US citizens .
When immigration skeptics like Sessions and Roy Beck , the head of Numbers USA , add up the figures , they see a 50 percent increase in US immigration on an annual basis and as many as 20 million more new green cards within the next dozen years than would otherwise be authorized – and perhaps as many as 30 million more , according to a Republican aide .
Why is it so hard to calculate the bill 's exact effect ? Immigration law is very , very complex .
The new Senate employment-based programs , for example , would flex with employer demand , in some cases . Moreover , the fact that some temporary-worker categories , such as high-skilled visas , can eventually lead to green cards makes immigration flows in any given year difficult to ascertain .
While immigration reform adversaries can craft scenarios in which new immigrants petition for multiple family members each and bump the figures up significantly , Democrats point out that employment-based immigrants ( toward whom future immigration flows will be more heavily tilted ) are less likely to do that .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Because the figures flex over time , however , immigration advocates are reluctant to offer an exact number – and expose themselves to political pyrotechnics from Beck and Sessions .
“ Part of the reason that we ’ re reluctant to give specific numbers is because it is so complicated , and we ’ re very aware that Numbers USA and all those other guys are going to have a field day with that , ” says Ms. Giovagnoli . “ We ’ re trying to be thoughtful about how we calculate those numbers . ”