CLOSE Kirstjen Nielsen says she still shares President Trump 's goal of securing the border , a day after she resigned as Homeland Security secy . ( April 8 ) AP
WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump says his administration wants to pursue a `` tougher direction '' on immigration , and the president is overseeing a leadership purge at the top levels of the Department of Homeland Security to make it happen .
But what does a `` tougher direction '' mean ? And does the president have new options following the resignation Sunday of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen ?
`` Within DHS , there have been a lot of policy suggestions , small and large , that have been worked up but have been blocked by the people who are the heads of the agencies , '' said Roy Beck , president of NumbersUSA , a group that advocates for lower levels of legal and illegal immigration .
Start the day smarter : Get ███ 's Daily Briefing in your inbox
Nielsen 's departure : After resigning , Kirstjen Nielsen says she supports Trump 's goal of 'securing the border '
Nielsen : Homeland Security Secretary resigns amid migrant surge at US-Mexico border
A look at some of the ideas that may be on the table :
Immigration advocacy groups were bracing Tuesday for the possibility that the Trump administration would return to the `` zero tolerance '' policy that led to the separation of thousands of migrant families .
Then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions issued a memo last year requiring that all immigrants entering the country illegally would be prosecuted . But a 1997 settlement in a federal court case required the U.S. to release children immigrants after 20 days . To honor both commitments , the Trump administration separated children and adults .
Trump backed down under immense pressure , signing an order in June to end family separations . Immigration advocates pointed to reports Monday that Trump and adviser Stephen Miller want to re-start the process with Nielsen gone .
Nielsen resignation : Donald Trump 's Cabinet agencies are increasingly led by 'acting ' secretaries
`` Trump and Stephen Miller 's desire to go in a 'tougher direction ' means we are heading for an even more dangerous and draconian era , '' said Kerri Talbot , director of federal advocacy for the advocacy group Immigration Hub .
`` More families will be separated while Trump and Miller disregard the law and create chaos in our immigration system , '' she said .
Trump repeatedly threatened to close the border last month before he retreated in recent days , arguing that Mexico had taken a more aggressive stance on apprehending Central American migrants in response to his words .
Closing all ports of entry along the U.S.-Mexico border would be a logistical and economic nightmare , experts say . Roughly $ 1.5 billion in trade takes place across the border every day . But past presidents – including Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan – took steps to slow traffic through checkpoints to send a political message to Mexico .
Reagan closed nine border crossings and increased inspections at the rest in 1985 , a response to the abduction and murder of Drug Enforcement Agency agent Enrique Camarena . Nixon approved Operation Intercept during his first year in office , increasing inspections at U.S.-Mexico border crossings to stem the flow of drugs .
More : 'It was long past time for her to go ' : Dems welcome Kirstjen Nielsen 's departure as DHS secretary
More : Who is Kevin McAleenan , Trump 's acting homeland security chief after Kirstjen Nielsen leaves ?
Trump threatened last week to impose a 25 % tariff on all cars made in Mexico and shipped into the U.S. if the Mexican government stopped apprehending immigrants who cross the border illegally . If that doesn ’ t work , he said , then he would close the border .
The U.S. , however , already has agreed not to impose tariffs on cars built in Mexico .
.... This will supersede USMCA . Likewise I am looking at an economic penalty for the 500 Billion Dollars in illegal DRUGS that are shipped and smuggled through Mexico and across our Southern Border . Over 100,00 Americans die each year , sooo many families destroyed ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) April 5 , 2019
A new trade agreement the Trump administration negotiated last year with Mexico and Canada includes a side letter that specifically exempts a certain number of passenger vehicles from any new tariffs the U.S. might impose on autos under the guise of national security .
For Mexico , the agreement means that 2.6 million passenger cars would be exempted from any new tariffs .
Trump , however , said on Twitter that his latest threat to impose tariffs would “ supersede ” the new trade pact .
Trump has sought to limit the number of people seeking asylum , claiming the system is a `` scam '' and that migrants only use the claims to get a foot in the door before disappearing rather than going through the process of confirming their eligibility .
Under Nielsen , the Trump administration sought to address that problem by requiring asylum claimants to remain in Mexico rather than entering the U.S. A federal judge Monday blocked that policy , ruling that DHS overstepped its legal authority .
Beck , with NumbersUSA , said the administration may now be considering changes to executive decisions made by past administrations .
More : Nielsen resignation does n't change fact child sexual abuse at border is real emergency
Among those , for instance , would be deputizing Customs and Border Patrol agents to take a more substantial role in deciding whether asylum claimants have a credible case to remain in the country . Supporters said that move could speed up reviews so migrants who do n't meet asylum requirements are returned to their native country more quickly .
`` There are some innovative ideas that have to do with way regulations are put together , '' Beck said . `` One of the big knocks against the current DHS secretary is that a lot of proposals have gone to her office and just died there . ''