President Donald Trump threatened to shut down the government during a heated argument with Democratic congressional leaders in the Oval Office on Tuesday in a remarkable display of partisan bickering just 10 days before a partial shutdown is set to take effect .
“ I am proud to shut down the government for border security , ” Trump said bluntly . “ I will take the mantle . I will be the one to shut it down . I ’ m not going to blame you for it . The last time you shut it down , it didn ’ t work . I will take the mantle of shutting down . And I ’ m going to shut it down for border security . ”
The remark came during an extraordinary 15-minute on-camera argument that began with Trump insisting that House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-CA ) and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D-NY ) should help him fund a border wall . Trump has asked for $ 5 billion in border-security funding , but Democrats have said $ 1.6 billion is their red line .
At first , both leaders sat silently listening to Trump read dubious figures and repeat falsehoods about how much of the wall has already been built . When Pelosi reminded the president that he does not have enough votes in the House to fund it , the president pivoted and began boasting about his party ’ s electoral gains in the Senate .
“ When the president brags that he won North Dakota and Indiana , he ’ s in real trouble , ” Schumer said with a laugh .
An exasperated Pelosi repeated to Trump that he does not have enough votes among House Republicans alone to fully fund a border wall , and Trump responded by saying he needs 60 votes in the Senate , where Republicans have just a 51-to-49 majority , to get anything to his desk .
“ The fact is , you do not have the votes in the House , ” Pelosi said , to which Trump insisted : “ Nancy , I do . ”
Schumer then confronted Trump directly over his exaggerations and mistruths about the border wall .
“ We have a lot of disagreements here . The Washington Post today gave you a whole lot of Pinocchios because they say you constantly misstate how much of the wall is built , ” a defiant Schumer said . “ You have called 20 times to shut down the government . You say , ‘ I want to shut down the government. ’ We don ’ t . We want to come to an agreement . ”
At one point , Trump jabbed at Pelosi , saying , “ Nancy ’ s in a situation where it ’ s not easy for her to talk right now . ”
Pelosi fired back immediately , telling the president , “ Please don ’ t characterize the strength that I bring to this meeting as leader of the House Democrats who just won a big victory . ”
After the meeting , Schumer vented about the president ’ s tone during the sit-down . “ This temper tantrum that he seems to throw will not get him his wall , ” he said .
The partisan jabbing , which came during a photo opportunity before Trump was set to negotiate with Pelosi and Schumer behind closed doors , represented a preview of what to expect with a divided government next year , when Democrats officially take control of the House of Representatives .
“ Unfortunately , this has spiraled downward when we came at a place to say , how do we meet the needs of the American people , ” Pelosi said .
During the tense exchanges , Vice President Mike Pence sat stoically next to Trump and remained silent .
After the meeting , some Republicans began rallying behind the president . Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-SC ) , a Trump ally , tweeted , “ Great job sticking to your guns on border security , Mr. President ! You are right to want more border security funding including Wall money . They are WRONG to say no . ”