Nearly a dozen illegal immigrations announced a campaign Wednesday to force President Obama ’ s hand on halting deportations , saying they would file papers demanding to be let into the existing program granting legal status to so-called Dreamers , although none qualifies .
Some of the immigrants came as children and would have qualified except they went home for college and then came back , while others are parents of Dreamers who already have legal status under Mr. Obama ’ s 2012 program . And one is Jose Antonio Vargas , a former Washington Post reporter who was a few months too old to qualify for the Dreamer policy , and whose case has become a flashpoint in the immigration debate .
Mr. Vargas , who travels the country advocating for illegal immigrants , said they often hear complaints from Americans who tell them they should get in the back of the immigration line . But he said that ’ s impossible for most illegal immigrants , saying there is “ no line ” for them to get in that would earn them legal status from within the U.S .
“ This morning , by submitting our applications , we created a line , a process . Now it ’ s up to the Obama administration . The ball is in your court , Mr. President , ” Mr. Vargas said .
Some of the 11 had never publicly outed themselves as illegal immigrants before , and as they addressed the press in a news conference in Washington , many of them said they were nervous .
The illegal immigrants aimed their plea at Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson .
The Department of Homeland Security didn ’ t respond to a request for comment on the applications .
Mr. Obama is pondering whether to expand his current nondeportation orders to include illegal immigrant parents of U.S. citizens and Dreamers , who have already received tentative legal status .
Mr. Obama ’ s legal ability to issue the original 2012 policy is already facing a court challenge , and his power to expand the policy is being heatedly debated within legal circles and on Capitol Hill .
Opponents say that if Mr. Obama were to expand his policy , it would doom any chance for working with Congress in 2015 or 2016 on a bigger immigration bill .
And if Republicans win control of the Senate , they would almost certainly use their near-complete control over spending bills to try to halt some of Mr. Obama ’ s nondeportation policies , forcing the president to have to choose between vetoing government spending or relinquishing on enforcement .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , Alabama Republican , is leading an effort to have activists push their senators to know where they stand on a bill that passed the House in July to halt Mr. Obama ’ s nondeportation policy , known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) .
“ The American people have begged and pleaded for years for our immigration laws to be enforced . But the politicians have refused , ” Mr . Sessions said last week .
The 11 illegal immigrants are also seeking deferred action , which means an official grant of tentative legal status , a work permit to allow them to get jobs and potentially a number of state benefits such as in-state tuition fees and driver ’ s licenses .
The existing DACA policy applied to Dreamers — those who came to the U.S. illegally while under age 16 , were under 31 as of June 15 , 2012 , and had been in the country continuously for five years leading up to that date .
It ’ s not clear how many of the 11 who filed applications Wednesday would be deported even without getting deferred action . Mr. Obama has said immigration agents should only target recent border crossers , those with significant criminal records or those who have previously been deported but who snuck back into the U.S .
Activists , though , say it is unfair to target those who have been deported and snuck back in , saying that crimes stemming from illegal immigration shouldn ’ t be considered in deciding who gets deported .
They also said that freedom from deportation isn ’ t enough — they need the work permits that come with deferred action in order to support their families .
The 11 who filed applications Wednesday said they are representative of the more than 11 million illegal immigrants estimated to be in the U.S .