WASHINGTON—The Trump administration is moving ahead to allow an additional 30,000 seasonal workers to return to the U.S. this summer , a higher-than-expected number that reflects internal tensions in the White House ’ s approach to legal immigration .
A rule to issue the extra visas , known as H-2Bs , to foreign workers who have held them in the past was cleared last week by the White House Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs . The administration had earlier indicated it was leaning toward only an additional 15,000 such visas .
Landscapers , fisheries , county fairs and holiday resorts—including President Trump ’ s own golf and beach clubs—all use the H-2B program to fill lower-skilled jobs they say they can ’ t find Americans to do . Such visas have been capped at an annual 66,000—33,000 for summer , 33,000 for winter—and demand routinely outstrips supply .
Share Your Thoughts Which types of jobs should the U.S. open up to foreign seasonal workers ? Join the conversation below .
Congress allows the administration to raise the cap each year . The Labor Department and Department of Homeland Security together authorized 15,000 extra visas a year in 2017 and 2018 .
Half of all H-2B visas in 2017 went to agricultural and horticultural industries , according to the most recent U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services data on approvals . Building and construction , forestry and logging , food services and handlers , helpers and laborers accounted for most of the rest , the data indicate .
The rule comes during an immigration tug of war in the administration between U.S. business allies on one side , who want relaxed rules on recruiting overseas to facilitate growth in a tight jobs market , and immigration restrictionists on the other , who say U.S. workers will see wages rise only if foreign workers are prevented from undercutting them .
The group NumbersUSA , which favors immigration restrictions , launched a cable-TV ad campaign in late April , partly in response to the administration ’ s plans for more H-2B visas .
“ The ad is responding to a number of developments in which businesses are receiving or demanding more work visas so they don ’ t have to recruit from the millions of Americans [ who ] are not in the labor market at all , ” said Roy Beck , the head of NumbersUSA . “ The H-2B increases are one of those troubling developments . ”
Top White House officials such as Stephen Miller are seeking to restrict legal immigration programs , which also include H-1B visas for high-skilled workers , and B-1 and B-2 visas for business and leisure visitors from certain countries whose nationals have high rates of overstaying . The officials see such restrictions as following through on Mr. Trump ’ s 2016 campaign promises to put American jobs first .
Meanwhile , Jared Kushner , the president ’ s adviser and son-in-law , emboldened by success with the bipartisan criminal-justice overhaul passed by Congress last year , said he is finalizing a legislative proposal to overhaul immigration . He has consulted extensively with business advocates , and the result may be to offer a larger number of H-1B visas for high-skilled workers , with fewer restrictions such as on the number of green cards available for any one particular country .
As recently as April , officials were citing the success of a new program to investigate companies the administration sees as discriminating against American workers in favor of temporary workers , the Protecting U.S. Workers Initiative , housed in the Department of Justice Civil Rights Division .
The initiative to date has reached settlements with five companies , including a landscaping and housekeeping company , for failing to follow all the steps required of the H-2B program ; the companies paid tens of thousands of dollars in compensation and penalties . This year , the initiative announced its first settlement with a company related to the H-1B program .
“ We are proud of these collaborations and the results we have achieved so far to stop discrimination against U.S. workers . We know , however , that much more work needs to be done , ” said Justice Department official Mary Thomas , at an administration-organized event last month billed as a listening session for workers and industry leaders .
Other members of the Trump administration have said they favor new legislation to guarantee a number of H-2B visas each year . “ For the last two years , rather than come to a decision as to what the right number is , Congress has simply chosen not to act , ” said Labor Secretary Alex Acosta , testifying last month after saying that he supported the 30,000 increase .
“ Businesses can ’ t plan . They don ’ t know how many visas are going to be available . And we owe them greater certainty , ” Mr. Acosta said .
Questions over low-skilled and high-skilled foreign labor divide Congress—and political parties .
A group of five senators including Dianne Feinstein ( D. , Calif. ) , Chuck Grassley ( R. , Iowa ) , Dick Durbin ( D. , Illinois ) and Tom Cotton ( R. , Ark . ) said in a letter released in early April that they had “ serious reservations about the harmful impact of the H-2B visa program on both immigrant and American workers , ” and asked for the increase to be reconsidered .
Another group of 11 senators including Republicans Cory Gardner of Colorado , Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Susan Collins of Maine , as well as Maine independent Angus King and Democrats from Alabama , Delaware and Minnesota , called on Department of Homeland Security Acting Secretary Kevin McAleenan in late April to expedite the release of the additional visas .
“ The states we represent lack the working-age population needed to meet the demands for seasonal jobs , ” their letter said , adding that the 30,000 extra visas “ will provide much-needed relief . ”