Around 4 million unauthorized immigrants are stuck in legal limbo more than two weeks after a federal judge in Texas suspended President Obama 's move to temporarily protect them from deportation .
Many of these parents of U.S. citizens and green-card holders are worried that the government will now force them to leave the U.S . The lack of legal clarity also means some of them are being treated inconsistently by government officials .
Wilfredis Ayala , a construction worker from El Salvador , would have been helped by President Obama 's deferred action program for parents staying in the U.S. illegally . Ayala , 30 , has been dodging deportation orders for the past 10 years after crossing the U.S.-Mexico border illegally by car .
Now living on Long Island , N.Y. , with his U.S.-born , 5-year-old son , Justin , Ayala says he 's never had trouble with the police — until he was arrested last January for trespassing on private property while taking a shortcut through his neighborhood . That put him in the sights of Immigration and Customs Enforcement , or ICE , which was ready to finally deport him before his lawyer got him released from the detention center .
`` I cried tears of joy to be with my son again , to be able to hug him and kiss him and play with him , '' Ayala says in Spanish . `` The whole time I was locked up I longed to be with him . ''
Ayala 's lawyer , Bryan Johnson , argued that his client was eligible for Obama 's deferred action program for parents , which temporarily protected Ayala from deportation until the Texas court ruling put the program on hold . Now , Johnson says he 's not sure what will happen during their next appointment with immigration officials .
`` I 'm going to tell ICE that we 're waiting for deferred action , and then from there , we 'll see what happens , '' says Johnson , a partner at the immigration law firm Amoachi & Johnson . `` But I mean he 's not safe because there is no deferred action to apply for . ''
In a statement , an ICE spokesman says the agency is still focusing on deporting criminals and those who recently crossed the border illegally first — priorities that the president emphasized during a recent town hall meeting televised by MSNBC and Telemundo .
`` If you 've been here for a long time and if you qualify , generally , then during this period , even with legal uncertainty , they should be in a good place , '' Obama told the audience in Miami .
But Marty Rosenbluth , who teaches immigration law at Elon University , says that some local immigration offices have been applying the policy inconsistently and detaining parents who would have been left alone before the Texas court ruling .
`` It 's created a huge amount of fear , and people who were preparing to apply now do n't know what to do , '' he says .
Rosenbluth adds this could have a long-term impact on Obama 's deferred action programs if the courts allow them to take effect . ( The government is still accepting applications for the original deferred action program for young immigrants who came before turning 16 and have lived in the U.S. since 2007 . )
`` Convincing people that it 's safe is going to be a lot tougher even if this temporary injunction is overturned , '' he says .
It could be months before the legal battle over the president 's deferred action programs is finished in the courts . A judge is still reviewing the Obama administration 's request for the programs to go ahead while the lawsuit continues .
But Ayala is facing a much shorter timeline ; he 's due back in front of immigration officials next Wednesday .
`` The truth is , '' he says in Spanish , `` I do n't know what is going to happen that day . ''