Senators on Thursday blocked all four plans dealing with immigration as President Trump torpedoed one proposal as “ a total catastrophe ” and his Department of Homeland Security lambasted it as the “ end of immigration enforcement in America . ”
During a series of afternoon procedural votes , no immigration amendments crossed the 60 vote threshold that would have cut off debate and paved the way for final votes .
The effort to pass immigration legislation comes as Democrats insist on protecting young illegal immigrants brought to the country as children and Trump demands funding for a border wall .
Ahead of the votes , the Trump administration focused on the bipartisan agreement drawn up by a “ Gang of 22 ” that would grant a 10-12 year path to the young illegal immigrants or Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) recipients .
The amendment failed by only getting 54 votes . Forty five senators voted against it .
The administration objected to the bill ’ s failure to address so-called “ chain migration ” -- by which immigrants can sponsor a broad number of relatives to come join them in the U.S. Trump has said that he wants to limit sponsorship to children and spouses .
The bill also would not end the visa lottery system , which allows 55,000 immigrants into the country each year and has been dogged by accusations of fraud and abuse .
Ahead of the vote , the DHS warned the plan would mean the “ end of immigration enforcement in America . ”
Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , meanwhile , accused Trump on the Senate floor of trying to spike the deal .
“ Why ? Because it isn ’ t 100 percent of what the president wants on immigration ? That ’ s not how our democracy works – you don ’ t get 100 percent of what you want in a democracy , ” he said . “ Maybe in a dictatorship . ”
Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C , who supported the amendment , said `` our proposal would represent the most significant change to immigration law in the past thirty-five years . '' Sen. Tim Kaine , D-Va. , called it “ the best chance to protect Dreamers against deportation from the only country they know as home . ''
In two tweets , Trump said the “ Schumer-Rounds-Collins immigration bill would be a total catastrophe . ”
“ It creates a giant amnesty ( including for dangerous criminals ) , doesn ’ t build the wall , expands chain migration , keeps the visa lottery , continues deadly catch-and-release , and bars enforcement even for FUTURE illegal immigrants , ” Trump said . “ Voting for this amendment would be a vote AGAINST law enforcement , and a vote FOR open borders . ”
Trump added : “ If Dems are actually serious about DACA , they should support the Grassley bill ! ”
That proposal , authored by Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley , was also rejected .
Senators also blocked a plan by Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz. , and Sen. Chris Coons , D-Del. , which would allow DACA recipients to qualify for permanent residency while directing agencies to control the border by 2020 .
And another plan offered by Sen. Pat Toomey , R-Pa. , that would block federal grants to sanctuary cities that do not cooperate with federal authorities on illegal immigration also failed to pass a test vote .