It ’ s here . President Trump ’ s travel ban — after two executive orders , several court rulings , and a huge administration victory from the Supreme Court — is back .
At 8pm Eastern time on Thursday , the ban — which temporarily bars some people from getting visas if they come from Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria , or Yemen for the next 90 days , as well as barring an untold number of refugees for 120 days —went into effect in airports around America and consular offices around the world .
The administration appears to be trying to avoid the chaos that plagued the first iteration of the “ travel ban , ” which was in effect for a week after getting signed in late January but was ultimately put on hold by the courts . ( The version going into effect tonight was a modified executive order signed by President Trump in March , and further modified by a Supreme Court ruling on Monday that allowed the ban to partially go into effect while the courts weigh its constitutionality . )
This time , the administration ’ s trying to set clear rules about who will be allowed to enter ( thanks to the Supreme Court ’ s mandate to the Trump administration on Monday ) because they have a “ bona fide relationship ” with someone or something in the US .
Mere minutes before the ban was set to go live , the State Department reversed itself to allow fiances of people in the United States to enter the country .
Advocacy groups are still upset by the administration ’ s narrow definition of “ bona fide ” family relationships ( which still excludes grandparents ) . And the government is hinting that refugees who ’ ve been placed with a resettlement agency won ’ t be allowed to come to the US unless they have close family members here — which would severely limit refugee resettlement in the US over the next 4 months .
And it ’ s still impossible to rule out the possibility that something will go down in the airports .
Starting at 8 pm Eastern on Thursday , US consulates and embassies around the world will no longer approve visas for people traveling on passports from Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria , or Yemen to come to the United States , unless those people can establish a “ bona fide relationship ” with someone or something in the US .
A “ bona fide relationship ” can be with a business or university in the US — for example , if the person has a job offer or a conference invitation — or it can be with certain family members .
Only certain family members , however , will count as “ bona fide ” relationships . According to the State Department cable , applicants ( or refugees seeking to be admitted to the US ) who have a “ parent ( including parent-in-law ) , spouse , child , adult son or daughter , son-in-law , daughter-in-law , sibling ” or half sibling — or a “ step ” version of any of those relationships ( stepparent , stepchild , etc ) — in the US will be approved , because that relationship counts as “ bona fide. ” But other relationships don ’ t — including grandparents and grandchildren , aunts , uncles , nieces , nephews , and cousins .
Initially , fiancé ( e ) s of people living in the US were not considered “ bona fide ” family . But 15 minutes before the ban was supposed to go into effect Thursday , the State Department updated its FAQ to state that fiancé ( e ) s were supposed to be granted visas .
People traveling for business , meanwhile , are only going to get visas if the US government determines that they ’ re not just being invited to the US to circumvent the ban .
There are exceptions . Consular officers are supposed to grant visas to people who ’ d otherwise be banned in some particular circumstances — for example , if they ’ re in need of urgent medical care or doing business with the US government — or if the officer ( with leadership approval ) decides that denying the visa would cause undue hardship and allowing the person to come is in the US ’ national interest .
Anyone who already has a valid visa as of 8 pm Eastern on Thursday is supposed to be allowed into the US , according to President Trump ’ s executive order .
What the ban means for refugees who don ’ t have “ bona fide ” family members in the US according to the categories laid out by the State Department . Many advocates have argued that the Supreme Court ’ s ruling should permit nearly all refugees to enter the US , because refugees have to be placed with a resettlement agency before entering the country , and that should count as a “ bona fide ” relationship . But the Supreme Court didn ’ t specify that , and the administration doesn ’ t seem to be taking it that way .
In a press call on Thursday , a senior administration official said that “ the fact that a resettlement agency in the United States has provided a formal assurance for refugees seeking admission is not sufficient , in and of itself , to establish a bona fide relationship under the ruling. ” It ’ s not yet clear whether this means refugees will only be admitted if they already have close family in the US , or whether some stage in the resettlement process will count as a “ bona fide ” relationship . And all refugees who are scheduled to arrive in the US through July 6th will be able to come without incident . But after that , tens of thousands of refugees , and the resettlement agencies in the US that employ people to help them , remain under a cloud of uncertainty — and it ’ s not looking good .
Whether Customs and Border Protection agents will cite the ban to detain anyone entering the US . Senior administration officials assured the press on Thursday that people with valid visas would be allowed into the US once the ban went into effect Thursday night . And because no one ’ s allowed to board a US-bound plane without a valid visa , there shouldn ’ t be any problems for anyone landing in the US . However , the overly-aggressive and inconsistent implementation of the first version of this executive order , back in January , has made many lawyers and advocates worry that CBP agents might be overly aggressive , or poorly trained , in implementing this guidance . Pro bono lawyers are already stationed at many international airports around the US , hoping to monitor how people coming in are being treated .
How generous consular officers are going to be in granting waivers for “ undue hardship . ”
How transparent consular officers will be in denying visas — and CBP officers will be in denying admission to people arriving in the US . The US government can deny a visa for almost any reason , and it ’ s near-impossible to challenge a visa denial . People who are from the 6 affected countries but have a “ bona fide relationship ” could still be denied visas for other reasons . And even if someone has a valid visa and comes to the US , the government ( through CBP ) has wide latitude to stop him from formally entering.If such denials are common , it might raise the suspicion that the government is using other criteria for visa denial and admissibility as a backdoor way to expand the scope of the ban .
Whether US courts are going to agree with the Trump administration ’ s interpretation of “ bona fide ” family members . US immigration law has always made distinctions among different types of family relationships . But the Supreme Court ’ s ruling didn ’ t make any distinctions among degrees of relationship when it set the standard for a “ bona fide ” relationship on Monday , and it ’ s not clear whether the courts will agree that it ’ s fair to say a grandmother doesn ’ t have a “ bona fide ” relationship with her grandchild . It is a near-certainty that , as soon as visas start getting denied under the ban , the US-based relatives will claim the Trump administration has violated the terms of the Supreme Court ’ s order by implementing the ban even when it wasn ’ t supposed to , and there will probably be a profusion of lawsuits . The question is whether federal courts will side with families or with the government , and whether — with the Supreme Court out for the summer — various courts around the country will come to different conclusions and create a patchwork of interpretations of the ban .
UPDATE : This article has been updated to include details from the full text of the State Department cable , and from reports of a press call with senior administration officials .