Imagine your city council telling the police department how many people it had to keep in jail each night .
That 's effectively what Congress has told U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement with a policy known as the `` detention bed mandate . '' The mandate calls for filling 34,000 beds in some 250 facilities across the country , per day , with immigrant detainees .
When NPR visited the Department of Homeland Security 's detention center in Florence , Ariz. , hundreds of men — nearly all from Latin America — were lining up for lunch . They were caught by the Border Patrol or , if apprehended away from the border , by local police and Immigration and Customs Enforcement . People can stay behind the razor-wire fences for days , weeks or years .
NPR was not allowed to talk with anyone in the detention center , but Francisco Rincon , who was recently released from Florence on bond , says he was in the facility for three weeks . Every day he was in detention cost taxpayers at least $ 120 . Add up all the nation 's detention centers and that 's more than $ 2 billion a year .
The detention bed mandate , which began in 2009 , is just part of the massive increase in enforcement-only immigration policies over the last two decades . The last time Congress passed a broad immigration law dealing with something other than enforcement — such as overhauling visa or guest worker policies — was 1986 .
Supporters of the directive include Rep. Hal Rogers , chairman of the House Appropriations Committee . In an email , the Kentucky Republican wrote that the bed mandate is `` intended to compel the agency to enforce existing immigration law . ''
But Janet Napolitano , former secretary of the Department of Homeland Security , called the bed mandate `` artificial '' when she spoke to a House Appropriations subcommittee in April . `` We ought to be managing the actual detention population to risk , not to an arbitrary number , '' she said .
Immigrants in detention range from violent criminals to people with no criminal history . On the day NPR visited Florence , nearly two-thirds of the 400 detainees had no known criminal record .
Take Rincon . He came to the U.S. from Mexico eight years ago and had no trouble with the law . Then he was arrested by the Border Patrol near Tucson when he took a wrong turn on his way home from work as a day laborer . Rincon has a hearing before an immigration judge in February , and he says he 'll ask to remain in the U.S. legally .
`` Because for Mexicans , particularly from Chiapas , where I 'm from , it is very hard to get a visa , '' he says through an interpreter . `` Otherwise , we come with visas . ''
That kind of story upsets immigrant-rights activists . They say ICE and local police departments are arresting more and more people for less and less .
`` They 're trying to pick people up for either very minor traffic violations or other minor convictions that would n't be considered serious , but that they can quantify as a criminal alien , '' says Nina Rabin , an immigration law professor at the University of Arizona .
Immigration hard-liners not only disagree with that contention , they want even more aggressive enforcement . They say the current detention system is too lax — and point to a startling statistic : As of October , a total of 870,000 immigrants have absconded after being ordered deported . They 've gone back underground . ICE confirms that number .
Jessica Vaughan , director of policy studies for the Center for Immigration Studies , a Washington-based think-tank that favors tougher enforcement , says the only way to make sure that people ordered deported actually leave is to keep them under lock and key .
`` Detention is necessary because of the high risk that people are simply going to flee or skip out on their hearings , '' Vaughan says .
Victor Cerda , ICE 's head of detention and removal during part of the George W. Bush administration , says that argument is `` very simplistic . '' Such extensive detention , he says , is `` very expensive . It 's very resource intensive . ''
Cerda agrees that detention is the surest way to hold people , but says that building tens of thousands more detention beds is unrealistic .
`` If you know what the problem is and the complexity of it , you quickly realize that there is not enough money in the government , '' he says . `` And I do n't think the taxpayers are ready to fork over the amount necessary to detain everybody . ''
There are options besides locking up tens of thousands of people . Alternative forms of supervision range from GPS-monitored ankle bracelets to routine check-ins with ICE . Those alternatives can cost less than $ 10 a day , but the budget for alternatives is only about 3 percent of the federal budget for detention .
The immigration bill passed by the Senate earlier this year calls for increased use of detention alternatives , but the House has yet to pass an immigration overhaul . It reinforced the status quo in June — voting down a Democratic-sponsored end to the detention bed mandate .