President Obama ’ s new deportation amnesty will remain halted , a federal judge in Texas ruled Tuesday night in an order that also delivered a judicial spanking to the president ’ s lawyers for misleading the court .
Judge Andrew S. Hanen , who first halted the amnesty in February , just two days before it was to take effect , said he ’ s even more convinced of his decision now , particularly after Mr. Obama earlier this year said he intends for his policies to supersede federal laws .
Judge Hanen pointed to Mr. Obama ’ s comments at a February town hall when the president warned immigration agents to adhere to his policies or else face “ consequences . ”
“ In summary , the chief executive has ordered that the laws requiring removal of illegal immigrants that conflict with the 2014 DHS directive are not to be enforced , and that anyone who attempts to do so will be punished , ” Judge Hanen wrote .
“ This is not merely ineffective enforcement . This is total non-enforcement , ” the judge continued , saying that Mr. Obama ’ s own descriptions of how he is carrying out his policies have hurt his case .
Mr. Obama in November announced a new amnesty for illegal immigrant parents whose children are either U.S. citizens or legal permanent residents . The amnesty could apply to as many as 5 million illegal immigrants .
Texas and 25 other states sued to stop Mr. Obama , and Judge Hanen sided with them , finding that they suffered an economic harm from the policy , granting them standing in court , and then finding that the president broke the law in bypassing Congress to announce his policy .
The administration has appealed Judge Hanen ’ s ruling , but also asked the judge to reconsider .
On Tuesday the judge not only refused to reconsider , but also said the administration misled him when it said no part of the amnesty had been implemented , and the lawyers bungled their attempt to try to repair the damage by filing an “ advisory ” with the judge early last month .
Since November , the administration had been granting a three-year amnesty to illegal immigrant Dreamers under the new policy . That ’ s a year longer than the two-year program Mr. Obama announced for the Dreamers in 2012 .
More than 100,000 applications were approved for the three-year amnesty between Nov. 21 and the February date when Judge Hanen halted the program .
“ Whether by ignorance , omission , purposeful misdirection , or because they were misled by their clients , the attorneys for the government misrepresented the facts , ” the judge said , adding that he was stunned the government waited for two more weeks after his ruling to inform him that the applications had already been processed .
Texas argues that had it known applications were being processed , it would have taken extra legal steps to try to halt the program earlier .
Judge Hanen said he may still issue sanctions against the government for misleading him — though he declined to strike the government ’ s pleadings , which would have essentially closed the case and granted victory to Texas .
The judge said that while that may be warranted , it would do a disservice to the weighty issues at stake in the case , including fundamental issues of presidential power .
Instead , the judge granted Texas ’ s request for limited discovery , demanding the federal government turn over documents showing its thought-process as it grappled with how to tell the court that it had already been processing applications .
In his decision upholding his injunction , meanwhile , Judge Hanen gave tremendous weight in his 15-page ruling to Mr. Obama ’ s February town hall when he described how he would carry out his policy and warned immigration agents of “ consequences ” to not following his dictates .
Just hours before Judge Hanen ruled , however , the appeals court that oversees him ruled in a separate challenge to Mr. Obama ’ s 2012 amnesty for Dreamers , and ignored the president ’ s warnings of consequences to agents . In that case , a three-judge panel of the 5th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that agents had ultimate discretion about whether or not to follow the new policies .
The Fifth Circuit next week will hold oral arguments on the government ’ s appeal of Judge Hanen ’ s ruling , and immigrant-rights activists said they hoped Tuesday ’ s ruling on the 2012 amnesty showed the court was inclined to allow Mr. Obama ’ s 2014 amnesty to take effect as well .