Schumer 's office reached out to Ryan to talk about moving forward with immigration . | AP Photos Schumer , Ryan talk immigration
Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer has held private talks on immigration with Republican Reps. Paul Ryan and Trey Gowdy . President Barack Obama ’ s emissaries have spoken with House GOP leadership about an overhaul . Speaker John Boehner and Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi have also chatted on the House floor about immigration .
It sometimes seems like House Republicans are in their own universe when it comes to rewriting the nation ’ s immigration laws . But since late last year , key House Republicans have been meeting with House and Senate Democrats as they try to reach a deal .
The talks haven ’ t led to any agreement on hugely controversial issues like a pathway to citizenship for the estimated 11.7 million undocumented immigrants in the United States . But they provide a window into the urgency — and high stakes — surrounding the immigration reform debate .
These are far from formal negotiations , and essentially amount to private information trading between Capitol power players .
But the sideline chats illustrate that House Republicans — long skittish about tackling the hot-button issue — aren ’ t exactly acting in a vacuum . Even if Senate Democrats don ’ t have a seat at the House Republican table , they have an idea where the chamber is heading . Cross-party and cross-chamber talks — no matter how limited the scope — show leading figures in both parties are serious about finding common ground . But it ’ s not clear whether these quiet discussions will lead to a breakthrough .
Schumer has been particularly busy . In 2013 , the New York Democrat — who led immigration negotiations in the Senate — approached Ryan , a Wisconsin Republican , and the pair have met four times since then , according to multiple sources with knowledge of the talks . They spoke about other issues as well — ice fishing and Asian carp — but immigration reform was high on the docket .
There were no actual negotiations in the meetings , which have not been disclosed until now . Schumer prodded Ryan to chart a course forward .
“ In 2013 , Sen. Schumer reached out and Congressman Ryan agreed to talk with him , ” Ryan spokesman Kevin Seifert said . “ They discussed a number of issues , but with respect to immigration reform , Congressman Ryan made clear to Sen. Schumer that we ’ re doing things differently in the House . ”
Gowdy , a South Carolina Republican , has also sat down with Schumer . A former prosecutor who chairs the House Subcommittee on Immigration and Border Security , Gowdy is a respected figure on the right and he has the ear of a broad swath of conservatives . Gowdy didn ’ t respond to an email from ███ about his discussions with Schumer .
“ Congressman Gowdy has met with people of all political persuasions on immigration , ” Gowdy spokeswoman Amanda Infield Duvall said in a statement . “ He meets with people all the time on the issue . ”
Schumer ’ s office declined to comment on the talks with Ryan and Gowdy . A source close to the issue said Schumer and Ryan “ did not negotiate any specifics of House legislation at all in these meetings . ”
Obama ’ s White House is also curious what ’ s going on with House Republicans and immigration , and administration officials are trying to quietly take their temperature .
When Katie Beirne Fallon came to Capitol Hill during her first rounds as the president ’ s new legislative affairs director , she discussed immigration with top aides and lawmakers in Republican leadership , including Speaker John Boehner of Ohio and his top staffer .
Similarly , before the House Republican leadership released its “ principles ” for immigration reform , Boehner and Pelosi huddled on the floor to go over the contours of the Republican document .
“ There are no across-the-aisle discussions on substance yet , ” said one House Democratic aide who is closely involved in the issue .
But the one-page document released by House leadership at its retreat last week did illustrate a step in the right direction in the eyes of most Democrats . Still , even immigration reform ’ s biggest advocates have doubts a bill can pass in 2014 .
“ The biggest impediment to making progress on immigration that I ’ ve seen over the last year … is a complete lack of confidence that the law will be applied , that the enforcement measures will happen , ” Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) said on Monday . “ And I think that ’ s only been exacerbated by the actions the president and this administration have taken over the last year . ”