President Trump slammed an immigration program Wednesday that he claims admitted the suspect responsible for the attack in New York City .
“ The terrorist came into our country through what is called the ‘ Diversity Visa Lottery Program , ’ a Chuck Schumer beauty . I want merit based , ” Mr. Trump tweeted , referring to the New York Democratic senator .
Mr. Trump was reacting to the attack in New York City on Tuesday that occurred in Lower Manhattan . A man drove a rental truck down a bike path , got out of the vehicle , and displayed a paintball gun and a pellet gun before being shot by police . Eight people have died while another 11 recover from injuries .
The suspect , Sayfullo Saipov , shouted “ God is Great ” in Arabic during the attack , and a note reading “ ISIS lives forever ” was found in the truck he was driving , according to an NBC News report .
“ We are fighting hard for Merit Based immigration , no more Democrat Lottery Systems . We must get MUCH tougher ( and smarter ) . @ foxandfriends , ” Mr. Trump added , with a mention of Fox News ’ morning show “ Fox & Friends . ”
” ‘ Senator Chuck Schumer helping to import Europes problems ’ said Col.Tony Shaffer . We will stop this craziness ! @ foxandfriends ” Mr. Trump tweeted .
Mr. Schumer pushed back in a statement Wednesday , saying cuts to the anti-terrorism forces in the latest budget should be reversed .
SEE ALSO : NYC suspect came to U.S. on Diversity Visa Lottery
“ I have always believed and continue to believe that immigration is good for America . President Trump , instead of politicizing and dividing America , which he always seems to do at times of national tragedy , should be focusing on the real solution — anti-terrorism funding — which he proposed cutting in his most recent budget , ” Mr. Schumer said .
He also addressed the matter on the Senate floor again calling on the president to “ restore these funds . ”
“ Instead of dividing , instead of politicizing , do something real , Mr. President , ” Mr. Schumer said .
Numerous other lawmakers , including New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio , called out Mr. Trump for politicizing the tragedy , saying that his reaction was inappropriate so soon after the deadliest terror attack in New York since the Sept. 11 , 2001 , attacks on the World Trade Center .
Sen. Jeff Flake , Arizona Republican , said Mr. Trump was incorrect about his line of facts concerning the current immigration system .
“ Actually , the Gang of 8 , including @ SenSchumer , did away with the Diversity Visa Program as part of broader reforms . I know , I was there , ” Mr. Flake tweeted .
Rep. Peter King , New York Republican , defended the lottery program saying many have gone on to become citizens through the system .
“ To be honest with you , I ’ ve known a number of people in New York who come in under the lottery system . They ’ ve made outstanding contributions . They ’ ve become citizens , ” Mr. King said on Fox Business .
Mr. Trump and Republican lawmakers have advocated for a merit-based immigration system that would give priority to those with a higher education , or who already speak English when trying to enter the U.S .
The current Diversity Immigrant Visa is a lottery system that gives 50,000 permanent resident visas each year with the goal of diversifying the population . The system typically picks applicants from countries with lower immigration rates , a point that Mr. Schumer proposed when he was a member of the House in the 1990s when this law was drafted .
It has not been confirmed that Saipov came into the U.S. through the lottery visa program . The New York Times reported Tuesday that he did have a green card , but it was unclear if he obtained it through the lottery system .
The terrorist came into our country through what is called the “ Diversity Visa Lottery Program , ” a Chuck Schumer beauty . I want merit based . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) November 1 , 2017
We are fighting hard for Merit Based immigration , no more Democrat Lottery Systems . We must get MUCH tougher ( and smarter ) . @ foxandfriends — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) November 1 , 2017