Those who want the president to act increasingly own the narrative . W.H . faces rising grass-roots heat
President Barack Obama has few progressive friends remaining who haven ’ t switched their focus in the immigration debate — turning their sights from critics of the president ’ s agenda to the White House itself .
Nearly all of the grass-roots-led organizations that shape the immigration debate on the left now see the White House — and the potential for Obama to act on his own — as the most likely avenue for progress on the issue , given the GOP ’ s control of the House and election-year jitters .
With White House officials keenly sensitive to any progressive criticism of its deportation policy , that shift had sparked a rift within the small world of immigration activists , most of whom have worked together for years .
But in this low-grade civil war over immigration messaging , those who want the president to act increasingly own the narrative .
The Center for American Progress and National Council of La Raza are the only groups within the progressive immigration world that aren ’ t demanding Obama put a stop to deportations himself — with officials from other grassroots groups saying both organizations may be too close to the White House to be objective .
“ There is no doubt that some groups have at times seen administrative advocacy as being in tension with the legislative campaign , an idea we strongly reject , ” said Chris Newman , the legal director of the Los Angeles-based National Day Laborer Organizing Network . “ We all have our different roles to play , but there is a perception outside of the Washington Beltway that some organizations with access have become apologists for the administration . ”
Officials from the major progressive immigration groups — who tend to work closely together , holding a weekly Monday afternoon conference call to discuss and debate strategy — are reluctant to attack each other directly in public .
“ It ’ s access misinterpreted as influence , ” said one official who leads an immigration group that has demanded a stop to deportations . “ We operate on the fundamental rule that if they ’ re upset , we ’ re making progress . It is how this White House operates . If you ’ re friendly to them , they think they ’ ve got you in their pocket . If you ’ re tough with them they scream and moan and complain but it gets their attention . ”
Rep. Luis Gutierrez ( D-Ill. ) said the push to stop deportations is so broad at the grassroots level that no Washington organization can stop it .
“ It ’ s becoming something that you can ’ t control , ” Gutierrez said . “ People have tried to control it . This administration has put inordinate pressure on people not to criticize the president on his immigration policy and not to talk about prosecutorial discretion . ”
The group most vocal in its demands that Obama act on deportations is the National Day Laborer Organizing Network , whose director , Pablo Alvarado , was arrested with Hispanic religious leaders Monday afternoon outside the White House to protest deportation policy .
NDLON was once part of the White House ’ s broad immigration coalition . Newman was invited to meetings with Obama and then-Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano during the first term .
After one 2009 meeting during which Obama mentioned but declined to act on what was then NDLON ’ s highest priority – restricting local law enforcement ’ s use of a federal program that creates deportation partnerships with federal immigration authorities .
Newman praised the president to television cameras waiting outside the meeting , he said , because Obama mentioned the issue . But in doing so , Obama said then the program would continue .
When Newman ’ s plane landed back in Los Angeles that night , his phone was full of text messages from his co-workers demanding to know why he had missed an opportunity to decry Obama ’ s ratification of a program it had worked to show was a failure .
“ In my mind , ” he said , “ I was thinking , ‘ I really wanted to get invited to the next White House meeting . ”
Once NDLON started agitating loudly for Obama to stop deportations , Newman ’ s invitations from and contact with the White House stopped .
“ There ’ s been no question that we ’ ve lost access . And I would say that – I don ’ t know if we lost our innocence and we got over our incredulity about promises the Obama administration had made , ” Newman said . “ We take comfort in knowing that our work is creating political space and that our presence is felt at the proverbial table , even if we have lost our golden ticket . ”
The internal debate is centered entirely among progressive immigration organizations . The more dependent a group is on grassroots support , the more likely it is to pressure the White House to do something on deportations . The more a group ’ s influence relies on its access to power , the less likely it is to push back . Conservative and business-focused groups like Mike Bloomberg ’ s Partnership for a New American Economy , the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and Fwd.us have kept their attention entirely on moving legislation in Congress and have not sought to pressure Obama on deportations .
“ There are differences of opinion in the movement about how to move forward on reform , ” said Kica Matos of the Fair Immigration Reform Movement . “ But the movement is resolute about one thing : We want reform , and we want it now . ”
But while the movement is divided on what steps to take next , the White House immigration position remains the same . Officials say Obama doesn ’ t have the authority to act unilaterally on deportations without Congress . The closest the president has come to suggesting otherwise came during a Google Hangout last month when he said he was willing to “ look at all options . ”
Speaking Friday on Univision radio , Obama urged listeners to call Republicans in Congress and demand they move on immigration .
“ I ’ ve been pushing and pushing Congress to take action , ” he said . “ Unfortunately , the House of Representatives has not passed a bill yet . And for it to become law , we need the House of Representatives to pass that bill . The main thing people can do right now is put pressure on Republicans who have refused so far to act . ”