The United States and Guatemala have signed an agreement to allow the U.S. to deport migrants seeking asylum if they reached the southern U.S. border by crossing through Guatemala , the Trump administration said Friday .
Interested in Immigration ? Add Immigration as an interest to stay up to date on the latest Immigration news , video , and analysis from ███ . Add Interest
The controversial deal , which critics say is illegal and immoral , is sure to face legal challenges in the U.S. and already does in Guatemala .
President Donald Trump had publicly pressured his Guatemalan counterpart Jimmy Morales to sign this week , threatening a `` ban '' or tariffs after Morales was forced to back out of signing a similar deal last week because of political pressure and a legal challenge back home .
`` They 're doing what we 've asked them to do . I think it 's going to be a great thing for Guatemala , '' Trump said in the Oval Office alongside acting Homeland Security Secretary Kevin McAleenan and Guatemalan Interior Minister Enrique Degenhart . `` They do n't want the problems either . ''
The agreement , sometimes known as a `` safe third country '' agreement , will force any migrants traveling through the Central American country en route to the U.S. to claim asylum there . If they do n't and they apply for asylum in the U.S. , they will face deportation to Guatemala , according to McAleenan .
`` We want them to feel safe , to claim protection and an asylum claim at the earliest possible point , '' McAleenan told reporters afterwards . `` If they do instead , in the hands of smugglers , make a journey all the way to the U.S. border , they would be removable back to Guatemala . ''
But refugee and human rights groups say such an agreement imperils migrants , given Guatemala 's dangerous crime rate and gang violence and lack of a proper asylum system .
`` Guatemala is in no way safe for refugees and asylum seekers , and all the strong-arming in the world won ’ t make it so , '' said Eric Schwartz , president of Refugees International . `` This agreement also violates U.S. law and will put some of the most vulnerable people in Central America in grave danger . ''
The deal is not in effect yet and must first pass `` several procedural steps in both governments to ratify and recognize '' it , McAleenan added . He said he thinks that can be done in `` several weeks '' and be `` up and running '' in August .
Today , President Trump announced a safe third country agreement with Guatemala that will put human smugglers out of business and provide safety for legitimate asylum seekers . pic.twitter.com/ENAifXfvRz — The White House ( @ WhiteHouse ) July 26 , 2019
There is already , however , a legal challenge in Guatemala . The Constitutional Court ruled earlier this month that Morales would have to get congressional approval before being able to declare his country is a safe third country . That ruling and the intense political pressure back home forced him to cancel a visit to Washington on July 15 , where he and Trump were expected to sign a similar deal .
After the cancellation , Trump took to Twitter to threaten Guatemala with tariffs , restrictions on remittances from Guatemalans in the U.S. to their families back home , or some sort of travel ban if they did not sign .
It 's unclear if and how the legal challenge has been avoided . Guatemalan Interior Minister Degenhart denied Friday that the court said Morales and his administration could not move ahead .
`` What the court said , which is a provisional injunction , was basically define the process that had to be followed ... define how to do that procedure , and we are going to implement it , '' Degenhart said .
While the White House celebrated the deal as a victory for Trump 's tactics , it 's also not clear if the deal does exactly what the administration says it does . McAleenan declined to call it a `` safe third country agreement , '' and in Guatemala 's own statement , the country makes no mention of any binding deal .
Instead , Guatemala says the two sides agreed to cooperate on the execution of an implementation plan that would affect Salvadorans and Hondurans -- those Central American migrants who would have to travel through Guatemala en route to the U.S .
The deal is also expected to face legal challenges in the U.S. , especially because Guatemala is a dangerous country in its own right and does not have a strong asylum system .
`` President Trump 's decision to sign this agreement with Guatemala is cruel and immoral . It is also illegal . Simply put , Guatemala is not a safe country for refugees and asylum seekers , as the law requires , '' said Rep. Eliot Engel , D-NY , chair of the House Foreign Affairs Committee .
McAleenan dismissed those concerns , saying it was `` risky '' to paint Guatemala and Central America in general with a `` broad brush ... There are places that are dangerous , but that does n't mean there is n't a process for people to seek protection . ''
In five trips to the country in the last year , he said that he saw refugee and international organizations working to increase the government 's capacity and that the U.S. was committed to helping them improve it .