Barring a court injunction or intervention by Congress , the new system will go into effect Oct. 15 .
Supporters argue that the new rule prioritizes self-sufficiency , a foundation of U.S. immigration law since the 19th century . To critics of the new policy , however , the change represents no less than a fundamental shift in the meaning of America . A federal lawsuit filed Tuesday in San Francisco charges that the new rule discourages use of public health care programs , and thus endangers community safety in instances of contagious disease .
“ Give me your tired and your poor who can stand on their own two feet and who will not become a public charge. ” This twist on Emma Lazarus ’ iconic poem , as delivered by Trump immigration official Ken Cuccinelli , represents a new focus : Receipt of a green card or permission to enter the U.S. in the first place will be harder for those of modest means and who use public benefits – or may do so in the future . Merit-based immigration is the new priority , not family unity .
It is perhaps the starkest example yet in the Trump presidency of “ America First . ”
Foreigners in the United States , legally present , could find themselves on a flight back to their native land . Families of “ mixed status ” – typically , noncitizen parents with citizen children – could face a choice of either leaving the U.S. together or splitting up . And over time , the face of American immigration could become whiter and wealthier .
The Trump administration ’ s new rule expanding the definition of “ public charge ” is designed to promote self-sufficiency among noncitizens and prevent them from being a drain on taxpayers , proponents say . The policy , released Monday , will make it harder for legal migrants who use public benefits to obtain green cards , the way station to full citizenship . It will also make it harder for low-income , less-educated foreigners to get into the U.S. in the first place .
“ Give me your tired and your poor who can stand on their own two feet and who will not become a public charge , ” Ken Cuccinelli , acting director of U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , said earlier this week on NPR .
To critics of the new policy , this recasting of the iconic sonnet by Emma Lazarus at the Statue of Liberty – which refers in the original to “ huddled masses yearning to breathe free ” – represents no less than a fundamental shift in the meaning of America .
“ The whole mindset of the Founding Fathers was that America is a land of refuge ; it ’ s a place you can come , you can get a new beginning , ” says James Hollifield , a political scientist at Southern Methodist University in Dallas and an expert on immigration . “ What we ’ re doing now is essentially criminalizing poverty . ”
What exactly do these new guidelines entail ? What is the likely impact ? Might the new rule be overturned in court ? Here are some answers :
For many noncitizens already in the U.S. legally , the rule broadens the categories of public assistance that , if used , could be held against someone applying for permanent residency – a green card . Such forms of assistance include Medicaid , food stamps , and subsidized housing .
For prospective immigrants applying to enter the U.S. , immigration officials will judge an applicant ’ s skills , assets , and health , and thus their ability to avoid reliance on public assistance . This represents a shift to a merit-based system over one that currently privileges family connections .
“ If fully enforced , it ’ s the most consequential action of this administration in immigration to date , perhaps the most consequential action in decades , ” says Mike Howell , a former Department of Homeland Security official and now an adviser at the conservative Heritage Foundation . “ In terms of preventing people from coming in , it ’ s huge . It will certainly add a lot more folks to the ‘ to be removed from the interior ’ tally . ”
Other observers note that this system will make it harder in particular for people from low-income countries to immigrate to the U.S. President Donald Trump has said he wants more immigrants from countries like Norway .
The new system , which goes into effect Oct. 15 , will not be applied retroactively and will not apply to people renewing their green cards . Also exempt are pregnant women , children , refugees , asylum-seekers , and immigrants serving in the U.S. military .
One challenge comes in “ mixed-status ” families , and the potential for a chilling effect . Some noncitizen parents may fear using benefits for their citizen children , such as food stamps or housing assistance , in the belief that such use could lead to a parent ’ s deportation .
On Monday , Mr. Cuccinelli said that such use of benefits for citizen children would not be held against a noncitizen parent , but among immigrants , there is still fear . And the impact could be widespread .
“ It will diminish many children ’ s long-term prospects because they won ’ t receive benefits important to their growth and development , which will weaken the future U.S. workforce , ” says Robert Greenstein , president of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities , in a statement .
Noncitizen parents without green cards also face heightened risk of deportation , which could split up families .
Most likely yes , legal experts say . Self-sufficiency has been a foundation of U.S. immigration law since the 19th century . The current law , enacted in 1996 , penalized immigrants dependent on cash assistance ; the new rule expands the definition of “ public charge . ”
“ Congress does have a say in this , ” says Jonathan Turley , a law professor at George Washington University . But “ to the extent that Congress does not act , the executive branch can fill that void . ”
Defenders note that the Trump administration followed the formal rule-making procedure , including a lengthy public comment period – garnering more than 266,000 comments , a record for DHS .
A federal lawsuit filed Tuesday in San Francisco charges that the new rule discourages use of public health care programs , and thus endangers community safety in instances of contagious disease .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
A 2017 study by the National Academies of Sciences , Engineering , and Medicine found that immigration has “ an overall positive impact on the long-run economic growth in the U.S . ”
But the benefit doesn ’ t appear until the second generation . First-generation immigrants cost the government about $ 1,600 per person annually , more than native-born Americans , according to the report . But second-generation Americans outperform the rest of the native-born population .