President Trump listens during a Cabinet meeting at the White House , February 12 , 2019 . ( Carlos Barria/Reuters )
The great National Review editor James Burnham famously said , “ When there is no alternative , there is no problem. ” By this standard , the border deal reached by congressional appropriators this week isn ’ t a problem for Donald Trump .
The deal falls far short of his demand for $ 5.7 billion in funding for a barrier at the border . At $ 1.37 billion , it is short even of what had been the Senate ’ s bipartisan compromise of $ 1.6 billion before the shutdown drama .
But the other options aren ’ t palatable . If the president opts for a so-called continuing resolution in lieu of the deal , he will get less funding for a barrier , because the CR is based on current spending levels . If he opts for another shutdown confrontation , he is likely to be abandoned by Senate Republicans not eager for a third kick from Mitch McConnell ’ s proverbial mule .
If this is a disappointing state of affairs , it ’ s a product of poor choices , by Trump and congressional Republicans , on one of the president ’ s top political priorities . It was malpractice not to get more funding for a border barrier out of Congress when it was held by Republicans ( though the Democrats might have filibustered any deal they didn ’ t like ) . It was bizarre that the White House didn ’ t formally request more funding last year , before Trump drastically increased his demand to $ 5.7 billion near the end of process . Finally , it was foolhardy to lurch into a shutdown without a viable strategy for getting out of it .
At least the current deal doesn ’ t reflect Nancy Pelosi ’ s vow not to approve a dollar for a border barrier , and Democrats backed off their demand in the negotiations for a hard cap on ICE detentions .
So , the cup is a quarter full . Of course , this isn ’ t to President Trump ’ s liking . We bristle at any president who talks of going around Congress the way Trump has , but if there are really pots of money that can be legally diverted to the wall , this would be his prerogative ( and Congress should consider tightening up on the purse strings going forward ) .
But taking the congressional compromise shouldn ’ t be a problem for Trump — because there ’ s no alternative .
Something to Consider If you enjoyed this article , we have a proposition for you : Join NRPLUS . Members get all of our content ( including the magazine ) , no paywalls or content meters , an advertising-minimal experience , and unique access to our writers and editors ( conference calls , social-media groups , etc. ) . And importantly , NRPLUS members help keep NR going . Consider it ? If you enjoyed this article , and were stimulated by its contents , we have a proposition for you : Join NRPLUS . LEARN MORE