WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Nearly 60 former senior U.S. national security officials on Monday rejected President Donald Trump ’ s national emergency declaration , saying there was “ no factual basis ” to circumvent Congress to build his long-promised border wall .
U.S. President Donald Trump speaks during a meeting with U.S. Governors at the White House in Washington , U.S. , February 25 , 2019 . ███/Jim Young
In an 11-page letter , former Secretaries of State Madeleine Albright and John Kerry , both Democrats , along with former Republican Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel and others , said there was no documented emergency at the U.S. border with Mexico .
Diverting funds to the project will “ undermine U.S. national security and foreign policy interests , ” the 58 ex-officials wrote in the letter , first reported by the Washington Post .
Trump moved to redirect federal funds intended for other purposes to build the border wall after Congress rejected his demand for $ 5.7 billion in construction money . His effort already faces numerous challenges , including multiple lawsuits .
Democrats have also launched a resolution to stop Trump ’ s border emergency and , on Tuesday , the Democratically controlled House of Representatives is scheduled to vote on the measure aimed at stopping it .
The resolution ’ s fate is less clear in the U.S. Senate , which is controlled by Trump ’ s fellow Republicans , though some Republicans have expressed concern about his declaration .
In a separate letter on Monday , 23 former Republican U.S. lawmakers also urged current members of Congress to pass the resolution , Politico reported .
Even if it passes , Trump has said he would veto it , and Congress would need to muster two-thirds of lawmakers to override a veto .
Trump on Monday continued to defend the declaration on Twitter and called on Republican senators to stand by him . “ Be strong and smart , don ’ t fall into the Democrats ‘ trap ’ of Open Borders and Crime ! ” he wrote .
The former security officials , in Monday ’ s letter , cited U.S. government statistics showing illegal border crossings at nearly 40-year lows . They also pointed to other government data on drug trafficking that showed most opioids enter the country via legal entry points — something they said a border wall would not stop .
“ There is no factual basis for the declaration of a national emergency for the purpose of circumventing the appropriations process and reprogramming billions of dollars in funding to construct a wall at the southern border , ” they wrote .
While the letter included both Republicans and Democrats , as well as career civil servants who served under presidents of both parties , the bulk of its most senior signatories rose to their top positions under Democratic presidents .
Among these former officials were CIA Director and Defense Secretary Leon Panetta , CIA Director John Brennan , White House National Security Adviser Susan Rice , Deputy Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Deputy CIA Director David Cohen , all of whom held those posts under Democratic President Barack Obama .
However , the list also included lower-level former officials such as John Bellinger , a former State Department legal adviser , and Eliot Cohen , a former State Department counselor , both of whom served under Republican President George W. Bush .