New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand ( D ) introduced a bill Thursday to place more scrutiny on Border Patrol agents when they stop and question passengers on buses and trains .
The Department of Homeland Security Accountability and Transparency Act would require border patrol and immigration enforcement agents to document every instance when they stop , search , or interrogate people . The bill is co-sponsored by Sens . Elizabeth Warren ( D-MA ) , Tom Udall ( D-NM ) and Jeff Merkley ( D-OR ) . The law applies to all stops by agents who work for US Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) and US Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) .
Under current law , agents from both departments have broad authority to stop and question people about their immigration status . In the 100-mile border zone — the area of the US that ’ s within 100 miles of a land or water border — agents can pull over cars and board vehicles to ask passengers about their citizenship if they suspect a person is not in the country legally . ( In the rest of the country , ICE agents can ’ t enter private property without a warrant or pull over vehicles without probable cause of an immigration violation . ) But the law doesn ’ t require agents keep track of whom they stop or why , unless the agents detain someone or end up using force .
The practice of stopping people and asking them their citizenship status happens all over the border zone — in immigrant neighborhoods , on Greyhound buses or Amtrak trains , outside grocery stores .
In recent months , videos of Border Patrol agents boarding buses in New York and Florida have gone viral on social media , alarming civil rights groups and raising questions about the potential violation of a person ’ s constitutional rights .
Agents have vast powers to question people about their citizenship status , but there are some limits to that power . It ’ s illegal for agents to stop someone solely because of their race , or for no reason whatsoever . But because CBP and ICE do not keep track of their stops and searches , oversight can be a challenge .
Gillibrand ’ s bill seeks to bring more accountability to the process . It would require the agencies to start collecting data every time officers question someone about their immigration status when they are not at an airport or border crossing . They would need to report the time , date , and place of each stop , and the basis for questioning someone and the duration of the stop , among other details . The agents would also need to report information about permanent and temporary immigration checkpoints set up in the border zone . The information would be reported annually to Congress and made available to the public . ( According to Gillibrand ’ s office , the bill is partly a response to this ███ article and other media reports about the Border Patrol ’ s practice of questioning bus and train passengers . )
“ Keeping our country safe can not come at a cost to basic human rights , ” Gillibrand wrote in a statement to ███ . “ When border patrol agents stop and question people in New York and in many places across the country , they aren ’ t keeping data about why they targeted a particular person or what happened during their encounter . ”
Social media brought attention to the Border Patrol ’ s immense powers
There is a good chance you saw a video like this in recent months : camera-phone footage of Border Patrol agents getting on a bus or train , then walking down the aisle asking passengers , seemingly at random , if they ’ re American citizens .
. @ CustomsBorder got on a Greyhound bus yesterday at 4:30pm in Fort Lauderdale and asked every passenger for their papers and to prove citizenship . Proof of citizenship is NOT required to ride a bus ! For more information about your rights , call our hotline 1-888-600-5762 pic.twitter.com/rWJn61o8VP — FLImmigrantCoalition ( @ FLImmigrant ) January 20 , 2018
The video , posted by the Florida Immigrant Coalition , shows CBP agents questioning a Greyhound bus passenger in Fort Lauderdale . The conversation is n't audible , but the passenger appears to hand agents some paperwork before they escort her off the bus .
A few days later , a passenger on an Amtrak train in Syracuse , New York , filmed Border Patrol agents as they asked passengers where they were born .
Both videos were viewed nearly 4 million times on Twitter , prompting thousands of angry tweets , with many blaming President Donald Trump for the hardline tactic .
These incidents have led to much confusion — and have raised a few questions about immigration and border agents ’ authority and the rights people have in these encounters .
It ’ s important to note that these stops are not a new Trump initiative to crack down on illegal immigration . Border Patrol agents have been doing this for a while , even under the Obama administration . I know this because I watched Border Patrol agents do the same thing back in 2010 . I was a crime reporter in South Florida , and I accompanied agents as they questioned passengers at a Greyhound station in the Fort Lauderdale area .
At the time , the agents said they were trying to track down undocumented immigrants heading to Florida from Mexico . But Border Patrol ’ s methods , coupled with growing anxiety about immigrant rights in the Trump era , have raised concerns about the legal basis for such a practice , and whether current law gives these agents too much power .
DHS does not publish data on how often CBP agents stop and question people in the border zone , so it 's hard to tell if it 's happening more often under Trump . Gillibrand ’ s bill targets that lack of data and transparency .
It ’ s absolutely legal for agents to ask a person about their citizenship status , with some exceptions
The videos of Border Patrol agents questioning passengers on a bus sparked outrage partly because this kind of intrusive questioning seems like a constitutional violation . The Fourth Amendment gives Americans a certain right to privacy and protection from unreasonable government intrusions and searches .
What most Americans do n't realize is that near a US border , the bar for what is considered a `` reasonable '' stop is far lower than it is in the rest of the country . Within 100 miles of a US land or coastal border , Border Patrol and ICE agents can stop vehicles and question anyone about their immigration status , as long as they have a `` reasonable suspicion '' that the person may be in the country illegally . Anywhere else , ICE agents would need a warrant or probable cause of an immigration violation to stop a vehicle or enter private property .
Here 's the thing : Most Americans live in this so-called 100-mile zone . It covers all of Florida , most of New York state , several other states entirely — including New Jersey , Delaware , and Rhode Island — the nation 's capital , and the country 's largest cities , including New York City and Los Angeles .
CBP officers are supposed to catch unauthorized immigrants who are arriving in the country , so they can only stop people at checkpoints and patrols in this zone . ICE agents are tasked with tracking down people who are working and living illegally in the United States , so they can operate anywhere . But in the border zone , they have the same freedom as CBP agents to pull over cars and board trains to look for unauthorized immigrants .
Congress created this border zone as part of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1946 . The law granted immigration agents the authority to `` board and search for aliens any vessel within the territorial waters of the United States and any railway car , aircraft , conveyance , or vehicle . '' However , they could only do this `` within a reasonable distance '' from an external US boundary .
At first , that distance was just 25 miles . But in 1953 , the Department of Justice published a rule redefining a reasonable distance to `` a distance of not exceeding 100 air miles of any boundary of the United States . '' In 2013 , a group of senators tried to shrink the 100-mile zone to 25 miles along the northern border . The provision was added to a bipartisan immigration reform bill that passed the Senate that year , but a similar bill never made it through the House .
Over the years , the Supreme Court has upheld Border Patrol agents ' authority to stop and search people in the border zone , while also defining some limit to their powers . For example , the Court has ruled that agents must have probable cause to believe that someone committed an immigration violation to search their car in a border zone , but they only need a reasonable suspicion ( a lower standard of proof ) to stop and question them . If they establish a roadside checkpoint within the border zone , they can stop and question anyone who drives through about their immigration status .
The Department of Homeland Security does n't publish data on how many people agents stop and question in the border zone , only how many people they detain . In 2017 , Border Patrol agents arrested 310,531 people at checkpoints and roving patrols across the country . This includes people apprehended trying to cross the border illegally .
Details of these arrests are scarce , and immigrant rights groups have repeatedly tried to get more information through Freedom of Information Act requests .
In 2012 , Families for Freedom , a legal aide group for immigrants in New York , succeeded in suing the agency for records related to immigration arrests at bus and train stations in the state .
What they discovered was alarming : At one bus station in the Rochester area , Border Patrol agents mistakenly arrested 300 people with legal status from 2006 to 2010 .
That included immigrants with green cards and visitors with tourist visas . It also included 12 American citizens , according to a 2013 report from the group :
On March 17 , 2009 a U.S. citizen born in Texas was arrested while traveling on a Greyhound bus . A USBP agent questioned the citizen about whether he was a citizen of the United States and reported that the man “ stared ” back at him . The agent repeated the question in Spanish , at which point the man responded “ yes ” and handed over a valid Georgia driver ’ s license . Despite the man ’ s assertion of his U.S. citizenship and his offer of a valid form of identification , the man ’ s interrogation did not cease . The agent later claimed that he continued the encounter because he noticed that the man was “ shaking ” and “ avoiding eye contact , ” which , according to the agent , was the “ sort of behavior ” exhibited by “ undocumented aliens illegally present in the United States. ” Again , the agent asked the man in Spanish where he was from . The man responded that he was born in Brownsville , a prominent border city in Texas . The agent proceeded to arrest the man and brought him to the station . Later , the agent was able to use the man ’ s social security number to confirm that he was , as he stated , a U.S. citizen .
Border Patrol agents eventually released everyone who had legal status , but the practice has outraged civil liberties groups .
Lawyers for the American Civil Liberties Union have repeatedly criticized the 100-mile zone , saying that it subjects nearly two-thirds of the US population to Border Patrol 's `` so-called investigatory detention and warrantless searches . ''
Lawmakers , it seems , have been paying attention . “ Border patrol agents have a duty to protect our borders without trampling on our constitutional rights , ” said Sen. Warren in a statement announcing the new bill . “ Without critical data to track stops and searches , Congress and the public can not fully monitor and hold agents accountable when they cross the line . ”