A “ Refugees Welcome ” mat at an immigration rally in New York , City , March 3 , 2017 . ( Carlo Allegri/Reuters )
Some people would prefer to remain safely in the land where they were born .
As of mid January , there were five immigration proposals before Congress ; here they are gathered in one chart so we can easily compare them . If we could reduce all the arguments to a single question , it might be : How much immigration is good for America ? I think most people agree that some amount of immigration is good for our country , and many would argue that some other amount is too much and is therefore bad for America . Where the political parties differ is in their estimate of how much immigration is the optimal amount , whom to allow in , and how to manage the system . They differ on quantity , quality , and control . However , across both sides of the aisle , there is one underlying agreement and unstated assumption : that immigration is good for the immigrant .
It is valid for Americans , acting in their own interest , to have a discussion about the quantity , quality , and control of our immigration system . And yet as an immigrant , I know that we also need to grapple with other questions that don ’ t normally take center stage in our public debates on immigration . I want to bring to the forefront a thought that may seem peculiar to many Americans : that immigration is not always an unqualified good . Through discussions with immigrants , I have found that in many cases , the answer is not yes ; often it is a qualified yes , and it would help us all to understand why this might be the case .
Immigration can be a good . But it is good , healthy , and fruitful — for the immigrant and the adoptive country — only insofar as the émigré makes the choice freely . Some will argue that , by default , everyone who comes here ( legally or illegally ) chooses to do so , since the very act of coming here is an act of free will . I say no : It ’ s not necessarily a free choice .
In the Summa Theologiae ( I-II.6 ) , St. Thomas Aquinas writes that “ violence is directly opposed to the voluntary. ” The word “ voluntary ” denotes something arising out of one ’ s own inclination , that which proceeds from the will . He goes on to say that what we do through fear is “ of a mixed character , ” voluntary and involuntary . Acting out of fear , “ inasmuch it is repugnant to the will , ” is involuntary . However , an act that “ hinders a greater evil that was feared ” is voluntary , and therefore willed freely . This understanding of how the will works shows us that the decisions people make to leave their homelands are fraught with complexity , and that some people are here not out of their own free will . And even when they do leave voluntarily to prevent greater harm , leaving can still feel forced because the option to stay in the country of origin was unviable .
When a person is trapped between political oppression , religious persecution , war , slavery , poverty , economic upheaval , etc . and the opportunity to flee elsewhere in order to survive , he will choose survival via emigration ( legal or illegal ) . Therefore , an individual in this situation is not quite choosing freely . He makes his choice under duress — and that is not a truly free choice . As a result , it is not an unqualified good for either the immigrant or the adoptive country .
In some sense , we know this is happening . We see refugees in the Middle East by the millions fleeing their homelands . Some years back , we saw children coming in waves from Central America to escape violence and brutal gangs that target children for use in the sex and drug trades . There ’ s no question that for many of these people , coming to America is the best thing that can happen to them .
The benefits are tangible . They go from chaotic lands to one where they can lead a tranquil life . They leave behind societies where deceit is necessary for survival , and they make their new homes in an orderly country governed by the rule of law . They escape crushing oppression under strongmen and societies built for the powerful and connected . They find respect and dignity in this new land . Hungry and downtrodden and with no economic or education prospects , they arrive in an America where there is plentiful food , material help , and opportunities available to those willing to work hard . Those persecuted for their religion find solace in religious freedom . For those of us fortunate to live in America , the physical and spiritual blessings are many . This happy outcome , however , lulls us into complacency and distracts us from the tougher moral and philosophical questions of immigration .
When immigrants are primarily coming to the U.S. to flee violence and fearful conditions in their countries of origin , they are not weighing risks and benefits to make a well-reasoned choice . As new immigrants , they face unknown perils and are exposed to cultural forces that often contradict their own customs and beliefs , leading to family instability , fragmentation , and often dispersion , especially intergenerationally . When they forsake the land of their heritage , they lose their livelihood . Sometimes they lose the value of their education because they can not practice the profession for which they trained . Some lose all their earthly possessions . They lose their communities and huddle in subcultures to survive cultural disorientation . They lose a sense of who they are and to whom they belong . In short , they are affected economically , morally , physically , psychologically , and socially in unpredictable and sometimes negative ways .
America ’ s approach to immigration can not only be that of the Good Samaritan : have mercy on the immigrant and the refugee and give him a home . That ’ s the answer sometimes , but it ’ s not sustainable .
America ’ s approach to immigration can not only be that of the Good Samaritan : have mercy on the immigrant and the refugee and give him a home . That ’ s the answer sometimes , but it ’ s not sustainable . The more merciful answer — the truly good answer — is to do everything we can to give immigrants and refugees a future and a hope in their own lands .
The answer to our immigration problems will never be resolved simply through domestic-policy decisions : expanding or restricting the number of immigrants ; favoring some countries over others ; choosing high-skill workers using a points system , or choosing low-skill workers to “ do the jobs Americans won ’ t ” ; preventing an immigrant from sponsoring members outside of his immediate family ; dithering over what “ immediate family ” means ; building walls or opening our border ; passing laws to deter migrants either legal or illegal .
Not even a combination of these policy ideas will resolve our immigration problem . Nor can we resolve them by a crass and facile plan that objectifies immigrants , like the one recently posed by Eric Posner and Glen Weyl in Politico Magazine , which recommended that individual citizens — rather than corporations — sponsor their own immigrants , put them to work , and reap the economic benefits of an immigrant of their own . ( The original title of the essay was “ What If You Could Get Your Own Immigrant ? ” After readers expressed outrage , Politico changed it to “ Sponsor an Immigrant Yourself . ” )
The only lasting and just resolution is to help create a world where people of all nations can stay in the land of their heritage if they choose , where immigration is by choice , rather than by necessity . The goal is not to eliminate immigration altogether but to create a more just world for all peoples . A by-product of such a world might be reduced immigration , but it need not be the goal .
We have a responsibility to create a better world for everyone , not just ourselves . St. John Paul II said to his audience on World Day of Migrants and Refugees 2000 :
The Church hears the suffering cry of all who are uprooted from their own land , of families forcefully separated , of those who , in the rapid changes of our day , are unable to find a stable home anywhere . She senses the anguish of those without rights , without any security , at the mercy of every kind of exploitation , and she supports them in their unhappiness .
Our unity under God , the call to solidarity , our duty to respect the dignity of fellow human beings , our ethical obligation to love the stranger go beyond welcoming him in our midst . They also require a radical rethinking of our resignation to upheaval in far-distant lands . Rather , as St. John Paul II said , and I am pressing for here : “ It includes the advancement of everyone ’ s right to be able to live peacefully in his own country . ”
We should not accept a world where people are forced — through violence and fear — to leave their homeland . The peoples of the world deserve to live in their own lands . It is time to include this as a goal in our discussion of immigration .