When asked what Americans thought about immigrants of their national origin , 65 percent of the students provided negative adjectives . “ Most Americans think we are lazy , gangsters , drug addicts , that only come to take their jobs away , ” a 14-year-old boy in the Bay Area told us . We also found that many educators , already overwhelmed by the challenges of inner-city teaching , considered immigrant parents uninformed and uninvolved .
Having just one friend who spoke English fluently was a strong predictor of positive academic outcomes . Yet more than a third of the students in our study reported that they had little or no opportunity even to interact with native-born students , much less make close friends .
Our research also confirmed that kids who arrive during their high school years , as Tamerlan Tsarnaev did , face bad odds , especially if they experienced interrupted schooling , family instability and traumatic dislocations back home .
According to news accounts , the younger brother , Dzhokhar , was a “ smart ” and “ respected ” student at Rindge and Latin , where he had friends and was a wrestling-team captain . But at the University of Massachusetts , Dartmouth , he was flunking out . The sociologist Alejandro Portes of Princeton and the educational psychologist Cynthia Garcia Coll of Brown have found declining performance over time . Nearly two-thirds of the students in our study exhibited such decline . Some dropped out to find work ; others joined gangs .
The good news : a quarter of the students sustained high academic performance over the five years of the study , and another 11 percent showed significant improvement . While they experienced the same initial shock of migration , they tended to be enrolled in supportive schools , to have caring teachers , and to develop informal mentorships with coaches , counselors or ministers . In addition , other researchers , like Philip Kasinitz , John H. Mollenkopf , Mary C. Waters and Jennifer Holdaway , have found that the second generation — American-born kids of immigrant parents — assimilate , and even excel , to a greater extent than the “ 1.5 generation ” ( children who immigrate in or before their early teens ) .
Whatever motivated the Tsarnaev brothers surely is not the fault of the schools and may never be known . Among some of the distinctive features of their case are family estrangement , multiple relocations across countries and , possibly , religious radicalization .
But the broad lesson — assimilating immigrant students into the fabric of society through academic , psychological and other supports — should inform educators and policy makers in the decades ahead , when immigrants and their children will account for most of the nation ’ s population growth . One successful model is the Internationals Network for Public Schools , where educators focus on students ’ distinct needs and develop authentic connections with their families .
Taking in what Emma Lazarus called the “ wretched refuse , ” including asylum seekers like the Tsarnaev brothers , without providing a scaffold of support undermines the promise of America .