Story highlights Joseph Nye says immigration is a bright spot for the United States
Joseph S. Nye Jr. is a professor at Harvard University and the author of `` Is the American Century Over ? '' The views expressed are his own .
( CNN ) As the 2016 presidential campaign heats up , candidates inevitably jockey for position on the contentious issue of immigration . The problem is that most focus on short-term issues and fail to take a longer historical view of the effect immigration has on America as a world power . Because if they did , they would see that at a time when declinists are again proclaiming the end of the American century , immigration is one of the bright spots about our position .
Population alone does not determine national power , but it is an important component , particularly if those human resources are educated and assimilated . It is encouraging , therefore , that the United States is one of the few developed countries that is projected to avoid demographic decline and keep its share of world population , partly as a result of immigration .
Most developed countries can expect to experience a shortage of people as this century progresses , whereas the U.S. Census Bureau projects that between 2010 and 2050 , the American population will grow by 42 % , to 439 million . According to U.N. demographers , today 's top-ranking states in terms of population are China , India and the United States . By 2050 , they project the order will be India , China and the United States . Because of its one-child policy in the past century , China 's population will age and actually shrink . As many Chinese say , they fear that their country will `` become old before we become rich . ''
So , 50 years from now , the United States will probably remain one of the top three or four most populous countries , with an age distribution that will be younger than that of other developed countries . Not only is this relevant to economic power , but given the fact that nearly all developed countries are aging and face a burden of providing for the older generation , immigration can help reduce the sharpness of our policy problem . We should particularly encourage the education of young immigrants . Studies show that as immigrant college graduates increase , so does the increase in patents per capita . A quarter of high-tech start-ups have an immigrant founder , while 40 % of Fortune 500 companies were founded by immigrants or their children .
And immigration also benefits America 's soft , or attractive , power . The fact that people want to come to the United States enhances American appeal , and the upward mobility of immigrants is attractive to people in other countries . America is a magnet , and many people can envisage themselves as Americans . Many Americans `` look like '' citizens of other countries . Moreover , connections between immigrants and their families and friends back home help to convey accurate and positive information about the United States . Rather than diluting hard and soft power , immigration enhances both .