House Speaker Nancy Pelosi is a Machiavellian genius . She took the rift between congressional Republicans and President
Donald Trump on immigration and turned it into a canyon-sized chasm , weakening the GOP before the 2020 elections . At the same time , she teed up an immigration bill in the House that could bring her party together right before the 2020 elections .
Trump this afternoon vetoed a congressional resolution to stop him from declaring a national emergency on the southern border and using it to raid unauthorized funds to build his wall . The Republican-controlled Senate did n't want to have to vote on the resolution . But once Pelosi successfully pushed it in the Democratic-controlled House , parliamentary rules left Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell no choice but to bring it up for a vote .
This put Republicans in a difficult position : Whether to vote for their principles ( do n't laugh ! ) and stand up against their president 's power grab , or give up their principles and obey the president to enlist his support—or at least not incite his wrath—before the 2020 elections . Ultimately , only 12 Republicans joined the 49 Senate Democrats to vote against him ( and only one of those , Maine 's Susan Collins was up for re-election next year ) . * All the rest fell in line ( including , disappointingly , Ben Sasse , that alleged evangelist on behalf of the Constitution ) .
Neither chamber has enough votes to override Trump 's veto , but prevailing was n't the point for Pelosi . She wanted to enjoy the spectacle of conservative agonizing .
Even as Republicans were contemplating how best to negotiate that trap , Pelosi was busy preparing the Dream and Promise Act . The bill would allow 2.5 million people— '' Dreamers '' and Temporary Protected Status ( TPS ) holders—to obtain permanent legal status . Dreamers are people who have grown up in America after they were brought to the country as minors without proper authorization . TPS holders are folks who have permission to live in America on a temporary but renewable basis because their countries are engulfed in political turmoil ( El Salvador , Honduras , Liberia ) or embroiled in a natural disaster ( Haiti ) .
Both these groups have become vulnerable to deportation under Trump . He scrapped the Obama-era DACA ( Deferred Action for Childhood Renewals ) program , which gave eligible Dreamers temporary legal status and work authorization . Meanwhile , he has pledged not to renew current TPS holders ' status once it lapses , which will force 98 percent of them to leave .
There are currently about 320,000 TPS holders in the country . The bill would allow many of them to apply for green cards right away , something that they ca n't do as TPS holders unless they marry an American or find an employer who can sponsor them for an H-1B visa . Once they 've spent five years on a green card , they become eligible for citizenship .
Dreamers would have to jump through more hoops , on the theory that , unlike TPS holders , they are in the country illegally and should have to do more to earn their green cards . Those Dreamers who arrived in America before the age of 18 , have led a crime-free life , and are working toward a GED or an equivalent would be able to apply for `` conditional permanent residency . '' After 10 years on that status , they 'd be able to apply for green cards and eventually citizenship .
The bill would cover all the 700,000 DACA beneficiaries . But there are 3.6 million Dreamers in the country , and so well over a million wo n't be covered . This makes it a pretty moderate bill .
Why did n't Pelosi go further ? Because she wants to make it easy for moderate Democrats to support it . At the same time , there 's no downside for more radical Democrats in embracing it—it 's a clean bill , without any of the border-enforcement poison pills that Trump was demanding as his price for legalizing Dreamers . In short , it 'll allow Democrats to mobilize their base without alienating others .
Meanwhile , although the Supreme Court declined to take up DACA in this year , it might well do so in fall and issue a decision sometime in 2020 . And should the Supreme Court uphold Trump then—which is entirely possible , given that scrapping DACA is quite likely within the presidential prerogative—Democrats will have something cued up to replace it and prevent Dreamers from being deported en masse . If Republicans scream `` amnesty '' at that point , which they will , they will come across as heartless monsters , especially since 82 percent of Americans favor the legalization of Dreamers .
That is n't a good image for voters to have in their heads just before they schlep to the polls . But that 's what Pelosi has set up .
* Correction : The piece had originally noted that Republican Senator Thom Tillis of North Carolina had voted for the resolution to censure the President . Apparently , after penning an oped in the Washington Post opposing Trump 's executive order , he switched his vote last minute . The error is regretted .