WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - President Donald Trump said on Sunday that people who enter the United States illegally should be sent back immediately to where they came from without any judicial process , likening them to invaders who are trying to “ break into ” the country .
His proposal drew immediate criticism from legal analysts and immigrant rights advocates who said it would violate the U.S. Constitution ’ s due process provision , which applies to citizens and non-citizens alike .
In a series of tweets on Sunday , Trump said : “ We can not allow all of these people to invade our Country . When somebody comes in , we must immediately , with no Judges or Court Cases , bring them back from where they came . ”
“ Can not accept all of the people trying to break into our Country . Strong Borders , No Crime ! ”
It was unclear if Trump was advocating an expansion of the provision that allows expedited removals of illegal immigrants at or near the U.S. border , a policy his administration has embraced since he took office . Nor did Trump differentiate between illegal immigrants and people who entered the United States to seek asylum protection .
The White House did not return a call seeking clarification .
“ The president of the United States has just forcefully proposed the end of political asylum and no due process for migrants , ” Sherrilyn Ifill , president of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund , wrote on Twitter .
Lee Gelernt , the deputy director of the ACLU ’ s Immigrants ’ Rights Project , told ███ : “ The administration can not simply get rid of all process for immigrants . The due process clause absolutely applies . It ’ s not a choice . ”
Authorities can bypass due process protections with the expedited removals policy that allows quick deportations if an immigrant is apprehended within 100 miles ( 160 km ) of the border and has been in the country less than 14 days . Those seeking asylum must be granted a hearing .
Trump ’ s tweets on Sunday came after a week of global outcry over images and video of crying children and their distraught parents separated at the U.S.-Mexico border . Critics in Trump ’ s Republican Party , as well as his wife and daughter , urged him to abandon the policy .
Honduran girls look out at the Rio Grande on the Mexican side of the Brownsville & Matamoros International Bridge after their asylum seeking families were denied entry by U.S. Customs and Border Protection officers near Brownsville , Texas , U.S. , June 24 , 2018 . Picture taken June 24 , 2018 . ███/Loren Elliott
The president buckled to the pressure on Wednesday , issuing an executive order that ended the separations . But the government has yet to reunite more than 2,000 children with their parents .
But Trump ’ s frustration over the issue only grew . He has issued a drumbeat of criticism of the immigration system and Democrats in Congress , while using increasingly harsh terms such as “ invasion ” and “ infestation ” to describe illegal immigration .
“ Here , I think he is making it clear , he just doesn ’ t want anybody here . He wants people to just be sent back , no matter what , ” said Jorge Baron , executive director for the Northwest Immigrant Rights Project , who compared Sunday ’ s tweets with comments Trump was reported to have made in January about immigrants from “ shithole ” countries .
While some who advocate for stricter immigration rules have argued that people are making fraudulent asylum claims or abusing the loopholes in U.S. immigration laws , Baron said Trump ’ s views went way beyond those arguments .
Trump ’ s “ zero tolerance ” policy of prosecuting adults for entering the country illegally entails a process that typically takes many months . That required children to be separated from parents because they are not legally allowed to be kept in detention for more than 20 days .
Keeping the children with their migrant parents as they await court proceedings faces obstacles , however , including the lack of sufficient housing , a paucity of immigration judges and a daunting backlog of cases .
Under expedited removal proceedings , which are used most commonly at ports of entry , an immigration official can evaluate an immigrant ’ s claim and reject it with no involvement by an immigration judge or review board .
The Trump administration called last year for the expansion of the expedited removals program to immigrants who have been in the country illegally for up to two years .
There is an exception from expedited removal for those with a credible fear of returning home .
Lindsay Harris , an assistant professor of law at the University of the District of Columbia , said those with no credible fear could still see a judge , while those with such a fear could begin a long legal process that eventually could result in asylum and applying for a work permit .
“ It ’ s already an extremely truncated process , ” the ACLU ’ s Gelernt said . “ The president ’ s suggestion that there is a ton of process for these individuals is simply wrong . There are already people being removed with a truncated process . ”