Washington ( CNN ) After months of winding through the courts , the so-called `` watered-down , '' revised version of President Donald Trump 's fiercely litigated travel ban finally went into effect at 8 p.m . ET Thursday .
Less than an hour before the ban was slated to begin , an emergency motion was filed in federal court by the state of Hawaii , which contests the Trump administration 's plan to exclude certain categories of foreign nationals that the state believes are allowed to enter the country under existing court rulings .
Here 's what to expect for the implementation of version 2.0 of the travel ban :
The test for foreign nationals under the Supreme Court 's ruling is whether one has a `` credible claim of bona fide relationship '' with either an entity ( like a school or a job ) or a person living in the US ( such as a spouse ) .
A hotel reservation , for example , will not constitute a bona fide relationship under the executive order , but an academic lecturer invited to speak in the US will be exempt from the travel ban .
If you ca n't sufficiently establish such a close relationship , you are banned for 90 days if you are from Libya , Syria , Iran , Somalia , Yemen and Sudan , and 120 days if you are a refugee from any country .
The new guidelines provide that applicants must prove a relationship with a parent , spouse , finacee , child , adult son or daughter , son-in-law , daughter-in-law or sibling in the US in order to enter the country .
Other family members -- including grandparents , grandchildren , aunts , uncles , nieces , nephews , cousins , brothers-in-law , sisters-in-law , and any other `` extended '' family members will not be considered `` close family '' under the executive order .
For several hours on Thursday -- prior to the executive order going into effect -- administration officials had provided guidance that fiancees would not be considered `` bona fide '' relationships , but later reversed course , and fiancees are now exempt just like spouses .
The State Department criteria applies not only to visa applicants , but also to all refugees currently awaiting approval for admission to the US .
Senior administration officials further confirmed despite any ambiguity in the Supreme Court 's decision , a refugee resettlement organization 's `` assurance '' or relationship to a prospective refugee will not be considered sufficiently close or bona fide for protection under the administration 's interpretation of the revised executive order .
Advocacy groups such as Amnesty International plan to send researchers to US airports , such as Dulles International Airport and John F. Kennedy Airport on Thursday , to monitor developments and observe implementation of the ban in case any disputes arise .
The following categories of travelers are excluded from the travel ban :
Any visa applicant who was in the US as of June 26
Any refugee already admitted to the US ( or cleared for travel by the State Department through July 6 )
Foreign nationals with `` bona fide '' family , educational or business tie to the US .
Importantly , visas that have already been approved will not be revoked , and senior administration officials confirmed on Thursday that previously scheduled visa application appointments will not be canceled .
The executive order also permits the issuance of a visa to anyone who would otherwise be excluded on a case-by-case basis at the discretion of DHS and the State Department .
Senior administration officials expressed confidence to reporters Thursday that the pandemonium seen at airports would not occur this time around and that consular officers and border agents are `` well-versed '' in how the process works .
`` We expect business as usual , '' said one official . `` We expect things to run smoothly -- our people are well-prepared for this . ''
The intent behind the executive order was hotly debated for the past several months .
On the campaign trail , then-candidate Trump called for a `` total and complete shutdown of Muslims `` entering the US .
But the text of the executive order states that `` additional scrutiny '' is required for foreign nationals traveling from the six identified nations because `` the conditions in these countries present heightened threats . Each of these countries is a state sponsor of terrorism , has been significantly compromised by terrorist organizations , or contains active conflict zones . ''
The Trump administration 's narrow reading of what constitutes a `` bona fide '' relationship has already elicited at least one challenge in court .
Late Thursday , Hawaii filed an emergency motion asking the federal district court judge who originally blocked implementation of the travel ban in March to `` clarify as soon as possible that the Supreme Court meant what it said , '' and issue an order confirming that the court orders do not allow the Trump administration to exclude grandparents , grandchildren , brothers-in-law , sisters-in-law , aunts , uncles , nieces , nephews and cousins of persons in the United States .
Experts say more legal battles are on the way , given the way the Trump administration has decided to interpret the Supreme Court 's ruling .
`` I predict more litigation as people challenge visa denials under these new instructions , '' said Cornell Law School Professor Stephen Yale-Loehr . `` Why can a stepsister visit the United States but not a grandmother ? ''