The US Supreme Court has agreed to decide the legality of President Donald Trump 's latest travel ban , which targets people from six Muslim-majority countries .
The court is due to hear arguments in April and will rule by the end of June .
But it has already allowed the policy to go into effect while legal challenges continue .
The third version of Mr Trump 's directive affects travellers from Chad , Iran , Libya , Somalia , Syria and Yemen .
It also bans travellers from North Korea and certain government officials from Venezuela from entering the US .
Opponents say it is unconstitutional and discriminatory and that in making it Mr Trump has exceeded his legal authority .
But supporters say the president is fulfilling his campaign promises to protect Americans and defend national security .
The Supreme Court , which has a conservative majority , will decide whether the policy is unconstitutional or violates federal immigration law .
In December , the court ruled it could go into full effect even as legal challenges continued in lower courts .
Only liberal Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sonia Sotomayor would have allowed the president 's order to remain blocked .
The original order issued last January barred people from seven majority-Muslim countries - Iran , Iraq , Syria , Yemen , Somalia , Sudan and Libya - from entering the US for 90 days .
It also halted refugee resettlement for 120 days and banned Syrian refugees indefinitely .
The revised order in March removed Iraq from the list , after it agreed to boost co-operation with the US , and it also lifted the indefinite ban on Syrian refugees .
In June , the Supreme Court allowed that version of the policy to take partial effect .
The latest travel ban says that the countries `` remain deficient at this time with respect to their identity-management and information-sharing capabilities , protocols , and practices . In some cases , these countries also have a significant terrorist presence within their territory '' .
Critics have noted that major attacks such as the 9/11 New York attacks , the Boston marathon bombing and the Orlando nightclub attack were carried out by people from countries not on the list or by US-born attackers .