LAKE BUENA VISTA , Fla. - José Manuel Godínez-Samperio ca n't vote in the November election . But Godínez-Samperio , along with and tens of thousands of other young undocumented immigrants are indelibly influencing the 2012 presidential race .
These so-called `` dreamers , '' who came to the U.S. before age 16 , entering the country illegally alongside their parents or as tourists , grew up as Americans and are now at the center of a high-stakes policy debate over deportations , jobs and citizenship .
Its tone and substance is particularly resonant with Latino voters in several key swing states , including Florida .
`` It shows the influence that 'dreamers ' have in this country . We 've come a long way in the past 10 years since we 've been fighting for the DREAM Act . It shows that people ca n't ignore us anymore , '' said Godínez-Samperio , 25 , a Mexican by birth who came to the U.S. with his parents as a fourth grader .
`` Both presidential candidates are paying us attention , and in part that has been thanks to Sen. Marco Rubio who helped open the political space by making his proposal , '' he said in an interview with ███ on the sidelines of the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials conference here .
Rubio , a Republican from Florida who is under consideration as a potential running mate for GOP nominee Mitt Romney , had recently drafted new legislation to provide relief for young immigrants like Godinez-Samperi0 , who live under threat of deportation . He was ultimately preempted by President Obama , who last week used executive authority to temporarily suspend removals and grant work permits to qualified youth .
`` It will certainly help in the election for Obama , '' said Godínez-Samperio , who was skeptical the shift would yield immediate , personal benefits while acknowledging it as a step forward .
`` The discourse is changing . People are talking about it differently , '' he said . `` Presidential candidate Romney before was talking about how we should all self-deport and he would veto the Dream Act . But now his position is less clear . So the fact that we have been able to change the discourse in this country is a huge step forward . ''
Romney has said he would replace Obama 's temporary measure with a permanent solution , but has not fully outlined what that would be . He has previously said he would veto the DREAM Act , a piece of bipartisan legislation first introduced in 2001 that would grant legal status to illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. before age 16 , have clean criminal records , graduated high school and attend college or join the military . It has failed to pass Congress on several tries , most recently in 2010 .
How will the candidates ' position on the DREAM Act play with Latino voters in Florida ?
`` It makes a huge difference because there are a lot of people that are voting for me , especially in this state , '' Godínez-Samperio said .
Public opinion polls show a majority of Americans support the DREAM Act provisions , with the strongest backing coming from Latino voters from across the political spectrum .
`` I 've been living in this country the majority of my life . I have n't committed any crimes . I have n't been arrested for anything . I 've never been in trouble . All I 'm asking is a chance to contribute to this society , '' said Godínez-Samperio . He graduated from a Florida high school as valedictorian in 2004 and later earned a law degree from Florida State University College of Law .
Godínez-Samperio passed the Florida bar exam on his first try but was denied a license by the Florida Board of Examiners because of his legal status , he said . He is now asking the Florida Supreme Court to review his case .
`` I 'm in the same boat as Senator Marco Rubio , '' he said . `` He graduated from law school just like I did . He passed the bar exam just like I did . And if I were in his position , if I were to get the benefits he got because he 's Cuban I would very gladly strive to do as much public service as he did . ''