The Obama administration regularly cuts a break for businesses that violate immigration hiring rules , reducing their fines by an average of 40 percent from what they should be , according to an audit released Tuesday that suggests the government could be doing more to go after unscrupulous employers .
According to the audit , conducted by the Homeland Security Department ’ s inspector general , U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement cut one business ’ s fine from $ 4.9 million to slightly more than $ 1 million — a 78 percent drop .
Investigators said the reduction is legal , but it may be undercutting the administration ’ s goal of getting tough on businesses that hire illegal immigrants .
“ The knowledge that fines can be significantly reduced may diminish the effectiveness of fines as a deterrent to hiring unauthorized workers , ” the inspector general said .
The report was released the same day that a coalition of business groups wrote a letter to House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican , asking him to pass an immigration bill this year . The business groups said they supported Mr. Boehner ’ s list of immigration principles , which would give businesses a new supply of legal guest workers while granting legal status to most illegal immigrants already in the U.S .
While most of the attention in the immigration debate goes to illegal immigrants themselves , analysts say the problem would be much smaller if businesses would abide by employment laws .
Under President Obama , the federal government was supposed to be putting more of an emphasis on going after employers . ICE specifically announced that it would conduct more audits of the I-9 forms all businesses are required to keep demonstrating that their employees are authorized to work in the U.S .
The goal was to try to ramp up pressure on businesses to hire legal workers .
Jessica Vaughan , director of policy studies at the Center for Immigration Studies , said Mr. Obama has talked a good game but hasn ’ t followed through .
“ This audit confirms what I ’ ve found in reviewing ICE audit records obtained through FOIA , ” Ms. Vaughan said in an email . “ Some field offices are conducting worksite enforcement ( albeit on a tight leash ) as if they actually mean to deter and punish illegal employment . Others do not take it seriously and are just going through the motions . Their goal is to rack up enough audits so that the administration can use the numbers to claim that it is vigorously enforcing the law . ”
The inspector general ’ s report said ICE submitted notices totaling fines of more than $ 52.7 million from 2009 through 2012 , but ended up charging only $ 31.2 million — for a 40 percent break for businesses .
It still marks a huge increase over the Bush administration , which imposed just $ 1.5 million in fines from 2003-2008 .
Investigators said the agency is allowed to reduce fines if it seems the businesses ’ finances can ’ t handle a large penalty .
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce said the fines in question weren ’ t for hiring illegal immigrants , but for other problems with the I-9 process . The business group said ICE had been chastised by Administrative Law Judge Ellen Thomas , who had ruled in a series of cases that the agency was excessive in its fines .
Faced with that , the chamber said , ICE has begun negotiating lower fines .
“ The Obama administration was bringing cases and imposing fines that were completely unreasonable in light of the fact that the employers had not hired unauthorized workers , and instead were being fined for errors in the employment verification process , sometimes thought of as ‘ paperwork violations , ’ ” chamber Senior Vice President Randy Johnson said in a statement to The ███ . “ Such high fines were inconsistent with the administration ’ s own guidelines . An administrative law judge stepped in , as well she should have , and reduced those fines , in case after case . ”
Investigators said overall , ICE showed little consistency in how it applied sanctions . Some field offices gave out far more warnings and far fewer fines than other offices .
All businesses are required to store the I-9 forms submitted by employees that show their legal work status .
Analysts say the I-9 paper-based process is easy to defraud . All sides agree that an electronic system would be better — though many businesses balk at adopting electronic verification without first changing the rest of the immigration system .
In its official reply to the report , ICE didn ’ t address the issue of reduced fines .
The agency said it has tried to be consistent overall with how it goes after employers with warnings and fines and that the differences among field offices are caused by a number of factors .
The agency said it even went back and reviewed some cases to see whether a fine or warning was the right response and that it found the initial decisions were usually correct .
The agency did agree to strive for more consistency in its reporting of information .
Businesses have been an afterthought in much of the immigration debate , which has focused on the estimated 11 million to 12 million illegal immigrants now in the country and whether they should be given a pathway to citizenship .
Business groups say passing a legalization bill is important because it would give them a more certain workforce and would likely increase legal immigration channels , which would mean more workers .
“ Failure to act is not an option , ” a coalition of 636 business organizations said in their letter to Mr. Boehner on Tuesday . “ We can not afford to be content and watch a dysfunctional immigration system work against our overall national interest . In short , immigration reform is an essential element of a jobs agenda and economic growth . It will add talent , innovation , investment , products , businesses , jobs , and dynamism to our economy . ”