Obama 's anticipated plan is expected to include relief from deportation for millions of immigrants . The new program is likely to build on the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program from 2012 , which allowed young immigrants who would have benefited from the DREAM Act to apply for two years of protection from deportation , and for work permits .
The plan 's also going to include other elements , including further tweaks to immigration enforcement and a plan to expand legal immigration . But relief for unauthorized immigrants is the centerpiece — and the most controversial element .
Here 's what we know the White House is considering , and what looks likely to make it into the final package .
Estimates tend to be on the order of about 4 million , based on a New York Times report . Those 4 million newly-eligible immigrants would join the 1.2 million unauthorized immigrants who are currently eligible for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program ( DACA ) , making a total of 5 million unauthorized immigrants who 'd be eligible for relief once the plan goes into effect . ( It 's worth noting that only about half of those eligible for DACA have actually applied for protection from deportation , so how many immigrants are eligible does n't necessarily equal the number who are protected . )
It all depends on who exactly is included in the new program , which no one knows for sure at this point .
The president 's ability to protect unauthorized immigrants from deportation is supposed to be limited to particularly worthy cases . When the Obama administration instituted the DACA program in 2012 , they justified it by saying that they were limiting the program to a particular group of immigrants — and then using the application process to evaluate individual cases .
Similarly , for this round of immigration relief , the administration will probably carve out one or more groups of unauthorized immigrants who will be eligible to apply , and then set an additional set of criteria that individuals in those groups will have to meet to get their applications approved .
Here are the groups that are most likely to be eligible under a new program :
Unauthorized immigrants whose children are US citizens or green-card holders . There are 3.5 million unauthorized immigrants with US-citizen children ( in most cases because their kids were born in the US ) . These immigrants should be eligible for legal status themselves , after their children turn 21 . But they 're blocked by rules that make it extremely difficult to get legal status in the US if you 've ever been unauthorized — especially if you 're not willing to risk leaving the US in the hopes that you might get to come back . Another 150,000 immigrants are parents of green-card holders , and would have to wait even longer — assuming their children did n't become citizens — to get legal status in the US .
Unauthorized immigrants who came as children or teenagers — who are n't already protected from deportation . In 2012 , Obama created the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which was intended to protect young unauthorized immigrants who would have qualified for the DREAM Act . The DACA program is limited to immigrants who arrived before 2007 , and who were under the age of 30 when the program was announced . Expanding the program to older immigrants who arrived in the US as children , or to immigrant children and teenagers who arrived after 2007 , could protect up to 300,000 more immigrants from deportation .
Jeanette Vizguerra , a Colorado immigrant whose children are US citizens and who 's been fighting her deportation .
Here are a few other groups that have n't been mentioned in recent reports about the administration 's plan — or about whom there are mixed reports :
Possibly included : Unauthorized immigrants who are married to US citizens or green-card holders . There are 1.5 million unauthorized immigrants in the US whose spouses have US citizenship , or at least a green card . They should be eligible for legal status immediately , but are blocked by the same rules that make it so hard for unauthorized immigrant parents to get legal status . These have n't been mentioned in any reports yet , though there have been vague reports of other immigrants being protected `` by other means . ''
Uncertain of inclusion : Farmworkers . Historically , legalizing unauthorized farmworkers has been more popular with Congress than legalizing other unauthorized workers — a bill called `` AgJOBS , '' to grant legal status to farmworkers , has been floating around Congress as long as the DREAM Act . On Wednesday , Politico reported that farmworkers were n't being included in the administration 's plan — but the United Farm Workers claimed that 250,000 farmworkers would be protected from deportation .
Probably not included : Other unauthorized immigrants with children . The Obama administration has said that immigration enforcement should n't split up families , and advocates believe that the only way to guarantee that is to protect parents from deportation . There are 900,000 unauthorized immigrants whose children are not citizens , but are under 18 . The administration could also protect the parents of DACA recipients , which could cover several hundred thousand more unauthorized immigrants . But according to Politico , lawmakers who attended the Wednesday dinner with President Obama said that DREAMers ' parents would not be included .
Immigrants wo n't automatically qualify for legal status if they fit one of these categories . There are other criteria to consider as well . To qualify for DACA , for example , an immigrant has to meet a set of criteria regarding age , education , criminal record , and time in the United States . Not all of those will matter for other groups of immigrants ( age requirements will likely be dropped ) but others will .
In particular , the administration is expected to require applicants to have been in the US for a certain number of years before they 're eligible for relief . The DACA program required immigrants to have been in the US since at least 2007 — five years before the program went into effect . ( That 's why the current proposals include a plan to expand it to other immigrants who arrived as children after 2007 . ) By that standard , an estimated 3.3 million parents of US citizens or green-card holders would be eligible .
The question is whether the White House will say that immigrants have to have been in the US for five years to be eligible for the new program , or whether it will require them to have been here for ten years . The higher standard could exclude 800,000 parents of US citizens or green-card holders . Furthermore , it 's going to be extremely hard for immigrants to prove when they entered the country without papers .