President Trump on Sunday called for illegal immigrants who “ invade ” the U.S. to be sent “ back from where they came ” from without due process for deportation cases .
“ We can not allow all of these people to invade our Country . When somebody comes in , we must immediately , with no Judges or Court Cases , bring them back from where they came . Our system is a mockery to good immigration policy and Law and Order , ” he tweeted . “ Most children come without parents… ”
“ Our Immigration policy , laughed at all over the world , is very unfair to all of those people who have gone through the system legally and are waiting on line for years ! Immigration must be based on merit - we need people who will help to Make America Great Again ! ” he added .
We can not allow all of these people to invade our Country . When somebody comes in , we must immediately , with no Judges or Court Cases , bring them back from where they came . Our system is a mockery to good immigration policy and Law and Order . Most children come without parents ... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 24 , 2018
.... Our Immigration policy , laughed at all over the world , is very unfair to all of those people who have gone through the system legally and are waiting on line for years ! Immigration must be based on merit - we need people who will help to Make America Great Again ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 24 , 2018
The president 's suggestion was quickly criticized by groups like the ACLU , which said what he was calling for was illegal .
“ What President Trump has suggested here is both illegal and unconstitutional , ” Omar Jadwat , director of the ACLU ’ s Immigrants ’ Rights Project , told the AP . “ Any official who has sworn an oath to uphold the Constitution and laws should disavow it unequivocally . ”
The House is expected to vote on immigration legislation this week , but Trump has signaled the lawmakers are `` wasting their time . ''
`` Republicans should stop wasting their time on Immigration until after we elect more Senators and Congressmen/women in November . Dems are just playing games , have no intention of doing anything to solves this decades old problem . We can pass great legislation after the Red Wave ! '' he wrote on Twitter Friday .