The DREAMer President Barack Obama highlighted in his national address on immigration Thursday night said she felt `` complete relief '' when Obama laid out his plan to shield up to 5 million undocumented immigrants from deportation and said she was surprised to hear him tell her story .
`` It was completely unexpected . I did n't know that it was coming , '' Astrid Silva , an undocumented immigrant who came to the U.S. with her parents when she was four , said in an interview with CNN Friday .
Obama said Thursday that he will use his executive authority to focus immigration officials on `` felons , not families . Criminals , not children . ''
Silva did not at first hear her name as she watched alongside a boisterous group of fellow immigration reform activists .
`` And when he started talking about the cross and my dress and I said , 'That 's how I came here ! ' '' Astrid recalled . `` It was definitely a moment that I 'll never forget . ''
JUST WATCHED Obama : We 'll deport felons , not families Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Obama : We 'll deport felons , not families 03:35
JUST WATCHED Obama : We were strangers once too Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Obama : We were strangers once too 02:37
JUST WATCHED President Obama 's full immigration speech Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH President Obama 's full immigration speech 15:00
During his speech on Thursday , Obama said : `` Astrid was brought to America when she was 4 years old . Her only possessions were a cross , her doll and the frilly dress she had on . ''
Silva was motivated to begin advocating for herself and other undocumented immigrants when her grandmother died and she could n't travel to Mexico for her funeral .
`` Are we a nation that kicks out a striving , hopeful immigrants like Astrid or are we a nation that finds a way to welcome her in , '' Obama said Thursday .
Silva said she watched the speech while standing next to her father who is facing deportation orders , but could get temporary legal status thanks to Obama 's action because his son , Silva 's brother , is a U.S. citizen , according to the Washington Post .
Obama 's orders will give papers and work authorization to up to 4 million undocumented parents of U.S. citizens .
`` We wo n't have to worry that this is going to be our last holidays together , '' she said . `` It was just very emotional . ''
Silva will meet Obama on Friday when he heads to Las Vegas to continue making his case at a high school .
Silva was relieved by Obama 's actions , but said what 's missing is still `` a law by Congress , since they refused to act on it . ''
`` A lot of parents of students who are undocumented are not included , '' she said . `` We are going to continue fighting for them and this is not the end . ''