CLOSE What the national emergency declaration means , where the money is coming from and where it is n't , and what to watch for next . Hannah Gaber , ███
WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump will declare a national emergency to speed up funding for his proposed wall on the U.S.-Mexican border , but experts said the move would create a legal morass that could take until the middle of next year to resolve .
The White House announced Thursday that Trump will make the move that he 'd suggested for weeks . The announcement came as Congress readied legislation that would devote $ 1.375 billion to the border wall , far less than the $ 5.7 billion Trump demanded .
Declaring an emergency would let Trump sidestep Democratic opposition to more wall funding , but it could draw legal challenges from lawmakers and others who viewed the move as a power grab . Although that could delay construction of his border barriers , an extended legal battle would give Trump a potent political issue to run on in the 2020 presidential election .
`` Everyone ’ s going to come out of the woodwork , '' said Stephen Vladeck , a University of Texas-Austin law professor who teaches national security law . `` I think we ’ re going to see an array of lawsuits that actually would all have to be dealt with separately . ''
CLOSE Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell says President Donald Trump has indicated he 's prepared to sign the government funding bill to avert another government shutdown and issue a national emergency on the border at the same time . ( Feb. 14 ) AP
More : How congressional Democrats could fight a Trump wall emergency declaration
More : What to know about national emergencies and their role in US history
White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said the administration is `` very prepared '' for legal challenges .
The potential for an extended legal battle may explain why Trump backed away from the emergency scenario last month . The president , who faced criticism from some Republicans for the idea , said he would n't declare an emergency imminently . Republicans noted a future Democratic president could also use an emergency to work around Congress .
Litigation could go all the way to the Supreme Court , which has smacked down attempts by both Trump and President Barack Obama to make end runs around Congress . How long that takes would depend on several factors :
• Which programs the White House might try to tap for funding .
• Whether Trump tries to speed the seizure of property from unwilling owners .
• Who could be harmed by the order and would have the right to sue .
• What court or courts are chosen by challengers seeking favorable verdicts .
For weeks , Trump weighed invoking a national emergency as the political impasse over the wall led to a partial government shutdown that became the longest in U.S. history . White House aides acknowledged that lawyers reviewed the ramifications .
The president expressed confidence in the legal strategy . `` The law is 100 percent on my side , '' he said .
Democrats blasted the move . House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer called the decision a `` gross abuse of the power of the presidency '' in a joint statement .
Legal experts differed over how much latitude Trump would have to free up money for the wall on his own . They cautioned that those who favor an emergency declaration may trade a deadlock in Congress for a lengthy legal fight in the federal judiciary .
Walter Dellinger , an assistant attorney general and head of the Office of Legal Counsel under President Bill Clinton , said a lawsuit could reach the Supreme Court in a matter of months but probably would not be resolved quickly .
“ I think that a clear majority of the Supreme Court will be deeply troubled by the invocation of emergency authority in this case , ” Dellinger said . `` In the normal course , we might not expect a decision until June of 2020 at the earliest . ''
Presidents have broad authority to declare an emergency but are more restricted in how they can use it . White House officials zeroed in on provisions that would let Trump capture unused money Congress set aside for other purposes .
“ None of these statutes is a blank check , '' Vladeck said .
Another question that would have to be decided early in the process : Who has the right to sue ? Lawmakers might sue by arguing the president usurped their power through an emergency declaration . Homeowners on the border whose property could be seized to build the wall also might have a case , experts said .
Litigation may turn in part on whether Trump erred in declaring an emergency in the first place . Though the president described the situation on the border as a `` security and humanitarian crisis , '' the number of people apprehended attempting to cross the border illegally has fallen considerably over the past decade .
Courts have traditionally given presidents leeway to decide matters of national security .
`` There ’ s just not a lot of guidance in these statutes about what actually constitutes a national emergency , '' said Margaret Taylor , senior editor and counsel at the legal blog Lawfare and a former Democratic aide on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . `` Congress and the courts have been deferential to presidents on that decision . ''
On the other hand , presidents have faced successful challenges after they took action to sidestep Congress . Obama 's effort to shield from deportation about 5 million undocumented immigrants through an executive order faced a high-profile lawsuit from Texas that dragged on for months before the Supreme Court killed the program .
Challengers presumably would bring their lawsuits to district court judges they considered likely to look askance at Trump ’ s action – a practice known as “ forum shopping ” that ’ s used by both liberals and conservatives to improve their chances . Liberals often file cases within the jurisdiction of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit , based in California ; conservatives often opt for the 5th Circuit , which includes Texas .
Signaling that he may have learned from the extended legal challenge that for months blocked his travel ban on predominately Muslim countries , Trump predicted opponents might try to bring a challenge to an emergency declaration in the 9th Circuit .
`` What will happen ? I 'll be sued . It 'll be brought to the 9th Circuit . We 'll probably lose there , too , '' Trump said . `` And then hopefully we 'll win in the Supreme Court . ''