Yesterday , the Department of Homeland Security announced that it would resume the application renewal process for illegal aliens seeking protection from deportation after being brought into the United States as children . These “ Dreamers ” , as they are known in some circles , had previously been shielded from deportation under President Barack Obama ’ s executive order known as the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program ( DACA ) .
On Tuesday January 9th , U.S. District Judge William Allsup ruled that President Donald J. Trump did not have the legal authority to rescind some parts of the program . In September 2017 , Trump pledged to end DACA altogether unless Democrats and Republicans in Congress could craft a bill addressing serious legal and immigration issues that he could sign . Allsup ruled that the DHS must accept applications from individuals seeking to renew their `` Dreamer '' status , but did not have to accept new applications from individuals applying for the first time .
`` These individuals had submitted substantial personal identifying information to the government , paid hefty fees and planned their lives according to the dictates of DACA , '' the Judge wrote . `` The administrative record includes no consideration to the disruption a rescission would have on the lives of DACA recipients , let alone their families , employers and employees , schools and communities . ''
He added that the government 's arguments were `` arbitrary , capricious and an abuse of discretion . ''
After hearing Allsup ’ s decision , the White House strongly condemned what some may say is judicial overreach . `` An issue of this magnitude must go through the normal legislative process , '' White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said . `` President Trump is committed to the rule of law , and will work with members of both parties to reach a permanent solution that corrects the unconstitutional actions taken by the last administration . ''
And President Trump tweeted on Wednesday , `` It just shows everyone how broken and unfair our Court System is when the opposing side in a case ( such as DACA ) always runs to the 9th Circuit and almost always wins before being reversed by higher courts . ”
On Sunday morning , President Trump once again took to Twitter to slam America ’ s immigration policy . `` DACA is probably dead because the Democrats don ’ t really want it , they just want to talk and take desperately needed money away from our Military , ” he proclaimed .
Moments the president later called for a merit based immigration system .
“ I , as President , want people coming into our Country who are going to help us become strong and great again , people coming in through a system based on MERIT . No more Lotteries ! # AMERICA FIRST , ” he added .
So far , Republicans and Democrats have not been able to compromise on an immigration reform bill that would also address the problem of illegal aliens and `` Dreamers '' currently in the United States .