A federal appeals court has unanimously rejected a Trump administration request to allow its travel ban to take effect .
The three-judge appeals panel declined to overturn a lower court 's order suspending the president 's ban against entry into the United States by refugees and travelers from seven majority-Muslim nations .
The travel ban was put on hold by federal district Judge James L. Robart of Seattle , who issued a nationwide restraining order on Feb. 3 . Robart said that the two states challenging the ban , Washington and Minnesota , had shown that their residents and universities were harmed by Trump 's action . The administration then asked the appeals court for an emergency stay of Robart 's restraining order .
But the judges dismissed the administration 's request , saying that it had to show that it is likely to succeed in the trial court on the merits of its appeal .
`` [ We ] hold that the Government has not shown a likelihood of success on the merits of its appeal , nor has it shown that failure to enter a stay would cause irreparable injury , and we therefore deny its emergency motion for a stay , '' wrote the panel .
Trump also spoke briefly with reporters outside his press secretary 's office after the ruling was announced and , as reported by Reuters , called the decision political and predicted the administration would ultimately win .
The result is a rebuke to the White House . In oral arguments heard on Tuesday , the panel vigorously quizzed attorneys both for the administration and for the state of Washington , the lead plaintiff , which originally filed the suit challenging the travel ban .
The solicitor general for the state of Washington , Noah Purcell , argued that the travel ban is discriminatory and violates both federal statutes and the U.S. Constitution . He told the court that the judiciary 's role is to step in and check the abuses of the executive branch .
But August Flentje , special counsel to the assistant attorney general , argued that the president has the ultimate authority to protect the national security and that his action in that regard — namely , the travel ban — was unreviewable by the courts .
In their ruling , the judges were unequivocal . `` There is no precedent to support this claimed unreviewability , which runs contrary to the fundamental structure of our democracy , '' the court wrote .
The judges also said that the administration had also failed to show it would suffer `` irreparable injury '' if its travel ban were not allowed to go back into effect . Acknowledging the government 's interest in combating terrorism , the judges nonetheless wrote , `` The Government has pointed to no evidence that any alien from any of the countries named in the Order has perpetrated a terrorist attack in the United States . Rather than present evidence to explain the need for the Executive Order , the Government has taken the position that we must not review the decision at all . ''
The states challenging the president 's travel ban won on virtually every issue , says Carl Tobias , a law professor at the University of Richmond School of Law .
`` The order was unanimous . The panel found that the states had standing , that the executive order was reviewable by the court , that the U.S. was not likely to succeed on the merits and that it had not shown that a stay was necessary to avoid irreparable injury , '' said Tobias .
Africa With Travel Ban On Hold , Somali Refugees Take Off For The U.S. With Travel Ban On Hold , Somali Refugees Take Off For The U.S . Listen · 2:09 2:09
In a news conference , Purcell declared victory . `` What we argued is it 's the role of the courts to say what the law is , and to serve as a check on the executive branch , and that 's what the court has done in this opinion , in this excellent opinion , with this well-reasoned , careful , thoughtful opinion that seriously considered all the government 's arguments and rejected them , '' he said .