Yesterday , the Obama administration announced that it was delaying — for the second time — its long-anticipated executive action on immigration until after the midterm elections in November .
So why the delay ? This morning , on Meet the Press , Obama said that he needed more time to explain to the American public why such changes were necessary :
But here 's one big problem with this line . `` Explaining '' immigration reform has been the centerpiece of the Obama administration 's immigration strategy since 2009 . The administration has actually designed its policy around explaining its goals to the public . And it has n't worked yet .
Here are four different times that the Obama administration has tried to get a group of people on board with its immigration priorities and failed completely .
2009-2011 : The Obama administration tries to explain that they 're tough on enforcing immigration law
On the campaign trail , Obama promised Latinos he 'd push for comprehensive immigration reform within a year of getting into office . In practice , the administration was quickly distracted .
Instead , Obama 's Department of Homeland Security tried to lay the groundwork for future Congressional reform . The administration figured that if it explained that the border was secure and immigration laws were being strictly enforced , Republicans and swing voters would feel more comfortable supporting immigration reform in Congress . ( Adam Serwer laid out this dynamic in an essay for the American Prospect in 2010 . )
Part of this strategy was making the case to the public that the administration took immigration enforcement seriously . Secretary of Homeland Security Janet Napolitano , who had immigration-enforcement cred as a former governor of a border state , made a series of speeches to claim that the border was more secure than ever .
But the other part of the strategy was to design immigration enforcement policy so that it would help the administration make that case to the public . The federal government deported record numbers of immigrants for each of Obama 's first five years in office — about 400,000 a year .
Did it work ? Neither Republicans nor swing voters were persuaded that the administration was being tough enough in immigration enforcement . Republicans rallied around the state of Arizona in 2010 , when it passed a law designed to get unauthorized immigrants to leave the state — under the logic that the federal government had failed to secure the border and now it was the states ' turn to try . Voters supported both comprehensive immigration reform and the Arizona law — because they felt nothing was being done on immigration , and that action of any kind was better than nothing .
And instead of Republicans in Congress getting on board with broader reform , Republicans who previously supported reform started running away . When the DREAM Act , a bill to give legal status to unauthorized immigrants who 'd arrived in the US as children , came up in Congress in 2010 , several Republicans in both chambers who had voted for the bill in past years walked away — and the bill narrowly failed to hit the 60-vote threshhold for cloture in the Senate .
2011-12 : The administration tries to explain to Latinos that it 's not deporting DREAMers
After the failure of the DREAM Act in Congress , immigration advocates , led by the DREAMers ( young people who would have qualified for legal status under the DREAM Act ) , started pressuring President Obama to take executive action to protect some immigrants from deportation . The administration 's response was , again , to try to explain to them that it was already doing all that it could .
First of all , Obama claimed that thanks to the Department of Homeland Security 's policy of `` prosecutorial discretion '' — making some unauthorized immigrants `` high priorities '' for deportation , and others `` low priorities '' — DREAMers already were n't getting deported . `` We are n't going around rounding up students , '' Obama told Univisión anchor Jorge Ramos in 2011 .
Second of all , Obama told advocates , there was n't anything more he could legally do to make sure that DREAMers were protected from deportation . He accused advocates of asking him to wave a magic wand to stop deportations and said the Constitution did n't allow him to do that .
Did it work ? The problem was that `` prosecutorial discretion '' was n't actually being implemented on the ground — and the immigrant community knew that , because they were seeing the evidence . The week after Obama made that statement , a young woman confronted him at a town hall about education and held up her deportation order . Advocates continued to put pressure on Obama and the Department of Homeland Security to find an effective way to protect DREAMers from deportation .
And the advocates won . In June 2012 , President Obama announced the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program — which would allow DREAMers to apply for two years of protection from deportation , as well as work permits .
2013-2014 : The administration tries to explain that it ca n't expand its executive action to other immigrants
In Obama 's first term , the legislative failure of the DREAM Act gave rise to pressure for executive action instead . That 's the same arc that comprehensive immigration reform followed in his second term .
As it became clear toward the end of 2013 that an immigration bill probably was n't going to pass Congress anytime soon , advocates began to pivot back to the administration — asking Obama to protect immigrant parents and workers , just like he 'd protected immigrant students with DACA .
The administration took the same line it took in 2011 : that they were already doing everything they could do . DACA was legal , they said , but it would n't be legal for them to expand the program to other immigrants , like parents of US citizens .
Did it work ? Immigration advocates had heard this argument already , and they 'd gotten the administration to back down . So they were n't terribly persuaded by the explanation this time . And again , it was the advocates who won : the president announced in March 2014 that he would be reviewing deportation policy to try to make it more humane . ( That 's the review that was delayed — for the second time — in September . )
2014 : The administration tries to explain to the public that the child and family migrant crisis is under control
In spring 2014 , the continued influx of Central American children and families into the Rio Grande Valley became a crisis that captured the attention of the nation . The immigration system just was n't equipped to handle the increase , and the administration was clearly caught unprepared . Anti-immigration pundits warned about an `` invasion '' of gang members , and Republicans , seizing on rumors that smugglers were telling families that they 'd get `` permisos '' in the United States , said that the administration 's promises of `` amnesty '' had caused the crisis .
The Obama administration spent the summer trying to prove to the public that it was acting aggressively to stop children and families from coming .
It `` surged '' immigration resources from the interior of the country to the Rio Grande Valley to process immigrants through the deportation system as quickly as possible . It built temporary detention facilities to house migrant families — where , reports indicate , government officials told detainees that they would all be deported , even though many of them were trying to claim asylum in the US . And in speech after speech , President Obama tried to speak directly to Central American families and tell them not to come to the US — hoping to explain to the American public that the administration wanted to stem the flow .
Did it work ? Not at all — in fact , that failure is exactly what Obama was talking about on Meet the Press . The panic over migrant children and families damaged public support for any sort of relief for unauthorized immigrants , even those who 'd lived in the US for a long time .
President Obama is now saying that this was a significant enough shift in public opinion that it 's worth putting executive action on hold to address it — but the administration was trying to address the shift in public opinion all summer , and to no avail .
Politicians ca n't successfully explain anything to the public if the public is already convinced it knows what 's going on . And that 's been the case on immigration for some time . Progressives and immigration advocates do n't believe that the administration has enough control over federal agents that it can tell them which immigrants not to deport — that 's why they 've pushed for programs like DACA , in which immigrants can apply directly for protection . Republicans and conservatives flatly do n't believe that the Obama administration has any interest in enforcing immigration laws .
Either the administration is finally , after five years of failure , going to make a breakthrough in explaining its immigration priorities to advocates and the American public , or this delay is n't going to improve the administration 's standing with anybody . The latter seems a lot more likely .