When the Trump administration outlined its rationale this week for ramping up immigration enforcement , it cited the “ unacceptable ” delays that currently plague the country ’ s immigration courts .
Their dockets currently include a record high of more than 534,000 pending cases , according to a Department of Homeland Security memo this week . The department ’ s resources are already “ significantly strained , ” the DHS memo noted – even as it outlined plans to deport and detain a far broader range of illegal immigrants than the Obama administration .
The Trump administration has promised a “ surge ” of immigration judges and asylum officers to handle the long-standing backlog , with additional plans to allocate billions for a massive border wall , new detention centers , and thousands of newly hired border and enforcement officers .
And in a move that legal experts say could have one of the more far-reaching effects on US immigration policy , President Trump is also expanding the “ expedited removal ” process .
The process , which was established by a 1996 law and allows an immigration officer to deport undocumented immigrants without referring them to a judge , is not unprecedented . The Bush and Obama administrations used it since 2004 for undocumented immigrants considered “ in transit ” – those picked up by authorities within 100 miles of the border within the past 14 days .
Mr. Trump , however , has expanded the expedited removal process to include any illegal immigrant anywhere in the country and who has been here for two years or less , making it far easier to remove tens of thousands of those who have crossed the US border without papers , many experts say .
To proponents , such a move is needed to prevent those who have crossed over illegally from establishing roots in a community – roots that would be difficult , if not inhumane , to break apart . This is part of the reason that the average wait of more than two years to see a judge – a wait that can stretch to five years – remains unacceptable for the Trump administration .
But others are concerned that Trump ’ s expansion of the expedited removal process is likely to deprive undocumented immigrants of their constitutional right to due process , which has been established by court precedents . Indeed , for those within the country two years , their cases are likely to be far more complex and difficult to evaluate in an expedited hearing
“ On the one hand , I think there ’ s been a lot of dramatic shifts and a lot of aggressive actions by this administration , but so far they have been , for better or for worse , keeping within a general understanding of the powers that were delegated to them by Congress , ” says Rick Su , a professor and expert in immigration law at University at Buffalo School of Law .
But , he adds , “ this now concentrates a lot of power within the decisions of low-level immigration enforcement officials ... who would essentially be Judge Dredd – judge , jury , and executioner in these cases . ”
Trump 's priorities target most all of those who have crossed the border without papers , ending the “ catch-and-release ” policy of the Obama administration , which only targeted serious criminals and recent arrivals for removal . Trump has made an exception , however , for law-abiding recipients of Obama ’ s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals order , known as DACA , and for those with American children – on a case-by-case basis .
“ The Obama administration ’ s conception of ‘ catch and release ’ was that those who didn ’ t violate a ‘ real law ’ wouldn ’ t have to face immigration consequences , ” says Mark Krikorian , executive director of The Center for Immigration Studies , which favors stricter limits on immigration . “ And that ’ s what ended . ”
The controversy over Trump ’ s changes to US immigration policies have highlighted questions over how far the Constitution protects non-citizens , including undocumented immigrants caught in the American legal system .
The Supreme Court is currently hearing arguments in a civil case brought by the parents of a Mexican boy shot and killed by a US border agent in 2010 , who fired a bullet in the US that struck the boy in Mexico . The parents argue that their son ’ s rights were violated under the Fourth Amendment , which prohibits the unreasonable use of force , and the Fifth Amendment , which prohibits depriving a person ’ s life and liberty without due process .
These questions have also arisen after the US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit upheld a federal court ruling that halted Trump ’ s temporary immigration ban from seven Muslim countries .
“ People who are subjected to expedited removal do have due process rights , ” says Margo Schlanger , professor of law at the University of Michigan , and the former civil rights officer for the Department of Homeland Security . She says that the expedited removal process has always been thought sufficient to satisfy their constitutional right to due process , which even non-citizens and undocumented immigrants have , according to court precedents .
But for people who have been in the country longer than 14 days , the expedited removal process may not meet constitutional muster , Professor Schlanger says .
And , she adds , the changes could result in more infractions of the law . “ I mean , we ’ re going to see a lot more mistakes being made in the application of a very complex body of law because the DHS memo says we ’ re going to move the cases along much faster , and we ’ re going to put the decisionmaking into the hands of a lot of people who are going to be brand new and inexperienced . ”
Technically , the 1996 federal immigrant law that legalized the expedited removal process authorized its use on those who have been in the US for two years or less . So Trump ’ s planned expansion still falls within that legal framework .
However , Professor Su notes that when Congress created the Department of Homeland Security , it specifically did not place immigration courts under its purview .
“ The reason for that is , if the immigration courts were in the same department , beholden to the same secretary and the same body that does the actual enforcement – if the prosecutor and the judge both work for the same person , that is – it would be very unlikely that you would have a fair proceeding , ” he says .
But that protection is wiped away if immigration officers under DHS ’ s purview decide whether to deport undocumented immigrants not just in transit , but who have been here for an extended period of time .
Yet many proponents say the constitutional right to due process is satisfied by immigration officers , who are trained to identify any valid reasons to delay deportation and move their cases along to the appropriate official .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
In an aggressive enforcement system , entirely controlled by DHS , mistakes have already affected many US-born Latinos and other legal immigrants caught up in the expedited removal system , says Cecilia Menjívar , co-director of the Center for Migration Research at the University of Kansas .
“ If we take a step back and look at the tactics themselves , and not the population they ’ re being applied to , ” she says , “ you can start to see that today it may be undocumented immigrants , but they can easily be applied to other populations . ”