LAKE BUENA VISTA , Fla. — Mitt Romney called immigration reform a “ moral imperative ” Thursday , laying out his vision for a broad increase in legal immigration for both business and family reunification and vowing to complete what he called “ a high-tech fence ” along the border .
But Mr. Romney again refused to say whether he will allow President Obama ’ s recent order halting deportations of young illegal immigrants to remain in place while he works on that longer-term solution .
In a major speech to the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials ( NALEO ) , holding their annual conference at Disney World , Mr. Romney , Republicans ’ presumptive presidential nominee , said Mr. Obama has had three years to work on a bill and instead settled for last week ’ s stopgap deportation decision — which Mr. Romney implied was done just to win over votes .
“ He ’ s taking your vote for granted . I ’ ve come here today with a very simple message : you do have an alternative . Your vote should be respected , ” Mr. Romney said .
Mr. Romney ’ s plan calls for expanded immigration for immediate relatives of current green card holders ; a streamlined temporary worker program that is easier for businesses to use ; and efforts to attract and keep high-skilled workers .
On border security , he promised to complete what he called “ a high-tech fence ” and said he ’ ll complete an exit verification system to cut down on the large percentage of illegal immigrants who arrived legally but stayed past their visas .
He also said he will support legalizing illegal immigrants who agree to join the U.S. military — a small part of the Dream Act , which would legalize most illegal immigrant young adults .
But Mr. Romney did not offer any broad plan for legalizing most illegal immigrants . Instead , Mr. Romney said only that he will “ address the problem of illegal immigration in a civil but resolute manner . ”
“ We may not always agree , but when I make a promise to you , I will keep it , ” he told NALEO .
Mr. Obama , by contrast , has called for a broad bill that would legalize most illegal immigrants now in the country , and has twice voted for that kind of legislation when he was a senator .
Most congressional Republicans say that amounts to amnesty , but for many Hispanic voters , support for a broad immigration plan that includes a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants is a threshold issue heading into November ’ s elections .
Mr. Romney ’ s speech comes less than a week after Mr. Obama announced he would stop deporting illegal immigrants under 30 who were brought here as children and who have completed high school or earned a GED .
Early polling shows that move is popular among most voters , though Mr. Romney said it was a stop-gap measure done more for election-year politics than because it was good policy .
“ After three-and-a-half years of putting every issue from loan guarantees for his donors to Cash For Clunkers before immigration , now the president has been seized by an overwhelming need to do what he could have done on Day One . I think you deserve better , ” Mr. Romney said .