Of all the sticking points in immigration reform , the stickiest is what to do about the estimated 11 million people already living illegally in the United States .
The Senate , in its bipartisan reform bill approved last June , opted to grant a “ pathway to citizenship ” for illegal immigrants . In the House , many Republicans call that `` amnesty , '' and want none of it . Now , however , House Republicans are discussing this alternative : Provide a pathway to legal status , but not citizenship .
So far , that idea is just a talking point on a list of immigration reform principles that House Republicans are considering at a retreat on Maryland ’ s Eastern Shore Jan. 29-31 . Even so , it could mark the road to an actual law or laws , so the distinction is important . Below we answer questions about legal status versus citizenship , and the arguments on both sides of the debate .
Gaining legal status would likely mean three things for people now living in the US illegally , according to Doris Meissner , director of the Migration Policy Institute , a nonpartisan think tank that studies global migration .
First , they would no longer be subject to deportation solely because they ’ re in the country illegally , as long as they are law abiding in other ways . Second , they would be authorized to work . Third , they would have the ability to travel in and out of the United States . At least 60 percent of the illegal population has been in the US for more than 10 years , says Ms. Meissner , and are unable to return to their home countries to visit family or for other reasons .
Republicans would want immigrants to meet certain conditions to qualify for legal status , such as admitting they entered the country illegally , passing background checks , paying fines and back taxes , and becoming proficient in English and American civics .
The Senate bill allows for a 13-year path to citizenship for illegal immigrants . As naturalized citizens , they would be eligible to receive government benefits , such as unemployment insurance and Social Security . They could vote . And they would be eligible for special immigration privileges , such as being able to bring family members into the country . If they commit a crime , they ca n't be deported .
These privileges of citizenship would not apply to people with legal status .
They view citizenship as “ amnesty ” that rewards people who broke the law . It unfairly gives illegal immigrants a “ head start ” over people trying to enter the country legally , they say . And granting citizenship to such people – even if the process takes 13 years – would only serve to convince future illegal migrants that they , too could eventually get citizenship if they just pressure Congress long enough .
Actually , some conservatives consider both citizenship and legal status to be “ amnesty. ” Both , they say , reward lawbreakers , give illegal immigrants an advantage , and signal to future illegal entrants that the door is open to them , too .
Conservatives do want other aspects of immigration reform : tighter border security , greater immigration enforcement at the workplace , and a functioning visa system . Only after these goals are achieved , they argue , will it be time to look at the undocumented who are already here .
For some conservatives , however , the time for immigration reform will never be ripe as long as President Obama is in office . They see him as lax on immigration enforcement , despite buttressing of the border patrol and increased workplace sweeps . `` If the president can not be trusted to enforce existing immigration laws , why should he be trusted to enforce new immigration laws ? ” asks Rep. Lamar Smith ( R ) of Texas .
They , too , see this as a fairness issue . It is unfair and un-American for the government to institute two classes of people in the US , a class with full rights and a lesser class without full rights , they argue . One part of immigration reform must be to bring the undocumented fully out of the shadows so that they can openly contribute to the economy and civic life , they argue . A full contribution is possible only with full citizenship .
House minority leader Nancy Pelosi ( D ) of California champions this view . “ There has to be a path to citizenship , ” she reiterated Jan. 29 . And it must be comprehensive , including children of illegal immigrants ( so-called “ Dreamers ” ) and adults , she said .
Immigrant groups themselves rank legal status as more important than citizenship , by pluralities of Hispanics and Asian-Americans – who make up two-thirds of the 28 million immigrants in the US . That may be the strongest argument on behalf of legalization .
Fifty-five percent of Hispanic adults in the US say that “ being able to live and work in the US legally without the threat of being deported ” is more important for unauthorized immigrants than “ having a pathway to citizenship for those who meet certain requirements , ” according to a December survey by the Pew Research Center . Among Asian-American adults in the US , 49 percent hold that view . Both groups still overwhelmingly favor a pathway to citizenship , but they say protection from deportation is the greater need .
Rep. John Yarmuth ( D ) of Kentucky , who worked on bipartisan immigration legislation in the House last year , believes that if getting immigration reform across the finish line in the House were to depend on giving up on citizenship and accepting legal status , enough Democrats would compromise to pass reform .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
`` If that were the only thing holding up a comprehensive measure , there would be a majority of votes in the House for passage [ of legal status ] , but with fewer Democrats , ” he said in an interview this week .
There 's also the purely political consideration . Because `` legal status '' would not give these 11 million people the right to vote , some Republican lawmakers might be more receptive to it . That 's because ethnic minorities currently vote Democratic by a large margin , and the new citizens would be presumed to do the same , at least initially . Democratic lawmakers may resist such a compromise for the same reason , not wanting to forgo an infusion of Democratic voters .