What kind of knife was the man that killed your father holding ? Can you remember how many stars were on the jacket of the military officer that raped you ? How many hours were you on the boat that night before the smuggler shot your brother and threw him overboard ?
I give her time to rest . I let the interpreter decide when the client is ready again .
Ready for me to continue the utterly invasive questions that will follow for hours , in four to five different sessions over a period of weeks or months , as part of my work as a legal adviser to Middle Eastern and African asylum seekers in Egypt .
My questions are invasive in part because the system of refugee status determination managed by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees isn ’ t like the domestic US court system . As an asylum seeker , you carry a burden of proof . You have to defend that you ’ re not lying about being a refugee — that you are in fact fleeing danger and have a credible fear of persecution .
Your word alone isn ’ t enough ; we need photo evidence , corroborating country of origin intelligence , documents , and medical records . And most of all , we need to know that however many different ways we ask you , the story always lines up . Your case hangs on your credibility .
President Trump is suggesting that the process for vetting is not thorough enough , not exacting enough . “ ‘ We want to ensure that we are not admitting into our country the very threats our soldiers are fighting overseas , ” he said when he signed his executive order on immigrants and refugees last week .
But there is a rigorous process to achieve just that objective already — more stringent than most Americans imagine . As someone who has worked in refugee resettlement for five years , including as a legal adviser and a co-founder of a refugee resettlement clinic in Egypt , I can tell you how wrong Trump ’ s characterization is .
Refugee resettlement is crushingly exclusive , reserved only for those who successfully navigate a vast , distrustful bureaucracy
When asylum seekers walk into the small legal aid clinic in downtown Cairo , there are three things that become readily apparent : that their former life was stolen from them ; how little they have now ; and how meager your assistance will be in helping them retrieve what they ’ ve lost . The first question I ask a client , which will mark the next two to five years of their life , seeks to answer how that happened .
I once had to excuse myself after a screening interview with a Somali client . She described the basis of her claim : After she was nearly raped by a militia leader , she said goodbye to her mother and sister and escaped with her brother in the middle of the night . Only a few hours later , she saw her brother shot in front of her just as they arrived to her country of refuge , and she spent the next seven years alone , with no contact with family and no community . As she told me this , she didn ’ t shiver or cry , but I did , because I recognized that steely face , one born from a life of struggle and a casualization of brutality .
Clients are initially directed to a multilingual administrator , who is trained to ask a series of eligibility questions — a first interview about the terms of their asylum claim , and what services they might need ( do they have kids , continuing trauma episodes , urgent health concerns , etc. ) . For those seeking refugee status , a privilege that merely secures their right to not be deported , the process may take one to two years . If they are pursuing resettlement to a third country like Canada , Switzerland , or the US , as many hope to , this process , if successful , will last anywhere from two to five years .
But in reality , refugee resettlement is crushingly exclusive , reserved only for those who successfully navigate a vast , inherently distrustful bureaucracy and pass some of the most stringent background checks in the world . Of all the registered refugees across the globe in 2015 , fewer than 1 percent were resettled . Most remain trapped in countries neighboring violence , never able make it to Europe , let alone the United States .
As for refugee children , in places like Egypt , they are not permitted to attend public school . So a delay or a halt of refugee resettlement is not like waiting for a promotion . It ’ s like waiting for life to begin again .
Coming to the US as a refugee requires answering seemingly endless questions about the worst days of your life
After an asylum seeker ’ s initial interview , the client meets with their legal adviser in four subsequent sessions where they are asked about the minute details surrounding the worst days of their life . Why did the security forces detain all the men coming past the checkout in Damascus that day ? Describe the room — how were you hung up ? Where did they attach the electric cable on your body ? Did you ever see your sister again ?
Some of these questions , as you might imagine , are very difficult for clients to discuss . Their grief and memories of terror pour over into tears and often long , heavy pauses . However , it ’ s a legal adviser ’ s job to be as kind yet as dispassionate as possible . The client must remain steady and credible throughout — to be fixed and to answer the interviewer 's questions even as they remember when the floor under them lost its form and carried away their life .
After four sessions of these merciless questions , the client is provided written legal testimony in English and , in some cases , legal advocacy ( legal representation lite ) during their interview at the UN High Commissioner for Refugees . If , and only if , the asylum seeker is granted refugee status , then the resettlement process begins . For those keeping count , the successful refugee client who ’ s received legal aid has , by this point , already completed six interviews .
Seeking the resettlement process in the United States , if they succeed , will mean one to four additional years , during which time their case will undergo 18 additional levels of screenings . They will be interviewed , with the help of an interpreter , by three additional vetting bodies , a US government Resettlement Support Center , the Department of Homeland Security , and custom officials — for a total of nine interviews that can last from one hour to six hours each . In between these interviews , their names and biographical data will be checked against a State Department database , and any information identified in these background checks will inform the next interviewers ’ questions . Next , the refugee ’ s biometric profile , such as fingerprints and photos , will be checked against an interagency database .
The irony of President Trump ’ s executive order : The most vetted are the most suspected
By the time refugees who have gone through the UNHCR process are approved for resettlement to the US , they will have been vetted by international legal advisers , the US State Department , the FBI , the Department of Homeland Security , the US intelligence community , and , of course , the UNHCR itself . Syrians will also undergo an additional vetting by US Citizenship and Immigration Services .
No individual who sets foot on American soil will ever have been more vetted and verified than a refugee is . And all of this after their identity has been nearly stripped from them in the rapture that took away their former life . It seems unbelievable that an individual seeking to harm the US would choose a torturous process that 99 percent of worthy , credible individuals fail to access — especially given that anyone who passes through the resettlement process is immediately on the radar of top intelligence agencies .
The irony of President Trump ’ s executive order is palpable . The most vetted are the most suspected . The most terrorized are those painted as terrorists . Up is down . Wrong is right . And only ISIS and President Trump can seem to agree on the same plan of action — send them back .
Susannah Cunningham is a Truman National Security Project fellow . In 2008 , she co-founded the Resettlement Legal Aid Project , a Cairo-based legal clinic originally created to serve Iraqi refugees , many translators , drivers , and contractors targeted for their work with Coalition Forces and American organizations . Today the clinic is the sole provider of legal assistance to Egypt 's sizable urban refugee population from Africa and the Middle East .