The spending showdown is likely to hit as enrollment in the insurance exchanges starts . | REUTERS Rubio : Defund ACA for spending deal
Sen. Marco Rubio pledged Thursday that he won ’ t vote for a short-term spending bill to keep the government open unless it defunds the Affordable Care Act .
“ I will not vote for a continuing resolution unless it defunds Obamacare , ” the Florida Republican said at a breakfast hosted by The Weekly Standard and Concerned Veterans for America . He called on his fellow senators to do the same . “ I believe we should not vote or pass a continuing resolution unless that continuing resolution defunds Obamacare . ”
The spending showdown is likely to hit around the time that enrollment in the Obamacare health insurance exchanges start in October . “ This debate is going to take place the same time as the implosion of Obamacare is happening before your eyes , ” he said .
In a speech full of praise for how “ special and unique ” America is , Rubio aimed some of his harshest criticism of President Barack Obama at his health care law , calling it “ un-implementable . ”
He predicted a host of disastrous consequences as Obamacare is rolled out this fall , predicting that insurance exchanges won ’ t be ready on time and the government won ’ t verify people ’ s income to make sure they ’ re not collecting too much in insurance subsidies .
Rubio said it will all come to a head when most members of Congress realize they ’ ll have to drop their federal insurance plans and go into the exchanges in January — a requirement in the law that many never intended to be included in the final legislation but that no one has yet figured out how to undo .
“ I ’ ll tell you when it ’ s going to come to a head is when members of Congress realize that they , too , will lose their health insurance , and they , too , will be thrown into a federal exchange , ” Rubio said .
Rubio cast the Affordable Care Act as one of many examples of the extent of the two parties ’ philosophical differences , saying their stark disagreements over the budget , the environment and gun control are other key issues .
In his 20-minute speech , Rubio did not mention immigration , which is now before the House . He was one of the forces behind the Senate ’ s bipartisan bill .