Thomas Homan , former acting director at Immigration and Customs Enforcement , testifying before Congress back in July . Yehyun Kim/USA Today via Reuters
Thomas Homan , the Trump administration ’ s acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement from January 2017 to June 2018 , helped to transform the agency into an arm of Donald Trump ’ s nativist agenda . During his 17 months , ICE escalated its terror tactics against immigrant communities , tormented thousands of individuals in ICE custody , and lied to federal courts . On Thursday , asked to answer for his agency ’ s conduct and policies in a congressional hearing , he responded with a meltdown that perfectly captured a lawless organization ’ s rejection of any rules or authority that might limit its power .
Thursday ’ s hearing before the House Subcommittee on Immigration and Citizenship focused on ICE detention centers , a hotbed of human rights abuses . More than 50,000 immigrants are currently being held in ICE custody , with private , for-profit prisons housing nearly three-fourths of them . Reports issued by the Department of Homeland Security ’ s Office of Inspector General in June 2019 and September 2018 found that ICE facilities are filthy , brutal , and dangerous . Immigrants , including children , are routinely denied access to medical care . They are forced to live in filthy conditions , given food that is expired and unsafe , denied hygiene items like toothbrushes and soap , and denied recreation and visitation . Detainees are illegally placed in solitary confinement and strip-searched . At one facility , inspectors found nooses in 15 different cells . At least 24 immigrants have died in ICE detention under Trump .
Democratic Rep. Pramila Jayapal , who chaired the subcommittee on Thursday , is the sponsor of a bill , the Dignity for Detained Immigrants Act of 2019 , that seeks to address these problems . The measure would heighten standards for ICE facilities , increase inspections , grant more robust rights to detainees , and phase out ICE ’ s use of private prisons . It has 130 co-sponsors in the House of Representatives , all Democrats . Jayapal sought to use the hearing to explore the cruelty inflicted on ICE ’ s victims . Witnesses included Selene Saavedra Roman , a Dreamer wrongfully detained by ICE for six weeks ; Denis Davydov , a gay HIV-positive immigrant wrongfully detained by ICE while seeking asylum from Russia ; and Blanche Engochan , a Cameroon refugee subjected to horrific mistreatment in ICE detention .
These survivors had important and heartbreaking stories to tell about the trauma they suffered at the hand of ICE officers . Yet Homan repeatedly hijacked the hearing to express his outrage about the real victims of all this , himself and the agency he used to lead . He shrieked at congressional Democrats , accusing them of making “ inaccurate and disgusting ” attacks on his agency . He praised ICE detention facilities , insisting that they “ have the highest standards in the industry ” and the “ best facilities in the world. ” In fact , Homan suggested that the U.S. spends too much money taking care of ICE detainees , declaring : “ I think a lot of taxpayers would be insulted on the amount of money we spend on such a high standards. ” And he charged Democrats with “ grandstanding political theater to attack our president and this administration and the men and women who serve in this administration . ”
The most indelible moment arrived when Homan ’ s time expired—and he refused to stop speaking . Jayapal attempted to gavel him down , but he continued to insult her . His rant ended with a moment of rage as he lectured Jayapal : “ I ’ m a taxpayer , you work for me ! ”
Former ⁦ @ ICEgov⁩ Dir . Tom Homan shows no respect to ⁦ @ RepJayapal⁩ during a House hearing today after going over his time , shouting out ,
“ I 'm a taxpayer , you work for me ! ” pic.twitter.com/kVK2VlWinG — Andrew Kimmel ( @ andrewkimmel ) September 26 , 2019
This was not his first blowup at the prospect of having to answer to criticism . Earlier this month , Homan engaged in a similar performance , attempting to shout down Democratic Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez after his time expired . Like Jayapal , Ocasio-Cortez had to gavel him down .
AOC bangs gavel to get former ICE director to stop speaking over her pic.twitter.com/Xuk4QytG0U — TPM Livewire ( @ TPMLiveWire ) September 12 , 2019
It was hard to miss the symbolism of Homan training his rage and condescension on two women of color . When he took over ICE , he instilled a culture that emboldened agents to disregard the rights of minority populations . Multiple ICE officers infamously lied repeatedly to a federal court in an effort to deport a Dreamer , falsely accusing him of gang affiliation . A federal judge also ruled that ICE officials had made “ demonstrably false statements to the Court ” and concealed key facts in its quest to deport 100 Iraqi immigrants . ICE agents arrested a victim of domestic violence at a courthouse where she had sought a protective order , allegedly acting on a tip from her abuser . The agents then appear to have lied about the incident on an affidavit , claiming they approached her after she exited when surveillance footage showed them accosting her inside the courthouse .
These incidents demonstrate how ICE operated under Homan ’ s watch . Agents felt free to illegally detain immigrants , then deceive courts to secure their deportation . They treated their targets as legal nonpersons , in a crusade to detain and deport as many as possible . ICE has gone after lawful immigrants , too , attempting to revoke their green cards for no good reason . Homan claimed he simply sought to enforce the laws on the books . But when state legislators began to limit local law enforcement ’ s ability to cooperate with ICE , Homan announced on Fox News that those lawmakers should be charged with crimes .
The first wave of coverage of Homan ’ s outburst Thursday came from right-wing media , praising his defiance . It was pure Trumpism , the elevation of culture war over the basic constitutional order . Thomas Homan does not recognize the authority of Pramila Jayapal or Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez . He does not think he has to follow their rules . He does not believe that two women of color have any right to hold power over him . “ You work for me ! ” the former government employee screamed at an elected member of the government . He is a man who is used to wielding power against people who look like Jayapal and Ocasio-Cortez . He is the embodiment of ICE under Trump , certain—as so many ICE officers are—that he answers to no one .