Illegal immigration across the Southwest border has surged back to Obama-era levels , according to the latest data released last week that suggests the gains President Trump made early in his tenure have worn off .
Nearly 40,000 illegal immigrants were nabbed attempting to jump the border in November , which was up about 12 percent compared to October , and more than twice the monthly numbers from March and April , when Mr. Trump touted his early accomplishments .
Perhaps just as worrisome for officials is the rise in families traveling together , which surged 45 percent last month , and unaccompanied minors traveling without parents , which rose 26 percent in November , according to the numbers released Friday .
Homeland Security said those numbers are still an improvement over the worst years of President Obama .
“ Under President Trump , illegal immigration has declined dramatically over the last year , ” said spokesman Tyler Q. Houston .
But he said more needs to be done , and said action needs to come from Capitol Hill .
“ The administration is working tirelessly to secure the border , enhance interior enforcement and establish a merit-based immigration system . But we need Congress to act immediately to close immigration loopholes , fund the border wall , terminate outdated visa programs and provide the necessary tools for DHS officials to carry out their mission , ” Mr. Houston said .
The 39,006 people caught in November included 29,086 caught by the Border Patrol , and 9,920 who tried to come through official ports of entry without permission . The total is still less than 2015 or 2016 , but is more than 2012 , 2013 or 2014 , signaling a return to Obama-era levels of illegal immigration on the border .
Just last week , the Trump administration crowed over its gains , pointing to a nearly 30 percent decline in people being caught at the border compared to the previous year . But they did say they were “ very concerned ” by the latest trends , which have been borne out in Friday ’ s numbers .
CBP officials said cartels have figured out how to “ exploit legal and policy loopholes ” in the U.S. to get illegal immigrants into the country and give them a chance to blend into the shadows .
In addition to more migrants , border agents and officers are catching more opioids , heroin and cocaine being smuggled from Mexico to the U.S .
Amount of people caught and drugs seized at the border is considered a rough approximation for the overall flow , so an increase in apprehensions is believed to indicate an increase in the overall flow of illegal migrants .
Border Patrol agents say the numbers dropped when Mr. Trump first took over because of his get-tough stance , with word filtering back to Mexico and Central America — the biggest sources of southwest border jumpers — that the U.S. was stiffening its enforcement .
But in fact deportations dropped over the last year and despite some high-profile enforcement actions newcomers are still able to exploit U.S. policy so that even if they face deportation , they are often released and have a chance to disappear into the shadows .
New Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen , traveling to the border last week , said she ’ s aware of the surge on the border , and ticked off a long list of changes the Trump administration is seeking to get a handle on it .
She said more manpower and infrastructure — including more fencing — is needed , but also said the government needs to do more to quickly deport illegal immigrants who arrive at the border . She said the average immigration court deportation case lasts 600 days , meaning that even if someone does get to the U.S. they have time to blend into the shadows .
“ We are going to make it very , very difficult to remain here unlawfully , ” she said .