The Associated Press has found documentation showing that Melania Trump broke immigration law when she first came to the US in 1996 — by entering the country on a tourist visa and then working as a professional model .
It ’ s an ironic twist for a presidential campaign that ’ s marked itself by casting aspersions on immigrants in general , and “ illegal ” immigrants in particular , for the past 17 months .
The AP ’ s revelations probably won ’ t sway Donald Trump ’ s supporters in the waning days of the campaign . And while technically under immigration law Melania ’ s citizenship could be revoked if the government found she ’ d committed visa fraud to come here , it ’ s extremely unlikely that that ’ s going to happen .
Immigration policy is extremely complicated ; the line between “ legal ” and “ illegal ” isn ’ t always visible . Melania appears to have entered the US legally and then worked illegally . If anything , that should give pause to anyone who believes her husband and other politicians who claim that unauthorized immigration can be remedied by building a wall at the border , or fixed easily at all .
Melania Trump came to the US in the mid-1990s to work as a model . But the specifics of her arrival , and the specific immigration status she had before getting a green card in 2001 , were always unclear — and have provoked a great deal of speculation about whether she was really a “ legal immigrant ” for the entire time she lived in the US .
The AP ’ s reporting doesn ’ t answer all the questions that have been raised about Melania ’ s immigration status , including how she got her green card in 2001 . But it does establish a clear timeline for how she came to the US to begin with . ( Lawyers affiliated with the Trumps dispute the AP article , saying its documents don ’ t “ reflect our records ” — but the Trumps have never released any documents related to Melania ’ s status themselves . )
According to the AP , Melania Knauss ( her maiden name ) first came to the US in August 1996 on a B1/B2 “ tourist visa. ” Tourist visas allow someone to stay in the US for six months , but they can ’ t seek employment in the US during that time .
Then on October 18 , 1996 , the AP found , she got an H-1B visa for “ skilled workers ” allowing her to work legally in the US as a model .
The problem is that the AP ’ s documentation shows that Melania was “ paid for 10 modeling assignments between September 10 and October 15 ” — while she was still on the tourist visa . In other words , she was working on a visa that didn ’ t legally permit her to work — and thus was violating the terms by which she ’ d been allowed to come to the US .
Melania could have committed visa fraud — or she could have been duped by unscrupulous employers
To be clear : Melania Knauss didn ’ t enter the US illegally . But she did , if the AP ’ s reporting is correct , violate immigration law .
Technically , she violated her tourist visa the minute she engaged in employment for pay in the US . But it ’ s possible that she didn ’ t know that .
B-visas are often issued to “ temporary business visitors ” — who are here for “ business activities ” but not allowed to work . It ’ s for people who are going to professional conferences , for example , or networking with associates — or even negotiating a contract for future employment . The US Citizenship and Immigration Services website explains that activities under a business visitor visa “ must be directly connected with and part of your work abroad . ”
Legally , working for pay for a US company is a clear violation of the terms of that visa , but it ’ s not exactly intuitive that someone coming on a business visa , especially if she ’ d been working as a model in Europe , wouldn ’ t be allowed to work .
This summer , when questions about Melania ’ s immigration status first came up , a Politico article cited a labor standards advocacy group ’ s claim that “ [ i ] t was a common practice in the 1990s in New York for less scrupulous agencies to bring in foreign models to work illegally on temporary business and tourist visas. ” If Melania Trump was on the same sort of visa as everyone else she worked with , it ’ s totally possible that she was simply being misled as to its legality .
Then again , it is also entirely possible that Melania knowingly committed visa fraud ; that , in fact , she lied to US immigration officials when entering the country in August 1996 about her intentions to work while in the US . That ’ s not just an immigration violation but an outright federal crime .
Either way , in order for Melania to have gotten a green card and then US citizenship , she would have had to attest that she hadn ’ t violated immigration law before — something that now appears to be untrue .
If the US government really wanted to , it could use the AP ’ s reporting to launch an investigation into whether Melania Trump deliberately misrepresented her immigration history when she sought US citizenship . It could even try to strip her of it .
It probably won ’ t . As the AP wrote , “ The government effectively does this in only the most egregious cases , such as instances involving terrorism or war crimes . ”
The fact of the matter is that not all violations of immigration law are equally serious . The federal government understands that , and conserves its resources accordingly . Melania Trump ’ s husband may not always understand it , but that ’ s the way the world works .
The problem isn ’ t Melania Trump — it ’ s a system that even Melania Trump can ’ t navigate
Ostensibly , the reason that Melania Trump ’ s immigration status 20 years ago is politically relevant is that it exposes her husband ’ s hypocrisy — which should , hypothetically , be a political liability for him . He says illegal immigrants should all be deported — but , according to this report , his own wife once worked illegally in the United States .
Yet Trump ’ s supporters tend to care less about an immigrant ’ s legal status than about whether she embraces US culture and values . If they liked Melania before , knowing she was an immigrant , it ’ s not obvious that they ’ ll start freaking out about her now .
What ’ s more interesting is that the scrutiny of Melania Trump actually undermines one of the core assumptions that Trump and his supporters have about the immigration system : that it ’ s perfectly clear who ’ s “ legal ” and who ’ s not , and that if you ’ re violating immigration law it must be out of malice . Neither of those things is true .
The scrutiny that Melania is facing , belatedly , is something that many immigrants and visa holders are entirely too familiar with . They ’ re used to having every detail of their pasts raked over — and having any inconsistency or mistake held up as evidence of fraud . Usually , it ’ s at the hands of the federal government .
I ’ ve seen Immigration and Customs Enforcement prosecutors accuse asylum seekers of making up their entire stories — simply because they said at one point that something happened in 1993 and at another point that it happened in 1994 . And most immigrants have fewer resources to make their case than the Trumps do .
Immigration law is incredibly hard to understand and even harder to comply with . That ’ s a very good reason not to pass laws that require government agents to be able to determine at a glance whether someone is “ legal ” or not — or deprive immigrants of a judicial hearing to sort out their status .
In other words , it ’ s a good reason not to automatically subject millions of immigrants to deportation and try to round up as many of them as possible without a chance to examine their cases — as Donald Trump has promised to do .