Donald Trump spent more than a year rousing crowds with a simple promise : `` I 'll build a great , great wall on our southern border , and I will have Mexico pay for that wall . '' As the campaign wore on , it got so he could ask `` Who 's gon na pay for the wall ? '' and the audience would roar , `` Mexico ! ''
It was fun while it lasted . But now , in the cold light of day , some facts are coming into focus : It may not exactly be a wall . It wo n't be paid for by Mexico . And it may not get built .
Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke is one of the people backing off from this promise . Non-wall options , such as electronic sensors , will have to be considered in some places , he said . You see , `` the border is complicated , as far as building a physical wall . ''
Not only that but where would we locate it ? `` The Rio Grande , what side of the river are you going to put the wall ? '' Zinke asked . `` We 're not going to put it on our side and cede the river to Mexico . And we 're probably not going to put it in the middle of the river . '' The Mexicans wo n't invite us to erect the structure on their side . So siting may be a problem .
That 's not all the Mexicans wo n't do . President Enrique Pena Nieto has said repeatedly and unequivocally that his government will not bear the cost . Trump had the chance to out-negotiate Pena on the wall when he met with him in Mexico City last summer—but Trump chose not to even raise the payment issue .
The Mexican president was supposed to come to Washington for a White House meeting in January . But when Trump said it would be better to cancel the trip if Mexico was not willing to pay for the wall , Pena canceled the trip .
Trump said that rather than make Mexico pay for it upfront , `` we 'll be reimbursed at a later date from whatever transaction we make from Mexico . '' So we 'll send the invoice and they 'll mail a check ? Well , not exactly . `` There will be a payment , '' he told ABC News . `` It will be in a form , perhaps a complicated form . ''
No one on Capitol Hill seems to share Trump 's confidence . When Politico 's Jake Sherman asked Mitch McConnell whether Mexico will pay for the wall , the Senate Republican leader could n't suppress his mirth at the very idea . `` 'Uh , no , ' he shot back , chuckling , '' Politico reported .
House Speaker Paul Ryan said with solemn vagueness , `` We will be working with ( Trump ) to finance the construction of the physical barrier , including the wall , on the southern border . '' Faced with the funding disagreement with Mexico , Trump included money for the wall in his budget outline , with the funds taken from other programs .
Republican enthusiasm is not abundant . Sen. Cory Gardner of Colorado , head of the National Republican Senatorial Committee , said recently that `` billions of dollars on a wall is not the right way to proceed . '' Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina agreed it is `` probably not a smart investment . ''
Democrats have promised to block any bill that includes money for the wall , which means they could force a government shutdown if Republicans attach it to the emergency spending measure that needs to be approved by April 28 . Ryan said Thursday that the wall appropriation will be dropped to avert a shutdown .
But there may not be much interest in funding it afterward , either . The House Freedom Caucus is generally not fond of spending money , and Trump 's declaration of war on the group will not make its members more eager to indulge him .
Plenty of Senate Republicans are also skeptical . `` If you 're going to spend that kind of money , you 're going to have to show me where you 're going to get that money , '' Sen. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska said in February . `` We ca n't pay for it out of thin air , '' said Sen. James Lankford of Oklahoma .
There do n't seem to be many people in Washington who think the wall can be built as Trump claimed or that it would work very well . Not to mention that it sounded a lot better when Mexico was going to pay for it .
Trump fooled a lot of voters when he made that promise , and he may have even fooled himself . But at some point , you run out of fools .