The Trump administration is likely to take its travel ban to the Supreme Court of the United States without a single lower court agreeing that it ’ s constitutional .
On Thursday , the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Maryland upheld a federal district judge ’ s ruling that barred the Trump administration from banning residents of six majority-Muslim countries from entering the US for 90 days .
The Fourth Circuit case didn ’ t address Trump ’ s attempt to temporarily ban refugees , or to overhaul the screening process for future arrivals to the US ; those parts of the administration ’ s March executive order are on hold thanks to a separate case , being considered in the West Coast Ninth Circuit . The Ninth Circuit has heard oral arguments in that case but hasn ’ t issued its opinion yet .
But the Fourth Circuit was the Trump administration ’ s best hope at a favorable ruling before reaching the Supreme Court .
Instead , it suffered the latest — and , arguably , harshest — in what ’ s becoming an unbroken string of judicial smackdowns over the travel ban .
“ When the government chooses sides on religious issues , the ‘ inevitable result ’ is ‘ hatred , disrespect and even contempt ’ towards those who fall on the wrong side of the line , ” wrote Chief Judge Roger L. Gregory . “ Improper government involvement with religion tends to destroy government and to degrade religion [ , ] encourage persecution of religious minorities and nonbelievers , and foster hostility and division in our pluralistic society . The risk of these harms is particularly acute here , where from the highest elected office in the nation has come an Executive Order steeped in animus and directed at a single religious group . ”
Technically , the Fourth Circuit didn ’ t fully uphold the lower court ’ s order . It made it clear that President Trump himself couldn ’ t be constrained by the courts , legally speaking ( it was already pretty obvious in all other senses ) .
But the rest of the Trump administration — including the Departments of State and Homeland Security , which would be implementing the travel ban — is still prohibited , under this order , from enforcing the proposed 90-day ban on entries from residents of Iran , Libya , Somalia , Syria , Sudan , and Yemen . In other words , the only nominal victory the Trump administration has gotten in the lawsuits over this travel ban is a victory that practically means nothing at all .
And it ’ s now guaranteed that the Supreme Court , if it agrees to consider the ban at all , will be considering a policy that ’ s never been put into effect .
Ever since Trump ’ s first attempt at a travel ban — rushed into effect on January 27 — was put on hold by a Washington judge a week later , the Trump administration has tried to disassociate the policy from Trump ’ s call during the presidential campaign for a “ total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States until our country ’ s representatives can figure out what is going on . ”
First , they made a show of withdrawing and reconsidering the travel ban , asking several government agencies for input ( only to be undermined when some of them said there was no reason for a ban at all ) . Then they issued a new executive order in March that avoided the biggest legal problems with the first ban ( such as its apparent ban on green card holders from the blacklisted countries returning to the US from abroad ) and gave the government more time to plan for its implementation .
But the rulings in Maryland and Hawaii put the new ban on hold the night before it was supposed to go into effect . In both cases , judges ruled that even if the ban didn ’ t explicitly target Muslims , it was impossible to disentangle it from Trump ’ s discriminatory campaign promise .
The Trump administration made a valiant effort in oral arguments before the Fourth Circuit to argue that a promise Trump made in 2015 , before a single presidential primary , shouldn ’ t outweigh everything the administration has said or done since then to argue the travel ban isn ’ t a Muslim ban . But Chief Judge Gregory , who wrote the court ’ s opinion , was , to say the least , unpersuaded :
These statements , taken together , provide direct , specific evidence of what motivated both EO-1 and EO-2 : President Trump ’ s desire to exclude Muslims from the United States . The statements also reveal President Trump ’ s intended means of effectuating the ban : by targeting majority-Muslim nations instead of Muslims explicitly . And after courts enjoined EO-1 , the statements show how President Trump attempted to preserve its core mission : by issuing EO-2—a “ watered down ” version with “ the same basic policy outcomes. ” J.A . 339 . These statements are the exact type of “ readily discoverable fact [ s ] ” that we use in determining a government action ’ s primary purpose . McCreary , 545 U.S. at 862 . They are explicit statements of purpose and are attributable either to President Trump directly or to his advisors . We need not probe anyone ’ s heart of hearts to discover the purpose of EO-2 , for President Trump and his aides have explained it on numerous occasions and in no uncertain terms .
The Supreme Court might not even have to take up the travel ban now
It ’ s unlikely that the “ very liberal Ninth Circuit ” ( as Trump and his administration usually refer to it ) is going to be more deferential to the president . The Fourth Circuit was clearly the administration ’ s best hope at a win , and it hasn ’ t gotten one .
But even if the Ninth Circuit does , somehow , rule in the administration ’ s favor , the Fourth Circuit ’ s ruling means that the 90-day ban against residents of the six majority-Muslim countries will still be on hold .
In other words , no matter what happens in the Ninth Circuit , the Trump administration is almost certainly going to appeal the Fourth Circuit ’ s ruling to the Supreme Court .
The question is whether the Supreme Court agrees to take the case .
If the Ninth Circuit rules in the administration ’ s favor while the Fourth Circuit has ruled against it , the Supreme Court will almost certainly step in to resolve the discrepancy . ( That ’ s called a “ circuit split , ” and the Court tends to step in to tell one circuit it ’ s wrong so contradictory precedents don ’ t spring up in different parts of the country . )
Again , though , that ’ s not terribly likely to happen . What ’ s more likely is that the Trump administration will ask the Supreme Court to overturn both the Ninth and Fourth Circuits to put the ban back in place . And technically , the Supreme Court has the option of simply refusing to hear the case and letting the lower courts ’ decisions stand .
This probably won ’ t happen — there are enough votes on the Supreme Court sympathetic to the administration to grant the case a hearing , and besides , the Supreme Court will likely feel obligated to weigh in on the president ’ s signature policy . For that matter , the White House still has a shot at winning a Supreme Court case , despite the lack of support from judges so far . But going to the Supreme Court with a winless record in two circuits is not the strongest position .