South Carolina Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham ’ s call for a short-term deal to reopen the government while continuing negotiations on border security means that there is now a working majority in the Senate publicly willing to vote to end the shutdown . Fellow Republican Sens . Susan Collins , Cory Gardner , and Lisa Murkowski have all urged passage of bipartisan appropriations bills that would bring nearly 800,000 federal employees back to work . Add Graham and all the Senate Democrats , and you have 51 votes .
Back in December , the Senate passed its bill to keep the government open by voice vote , which is recorded as unanimous . That was before President Donald Trump changed his mind and said he would refuse to sign the bills .
The House is now run by Democrats who have already passed legislation to reopen the government . House Republicans are cracking too : The most recent appropriations bill passed for the Department of the Interior earned 10 Republican votes , inching closer to supermajority support . So it ’ s reasonable to suggest that , under the surface , there may be enough support for the Graham option to override a presidential veto .
This means that one of the main impediments to ending the shutdown is not Trump but Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , who has quietly aligned with Trump since the shutdown began . All McConnell would have to do to open the government would be to put the same bill that the Senate already passed back on the floor .
Yet McConnell has been adamant that he would not put anything up for a vote in the Senate that the president wouldn ’ t sign , making numerous speeches on the Senate floor on the subject . He has steered clear of negotiations to end the shutdown , now in its fourth week . He rejected a compromise proposal from his own caucus to consider exchanging protections for Dreamers for wall funding .
Democrats have bashed McConnell for abdicating responsibility by refusing to line up votes , but he has not budged . The big question is this : Why has McConnell , whose primary motivation has always been protecting Senate Republicans from negative publicity , hung his fellow senators out to dry on the unpopular shutdown and opened them up to widespread criticism ?
It ’ s true that McConnell cares deeply about the electoral fates of his GOP colleagues . But he also cares about his own . And Mitch McConnell is up for re-election in 2020 .
McConnell ’ s major problem is that , in Kentucky and across the country , he is not particularly likable . He is among the most unpopular of America ’ s senators , with just a 38 percent approval rating , according to the most recent poll from Morning Consult . That ’ s actually an improvement over last year , when McConnell ranked as the most unpopular . But that ’ s still well below Trump ’ s 55 percent approval in Kentucky , per the same polling outlet .
In 2017 , after McConnell publicly clashed with Trump , a poll put the majority leader ’ s approval rating in Kentucky at 18 percent . Just 37 percent said they ’ d like to see him re-elected in 2020 .
It ’ s probably the case that McConnell doesn ’ t fear losing to a Democrat in next year ’ s elections . Or , at least if he does , it ’ s a manageable fear — though , the longer he drags out an unpopular shutdown , the more conceivable it becomes . But overriding a Trump veto , crossing him in such a public way , could bolster a primary challenge .
And Trump ’ s ability to pull McConnell ’ s stature up in a state like Kentucky was evidenced in the last Congress . McConnell was much further underwater in Kentucky last summer , finishing dead last in popularity among senators , with 30 percent support and 56 percent disapproval . His numbers only started to turn around when Brett Kavanaugh was nominated to the Supreme Court and McConnell made sure that he was confirmed , regardless of the controversy over sexual assault allegations . McConnell has raised his net approval by 17 points since last summer , mainly by sticking to Trump like glue .
It ’ s true that a political crisis 22 months before the next election would typically not register with voters . But this is no ordinary crisis : It involves the border wall , the signature proposal on which Trump has staked his political career . If McConnell were to undercut the president on the wall , constituents in Kentucky might not forget . Or Trump might not let them . And the primary takes place in May 2020 , six months closer than next November .
On Monday , ███ asked senators if they thought McConnell ’ s re-election played a role in setting the Senate strategy . “ No , I think that Senator McConnell has rightly determined that in order for this to end , and for this to get resolved , that the president and the Democrats have to come to an agreement , ” said Sen. John Thune of South Dakota , a member of GOP leadership . “ He ’ ll be more than happy to bring something to the floor that can get 60 votes in the Senate and a presidential signature . I think it ’ s pretty straightforward . ”
Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , said that McConnell was waiting for Trump to tell him what he ’ ll accept . “ No , I think it has to do with — the Senate passed a bill and then the White House said they were open to [ it ] and then they changed their mind the next day , ” he said . “ Ultimately there ’ s no bill we can pass that will become law unless the president signs it . So I think he ’ s just waiting for the White House to tell us what they would support . And I think he would put to a vote virtually anything they would support. ” ( As a matter of civics , Congress can enact a law by overriding a presidential veto , with two-thirds of the votes in both chambers . That ’ s the move McConnell is resisting . )
The White House has endorsed McConnell ’ s subordinate approach and has broadcasted its appreciation . “ Leader McConnell is standing strong , ” Vice President Mike Pence told reporters last week . “ Republicans are standing rock solid with the president , and Leader McConnell is right there with them . ”