Bob Carey , who oversaw refugee resettlement under Obama , says Trump administration ’ s new limit will have dire consequences
A former senior government official who oversaw refugee resettlement under Barack Obama warned that the Trump administration ’ s decision to slash the refugee admissions cap to a record low could have fatal consequences .
Bob Carey , the director of the Office of Refugee Resettlement ( ORR ) under the Obama administration from 2015 to 2017 , told ███ the new limit of 30,000 refugees per year and the Trump administration ’ s justification for the cap was “ a new low in our history ” .
Mike Pompeo , the secretary of state , announced on Monday that in the fiscal year that begins 1 October , the US will only allow up to 30,000 refugees – a sliver of 1 % of the more than 68 million people forcibly displaced across the globe .
Carey and other refugee advocates said the new limit is part of a systematic effort by the US government to dismantle humanitarian protections for people fleeing violence , religious persecution and armed conflict . And they are concerned other countries will follow the US in dismantling refugee programs .
US government accused of 'devastating damage ' to families separated at border Read more
Pompeo ’ s announcement followed a six-month period where the US forcibly separated more than 2,600 migrant children from their parents , ended its commitment to funding the United Nations ’ program for Palestinian refugees and was scrutinized by its own military officials for denying entry to Iraqis who assisted US troops .
Carey left his posting at ORR , an office in the health department , when Trump took office in January 2017 . He said the refugee program – which is overseen by the health department , department of homeland security and state department – is being “ managed to fail ” .
“ It ’ s really disturbing and tragic , ” said Carey , who is now a fellow at the Open Society Foundations . “ I think it will ultimately make the world less secure . ”
Resettlement is what happens after people flee to one county and are then given a chance to start new lives in a third country . Resettlement is not what happens to most refugees : there were 19.9 million people who had fled their home country at the end of 2017 , but less than 1 % were resettled that year , according to the UN refugee agency .
An additional 40 million people are internally displaced and 3.1 million are seeking asylum , according to UNHCR .
With two weeks to go in the 2018 fiscal year , the US has admitted 20,918 refugees for resettlement – 46 % of the current 45,000 refugee cap .
Palestinian anger over US decision to end funding for UN agency Read more
To justify the lower cap , Pompeo cited a backlog of outstanding asylum cases for draining resources . In doing so , he linked two groups that are processed differently – refugees and asylum seekers – and overstated how many asylum cases are in the backlog .
“ Some will characterize the refugee ceiling as the sole barometer of America ’ s commitment to vulnerable people around the world , ” Pompeo said . “ This would be wrong . ”
But humanitarian groups allege that targeting a population that is vetted more than any other immigrant group is a key indicator of the US ’ s humanitarian priorities under Trump .
“ There is no question that from the very beginning this administration had a goal to shut down or extremely limit the refugee program , ” said Michelle Brané , director of the migrant rights and justice program at the Women ’ s Refugee Commission .
Brané said low refugee admissions , coupled with the Trump administration ’ s slate of policies and directives that limit legal and illegal immigration , has created a “ pressure cooker ” in the most unstable regions in the world .
“ You lock people in , you don ’ t let them out , ” Brané said . “ You don ’ t provide them an avenue to safety . What does that mean in the end ? It feels like we ’ re leading to a bigger crisis . ”
People in the refugee resettlement community are worried that the rapid , dramatic dismantling of the program means it will be difficult to rebuild if the cap is raised in the future .
The Syria paradox : America drops bombs but 'turns its back ' on refugees Read more
This is because with fewer refugees coming in , there is less need for refugee resettlement agencies who work as nonprofits contracted by the US government to manage the resettlement process by finding refugees housing , jobs and schools . This year , at least 20 were set to close and 40 others have cut operations , according to Reuters .
Paedia Mixon is CEO of New American Pathways , an Atlanta resettlement agency that provides assistance to all types of immigrants . “ Our fears are in a short period of time you can destroy something that ’ s worked really well , ” Mixon said .
Mixon said New American Pathways has lost more than $ 1m in revenue since Trump took office and had to let go seven of its staff members .
“ We always felt like we did this work in partnership with the US government , that we were providing a service to our country , doing humanitarian work on behalf of the United States , ” Mixon said .
This was true even when admissions , but not the refugee cap , plummeted after 9/11 .
Mixon and others who worked for the government and at resettlement agencies at that time said it appeared the government was interested in keeping the refugee program afloat , once it had made security adjustments to the vetting process .
Mixon said : “ It looks like they are trying to remove certain types of people from the country , which is what most of our refugees are trying to flee from – a government that would remove you based on who you are , what you look like , where you are from . ”