( CNN ) - As the President makes another pitch for immigration reform Monday , recent polls show a majority of Americans support allowing undocumented immigrants to stay in the United States and apply for citizenship .
But one poll indicates Americans are divided over whether immigration reform should be considered an immediate priority .
A Public Religion Research Institute survey released Monday ( but conducted earlier this month ) indicates 63 % of adults nationwide favor allowing undocumented immigrants to become citizens if they meet certain requirements .
Another 14 % prefer they become legal residents only , while 18 % support the idea of deporting those who came to the United States illegally . Four percent are unsure or did not give an answer .
On whether immigration reform should be a top priority , only 41 % say it should be tackled immediately , while 42 % say it can wait to be addressed over the next couple of years . Fourteen percent say it should n't be a priority at all .
According to a Quinnipiac University survey from earlier in November , 57 % of registered voters nationwide support a pathway to citizenship , while 13 % say undocumented immigrants should be allowed to stay but not become citizens .
Twenty-six percent , however , say those immigrants should be required to leave , while four percent are unsure .
While in San Francisco on a West Coast fundraising swing for Democrats , President Barack Obama on Monday will make remarks about immigration reform at the Betty Ann Ong Chinese Recreation Center .
The year started off with immigration as a top priority in the White House and on Capitol Hill , but the issue has largely been overshadowed by a host of other pressing issues in Washington in recent months–including a government shutdown , the botched rollout of HealthCare.Gov , the crisis in Syria and negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program .
The Senate passed a comprehensive immigration package this summer that includes a pathway to citizenship , but the legislation has faced sharp pushback from House conservatives . House Speaker John Boehner announced this month the body wo n't go to conference with the Senate over the bill to reconcile the two chambers ' differences .
But Boehner has insisted immigration reform is `` absolutely not '' dead in the House , and Republicans have indicated they 're more likely to support the passage of smaller bills that tackle different aspects of immigration reform piece-by-piece .
Obama told CEOs last week he 'd be willing to accept such an approach if it means getting something done .
`` If they want to chop that thing up into five pieces , as long as all five pieces get done , I do n't care what it looks like as long as it 's actually delivering on those core values that we talk about , '' he said .
A White House official said Obama would hit on principles Monday that must be part of an immigration overhaul , including a path to citizenship and bolstering border security .
The Public Religion Research Institute surveyed 1,005 adults by telephone from November 6-10 . The overall sampling error is plus or minus 3.1 percentage points .
The Quinnipiac University Polling Institute interviewed 2,545 registered voters by telephone from November 6-11 , with an overall sampling error of plus or minus 1.9 percentage points .