LISTEN TO ARTICLE 3:07 SHARE THIS ARTICLE Share Tweet Post Email
President Donald Trump said he ’ d mobilize the U.S. military to close the border with Mexico to stop an “ assault ” on the nation by a caravan of migrants from Central America .
Trump , who ran in 2016 promising to tighten U.S. immigration laws and stanch the inflow of undocumented migrants , has called for cutting off foreign aid to Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador if they don ’ t stop the migrants .
“ In addition to stopping all payments to these countries , which seem to have almost no control over their population , I must , in the strongest of terms , ask Mexico to stop this onslaught - and if unable to do so I will call up the U.S. Military and CLOSE OUR SOUTHERN BORDER ! ” Trump said on Twitter .
Hours later , Lieutenant Colonel Jamie Davis , a Pentagon spokesman , said in a statement that “ the Department of Defense has not been tasked to provide additional support ” beyond National Guard troops already providing assistance .
Trump also attempted to politicize the issue Thursday by claiming -- without providing evidence -- that Democrats are backing the human movement to bolster what he said was the party ’ s preference for “ open borders and existing weak laws . ”
I am watching the Democrat Party led ( because they want Open Borders and existing weak laws ) assault on our country by Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador , whose leaders are doing little to stop this large flow of people , INCLUDING MANY CRIMINALS , from entering Mexico to U.S ..... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 18 , 2018
Democrats in Congress generally have supported a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants -- but only those who meet certain criteria -- and have never proposed doing away with border rules . Democrats in 2013 led the charge to overhaul the nation ’ s immigration laws , an effort that stalled because of opposition from Republicans who controlled the House .
The issue has gained new urgency under Trump , whose “ zero-tolerance ” policy of enforcing border laws came under fire earlier this year after Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a plan that included separating migrant families . Though the administration abandoned that policy , Trump has said he ’ s considering bringing it back as a deterrent .
Currently more than 2,000 people -- including many who left home so quickly they brought only backpacks -- are making their way from Honduras , traveling through Guatemala and heading toward the U.S. , The Associated Press reports .
In April , Trump authorized the National Guard to protect the border as a similar group of migrants headed up from Central America . He later credited authorities in Mexico for breaking up that assembly .
The Defense Department has in the past helped the Department of Homeland Security with border security . And former Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama both deployed National Guard troops to the border during their administrations to bolster security . But American law may also restrict how much the military can do to carry out Trump ’ s wishes : The 19th-century Posse Comitatus Act is viewed as prohibiting the use of the military to execute domestic laws , according to a 2013 report by the Congressional Research Service .
In other Twitter posts , Trump claimed -- without substantiation -- that many in the caravan are criminals .
.... The assault on our country at our Southern Border , including the Criminal elements and DRUGS pouring in , is far more important to me , as President , than Trade or the USMCA . Hopefully Mexico will stop this onslaught at their Northern Border . All Democrats fault for weak laws ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 18 , 2018
“ I am watching the Democrat Party led ( because they want Open Borders and existing weak laws ) assault on our country by Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador , whose leaders are doing little to stop this large flow of people , INCLUDING MANY CRIMINALS , from entering Mexico to U.S , ” he said .