U.S. federal immigration agents arrested hundreds of undocumented immigrants in at least four states this week in what officials on Friday called routine enforcement actions .
Reports of immigration sweeps this week sparked concern among immigration advocates and families , coming on the heels of President Donald Trump 's executive order barring refugees and immigrants from seven majority-Muslim nations . That order is currently on hold .
`` The fear coursing through immigrant homes and the native-born Americans who love immigrants as friends and family is palpable , '' Ali Noorani , executive director of the National Immigration Forum , said in a statement . `` Reports of raids in immigrant communities are a grave concern . ''
The enforcement actions took place in Atlanta , New York , Chicago , Los Angeles and surrounding areas , said David Marin , director of enforcement and removal for the Los Angeles field office of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement .
Only five of 161 people arrested in Southern California would not have been enforcement priorities under the Obama administration , he said .
The agency did not release a total number of detainees . The Atlanta office , which covers three states , arrested 200 people , Bryan Cox , a spokesman for the office , said . The 161 arrests in the Los Angeles area were made in a region that included seven highly populated counties , Marin said .
In a conference call with reporters , he said that such actions were routine , pointing to one last summer in Los Angeles under former President Barack Obama .
`` The rash of these recent reports about ICE checkpoints and random sweeps , that 's all false and that 's dangerous and irresponsible , '' Marin said . `` Reports like that create a panic . ''
He said that of the people arrested in Southern California , only 10 did not have criminal records . Of those , five had prior deportation orders .
Michael Kagan , a professor of immigration law at the University of Nevada at Las Vegas , said immigration advocates are concerned that the arrests could signal the beginning of more aggressive enforcement and increased deportations under Trump .
`` It sounds as if the majority are people who would have been priorities under Obama as well , '' Kagan said in a telephone interview . `` But the others may indicate the first edge of a new wave of arrests and deportations . ''
Trump recently broadened the categories of people who could be targeted for immigration enforcement to anyone who had been charged with a crime , removing an Obama-era exception for people convicted of traffic misdemeanors , Kagan said .