Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday that the immigration bill making its way to the chamber floor later in the day has “ serious flaws ” that must be fixed before the legislation can pass .
Mr. McConnell said he won ’ t launch a filibuster of the bill in a key test vote scheduled for Tuesday afternoon , but said the bill is still in danger unless its border security provisions can be stiffened and the bill is amended to deny illegal immigrants access to taxpayer-funded benefits like tax credits .
“ I ’ m going to need more than an assurance from [ Homeland Security Secretary Janet ] Napolitano , for instance , that the border is secure to feel comfortable about the situation on the border , ” the Kentucky Republican said .
He said the key to fixing the bill will be to have an open amendment process . And indeed , the jockeying over amendments has already begun .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , Nevada Democrat , has said he will allow amendments but signaled he will keep tight reins on which amendments reach the floor .
His goal is to protect the crux of the immigration deal , which offers illegal immigrants quick legalization but withholds the full path to citizenship until after more money is spent on border security , the government creates a new verification system to check workers , and immigration authorities begin to track entries and exits at airports and seaports .
Mr. Reid told Univision , a Spanish-language television network , that he will allow some small changes but nothing “ major . ”
SEE ALSO : Union launches ad blitz to sway GOP on immigration
In 2007 — the last time the Senate debated a bill — Mr. Reid ’ s heavy hand in controlling amendments threatened to derail the bill , and he had to relent . When fellow Democrats passed an amendment cutting the number of guest-workers from the bill , it threw a wrench in the core of that year ’ s deal , and the bill died in a bipartisan filibuster .
Sen. Marco Rubio , the Florida Republican who helped write this year ’ s bill and is considered the key to selling the measure to conservatives , has said he needs to see changes to border security and the entry-exit system .
On Tuesday he said he ’ ll introduce an amendment requiring that illegal immigrants seeking green cards prove they ’ ve learned English — not just enrolled in language classes , as the bill currently allows .