Mitch McConnell has just turned the immigration debate in the Senate , already mysterious and complicated , into something everyone in Washington is struggling to wrap their heads around .
He ’ s giving the Senate a week of floor debate to address any immigration issue that members wish : addressing the fate of the 690,000 unauthorized immigrants facing the loss of their protections from deportation and work permits under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , as well as the fate of the other “ DREAMers ” who came to the US as children and didn ’ t or couldn ’ t apply for DACA ; Trump ’ s border “ wall ” ; policy toward asylum seekers and unaccompanied children at the border ; the future of legal immigration to the US ; and anything else that senators think is particularly important .
Instead of focusing the debate by introducing a bill and using amendments to push it to the right or left , McConnell is starting the debate with nothing . One of two things will happen from there : Either he ’ ll have each side introduce amendments to build an immigration bill from scratch or he ’ ll reveal an amendment of his own that represents a compromise as Mitch McConnell defines it .
That raises the question of what represents a compromise on immigration to Mitch McConnell . He ’ s not tipping his hand in the slightest . And in the meantime , he ’ s essentially saying , “ Immigration : talk amongst yourselves . ”
McConnell is starting the debate a week before the Senate ’ s February recess — meaning that he ’ s either asking senators to solve America ’ s most contentious policy issue in five days or telling them to pause in the middle of a floor debate , spend a week being yelled at by constituents , and come back to take some very difficult votes .
The Senate can ’ t agree on a starting point , so McConnell is opening the debate up even wider
Because immigration is such a broad and complicated issue , and it ’ s not clear what McConnell ’ s priorities are in narrowing it , it ’ s hard to predict what amendments will be offered . But various divides have already erupted among senators — and it ’ s not clear whether , in any of these debates , one side or the other has the 60 votes necessary to pass .
Who is getting legalized and how ? Legalization proposals from Democrats and immigration-dove Republicans , as well as the White House ’ s one-page immigration framework , have proposed allowing both DACA recipients and other DREAMers to apply for legal status and eventually become eligible for citizenship . Proposals from immigration hawks in Congress , meanwhile , have offered legalization only to current DACA recipients , and haven ’ t included any way for them to apply for citizenship after getting legalized . It ’ s not clear whether there ’ s a 60-vote consensus for how many immigrants a legalization deal should cover , or for whether they should get a path to citizenship . And while Sen. Jeff Flake ( R-AZ ) plans to offer a proposal to simply extend the temporary protections DACA recipients currently have for another three years ( something that sounds easier in theory than it would be in practice ) , it ’ s not clear that there are 60 votes for that either .
Legalization proposals from Democrats and immigration-dove Republicans , as well as the White House ’ s one-page immigration framework , have proposed allowing both DACA recipients and other DREAMers to apply for legal status and eventually become eligible for citizenship . Proposals from immigration hawks in Congress , meanwhile , have offered legalization only to current DACA recipients , and haven ’ t included any way for them to apply for citizenship after getting legalized . It ’ s not clear whether there ’ s a 60-vote consensus for how many immigrants a legalization deal should cover , or for whether they should get a path to citizenship . And while Sen. Jeff Flake ( R-AZ ) plans to offer a proposal to simply extend the temporary protections DACA recipients currently have for another three years ( something that sounds easier in theory than it would be in practice ) , it ’ s not clear that there are 60 votes for that either . What about the parents of DREAMers ? Immigration hawks are particularly concerned that allowing DREAMers to become citizens will allow them to sponsor their parents for citizenship . The Senate will have to decide if parents of DREAMers should be specifically barred from becoming citizens through their children . If so , the Senate will have to decide whether to offer some form of temporary legal status to parents instead ( as the compromise bill proposed by Sens . Graham and Dick Durbin ( D-IL ) proposed ) or simply keep them in the shadows .
Immigration hawks are particularly concerned that allowing DREAMers to become citizens will allow them to sponsor their parents for citizenship . The Senate will have to decide if parents of DREAMers should be specifically barred from becoming citizens through their children . If so , the Senate will have to decide whether to offer some form of temporary legal status to parents instead ( as the compromise bill proposed by Sens . Graham and Dick Durbin ( D-IL ) proposed ) or simply keep them in the shadows . How much money does the wall get ? The White House wants $ 25 billion . The Graham-Durbin bill offered $ 1.6 billion . Another bill offered by Sens . John McCain ( R-AZ ) and Chris Coons ( D-DE ) offers $ 0 , instead proposing a study of border needs . Is there a number between $ 0 and $ 25 billion that 60 senators can agree is worth spending on a wall ? Maybe ! But we have no idea what that is yet .
The White House wants $ 25 billion . The Graham-Durbin bill offered $ 1.6 billion . Another bill offered by Sens . John McCain ( R-AZ ) and Chris Coons ( D-DE ) offers $ 0 , instead proposing a study of border needs . Is there a number between $ 0 and $ 25 billion that 60 senators can agree is worth spending on a wall ? Maybe ! But we have no idea what that is yet . Can closing “ loopholes ” stop gang members from entering the US without hurting children fleeing persecution ? Trump ’ s Department of Homeland Security — and , increasingly , Trump himself — is less concerned about money for the border than with changing the law to make it easier to turn away unaccompanied children from Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador , and easier to deport them after they have been allowed to enter the US . The White House considers this an important tool to fight the revival of MS-13 activity on the East Coast . Democrats consider it a recipe for disaster that will result in would-be refugees being sent back to their deaths .
Trump ’ s Department of Homeland Security — and , increasingly , Trump himself — is less concerned about money for the border than with changing the law to make it easier to turn away unaccompanied children from Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador , and easier to deport them after they have been allowed to enter the US . The White House considers this an important tool to fight the revival of MS-13 activity on the East Coast . Democrats consider it a recipe for disaster that will result in would-be refugees being sent back to their deaths . Does the Senate care about abolishing the “ visa lottery ” ? A nd if it does , what does it want instead ? Eliminating the diversity visa , or at least eliminating the lottery used to select who gets to apply for a visa , has become a priority for Republicans because it ’ s a priority for Trump . It ’ s not clear whether it ’ s a priority for 60 senators . Even if it is , they might not agree on whether to cut the 45,000 slots currently allocated to the diversity visa or just reallocate them . Even if they agree to reallocate them , they might not agree on whether to make sure they keep going to people from countries that don ’ t send many immigrants to the US .
Eliminating the diversity visa , or at least eliminating the lottery used to select who gets to apply for a visa , has become a priority for Republicans because it ’ s a priority for Trump . It ’ s not clear whether it ’ s a priority for 60 senators . Even if it is , they might not agree on whether to cut the 45,000 slots currently allocated to the diversity visa or just reallocate them . Even if they agree to reallocate them , they might not agree on whether to make sure they keep going to people from countries that don ’ t send many immigrants to the US . Should legal immigration be cut , shifted , or neither ? The only Senate immigration bill the White House has actually endorsed isn ’ t about any of these issues . It ’ s the RAISE Act , sponsored by Sens . Tom Cotton ( R-AR ) and David Perdue ( R-GA ) , which would slash legal immigration to the US by as much as 50 percent over the next decade by making huge cuts to family-based immigration without expanding employment-based immigration to match it . Nothing is stopping Cotton from introducing the RAISE Act as an amendment next week — except the prospect of getting 60 votes for it . Instead , immigration hawks might decide to propose more modest cuts to family-based immigration . Or they might decide to propose keeping overall immigration levels similar but shifting some slots away from family-based immigrants so that more employment-based immigrants can come into the US instead .
The only Senate immigration bill the White House has actually endorsed isn ’ t about any of these issues . It ’ s the RAISE Act , sponsored by Sens . Tom Cotton ( R-AR ) and David Perdue ( R-GA ) , which would slash legal immigration to the US by as much as 50 percent over the next decade by making huge cuts to family-based immigration without expanding employment-based immigration to match it . Nothing is stopping Cotton from introducing the RAISE Act as an amendment next week — except the prospect of getting 60 votes for it . Instead , immigration hawks might decide to propose more modest cuts to family-based immigration . Or they might decide to propose keeping overall immigration levels similar but shifting some slots away from family-based immigrants so that more employment-based immigrants can come into the US instead . What about interior enforcement ? The White House ’ s attention toward cutting legal immigration has kind of crowded out immigration hawks ’ requests for a crackdown on immigration in the interior of the US — including everything from defunding “ sanctuary cities ” to expanding mandatory use of the E-Verify system to check the legal status of employees . But some immigration hawks , including Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R-IA ) , the head of the Judiciary Committee , are still concerned about the interior . And they might be concerned enough to wedge it into the floor debate .
It ’ s possible that several of these issues will get rolled into a single amendment in the hopes that that amendment can get 60 votes . But then whichever party is willing to propose such an amendment has to hope that 20 of those senators don ’ t vote for any other amendment the other 40 senators consider a poison pill .
There are more than enough proposals — but McConnell wants to start from scratch
Various groups of legislators have already introduced bills that include some form of legal status for DACA recipients ( or DREAMers more broadly ) alongside whatever immigration enforcement provisions or cuts to future legal immigration they think are appropriate trade-offs .
The authors of each of those bills hoped that their bill would be selected as the starting point for the floor debate . But there wasn ’ t anywhere near a consensus on which bill to pick — or even what issues the bill should address ( whether it should include cuts to future legal immigration and/or increased immigration enforcement in the interior ; the extent of money it gave for border security ; and how many DREAMers it would legalize , and how ) .
McConnell ’ s solution to this problem is to choose none of those bills as a starting point .
This actually gives the Senate an even wider menu of options than they already had . Almost all the bills that have been introduced were intended to be , to some extent , compromises — and they were almost all intended to address multiple issues at once .
And this whole floor debate could be a sideshow while real negotiations are happening in private .
Several groups of legislators are theoretically working on new immigration compromises , and none of them have figured one out yet — probably because the biggest splits among legislators aren ’ t even on policy , but on the question of how important it actually is to pass a bill in the coming weeks . But if they do make a breakthrough , or if McConnell works something out himself , that compromise would be introduced as the new starting point .
But envisioning a compromise bill requires knowing which immigration proposals can get 60 votes in the Senate , which is exactly the problem .
It would be very easy for the open debate next week to result in a bill whose ultimate support is less than the sum of its parts . It could be just as easy for every amendment to fail . The Senate has to thread a very narrow needle — in very little time .