Baggage handlers stand next to luggage carts in advance of the incoming travel ban to the U.S. at John F. Kennedy airport in the Queens borough of New York City , New York , U.S. June 29 , 2017 . ███/Carlo Allegri
NEW YORK ( ███ ) - Six in 10 American voters support the new ban on people from six predominantly Muslim countries from entering the United States unless they can show they have a close relative here , according to opinion poll results released on Wednesday .
The Politico-Morning Consult poll found 37 percent of voters said they “ strongly supported ” the new U.S. State Department guidelines that would deny visas to citizens of Iran , Libya , Syria , Somalia , Sudan and Yemen who do not have close relatives in the United States . Another 23 percent of voters said they “ somewhat support ” the guidelines .
The poll was conducted online on Thursday and Friday following a U.S. Supreme Court ruling that partly upheld the ban , with 1,989 registered voters taking part . The poll results ' margin of error was 2 percentage points , meaning results could vary that much either way . ( Link to the poll : politi.co/2uJLfoO )
The survey asked respondents whether they support or oppose the State Department ’ s new guidelines , “ which say visa applicants from six predominately Muslim countries must prove a close family relationship with a U.S. resident in order to enter the country. ” It did not mention U.S. President Donald Trump , nor the president ’ s executive orders on immigration .
The Supreme Court ruled on June 26 that the temporary travel ban could proceed so long as visa applicants with a “ bona fide relationship ” with a person or entity in the United States were exempted .
A year before his election , Trump promised voters he would seek a temporary “ total and complete shutdown ” of Muslims entering the United States . Trump said it was necessary to prevent attacks by Islamist militants , while critics said it was a needlessly discriminatory policy that could inflame prejudice against Muslims in the United States and abroad .
The partial ban , which took effect on Thursday , was most strongly supported by Trump ’ s fellow Republicans , 83 percent of whom approved . Even among Democratic voters , only 46 percent said they were opposed .
Forty-one percent of Democrats said they support it , and the remaining 13 percent said they “ don ’ t know . ”
The Supreme Court allowed the ban , which bars people from the designated six countries for 90 days and refugees from any country for 120 days , to take effect until it can take up the case during its next term starting in October .