If this president is allowed to reinterpret the law , what about the next one ?
Sometimes it seems the Supreme Court ’ s main purpose these days is to resolve disputes between Republicans and President Obama .
Toward the end of Obama ’ s first term , the court ruled on a challenge to his signature health care law . On Monday , as Obama approaches the end of his second term , the justices are set to consider his executive order that would allow millions of undocumented workers to avoid deportation .
Obama won the first of these cases . The court ruled , correctly in our view , that Obamacare 's insurance mandate did not violate the Constitution . The president 's backers hope and believe that the court will take a similar tack in U.S. v. Texas , finding that the case is a political squabble dressed up as a legal dispute .
To be sure , Obama ’ s quest to reform the immigration system is a worthy cause . Keeping millions of undocumented immigrants in a state of legal limbo makes little sense .
Like his predecessor , George W. Bush , Obama backed legislation to grant these immigrants a path to legal status while beefing up border enforcement and making needed changes to the legal immigration system . That legislation passed with bipartisan support in the Senate but ran into a buzz saw of opposition from conservatives in the House .
Faced with legislative gridlock , the president acted unilaterally . Obama ’ s 2014 order , known as the Deferred Action for Parents of Americans , combined with a predecessor order he issued two years earlier , would allow as many as 5 million of the estimated 11 million undocumented people to remain in the United States without fear of deportation .
While courts have typically given great deference to presidents in matters of immigration , this is simply too sweeping a policy change to exclude the legislative branch . It does the right thing in the wrong way .
The order has many flaws . Because it could be rescinded by a future president , it would not give immigrants the certainty they 'd need to come out from the shadows and fully participate in their communities . Because it addresses only undocumented workers , it would do nothing for backlogs in legal immigration and a shortage of skilled workers .
The order 's biggest flaw , however , is the precedent it would set by giving the president sweeping authority to interpret immigration laws virtually any way he or she sees fit . The same people who think Obama should have broad powers over immigration enforcement will feel a lot differently if a Republican wins the White House in November .
Imagine what orders Ted Cruz or Donald Trump would issue if elected president . Trump has advocated mass deportations , temporarily banning entry of foreign Muslims , and building a border wall financed by confiscating the remittances that undocumented workers attempt to send to their families back home .
In an interview with NBC News this year , Trump said he would n't hesitate to issue executive orders , noting that Obama had “ led the way ” with his actions .
The court would be wise to limit the president 's authority in this area , and leave Congress and the White House to work out through the legislative process how to handle undocumented immigrants , as maddening as that might be .
███ 's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board , separate from the news staff . Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique ███ feature .
To read more editorials , go to the Opinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter .