Washington ( CNN ) - A possible move by Obama administration to single-handedly act on immigration reform before November 's midterm elections could have major political consequences .
The White House could by the end of the summer use executive action to grant work permits to possibly millions of undocumented immigrants , multiple sources confirm to CNN . Such a move would legally allow such undocumented immigrants to stay in the U.S .
The influx of Central American children trying to cross the border from Mexico into the U.S. , many of them unaccompanied , has been a major media story over the past two months . The White House and many Democrats have clashed with Republicans in Congress and governors over who is to blame and what should be done about it . President Barack Obama has requested nearly $ 4 billion to deal with the crisis on the southern border but a House Republican plan would provide less than a quarter of what Obama 's asking .
Last month , Obama said he was starting `` a new effort to fix as much of our immigration system as I can on my own , without Congress . ''
With the bipartisan immigration reform bill passed last summer by the Senate all but dead in the GOP-controlled House , Obama said that `` if Congress will not do their job , at least we can do ours , '' adding he expected the recommendations by the end of summer and would act on them without delay .
Asked about the reported proposal to give work permits to undocumented immigrants , White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said , `` What is underway right now is a review at the order of the President by the secretary of Homeland Security and the attorney general to consider what options are available to the President . ''
Earnest added that once that review is complete , `` I anticipate that we 'll have an announcement about steps that the President has decided to take to address some of these problems . ''
A large scale move by the White House on immigration could cause instant fireworks . Conservatives would yell `` amnesty '' - their interpretation of a pathway to citizenship for those who entered the country illegally - and the roster of Republicans calling for Obama to be impeached would surely increase .
The move would have instant reverberations on the campaign trail , with one third of the Senate and the entire House being contested in November .
Democrats have a 55-45 majority in the Senate ( 53 Democrats and two independents who caucus with the party ) . But in the midterms , the party is defending 21 of the 36 seats up for grabs , with half of those Democratic-held seats in red or purple states . In the House , the Democrats would need to pick up an extremely challenging 17 Republican-held seats to win back the majority from the GOP .
Facing a lawsuit by House Republicans and calls for impeachment , Democratic strategist and CNN contributor Maria Cardona said the President `` at this point has nothing to lose and everything to gain . ''
`` It will energize the base and will energize Latino voters - to what extent is the question but every little bit helps since there are enough eligible Latinos in enough swing districts that could register and vote - that could flip the House , '' Cardona said .
A larger turnout by Latino voters could be crucial , because a typical , smaller midterm electorate should favor Republicans . That 's because minority voters such as Latinos , and younger people and single women , all of whom are big supporters of Democrats in presidential election years , tend to cast ballots in smaller numbers in the midterms .
Republican strategist and CNN contributor Ana Navarro disagreed with Cardona 's assertion , saying the President is `` in such a box '' when it comes to immigration .
`` Politically , he 's under huge pressure from immigration advocates and Latino leadership . Midterms are approaching and Hispanics , a key part of the Democrat coalition , are disillusioned and unmotivated . Obama has gone from 'President Si , se puede , ' to the 'Deporter-in-Chief , ' `` Navarro said .
Longtime GOP consultant Alex Castellanos says an executive order by Obama could hurt fellow Democrats facing tough re-elections this year .
`` If you are a Democrat in a swing district , Barack Obama has just made your life impossibly difficult , charging up your opponent 's voters and giving him a couple of extra points in November , '' said Castellanos , who predicts a GOP wave in November .
`` President Obama does n't seem to care what he does to his own party . He seems to be willing to sacrifice the U.S. Senate and more seats in the House to make this a borderless country , '' added Castellanos , a CNN contributor .
The crisis on the nation 's southern border appears to be fueling a notable shift in American attitudes toward immigration policy with border security growing in importance , according to a new national survey .
According to a recent CNN/ORC International poll , 51 % now say the government 's focus on immigration policy should be formulating a plan to stop the flow of undocumented immigrants . Forty-five percent say the top priority should be developing a plan that would allow undocumented immigrants who have jobs to become legal residents . That 's a change from February , when Americans said 54 % -41 % that legal status trumped border security .
The attention the current crisis is receiving is also fueling a spike in those who say the issue 's extremely important . Thirty-nine percent now say it 's extremely important for the President and Congress to deal with illegal immigration , up 10 points from last year .
With all the attention now focused on the issue , any move by the President will be under the microscope .
CNN White House Correspondent Athena Jones and CNN White House Producer Becky Brittain contributed to this report