With the exception of two Republican members of the bipartisan group who also sit on the Judiciary Committee — Senators Jeff Flake of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina — Mr. Hatch is considered the other Republican member most likely to support the bill , which would give it some conservative gravitas as it heads to the Senate floor .
The bipartisan group is hoping for a large Senate vote in support of the bill — some members have suggested as many as 70 votes — to place pressure on House Republicans to also get behind the legislation . And Mr. Hatch ’ s “ yes ” vote is seen as a driver for what they hope will be a groundswell of support . Mr. Hatch , who hails from a state with a dynamic immigration culture , meanwhile finds himself with a final chance to help pass a broad immigration overhaul , something in which he has both publicly and privately expressed a genuine interest .
But Mr. Hatch ’ s “ yes ” vote in committee comes with a major caveat — the acceptance of provisions of his that would , among other things , help technology companies by increasing the number of temporary visas available for high-skilled workers ( known as H-1B visas ) and ease restrictions around the hiring and firing of workers . He also is offering some provisions on the finance side , including one that would require immigrants to show they have paid back taxes and are staying current with them as they proceed toward legal status .
“ I personally believe we need immigration reform , ” said Mr. Hatch , adding that his tweaks to the bill are “ amendments that clean it up and make it a better bill , and may even be able to get it more votes. ” The provisions are also , he explained , an all-but-ironclad requirement for earning his vote : “ They know my point is I ’ ve got to have those , ” he said , referring to the message he has communicated to the group .
And so last week , as the committee met twice to discuss the bill publicly , the behind-the-scenes negotiating and arm-twisting picked up in earnest , with Mr. Schumer ’ s office taking the lead in trying to work out an agreement with Mr. Hatch .