The principal student newspaper at Harvard University is being forced by student activists to defend the standard journalistic practice of asking subjects of stories for comment .
The Crimson , according to a “ Note to Readers ” published Tuesday , was publicly condemned by the group Act on a Dream and 10 other student groups for seeking comment from Immigration and Customs Enforcement for a Sept. 13 article about an Act protest calling for the agency to be abolished .
More than 650 people have signed a petition , which condemns getting comment from ICE as “ cultural insensitivity . ”
“ In this political climate , a request for comment is virtually the same as tipping [ ICE ] off , regardless of how they are contacted , ” reads the petition , which demands that the Crimson “ reexamine and interrogate policies that place students under threat ” and apologize for “ the harm they inflicted ” on illegal-immigrant students .
Act on a Dream also took to Twitter to “ call on our peers and fellow student organizations to boycott @ thecrimson and decline any interviews or requests for comment until they change their reckless policy that requires calling ICE in their reporting . ”
We call on our peers and fellow student organizations to boycott @ thecrimson and decline any interviews or requests for comment until they change their reckless policy that requires calling ICE in their reporting . — Act on a Dream ( @ actonadream ) October 19 , 2019
The Crimson letter defended contacting ICE but only after assuaging some of Act on a Dream ’ s concerns and treating its demand for one-sided stories as serious .
“ Let us be clear : In The Crimson ’ s communication with ICE ’ s media office , the reporters did not provide the names or immigration statuses of any individual at the protest . We did not give ICE forewarning of the protest , nor did we seek to interfere with the protest as it was occurring . Indeed , it is The Crimson ’ s practice to wait until a protest concludes before asking for comment from the target of the protest — a rule which was followed here . The Crimson ’ s outreach to ICE only consisted of public information and a broad summary of protestors ’ criticisms . As noted in the story , ICE did not respond to a request for comment , ” wrote Crimson President Kristine E. Guillaume and Managing Editor Angela N. Fu .
“ Experts from the Student Press Law Center and the Society of Professional Journalists have affirmed that The Crimson followed ethical journalistic practices , ” they noted , before concluding that “ we understand that some readers may disagree with The Crimson ’ s policies . ”
The tone of the Crimson letter was not lost on some commentators at its site .
“ If Donald Trump insisted that The Crimson cover just his point of view and hold off from ever seeking comment from his political opponents , I doubt that this long-winded and painfully defensive apology would be forthcoming , ” said commenter “ Nestor 33 . ”
Among the groups joining Act on a Dream ’ s demand for one-sided stories , at least about immigration and ICE , are the Harvard College Democrats and the Harvard College Democrats for [ Sen. Elizabeth ] Warren .
Act on a Dream did not immediately respond to a request for comment from The ███ .