Earlier this week U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services admitted gang member and illegal alien Jesus Rangel-Hernandez , who has been charged with four counts of first-degree murder in North Carolina , should have been deported but was n't thanks to President Obama 's executive amnesty , deferred action program [ DACA ] .
`` I understand that you are seeking information regarding a specific individual , including information regarding his involvement in Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) . In addition , you are seeking the official policy and other information related to the adjudication of DACA requests from suspected or known gang members , '' a letter from USCIS to Grassley states ( bolding is mine ) . `` Our review of the file indicates on January 22 , 2013 , the individual requested deferred action pursuant to DACA . At the time of filing his request for deferred action , he was in removal proceedings as an alien present in the United States without being admitted or paroled . It appears he came to the attention of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) as a result of a 2012 arrest for possession of marijuana for which charges were subsequently dismissed . Based on ICE records , there is no indication that ICE was aware at the time of the arrest that the individual was a gang member . His request for deferred action was approved on August 26 , 2013 , notwithstanding a TECS record indicating that he was a known gang member , and his application for employment authorization was approved . After the deferred action request was approved , immigration proceedings were administratively closed on December 18 , 2013 . ''
Hernandez was scheduled for deportation , applied for DACA , was approved and was able to stay . In February 2015 , he allegedly murdered four people in North Carolina .
Police in Charlotte-Mecklenburg , N.C. , said in a statement Wednesday that 19-year-old Emmanuel Jesus Rangel-Hernandez has been charged with three counts of first-degree murder in the death of 19-year-old Mirjana Puhar and two other victims . The victims ’ bodies were found Tuesday in a Charlotte home . Police did not reveal how they were killed .
Police say Rangel-Hernandez is also charged in connection with a murder at a motel Sunday .
“ This agency ’ s admission is chilling . For some time , the administration has promised Americans that those who qualify for their executive order would fully meet a set of guidelines meant to keep criminals out of our country . We now know that isn ’ t true and that the agency tasked with implementing the President ’ s edict can not effectively carry out the rule without compromising the safety of Americans . This is one more reason why the President ’ s habit of governing by proclamation is a poor replacement for actual law making , ” North Carolina Senator Richard Burr said earlier this week .
“ The flawed implementation of the President ’ s blanket deferred action program has created a loophole that allows dangerous criminals who came here illegally – even known gang members – to stay in the country . The USCIS needs to immediately start performing detailed criminal background checks to prevent similar tragedies from occurring in the future , ” North Carolina Senator Thom Tillis added .
Today the Senate Judiciary Committee will hold a hearing examining the Obama administration 's Central American Minors Refugee and Parole Program . During the unaccompanied minor crisis last summer , MS-13 gang members were using Border Patrol processing centers as recruitment areas and as a way to easily access the United States .