The self-proclaimed Islamic State in Iraq and Syria , or ISIS , has emerged as the new face of the radical terror that has bedeviled the West in recent decades . As the American people are now painfully aware in the wake of ISIS ’ s murderous rampage in Paris last Friday , they have apparently now directly threatened both Washington and New York . Their attacks and threats serve as reminders that ISIS can and , given time and opportunity , will strike the West again .
This jihadist organization is intentionally infiltrating the flood of refugees that are currently entering Europe through Turkey , Greece , and points west . Rather than taking the threat seriously , President Obama has doubled down on his dangerous open-borders policies by proposing to welcome thousands of refugees who have potentially been infiltrated by terrorists to the United States . This headlong rush toward a careless policy comes just weeks after FBI Director James Comey told Congress , in no uncertain terms , that our government lacks the tools to properly screen these refugees .
Since the beginning of the Syrian refugee crisis , more than 2,100 refugees from Syria have already been admitted to the United States . President Obama now wants to accept at least 10,000 more this fiscal year . That ’ s roughly a third of the 34,000 total refugees President Obama proposes to accept from the Near East and South Asia .
This policy makes no sense . Given the existential nature and scope of the threat posed by radical Islamic terrorism , the limitations on our ability to screen the flood of refugees , and the obligations of our government to provide for the safety and security of all Americans , we simply can not accept refugees from countries that have a significant terrorist presence until the terrorist threat has been eliminated .
As an unapologetic proponent of legal immigration , it brings me no pleasure to advocate for limiting the flow of refugees to America . But the first duty of our government , which President Obama and Hillary Clinton are ignoring , is to protect the American people . And if that means temporarily suspending the admission of high-risk refugees from countries beset by jihadist groups , then so be it .
This is why I have introduced the Terrorist Refugee Infiltration Prevention Act of 2015 . This constitutionally sound , common-sense measure would immediately bar any refugee who is from any country that contains territory controlled in substantial part by ISIS , al Qaeda , or any other designated foreign terrorist organization ascribing to the radical , totalitarian Islamism dedicated to the destruction of the United States and our allies , and whose proponents find anyone who does not share their faith—from couples dining in cafes to Jews shopping in a kosher market to satirical cartoonists—equally offensive . The bill specifically names Iraq , Libya , Somalia , Syria , and Yemen as countries from which refugees can not be accepted , and empowers the State Department to identify and designate additional countries as potential sources of terror .
It is important to note this refugee ban would be temporary . It would sunset after three years , and allow Congress to reevaluate the global situation and make necessary adjustments , or let the law expire . It would in no way prevent the United States from providing assistance to humanitarian disasters in a way that is consistent with our national security .
The bill would also allow a narrow exception to the refugee ban in cases that involve victims of genocide like the Yazidis and certain Christian sects , including Assyrians , who , amazingly , still speak a form of Aramaic that is believed to have been spoken by Jesus Christ . This exception would only be available for the severest cases of persecution , and would require a high bar of proof .
The American people already know the truth President Obama will not utter , which is that the threat we face is radical Islamic terrorism , not random violence . The fact of the matter is that no Christian or Yazidi has systematically executed concert-goers while shouting “ Allahu Akbar. ” Pretending all the refugees are equally likely or unlikely to commit terrorist acts prevents us from helping those we can while protecting ourselves from a real threat . And the insistence of the Obama Administration that the terrorist threat is “ not Islamic ” gives no confidence that any screening mechanism they would design would actually identify the radical Islamic terrorists whose stated goal is to murder Americans .
After the horror of Paris , it would be downright reckless not to take basic steps to protect ourselves from the threat of terrorist infiltration . It takes just one jihadist to cause enormous damage and take countless lives . This is a small , first step toward protecting America , and I will never apologize for defending this nation .
Senator Ted Cruz ( R-Texas ) is a candidate for the Republican nomination for president .