As the immigration reform Gang of Eight inside the Beltway prepares to announce a deal later this week , claiming border security will come before a path to citizenship for millions of illegals , Border Patrol agents have seen illegal border crossings double and warn the cutting of agent work hours will only result in less border security , not more .
`` We 've seen the number of illegal aliens double , maybe even triple since amnesty talk started happening , '' an agent told ███ , who asked to remain unnamed due to fears of retaliation within Customs and Border Protection [ CBP ] , something he said is common . `` A lot of these people , although not the majority , are criminals or aggravated felons . This is a direct danger to our communities . ''
Data obtained by ███ and reported within CBP from February 5 through March 1 , 2013 shows 504 illegal aliens were spotted exploiting the Tucson/Nogales area , 189 were caught on CBP intelligence cameras . Of those 504 , only 174 were apprehended and 32 of the 189 on camera were carrying large drug load packs for Mexican cartels . Some were armed with AK-47 style weapons .
Below are selected photos obtained by ███ from CBP intelligence cameras in Southern Arizona near the border with Mexico . Sensitive information has been redacted in order to protect the security and identity of the camera locations .
Last week , Fox News reported sections of the border will soon become unpatrolled as hours for on-the-ground agents are cut . ███ has learned Border Patrol agents working the border have been fully funded , yet internal political battles within CBP may be causing funds to be funneled to managers , rather than those getting their boots dirty on patrols .
`` Customs and Border Protection has been given enough money to fully staff the border but has chosen to use the money elsewhere , we believe it is to fund the salaries of Supervisory CBP Officers . The money they are diverting was to go to AUO ( Administratively Uncontrollable Overtime ) which is actually straight pay and is used to pay Border Patrol Agents for anything past eight hours . Being that we have to maintain staffing 24/7 this is a huge part of border security . The criminals and drugs do n't stop coming so we have to make sure we have people out there . Cutting AUO will be a 30 % pay cut for our agents but more importantly a minimum 20 % loss of staffing out in the field , '' Vice President of the National Border Patrol Council Shawn Moran tells ███ . `` It is internal politics within CBP and also with immigration reform . There are still battles between legacy Customs , INS , and Border Patrol managers as to the direction CBP takes and how the funds are being used . Meanwhile both parties claim no immigration reform until the border is secured , well this surely will not secure the border . ''
As sequestration goes into full effect April 7 and a deal in Washington on immigration reform gets locked in , illegal crossings are expected to get worse .
`` We have seen increased crossings and smuggling since word of staffing cuts began circulating . The illegals have even told us that is why they tried crossing . The border is safer but by no means secure , '' Moran says .
Another agent expressed the same sentiment , saying when apprehended , some illegal aliens ask where they can go to find amnesty .
Despite border security being put further at risk through bad policy , the push for immigration reform well before full border security is ongoing . The AFL-CIO reached a deal with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce on a guest worker program late last Friday . Republican Senator Lindsey Graham said the Gang of Eight has reached a deal on immigration reform on CNN 's State of the Union over the weekend , but Republican Senator Marco Rubio has said reports of a deal are pre-mature .
RELATED : As Amnesty Looms , Illegal Immigration Picks Up Speed in Arizona