Criticism of the Obama administration 's deportation policies continues to pour in as previously supportive groups called the latest government effort a failure .
Immigrant advocates on Monday condemned the administration 's recent findings that a policy designed to reduce the deportations of otherwise law-abiding illegal immigrants has had almost no effect .
An ongoing government review has found that fewer than 2 percent of the more than 400,000 pending deportation cases have been halted .
The government says thousands more cases will be closed , but critics say the paltry results so far expose an unwillingness among immigration agents to enforce the new policy .
`` We were quite hopeful that the new policies would usher in a new era of humane enforcement , '' Frank Sharry , executive director of America 's Voice Education Fund , told reporters on a conference call with other advocacy groups . `` A year later , we are sad to declare that the implementation of this policy is failing . [ It ] has not made this better and to some extent has made it worse . ''
A year ago , the Obama administration announced a shift in focus to the deportation of convicted criminals , people who pose `` a clear risk to national security '' and others who defraud the visa system .
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement issued memorandums granting its agents `` prosecutorial discretion '' to extend leniency to DREAM Act-eligible people and others with clean records .
Leniency was to take several forms , including deferred deportation , which could last for up to 12 months , at which time individuals could request an extension and potentially reapply every year . Another option was the authorization of people to work in the U.S. legally .
The Obama administration 's immigration policies have drawn criticism from all sides . Republicans say the administration is trying to circumvent immigration laws to grant amnesty and blocked the Senate 's passage of the DREAM Act bill in 2010 . ( The DREAM Act would establish a path to citizenship for young people brought to the U.S. illegally as children provided that they attend college or serve in the military . )
Immigrant advocates and Latino leaders have criticized Obama for increasing the pace of deportations beyond that of the Bush administration . The Obama administration 's tougher enforcement has led to the deportation of a record 1.1 million people in the last three years .
The deportations have compounded Latinos ' frustrations over Obama 's failure to fulfill his 2008 campaign promise of pushing an immigration overhaul through Congress , as well as the failed DREAM Act .
Last week , ICE Director John Morton told NPR 's Weekend Edition Saturday that the targeting of serious criminal offenders is driving the deportation numbers . He said roughly 216,000 criminals were removed last year .
But immigrant advocates say the stepped-up enforcement continues to target people who are supposed to be protected under the new policy .
They say ICE is n't effectively applying its newfound discretion , in part by declining to offer the full range of options called for in the new policy even though people in a majority of cases meet the standards .
Crystal Williams , executive director of the American Immigration Lawyers Association , said on the call that most people are being offered administrative closure without the option to obtain work : `` It 's putting your file on a shelf . That 's it . No other possibilities are being offered , like the settlement of cases , adjustment of status . ''
As a result , critics say , the new policy likely will clear no more than 5 percent of the cases .