President Trump said this weekend that he offered a “ wonderful deal ” to protect illegal immigrant Dreamers and that resistance among Democrats suggests the party would rather have a political issue than a solution .
Democrats have largely rejected the outlines of Mr. Trump ’ s proposal , saying that while the legalization of 1.8 million Dreamers was an important step , they would not agree to his plans for a border wall or to limiting the long chain of family migration .
The president is poised to deliver his plan to Capitol Hill this week and make his case directly to the public in his State of the Union address .
Mr. Trump took to Twitter late Saturday to say part of the reason he offered to protect 1.8 million Dreamers — nearly three times the number protected from deportation under the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals amnesty — was to try to make Democrats feel the heat .
“ I have offered DACA a wonderful deal , including a doubling in the number of recipients & a twelve year pathway to citizenship , for two reasons : ( 1 ) Because the Republicans want to fix a long time terrible problem . ( 2 ) To show that Democrats do not want to solve DACA , only use it ! ” Mr. Trump said .
“ Democrats are not interested in Border Safety & Security or in the funding and rebuilding of our Military . They are only interested in Obstruction ! ” he added .
His plan would couple the amnesty for Dreamers with a $ 25 billion request for wall funding , limiting family sponsorship of migration to spouses and minor children , eliminating the Diversity Visa Lottery that gives away immigration passes based on chance , and a number of policy changes to stop abuse of the asylum system and speed deportations of illegal immigrants .
Republicans said that plan could be the basis of talks but they are eager to entice Democrats to deal .
“ I think whatever we do is not going to pass with one party or the other , ” House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy , California Republican , said on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press. ” “ If you want to solve this and not be at this in another five or 10 years , you want to do it correctly and I think that bill has a lot of merit to solving the problem . ”
Sen. Lindsey Graham , a South Carolina Republican who proposed a plan this month that would have protected 3 million illegal immigrants , said Mr. Trump ’ s proposal for 1.8 million Dreamers is a “ credible offer . ”
But he said the president was asking for too much on the chain migration side .
“ We ’ re going to get there . We ’ re going to give a pathway to citizenship for 1.8 million Dreamers who have been well-vetted . We ’ re going to do something substantial on the border . We ’ re not going to cut legal immigration in half , ” he said on ABC ’ s “ This Week ” program . “ We ’ ll deal with chain migration in two phases , beginning in phase one . ”
He also urged Democrats to “ calm down ” after several days of over-the-top vitriol that included accusations of racism and xenophobia lobbed at the president .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , has said the proposal is part of Mr. Trump ’ s plan to “ make America white again , ” and Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat , said Mr. Trump was using the Dreamers as a tool to fulfill a wish list for immigration hard-liners .
Sen. Bernard Sanders , Vermont independent , said Sunday that he has serious concerns about some parts of the president ’ s proposal and that the focus should be on ensuring legal status and a path to citizenship for Dreamers .
“ Where the bad part comes is the idea of a wall , which I thought was a great idea in the 15th century when China built the Great Wall . Not so smart today when we have technology that is much more effective , ” Mr. Sanders said on CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation . ”
“ I think you ’ re going to see a lot of debate about how much money we should spend on border security , ” he said .
Rep. Will Hurd , Texas Republican , and Rep. Pete Aguilar , California Democrat , said Mr. Trump was too ambitious and that the better solution is a narrow bill that protects Dreamers but doesn ’ t do nearly as much on immigration policy or border security .
They have offered a bill that would couple an amnesty with calls for more studies of border security and a promise for action three years from now .
“ This is the only bill that would have 218 votes on the House floor . We feel very confident about that , ” Mr. Hurd said on CBS .
In the Senate , meanwhile , Sen. Joe Manchin III , West Virginia Democrat , said hopes for a solution might lie in the two-dozen-member Common Sense Coalition of moderate senators who recently worked to end the three-day partial shutdown of the federal government .
“ The president has laid out a template . We ’ re going to look at that template , and we ’ re going to work with it , ” Mr. Manchin said on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union . ”
“ We don ’ t need that type of rhetoric on either side — from Nancy , Paul Ryan or anybody else , ” Mr. Manchin said .
“ I ’ m condemning all this crazy rhetoric that goes on , ” he said . “ We have to work together . ”