John Boehner and his leadership colleagues don ’ t see the issue as time sensitive . House GOP 's immigration playbook
Circle July 10 with red ink : It ’ s now the most important day for immigration reform .
That Wednesday is when a hobbled , divided and raucous House Republican Conference will meet in the Capitol basement to figure out how to address the Senate-passed bill .
Lawmakers will have just returned from a week in their districts , hearing constituents react to the Senate plan . Leadership expects some will feel a compulsion to move quickly , and others will want to throw on the emergency brake .
But top GOP aides and lawmakers are privately skeptical that any immigration bill — even with beefed up border security — can get the support of 218 Republicans . Speaker John Boehner and his leadership team will ignore the Senate bill but know they can ’ t skip out on the issue altogether . They have to figure out what they ’ ll try to pass , when they ’ ll vote and how the bill will be packaged .
Boehner and his leadership colleagues are acutely aware of the political pressure that will build but don ’ t see immigration as time sensitive . They are comfortable with letting the process stretch until the end of the year .
Key lawmakers have been meeting with groups of rank-and-file Republicans , but have had a difficult time reading what they call the “ coalitions ” — the pockets of opposition and support for the myriad proposals .
“ I don ’ t know , I really don ’ t , ” said Rep. James Lankford ( R-Okla. ) , a member of leadership , when asked what could garner enough Republicans needed for a floor vote .
“ There ’ s a whole group of folks that don ’ t want anything to go to conference because they ’ re terrified of what it might be , ” he said . Speaker John “ Boehner has been very clear multiple times that if we don ’ t have a majority of the majority in the passage of bill and passage of conference version , then we don ’ t move it . ”
The leadership ’ s strategy , pieced together from conversations with lawmakers and aides , is coming into clearer focus . So is precisely how the process can come together or abruptly fall apart . Just as January ’ s conference in Williamsburg , Va. , shaped the party ’ s fiscal strategy , this meeting will chart a path forward on immigration reform .
The “ Special GOP conference meeting , ” set for 3 p.m. and possibly stretching for several hours , will be broken down into a three-step process .
GOP leadership — some combination of Boehner , Majority Leader Eric Cantor ( R-Va. ) and Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) — is likely to give a short presentation in which they ’ ll urge lawmakers to speak their minds so the party can develop a policy .
Judiciary Chairman Bob Goodlatte ( R-Va. ) and Homeland Security Committee Chairman Mike McCaul ( R-Texas ) will explain what House committees have already passed and options going forward .
Leadership needs to find out where people stand on four main areas : the future flow of immigrants into the U.S. , a possible pathway to citizenship , government benefits and border security . Could they tie these items together in one bill ? It ’ s possible , but there are political upsides to putting them on the floor separately : One reason would be to jam Democrats who vote against them . Putting the bills together would allow members to say they supported a package with items they both liked and disliked . It ’ s possible that the House takes up the Senate bill in committee and strips it down to the studs and rewrites it .
A lot of this will be decided in a somewhat stealthy manner .