President Trump on Friday said he plans to unveil sometime in the next month an immigration measure that he said would include some protections for DACA — the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program that provides for work permits and other protections for people brought to the U.S. as children by undocumented parents .
Trump had tried to cancel the Obama-era program , but the Supreme Court last month said it could stay in place .
In an interview with Noticias Telemundo , Trump made a series of seemingly conflicting comments about his next steps . He said he would be `` taking care '' of DACA and said the program would be `` just fine . '' He said he would be signing a `` big immigration bill , '' which he also called a `` big executive order , '' and said , `` I 'm going to make DACA a part of it . ''
`` We 're working out the legal complexities right now , but I 'm going to be signing a very major immigration bill as an executive order , which the Supreme Court now , because of the DACA decision , has given me the power to do that , '' Trump said .
Pressed on whether the provision would give DREAMers protected by the program legal status in the United States , Trump said : `` They 're going to be part of a much bigger bill on immigration . It 's going to be a very big bill , a very good bill , and merit-based bill and it will include DACA , and I think people are going to be very happy . '' He also said that it would `` give them a road to citizenship . ''
Trump has long sought to overhaul the immigration system to be based on merit rather than family ties , but it is not clear that he would have the ability to do so on his own , without Congress .
Adding to the confusion , Trump said about DACA : `` We put it in , and we 'll probably going to then be taking it out '' — a phrase he repeated twice in the interview .
Asked to clarify Trump 's comments , White House spokesman Judd Deere provided the following statement : `` As the president announced today , he is working on an executive order to establish a merit-based immigration system to further protect U.S. workers . Furthermore , the president has long said he is willing to work with Congress on a negotiated legislative solution to DACA , one that could include citizenship , along with strong border security and permanent merit-based reforms . This does not include amnesty . ''