Sen. Marco Rubio , one of the key authors of the Senate ’ s immigration bill , signaled Monday that he might abandon the bill if parts of it are weakened or if “ improvements ” aren ’ t made when it goes to the chamber floor .
In a video to his constituents , Mr. Rubio , Florida Republican , said he will oppose any “ horse trading ” by his colleagues to try to sway support , and said the bill ’ s fate rests on whether voters believe it will lead to better enforcement .
“ Let me tell you , there will have to be improvements . Because the good thing is the American people , the vast majority of them throughout the political spectrum , have clearly said that they are prepared to responsibly deal with those that are here illegally . But they are only willing to do so if we can take measures that ensure that this problem will never happen again in the future , ” Mr. Rubio said .
Mr. Rubio was part of a bipartisan group of eight senators who wrote the immigration bill , which calls for quick legal status for illegal immigrants but withholds a full pathway to citizenship until after the administration spends more money on border security and creates a national electronic worker-verification system .
Last month , while the measure was being debated by the Senate Judiciary Committee , Mr. Rubio said he thought the bill was solid but that he would accept changes if they were needed to win voters ’ confidence that the government would enforce the laws .
One change he has said he wants to see is to create a biometrics-based system to check the visas of those entering and leaving at airports and seaports .
The immigration bill cleared the committee on a 13-5 vote , and is expected to reach the full Senate floor later this month , where all sides are expected to offer amendments that will test the durability of the deal Mr. Rubio and his seven colleagues reached .
That so-called Gang of Eight senators have vowed to try to defend the core of the deal against efforts to weaken or enhance it too much , saying they ’ ve struck the right balance between forgiveness for illegal immigrants and vows of stiffer enforcement to prevent a new wave of illegal immigration in the future .
Mr. Rubio will be a key figure in that floor fight , but immigrant rights advocates warned that he risks alienating Hispanic voters if he pushes for more enforcement .
America ’ s Voice , which is pushing for an immigration deal , said the linchpin of a deal is the path to citizenship .
Frank Sharry , the group ’ s executive director , said Republicans hoping to repair relations with Hispanic voters must not hold citizenship hostage to unattainable security conditions .
“ The only way for the Republican Party to avoid the demographic cliff they are in danger of hurtling over is to share credit in passing immigration reform with a clear path to citizenship , ” he said .
Mr. Sharry said the bill already includes a major boost in border security spending , which comes on top of a decade of higher spending that has led to a drop in the number of illegal immigrants being captured trying to cross the border .
But many lawmakers , including key Republicans and Democrats in the House , say spending money isn ’ t enough . They have called for the Homeland Security Department to produce a yardstick to measure the border security achieved by that money .