The illegal immigrant who fired the gun shot that killed Kate Steinle was able to beat a murder charge this week .
Jose Garcia Zarate , a five-time deportee from Mexico and convicted felon , walked away with only a gun conviction after his legal team convinced the jury their client accidentally fired a gun three times and had no intent of killing anyone . ( RELATED : Jury Finds Illegal Immigrant NOT GUILTY In Kate Steinle Murder )
The Steinle case has attracted national attention ever since her murder occurred in 2015 in the sanctuary city of San Francisco . The murder became the focal point in the debate over illegal immigration , showing the dangers of sanctuary city policies and how America can ’ t secure its borders from convicted felons with multiple deportations .
Presidential candidate Donald Trump highlighted the murder several times on the campaign trail for why America needs to get tough on illegal immigration and eliminate sanctuary city policies .
There was always a political element to the case , and that comes into play as to why a San Francisco jury sought fit to let Zarate go free without even an involuntary manslaughter charge .
The prosecution team does warrant some of the blame for why that occurred . As RedState ’ s Sarah Rumpf argued , prosecutorial overreach trying to get a harder to prove first-degree murder charge bears some responsibility for the exoneration of Zarate for Kate ’ s killing .
However , that factor can ’ t be solely responsible for the not guilty verdict for an illegal immigrant who somehow accidentally fired off a gun three times with no malicious intent in mind .
San Francisco is a very liberal area and jury selection , according to Zarate ’ s defense team , was ensured to better benefit their client .
“ We are very pleased with the jury , ” said Matt Gonzalez , the lead defense lawyer for Zarate , upon the completion of jury selection . “ We have such great diversity built in in San Francisco and I think we have a jury that understands a lot of the concerns about the defendant receiving a fair trial . ”
That diversity was reflected in the jury consisting of three immigrants , at least one of whom ’ s primary language was Spanish . Potential jurors were quizzed about their thoughts on immigration , Latinos , guns and crime when being taken into consideration .
Gonzalez also asked them how they would be fine with a verdict that came out contrary to President Trump ’ s wishes .
While the judge presiding over the case urged the jury to leave aside their opinions on immigration and guns and focus on the facts , it was always hard for this case to escape from politics .
Juries don ’ t always make the right decision , as anyone who is still upset by O.J . Simpson walking free can attest . The Steinle case seems to be emblematic for how America ’ s legal system seems incapable of adequately dealing with immigration issues .
Zarate should ’ ve never been in the country to begin with , yet a San Francisco prison let him go free while under a sixth deportation order three months before Steinle ’ s murder . All thanks to sanctuary city policies .
And this isn ’ t the only case where the legal system failed to find justice for illegal immigrant crime .
In October , a Texas woman who lost her husband and two children to a car crash caused by an illegal immigrant expressed outrage that the man responsible only received a two-year sentence for the crime .
In May , an Oregon circuit court overturned the conviction for an illegal immigrant who ran over and killed two girls playing in a leaf pile . The court bought the driver ’ s story that she didn ’ t realize she ran over anything as she drove away from the scene of the killing .
That reversed conviction was not for vehicular homicide , but for the driver being found guilty of failing to perform her duties as a driver . The courts also managed to dismiss her deportation case over the incident .
There ’ s also the example of San Francisco feeling embolden to continue to defend their sanctuary city policies , which give protection to illegal immigrants from deportation , after the Steinle verdict . A convicted felon who will apparently fire off guns without thinking isn ’ t exactly the poster boy you want for your policies , but San Fran seems comfortable with that association .
Then again , the city should feel emboldened by how the courts continue to strike down the immigration orders of the president .
Even more important than the individual cases of leniency given to illegal immigrant criminals is how the courts are presently shaping our country ’ s immigration policy .
The White House has sought to punish jurisdictions that refuse to follow federal immigration law , yet courts have blocked the administration ’ s attempt to do so . In November , a U.S. district judge in California ruled the administration could not reduce federal funding to sanctuary cities because it “ will cause them constitutional injuries . ”
Earlier the same month , another U.S. district court judge argued from the bench that the Department of Justice was wrong to say a city was failing to meet law enforcement requirements by giving protection to illegal aliens .
Even more expansive than these court arguments on sanctuary cities is the legal system ’ s opinion on who the government can bar from entry into the country .
Increasingly , the courts have inched towards the opinion that the federal government can not restrict immigration from any part of the world . The various versions of Trump ’ s travel ban have been knocked down by the courts for the alleged reason they discriminate on the basis “ of the person ’ s race , sex , nationality , place of birth , or place of residence . ”
In spite of the lengthy legal history of America restricting immigration based on national origin , judges have taken the initiative to make their own interpretation of migration policy . No matter how many times the Trump administration revises the executive order to prove it is not a Muslim ban , the courts still find it too discriminatory to take effect .
By declaring that the government can not restrict immigration based on national origin , judges are declaring any attempt to limit migration is inherently racist . This thinking operates under the delusion that there is some hidden open borders clause in the Constitution .
We must take in any and all newcomers to the country because the Statue of Liberty poem says so . It doesn ’ t matter whether they come here legally or illegally , we must unquestionably welcome these immigrants or we are no longer America . ( RELATED : Exploiting The Statue Of Liberty To Support Open Borders )
Many Americans find this argument ridiculous , as a large percentage of our country supports immigration reduction . But courts don ’ t have to answer to the people , and judges have used their power to impose their own will on immigration policy .
From the leniency shown to illegal alien criminals to preventing the president from enforcing immigration law , America ’ s legal system is proving it can not be trusted to side with the interests of the nation ’ s citizens .
Fortunately , Trump is reshaping the federal judiciary with conservative picks and one hopes thatrestores sanity to the courts soon .
Until then , try not to be killed by an illegal immigrant in a sanctuary city . A jury may find it ’ s more important to send a message to the president than find justice for your murder .
Follow Scott on Twitter and buy his new book , “ No Campus for White Men . ”