Trump grew up in New York , but I guess he never got around to reading the inscription on the State of Liberty .
At one time or another , just about any place from which anyone has emigrated to America has been referred to as what Donald Trump — the sitting president of the United States — reportedly referred to as “ shithole countries . ”
During a meeting with members of Congress concerning immigration , the president got upset when there was talk of immigrants from Haiti and African countries , saying , “ Why are we having all these people from shithole countries come here ? ''
More : Trump 's DACA demands do n't show his 'love ' for immigrants , or America 's
More : Keep DACA and the Dreamers . They 'll make America even greater .
Trump grew up in New York , but I guess he never got around to reading the inscription on the Statue of Liberty .
His own ancestors trace their roots to places like Germany and Scotland .
At different times in our past , there were Americans who would have referred to those places using Trump ’ s crude adjective .
Contemporary Americans with Haitian family roots include the musician and humanitarian Usher and the basketball star Blake Griffin .
As for Africa , there are too many Americans of importance of African ancestry to name them all .
Just a few might include Muhammad Ali , Clarence Thomas , Martin Luther King Jr. , Willie Mays , Maya Angelou , Jackie Robinson , Booker T. Washington , George Washington Carver and a man you may not have heard of named William H. Carney . He was the first African American awarded the Medal of Honor in the Civil War .
Pick any nation from which America has drawn immigrants and you will find offspring who go on to do great things .
All of those countries , at one time or another , would been called you-know-what countries .
Although , perhaps , not by the president of the United States .
But among the Americans with lineage to Ireland are Walt Disney , Christa McAuliffe ( the teacher-astronaut killed in 1986 Challenger disaster ) , Audie Murphy ( the most decorated soldier of World War II ) and more than 20 presidents , ranging from Andrew Jackson to Ulysses S. Grant to John F. Kennedy .
My family came from Italy , among a wave of immigrants from a country perhaps referred to in scatological terms at one time . But without those immigrants there would have been no Americans like Enrico Fermi ( the physicist and Nobel Prize recipient ) , and no Frank Sinatra , Robert De Niro , businessman Lee Iacocca or Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia .
Someone should remind the president ( not that it would do any good ) that without the world ’ s “ shithole countries , ” there would be no America .
EJ Montini is a columnist for The Arizona Republic , where this piece first appeared . Follow him on Twitter : @ ejmontini