Spending $ 35 billion on new Border Patrol agents and fencing would keep tens of thousands of new illegal immigrants from crossing the border each year , but would still only stop between a third and half of future illegal immigration , according to the Congressional Budget Office ’ s latest analysis released Wednesday .
The CBO looked at the latest version of the Senate ’ s immigration bill , which cleared the chamber in a 68-32 vote last week , and said it would reduce but not eliminate illegal immigration .
The “ CBO estimates that the net inflow would be reduced by between one-third and one-half compared with the projected net inflow under current law . That effect would not be immediate , as it would take several years before [ the Department of Homeland Security ] could hire the full number of Border Patrol agents called for in the act , ” the nonpartisan agency said in the section of its new analysis dealing with future illegal immigration .
The CBO also had continued good news about an immigration bill ’ s effects on the federal budget , saying that the additional legal workers will boost the economy and lead to nearly $ 1 trillion in new tax revenue over the next 20 years .
Wednesday ’ s analysis was an update to the CBO ’ s first crack last month at the Senate bill as it emerged from the Judiciary Committee .
That first analysis found the bill would only reduce future illegal immigration by about 25 percent , which comes to about 1.3 million people over the next decade . That still means about 4 million more illegal immigrants would get through .
SEE ALSO : Border Patrol stymied by other agencies , former agents say
The analysis , which takes into account the 20,000 additional Border Patrol agents and 350 miles of new pedestrian fencing that were added on the Senate floor , says those enhancements could stop an additional 800,000 or so illegal immigrants .
In order to win GOP votes on the Senate floor , the “ Gang of Eight ” senators who wrote the immigration bill accepted an amendment from Republican Sens . Bob Corker of Tennessee and John Hoeven of North Dakota to add fencing and border agents , which will bring the total number of agents on the southwest border to more than 38,400 .
The additional security spending will cost $ 38 billion , the CBO said .
Security experts on all sides of the immigration debate have cast doubt on the efficacy of doubling the size of the Border Patrol , saying the return on investment is rather low .
But the bill ’ s authors said they are convinced illegal immigration can be stopped with more agents and fencing , coupled with technology on the border , a stricter entry-exit system to check visitors at airports and seaports , and a new electronic verification system to check workers ’ legal status .
“ CBO has reaffirmed that immigration reform reduces the debt and grows the economy . It also shows that the Corker-Hoeven amendment further substantially reduces the flow of illegal immigrants , even using a methodology that underestimates how effective immigration reform will be in reducing that flow , ” said Sen. Charles E. Schumer , the New York Democrat who is chief sponsor of the bill .
Opponents said a 50 percent drop in illegal immigration still isn ’ t enough .
The “ CBO today confirmed that this bill falls far short of living up to its sponsors ’ promises , ” said Andrew Logan , spokesman for Sen. Jeff Sessions , an Alabama Republican .
As for the federal deficit , the CBO said the additional border spending will hurt , but the additional taxes being paid by new workers and a stronger economy the bill would still improve federal finances by nearly $ 1 trillion over the next two decades .
But the agency also issued a stark warning that since the 2011 debt deal capped discretionary spending , adding all of the security-related spending would force members of Congress to cut elsewhere .
“ The total amount of discretionary funding is currently capped ( through 2021 ) by the Budget Control Act of 2011 ; extra funding for the purposes of this legislation might lead to lower funding for other purposes , ” the agency said .