( CNN ) - President Barack Obama said Wednesday he wants to get an immigration reform package passed as soon as this summer .
`` I 'm hopeful that this can get done , and I do n't think that it should take many , many months , '' Obama said in an interview with the Spanish-language network Telemundo . `` I think this is something we should be able to get done certainly this year , and I 'd like to see if we could get it done sooner , in the first half of the year if possible . ''
Obama previously said he wanted to accomplish immigration reform within the first year of his second term , but his latest comments represent a more rushed timeline of his goals .
The president said `` now 's the time '' for reform and highlighted his agenda Tuesday in a Las Vegas speech , specifying three pillars : better enforcement of immigration laws , providing a path to citizenship for the more than 11 million undocumented immigrants already in the country , and reforming the legal immigration system .
His speech came one day after a bipartisan group of eight senators outlined their own framework for immigration legislation . A main sticking point between the two plans involves a path to citizenship : Obama says he wants a `` clear '' path , while the senators want a `` tough but fair '' path and only after bolstering the nation 's border security .
Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida , one of the so-called Gang of Eight senators , criticized the president Tuesday for not making border security more of a priority in his proposals .
Obama , however , said Wednesday in an interview with another Spanish-language network , Univision , that his administration has already `` done more on border security in the last four years than we have in the previous 20 . ''
`` We 've actually done almost everything that Republicans asked to be done several years ago as a condition to move ahead on comprehensive immigration reform , '' he said .
The president added that he does n't want to `` create some vague prospect '' that would kick immigration reform down the road , or `` mañana , '' as he put it .
`` We want to make sure that we 're very clear that this legislation provides a real pathway , '' he said .
Asked why he has n't met in person with any Republicans in the `` Gang of Eight , '' Obama said he 's `` happy to meet with anybody '' but added that lawmakers have a different way of going about forming bipartisan deals .
`` Oftentimes what happens is members of Congress prefer meeting by themselves to build trust between Democrats and Republicans . They want assistance from us but sometimes they want back channels , and if they want to have a public meeting , if they want a private meeting , anything that is necessary to move this forward , we are happy to . ''
While Obama issued an executive directive last year that deferred the deportation of some young undocumented workers , he said Wednesday that broader reform can only come from the legislative branch .
`` I 'm not a king , '' he said in the Telemundo interview . `` You know , my job as the head of the executive branch ultimately is to carry out the law ... this is why we need a comprehensive immigration reform to make sure that once and for all , in a way that is ratified by Congress , we can say there is a pathway to citizenship for people . ''
If Congress fails to act in a `` timely fashion , '' however , Obama has said he will send up his own bill on the issue .