While advocates of immigration reform are eternally optimistic that Congress will pass a bill in 2013 -- even though two influential House Republicans have already poured cold water over hopes of such legislation leaving the chamber -- some opponents of the overhaul are being more cautious in declaring the measure dead .
“ We can ’ t sign the death certificate just yet , ” said Kristen Williamson , a spokeswoman for the Federation for American Immigration Reform , which favors immigration restrtictions .
Here ’ s why Williamson said her organization is cautious about declaring comprehensive immigration reform dead .
“ It ’ s clear that establishment Republicans -- [ Speaker John ] Boehner , [ Majority Whip Kevin ] McCarthy -- aren ’ t ready to commit to no amnesty , ” she said , adding that the speaker hasn ’ t said he will not go to conference with the Senate . “ Republicans are unable to commit to no conference and no amnesty on immigration because they are being pushed by special interest corporations who are trying to be the go-between the White House and Republicans . Until that happens the door is left open . ”
Republicans have a series of piecemeal reform bills that satisfy the conservatives ' call for more enforcement , improvements to border security , and an E-verify system to make it impossible for companies to employ undocumented immigrants . Those bills largely avoid the issue of citizenship for the 11 million undocumented immigrants in the U.S. , but some Republicans are flirting with the idea of legal status for immigrants .
The Democratic-led Senate passed its vision of immigration reform in June . That measure includes doubling the number of border patrol agents along the Mexican border to about 40,000 and providing a 13-year pathway to citizenship for the estimated 11 million in the country without papers . Republicans see this pathway as “ amnesty. ” However , the bill has been lingering in the House of Representatives for months now because of Boehner ’ s promise to not put a bill on the floor without a `` majority of the majority '' support .
In an attempt to break the impasse and keep the issue at the forefront , House Democrats , led by Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California , introduced their own legislation , removing the “ border surge ” in the Senate ’ s bill and replacing it with a bipartisan amendment that passed the House Homeland Security Committee in May . The border security bill from Rep. Michael McCaul requires that the administration draft a border plan for 90 percent apprehension of illegal border crossers in five years .
But from FAIR ’ s perspective , any of the House bills can be used a “ vehicle to get amnesty ” via a conference with the Senate legislation .
“ It ’ s clear that moving forward any new immigration law that tries to improve our legal immigration system and also prevent illegal immigration will not be enforced , ” Williamson said .
While FAIR waits for a commitment from the establishment , Alex Nowrasteh , an immigration policy analyst at libertarian think tank Cato Institute , is a bit more confident that it ’ s likely a no-go this year for immigration reform .
Nowrasteh said that timing is the reason , as there aren ’ t enough legislative days left on the calendar to pass it . There are just 15 legislative days left this year . The momentum the issue had earlier this year among lawmakers was quickly derailed by the Syrian chemical weapons crisis , NSA spying , and the recent government shutdown . Currently , the broken health-care websites and the fact that millions of Americans are losing insurance plans they would like to keep remain the focus of President Barack Obama and his administration . This , after Obama said immigration was among his top priorities , following the reopening of the federal government last month .
“ Just because it doesn ’ t pass in 2013 does not mean it is dead in 2014 , ” Nowrasteh said . “ I think it will definitely have some legs in 2014 , especially in the early part of the year . ”
Last week , Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart of Florida , one of the key Republican players in the immigration debate , said if lawmakers didn ’ t tackle the issue early next year then “ it flatlines ” because of the 2014 midterm election cycle .
But the Cato analyst said anything is possible in 2014 , especially when history shows that the 1990 Immigration Act passed the House in October ( during an election year ) and President Ronald Reagan ’ s 1986 “ amnesty ” act also became law in an election year .
“ The notion that it ’ s dead because of an election year is a talking point to try and delay reform , rather than serious analysis , ” Nowrasteh said . “ A lot of Republicans are still skeptical about a path to citizenship . ”
Instead , he added the House is at a point where close to half or a majority of Republicans are in favor of at least legal status for undocumented immigrants . But the leadership needs time to rally the troops and draft the language .
“ They also need to figure out how much legalization they are going to do , ” Nowrasteh said . “ We expect it to be imperfect so we can debate it . ”
But according to Steven Camarota , director of research at the Center for Immigration Studies , reform is dead , whether this year or the next .
He , too , thinks that unless Congress schedules more legislative days such a mammoth undertaking is doomed to fail . However , Camarota believes the House will not take up immigration because they just don ’ t have a “ real appetite to do it . ”
“ Republicans aren ’ t convinced that this is a politically good idea for them , ” he said .
Though the polls would differ , as they show a majority of Americans favoring reform , Camarota said “ polling is always difficult because it depends on the questions ’ wording . ”
And if polls are anything to go by , then perhaps Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida ’ s popularity decline this summer is a sign for Republicans to stay away from reform .
According to a survey from Rasmussen , Rubio ’ s popularity among Republican voters dropped 10 percentage points in June to 58 percent , after his efforts to pass comprehensive immigration reform .
“ Republicans know their members don ’ t like it and that the public will fight against them [ if they block it ] , ” Camarota said . “ So there is just no appetite for it . The bottom line is , from Republicans ’ point of view , is focus on Obamacare . The politics is that this thing won ’ t pass this year or next year either . ”
That ’ s unless the president decides to exercise his use of executive action to stop deportations of the undocumented . Obama has already said ‘ no ’ to expanding deferred action to unauthorized immigrants .
Even if Obama changes his mind on that , Camarota said , the president will likely get pushback . Just whether it will be strong enough to stop him is another matter .
“ I don ’ t know , ” Camarota said . “ As his popularity drops his ability to maneuver on these issues drops too . ”
Frank Sharry , executive director of advocacy group America ’ s Voice , said he isn ’ t buying into the idea that there aren ’ t enough days left for Congress to act on immigration reform .
“ We just find it ridiculous that House leadership is saying they have no time when they have nothing else to do , ” he said in a phone interview on Tuesday . “ It just doesn ’ t strike us as credible that they don ’ t have enough time . ”
Rather , Sharry said action on comprehensive immigration reform is a matter of Republicans ’ will versus the number of days on their calendar .
“ Maybe they don ’ t have enough time for whatever they are cooking up in the back room , ” he said . “ We want them to take floor votes before the end of the year . They have time . There is broad public support in favor of reform . It ’ s in the economic interest of the country . It ’ s in the political interest of the party . They just need to act rationally . At some point the Republican Party has to decide if they are going to let the minority in the party be the tail that wags the dog . ”