Ralph Reed ’ s group released a letter Tuesday that outlines broad goals for reform . Immigration 's latest ally : Christian right
The usual suspects pushing immigration reform have a new ally in the fight this time — the religious right .
Christian conservatives , who stayed on the sidelines in 2006 or opposed reform outright , have sprung into action for the cause .
They ’ re talking to their congregations from the pulpit . They ’ re urging lawmakers in private meetings to support reform . And they ’ re even calling for change publicly .
The efforts have dramatically changed the dynamics of the debate , so much so that Republicans anxious to vote yes on a deal might have the political cover to do it .
“ I think it is night and day , particularly among social conservatives , ” Faith and Freedom Coalition ’ s Ralph Reed told ███ of the support for immigration reform .
Reed ’ s group released a letter Tuesday that outlines broad goals for reform , like keeping families together , reforming the visa system and securing the border .
High profile leaders are also weighing in . Mathew Staver , vice president of Liberty University , the college started by former TV minister Jerry Falwell , is on board . Focus on the Family , which for years has focused on issues like opposing abortion rights and gay marriage , is supporting immigration reform for the first time in its history — even using its radio broadcast that reaches millions to push its message .
“ The issues had been so demagogued for the last five or six years , it was hopeless to get seriously into this , ” said Tom Minnery or Focus on the Family . “ It seems the time is better . The time has changed…That ’ s why we ’ ve become more active . ”
Social conservatives are directly targeting GOP offices and trying to show that they can give cover to lawmakers in the South , West and Midwest , who are worried about facing retaliation at the ballot box in 2014 .
“ Many of the most hostile critics got beat , a fact not lost on the other House members , ” said Richard Land of the Southern Baptist Convention , referring to Republicans who have lost their seats since 2006 . “ I think there ’ s a bigger coalition in the House for immigration reform than people think . ”
While many of the groups have put together a broad framework of what they support , it ’ s unclear if the unity will withstand what could turn into an all-out political brawl — especially on tenuous subjects like border enforcement , citizenship and including immigration rights for gays and lesbians .
But for now , many involved in the movement say it is more about raising visibility with social conservatives .
Nearly a dozen groups , including Bread for the World , Esperanza , Christian Community Development Association and the National Association of Evangelicals , have launched a 40-day “ I was a stranger ” campaign asking parishioners to read a bible verse dealing with immigrants each day .
“ We ’ ve moved beyond the religious leadership in our country on the evangelical side to begin influencing more of the pews , ” said Noel Castellanos of CCDA . “ We need to inform them and expose them the way we did with our pastors . ”