Poor Donald Trump . At least that ’ s how the president was feeling on Christmas Eve , according to his own Twitter account . “ I am all alone ( poor me ) in the White House waiting for the Democrats to come back and make a deal on desperately needed Border Security , ” he proclaimed . “ At some point the Democrats not wanting to make a deal will cost our Country more money than the Border Wall we are all talking about . Crazy ! ”
The craziness Mr. Trump alluded to was this : The completely unnecessary partial government shutdown that began over the weekend .
How did we get here ? Seventy-five percent of the federal government is funded . Funding for the other 25 percent , including departments like Justice , State and Commerce , expired at midnight on Dec. 21 . Mr. Trump has asked for a mere $ 5 billion in border wall funding to be attached to the appropriations bill covering that remaining 25 percent . ( $ 5 billion , by the way , would not come close to completing the whole wall ; it ’ s simply viewed as a down payment . )
The House obliged ; in its final days under Republican control , before the dread Nancy Pelosi of San Francisco assumes the speakership , the chamber passed a bill funding the government and including $ 5 billion in border security . The Senate , however , stymied by the obstructionist minority headed up by New York Sen. Chuck Schumer , refused . And so we find ourselves at an impasse . A quarter of the federal government has shut down . The president says he will not sign a funding bill that does not include money for a border wall , or “ steel slats ” as he has begun calling them . The Democrats , for their party , have indicated that they won ’ t budge .
Oddly , the Democrats once supported border security — and not that long ago . None other than Hillary Clinton boasted in 2015 that “ I voted numerous times when I was a senator to spend money to build a barrier to try to prevent illegal immigrants from coming in . And I do think you have to control your borders. ” Now they sing a rather different tune . Mr. Schumer and Ms. Pelosi are adamant that they won ’ t spend a cent on the wall . Ms. Pelosi has even called the wall “ immoral . ”
The Democrats have two reasons for opposing the wall . Both are political and have little to do with “ morality. ” For one , the Democrats claim , dubiously , that the wall would be “ ineffective. ” But as the experience of Israel and other nations has shown , that ’ s bunk : Walls can absolutely be effective in keeping unwanted populations out . The Democrats aren ’ t so ignorant as to not realize this . The truth , indeed , is that they oppose the wall precisely because it does work . Bleeding support from older and white voters , the Democrats have banked their future on a more ethnically diverse electorate . A wall would slow down the pace of ethnic change .
The Democrats are also shrewd enough to realize that blocking the wall will kneecap the president ’ s re-election chances . Mr. Trump ’ s central campaign promise , after all , was that “ big beautiful wall. ” Should they stymie his building of it , they ’ ll deny the president a powerful re-election plank ; and they ’ ll also be able to argue , not unconvincingly , that Mr. Trump has not kept his promises .
Still , there is political peril for the Democrats in their position , and not just from the obvious hypocrisy of abandoning their recent support for border control . Controlling immigration is a popular position . Mr. Trump is for it ; the Democrats , apparently , against it . They look stubborn and ideological by refusing to spend a mere $ 5 billion to help implement a policy — national sovereignty — that most Americans support . And that their obstinacy has provoked a government shutdown — never a popular course of action — will simply heighten public revulsion at their antics . In other words , they ’ ve shut the government down in pursuit of an unpopular policy .
In the end , then , we suspect the Democrats will probably want to make a deal ; perhaps a bit less than $ 5 billion to save face , but at least something . Throughout the 2016 presidential campaign , Mr. Trump promised to “ build a wall and make Mexico pay for it. ” There was never much chance he ’ d get Mexico to chip in . He might have better luck with a new slogan now : “ Build a wall and make the Democrats pay for it. ” They just might .