House Republicans vowed Tuesday to confront President Obama ’ s temporary amnesty for illegal immigrants , but they continued to wrestle with how to do it , as conservatives balked at the GOP leadership ’ s plan to put off the fight until March .
Leaders were counting noses to see whether they had enough support for a three-pronged approach , which would include passing an omnibus spending bill to fund most of the government through the end of the fiscal year , while carving out funding for homeland security programs in a separate measure that would last until early next year , when Congress would revisit the amnesty controversy .
The approach would avoid a government shutdown and preserve the GOP ’ s chance to fight the president when the next Congress convenes in January and when Republicans will control the House and Senate , giving them more leverage for a battle with the White House .
Some conservatives were reluctant to wait until March , and others said they couldn ’ t vote for any bill that didn ’ t try to ban Mr. Obama ’ s policy — leaving Republican leaders wondering whether they had enough support to move ahead .
“ This is a serious breach of our Constitution . It ’ s a serious threat to our system of government and , frankly , we have limited options and limited abilities to deal with it directly , ” House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican , said of the president ’ s executive action . “ We have not made any decisions on how we are going to proceed , but we are in fact going to proceed . ”
In an attempt to appease conservatives itching to take on Mr. Obama , the House also would vote on a bill by Rep. Ted S. Yoho , Florida Republican , that would declare the president ’ s action void . Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , Nevada Democrat , said he would not bring the bill to the floor , making the House vote largely symbolic .
SEE ALSO : Illegals get a pay raise while current American workers ’ checks get squeezed
House Republicans emerged from a closed-door meeting Tuesday to say they were determined to avoid another shutdown after taking the brunt of the blame for closing the government for 16 days in October 2013 .
“ We ’ re not going to take that bait , ” said Rep. Dennis A. Ross , Florida Republican .
Mr. Obama said he resorted to executive action because House Republicans refused to pass an immigration reform bill that met his standards . His policy would grant legal status and three-year work permits to nearly half of the estimated 12 million undocumented residents in the U.S .
White House press secretary Josh Earnest said the administration wants congressional Republicans to fund the entire government for a full year .
“ We ’ re not asking them to do anything heroic . We ’ re asking them to do their job , ” Mr . Earnest said .
Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson pleaded with lawmakers to give him full funding now , saying that without a new spending bill he won ’ t be able to hire enough Secret Service agents to protect presidential candidates in the 2016 primaries and won ’ t be able to expand detention facilities to hold illegal immigrants .
Republicans have struggled for weeks to devise a strategy that would avoid a shutdown showdown while taking a stand against Mr. Obama ’ s immigration moves .
House and Senate Republicans who backed Mr. Boehner ’ s plan insisted it would succeed because enough Democrats in both chambers wanted to pass an overall spending measure , which will be packed with pet projects for their home districts and states .
The omnibus package would fund education , parks , the Defense Department , health programs and the rest of government through Sept. 30 . The funding for homeland security , including money for carrying out the immigration amnesty , would expire as late as March , providing a new deadline for trying to rein in Mr. Obama ’ s actions .
Appropriators from both parties continued to negotiate the omnibus package ahead of a Dec. 11 deadline , when the government ’ s spending expires .
Mr. Reid voiced tentative support splitting off the immigration issue from the omnibus spending debate , saying that passing full-year funding for all departments except one would be “ a great accomplishment . ”
“ I think it ’ s a shame that they ’ re not going to include the very important Homeland Security appropriation bill , but I understand why they ’ re doing it . We ’ ll take a look at it , ” he said .
Other top Democrats slammed the plan but didn ’ t threaten to vote it down .
“ Singling out DHS , by funding it through a continuing resolution , undermines its ability to carry out its critical homeland security mission such as protecting our air , land and sea borders and cyberspace , ” said Rep. Bennie G. Thompson of Mississippi , the ranking Democrat on the House Homeland Security Committee .
Still , a faction of conservatives within the House Republican conference threatened to pull their support unless the stopgap bill bars funding for Mr. Obama ’ s amnesty plan .
“ I will not vote to fund the president ’ s lawless , unconstitutional act and they should not be asking members to do so , ” said Rep. Steve King , Iowa Republican and outspoken opponent of easing immigration laws . “ This is the time to fight , this is the ground to fight on . And I ’ m a little bit amazed that that isn ’ t more clear to more people . ”
Another sticking point appeared to be the length of the short-term funding , with the Republican conference ’ s more conservative members pushing for funding only through mid-January in order to confront Mr. Obama on the issue as soon as the next Congress convenes .
“ If we fund it to mid-March , half the year is already funded , ” said Rep. John Fleming , Louisiana Republican . “ They ’ re printing work permits right now . ”