CLOSE President Donald Trump is considering ending a program that allowed young immigrants who came to the United States with their parents illegally to stay in the country under the Development , Relief , and Education for Alien Minors Act . Rough Cut ( no reporter narration ) . Video provided by Reuters Newslook
The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals Program ( DACA ) currently protects nearly 800,000 undocumented immigrants from deportation .
CLOSE More than 780,000 DREAMers have been allowed to stay in the U.S. under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program created under President Obama . Many worry about their future under President Trump . ███
The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals Program , known as DACA , allows two-year stays for certain undocumented immigrants who entered the country before their 16th birthday who have attended school or joined the military and have not committed any serious crimes .
They receive a renewable two-year period of deportation protections and eligibility for a work permit . Some enrollees are currently on their third term .
DACA was created in 2012 by the Obama administration after several failed attempts in Congress to pass a law to protect from deportation undocumented immigrants brought to the country as children .
While announcing the program during a speech in the Rose Garden , Obama said those DREAMers — undocumented immigrants brought to America as children — did n't make the decision to enter the U.S. illegally and should n't be punished as a result .
Not all DREAMers became DACA recipients . There are a total of 1.9 million undocumented immigrants eligible to apply for the program , but many have not , according to the Migration Policy Institute . The federal government has approved 787,580 people for the program .
To apply for DACA , immigrants must have come to the United States before 2007 . The immigrants were required to have been 15 or younger when they arrived and younger than 31 when DACA was created in 2012 . They had to have a clean criminal record and be enrolled in high school or have a high school diploma or equivalent .
Why can DACA be taken away by the executive branch ?
The program was created through a memorandum from the Department of Homeland Security , which means it could be rescinded at any time without any input from Congress . That was always a concern of applicants , who knew their protections could be taken away by a future president and the personal information they provided could be used to arrest and deport them .
CLOSE Pre-immigrant protestors in New York march near Trump Tower ahead of a decision that could see the U.S. president rescind a policy that protects hundreds of thousands of immigrants who entered the country illegally as children . Video provided by Reuters Newslook
Republican leaders from 10 states , led by Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton , gave President Trump a deadline of Sept. 5 to end DACA or they 'd sue . They believe the program is an abuse of executive power , and feel that only Congress can provide such a broad `` amnesty '' to any group of undocumented immigrants .
As rumors of DACA 's demise floated in recent weeks , a variety of groups pleaded with the Trump administration to maintain the program . On Aug. 14 , more than 100 law professors signed a letter to Trump insisting that DACA is perfectly legal . On Wednesday , a group of more than 1,850 governors , state attorneys general , faith leaders , police chiefs , sheriffs and civic leaders signed a statement urging Trump to keep the program . And on Thursday , hundreds of tech and business leaders from Amazon 's Jeff Bezos to Google 's Sundar Pichai sent a similar letter to Trump .
More : 1,850 U.S. leaders to Trump : Do n't kill DREAMer protection program
More : Here 's why Arizona 'dreamers ' say Trump should keep DACA