US President Donald Trump has said he is `` fairly close '' to a bipartisan deal to protect young undocumented migrants known as Dreamers .
Mr Trump told journalists at the White House that any agreement must include `` massive border security '' .
The president said funding for his proposed border wall on the US border with Mexico was not part of the pact .
Mr Trump spoke a day after talks with top Democrats Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer at the White House .
Only last week Mr Trump stunned fellow Republicans by making a budget deal with the Democrats .
The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( Daca ) programme allows some 800,000 people to remain in the US , and provides temporary permits for work and study .
The Obama-era scheme was put in place to protect so-called `` Dreamers '' - migrants who entered the US illegally as children - from deportation .
Only last week Mr Trump announced he would cancel the programme .
He said he was giving Congress six months to enact a replacement plan for Daca recipients .
Deal or No Deal - Anthony Zurcher , ███ Washington
Welcome to another episode of Deal or No Deal , White House edition . Unlike the classic game show , however , Donald Trump appears to be playing against himself .
In a series of tweets , the president denied he had struck an immigration/border security agreement with Democratic congressional leaders , then effectively endorsed the same terms they set out in a press release Wednesday night .
When speaking to reporters , he even echoed Democratic justifications for why undocumented immigrants who entered the US as children should be given normalised residency status .
This comes as a shock to some of Trump 's diehard anti-immigration supporters , who view any Daca-like agreement as amnesty for law-breakers . Congressional Republicans , who were working on their own deal with Democrats , are in a daze as well .
There is the possibility that this could be a Nixon-in-China moment for the president , where only a man who campaigned vociferously against undocumented immigrants could agree to give legal residency to hundreds of thousands of them .
Unlike Nixon 's China diplomacy , however , Mr Trump will need congressional Republicans to go along with his deal . Many voted against his earlier agreement to raise the debt limit and avoid a government shutdown .
Heading to Florida on Thursday morning to view the damage from Hurricane Irma , Mr Trump told journalists : `` We 're working on a plan subject to getting massive border control , we are working on a plan for Daca . People want to see that happen . ''
He added : `` So we met last night with , as you know , with Schumer , Pelosi and a whole group and I think we 're fairly close but we have to get massive border security . ''
The president said the congressional Republican leadership was `` on board '' with the plan .
`` The wall is going to be built , '' he added . `` It will be funded a little bit later . ''
Democrats have repeatedly vowed to block any legislation that includes funding for the border wall - a key campaign pledge by Mr Trump .
After arriving in Florida , Mr Trump denied that he would back a path to citizenship for Dreamers .
During the presidential campaign , in August 2015 , Mr Trump said in a TV interview that Dreamers `` have to go '' .
But on Thursday , he voiced support for the young immigrants in language that echoed former President Barack Obama .
`` Does anybody really want to throw out good , educated and accomplished young people who have jobs , some serving in the military ? Really ! '' Mr Trump tweeted .
Paul Ryan , the top Republican in Congress , said Mr Trump 's meeting with Democrats `` was a discussion not an agreement or a negotiation '' .
Ms Pelosi told reporters no deal had been finalised with the president .
But she added : `` We had an agreement to move forward in our view , with a Dream Act as the basis for how we protect the Dreamers , and for further discussions on what provisions relating to the border might be and an accompanying bill or whatever as we go forward . ''
Democrats failed to get Daca on to the statute books during the Obama administration , so it would be a political coup to succeed in doing so when Republicans control the White House and Congress .
Congressman Steve King of Iowa tweeted at the president that , if the latest reports are true , `` Trump base is blown up , destroyed , irreparable , and disillusioned beyond repair . No promise is credible . ''
One of Mr Trump 's earliest backers , media commentator Ann Coulter , tweeted : `` At this point , who DOES N'T want Trump impeached ? ''
Breitbart , the website run by Mr Trump 's former chief strategist Steve Bannon , ran the headline , `` Amnesty Don '' and accused the president of `` a full-fledged cave '' .
Fox News host Sean Hannity tweeted that `` weak Republicans have betrayed voters '' and pushed Mr Trump `` into arms of political suicide '' .
The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( Daca ) programme was created in 2012 by then-President Barack Obama to shield children of undocumented immigrants from deportation .
It also provided work and study permits for those it covered - popularly known as `` Dreamers '' .
In order to qualify for Daca , applicants under the age of 30 were required to submit personal information to the Department of Homeland Security , including addresses and phone numbers .
They had to pass an FBI background check , have a clean criminal background , and either be in school , recently graduated or have been honourably discharged from the military .
In exchange , the US government agreed to `` defer '' any action on their immigration status for a period of two years .
The majority of Dreamers are from Mexico and other Latin American countries .
The Department of Justice has said no new Daca applications will be taken .