“ I think the opposition is counting on mistrust of government , hatred of Obama and the idea that Congress can ’ t get anything right to combine as the pathway to no , ” said Frank Sharry , the executive director of America ’ s Voice , an immigrant advocacy group .
Many Congressional Republicans say they are bracing for Mr. Obama to blame them for any problems with the legislative process .
“ I do get the sense that everything for this administration seems to be a day-to-day tactical decision , rather than a legislative strategy of how to get things passed , ” said Senator Roy Blunt , Republican of Missouri . “ That ’ s not the same as doing what it takes to get work done . ”
Process could also prove an enemy . Senate leaders will need 60 votes to even start on a bill , but before then they will have to ponder numerous amendments from the left and right — all of which could injure the bill ’ s chances in both camps . In fact , when Mr. Obama was a senator , he fought for a “ poison pill ” amendment in 2007 to phase out a guest-worker program favored by Republicans , an amendment that , when attached to the bill , helped sink it .
Some House members have already started to go their own way with far more modest , incremental proposals . Republicans there will certainly produce a far different bill from the Senate ’ s . Should the Senate and House end up in a conference to reconcile two bills , the final measure may well end up closer to that produced in the Senate , as has been the case with other bills that have gone to conference .
If this happens , Speaker John A. Boehner , Republican of Ohio , might be presented with the excruciating choice of bringing a more liberal version of legislation to the House floor or failing to close the deal on immigration reform that many in his party believe is needed .
Perhaps the most important factor in the bill ’ s favor is its broad support among a wide variety of constituencies , including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , the agricultural industry , labor unions and many church groups . Unlike the gun legislation , the immigration bill has no strong single opponent analogous to the National Rifle Association . Immigration legislation also has a compelling advocate in the Senate .