WASHINGTON — A bipartisan immigration proposal has surfaced in the Senate , only to be quickly knocked down by President Donald Trump via Twitter on Monday .
Republican Sen. John McCain and Democratic Sen. Chris Coons planned to propose legislation Monday that would shield from deportation immigrants who entered the U.S. illegally as children , known as “ Dreamers ” helped by the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , or DACA . The bill also would strengthen border security , but it wouldn ’ t provide the $ 25 billion Trump wants for a U.S.-Mexico border wall .
But before the Senate had a chance to consider the narrow plan , Trump seemed to reject it on Twitter .
“ Any deal on DACA that does not include STRONG border security and the desperately needed WALL is a total waste of time . March 5th is rapidly approaching and the Dems seem not to care about DACA . Make a deal ! ” Trump tweeted .
Any deal on DACA that does not include STRONG border security and the desperately needed WALL is a total waste of time . March 5th is rapidly approaching and the Dems seem not to care about DACA . Make a deal ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) February 5 , 2018
McCain , R-Ariz. , and Coons , D-Del. , said in a statement that their bill was designed to focus on two “ pressing ” border issues — the “ Dreamers ” and border security — so lawmakers could focus on completing a long-overdue budget deal .
The McCain-Coons plan is a more modest approach than Trump has sought for protecting the estimated 1.8 million young immigrants . The measure lacks Trump ’ s demands for limiting the relatives that “ Dreamers ” can sponsor for citizenship , and ending a visa lottery aimed at admitting more immigrants from diverse places including Africa .
The senators ’ plan would create a road to legal status for “ Dreamers ” who arrived in the U.S. by the end of 2013 and meet other criteria , including no convictions for serious crimes . Once they ’ ve become lawful permanent residents , they can follow existing procedures to apply for citizenship .
Democrats and some Republicans want to give “ Dreamers ” a pathway to citizenship , but oppose cuts Trump would make in the number of legal immigrants allowed to enter the U.S. Conservatives oppose letting “ Dreamers ” become citizens . That stalemate has led many to believe the likeliest outcome is a narrowly focused bill or even no legislation at all .
The senators ’ proposal is similar to a bipartisan House package by Reps. Will Hurd , R-Texas , and Pete Aguilar , D-Calif .
READ MORE : What ’ s in the White House ’ s latest immigration plan ?