Donald Trump seized the chance to make the case for his border wall , during a rally in El Paso that addressed topics far beyond immigration .
Party leaders reach deal to avoid fresh US government shutdown Read more
A big US flag along with three “ finish the wall ” banners lined the El Paso County Coliseum , making it clear immigration and border security were at the center of Trump ’ s speech . Mere days before another government shutdown deadline , Trump tried to convince his supporters he would fulfil one of his signature campaign promises .
Trump told the crowd : “ We are setting the stage … We are setting the table . We are doing whatever we have to do . The wall is being built . ”
But Trump didn ’ t just stick to immigration . In a typically freewheeling speech , he returned to many familiar themes , including North Korea , the Democrats and the Mueller investigation .
Trump touted his foreign policy strategy in Asia , confirming plans to meet North Korean leader Kim Jong-un at a summit in Vietnam at the end of the month .
He made time to mock counter-demonstrators who had gathered at a nearby counter-protest led by former congressman and potential presidential candidate Beto O ’ Rourke . Trump ridiculed the size of the crowd at the O ’ Rourke event , even though both men drew thousands .
“ That may be the end of his presidential bid , ” Trump said . He also said O ’ Rourke was a “ young man who ’ s got very little going for himself , except he ’ s got a good first name ” .
According to local journalist Bob Moore , officials estimated the attendance at Trump ’ s rally at close to 7,000 with another 6,000 watching on screens outside . Approximately 7,000 people attended the counter-protests .
Trump also railed against the Green New Deal , recently introduced by Democrats in the House of Representatives seeking to tackle climate change . And he continued to call the investigation by special counsel Robert Mueller into potential collusion between Russia and the Trump campaign a witch-hunt .
On immigration , Trump promised to build his border wall between Mexico and the US . “ Walls work , ” the president said . “ Walls save lives . ”
Trump again claimed the border fence built in El Paso in 2008 was an important factor in reducing crime in the area . FBI crime statistics show otherwise . El Paso hit a record low in crime level in 2006 , two years before the construction of the fence that separates it from Ciudad Juárez .
The president ’ s inaccurate statements didn ’ t stop there . He told rally attendees that construction of the wall had begun in El Paso on Monday morning .
“ On the banks of the legendary Rio Grande … today we started a big , beautiful wall , ” Trump said .
That is not true . Last fall , construction began at the neighborhood of Chihuahuita in downtown El Paso – but the project will only replace old fencing with a new , taller fence .
Yet “ the wall is being built , and at a very fast pace ” , Trump claimed .
Trump ’ s rally began moments after negotiators on Capitol Hill announced lawmakers had reached an agreement in principle to fund the government before a midnight Friday deadline .
Republicans agreed to far less money for Trump ’ s border security plans than the White House ’ s $ 5.7bn request , settling for nearly $ 1.4bn , according to congressional aides . The funding measure is through the fiscal year , which ends 30 September .
Three people familiar with the tentative border security deal told the Associated Press the accord would provide $ 1.375bn to build 55 miles of new border barriers , well below the $ 5.7bn that Trump demanded to build more than 200 miles of wall along the Mexican border . The money will be for vertical steel slats called bollards , not a solid wall .
At the rally , Trump appeared oblivious to the deal , saying he had been informed by aides negotiators had made some progress but that he had declined to be fully briefed because he wanted to go onstage .
Trump supporters had lined up for hours in hopes of hearing what the president had to say on immigration and the negotiations on the government shutdown .
“ I ’ m hoping he gives a bit more details of what his plans are on immigration , whether it ’ s the wall or better and stronger immigration laws , ” said Cody Perkins , a local supporter of the president .
‘ Safe not because of walls but in spite of walls ’
At O ’ Rourke ’ s rally nearby , dozens of civic , human rights and Hispanic groups in the former congressman ’ s home town attended a protest rally which brought thousands to a baseball field within shouting distance from the arena where Trump spoke .
“ With the eyes of the country upon us , all of us together are going to make our stand here in one of the safest cities in America , ” O ’ Rourke said . “ Safe not because of walls but in spite of walls . ”
Flanking the president on Monday were Texas senators John Cornyn and Ted Cruz , Texas governor Greg Abbott , his deputy , Dan Patrick , and the state attorney general , Ken Paxton . Cornyn , Cruz and Donald Trump Jr spoke before the president ’ s speech .
Cornyn praised Trump for nominating a record number of conservative judges to the federal bench , and applauded the nomination and confirmation of Brett Kavanaugh to the supreme court .
He also expressed support for Trump ’ s immigration plans , criticizing both Democrats and the media . “ We can have both a secure border and a strong economy , ” Cornyn said .