President Trump is preparing to add more countries to his six-nation travel ban executive order — though he ’ ll likely impose lesser penalties such as additional traveler screening on them , administration officials said Friday .
The officials also declared victory from the original travel ban , saying that the process has pushed a number of other countries to begin sharing more information about their citizens who are seeking visas to enter the U.S .
The crux of the travel ban — a 90-day pause on some admissions from six terrorist-connected — is slated to expire Sunday , and White House , Homeland Security and State Department officials said Friday they ’ re looking to update it .
Homeland Security Secretary Elaine Duke has submitted a set of recommendations to Mr. Trump for countries that should still face travel restrictions or whose travelers will face “ enhanced screening . ”
Mr. Trump is pondering the recommendations , and officials declined Friday to talk about which countries are in play . They wouldn ’ t say whether the six countries on the original target list from March — Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen — will all remain on the updated list , but did say others have been added into the list as less-than-cooperative .
“ What the secretary has recommended are tougher measures and more specific measures , ” said Miles Taylor , counselor to Ms. Duke .
The government said it went through a months-long , two-tier review of other countries ’ information-sharing with the U.S. After an initial assessment , countries that were deemed “ inadequate ” were put on 50-day notice that if they didn ’ t promise to comply they could face restrictions .
“ We managed to get countries who had not previously been sharing things like terrorist information to start doing just that , ” he said .
But Mr. Taylor said some countries were “ still unable or worse yet , deliberately unwilling to comply. ” They ’ re the ones that will face new restrictions .
He said the new standards Ms. Duke suggested are conditions-based , rather than the time-based 90-day approach Mr. Trump took in his initial executive order .
Even before Mr. Trump ’ s final decision , his political opponents blasted him , saying the entire process “ continues to be driven by religious animus . ”
“ Any nominal changes in countries or security rationalizations will not change that : This order has been and will continue to be the president ’ s way of making good on his campaign promise to institute a Muslim ban , ” said Johnathan Smith , legal director of Muslim Advocates .
The original travel ban grew out of then-candidate Trump ’ s demand for “ extreme vetting ” of travelers , particularly those from Muslim countries .
Once in office , he called for a 90-day pause in travel from seven countries he said were too connected to terrorism . He also imposed a 120-halt to admissions of refugees . In both cases he said he wanted to give the government a chance to get a handle on its admission policies .
His initial Jan. 27 travel ban executive order was chaotically implemented and met resistance in the courts , leading the president to issue a revised order in March .
The new order cut Iraq from the list of targeted countries — the administration said the Iraqi government earned its way off the ban by taking quick steps toward better cooperation — and curtailed the ban so it didn ’ t apply to legal immigrants and some others with deep ties to the U.S .
The Supreme Court had been set to hear oral argument next month on the current version of the travel ban , but had signaled that could become moot if Mr. Trump made substantial changes to the policy tied to the end of the 90-day pause .
Officials briefing reporters Friday said they can ’ t predict how the updates will affect the court case since Mr. Trump hasn ’ t announced a final decision yet . But they said the Justice Department has been consulted throughout the process .
Supreme Court justices have delivered a mixed verdict on the current ban , ruling that Mr. Trump does have important national security powers that must be respected , but finding that in cases where the would-be visitor has “ bona fide ” ties to a person or institution in the U.S. , they have rights that must also be respected .
Under that framework , the justices said , the administration was free to block some travel , but had to admit refugees worldwide , and visitors from the six targeted countries , if they proved those ties .
That set off a new round of litigation over whether grandparents or cousins counted as “ close ” relations , and whether having a refugee case assigned to a resettlement agency in the U.S. was a “ bona fide ” relationship . The administration capitulated on the family issue , but won another victory in the Supreme Court on the refugee side .
Under the calendar Mr. Trump laid out in his executive order , the refugee ban runs for another month .