Now that Republicans are widely embracing an overhaul of immigration laws , even a path to legal status for illegal residents , will their members in Congress follow through ?
At first glance , it appears that they just might . After the election , in which more than 70 percent of Latinos voted for President Obama , House Speaker John Boehner , R-Ohio , said `` a comprehensive approach is long overdue '' and that Republican House leaders and Obama `` can find the common ground . ''
On Nov. 16 , Florida Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart announced that he and fellow Hispanic Republican lawmakers had begun meeting with Democrats to `` find a bipartisan solution . ''
Democratic Rep. Luis Gutierrez of Illinois , who has aggressively pushed for immigration reform , even when his fellow Democrats were silent , could n't be happier .
`` Finally , thank God , '' Gutierrez says . `` On a serious note , I 've met with a dozen of my colleagues on the Republican side , and they have all said , 'We 've got to get this done . ' This election proved that people wo n't accept doing nothing . And they wo n't accept finger-pointing . ''
This coming week , the Congressional Hispanic Caucus , which consists largely of Democrats , is expected to release a set of `` principles '' that they hope will guide bipartisan talks when the new Congress begins in January . Obama also has urged lawmakers to `` seize the moment '' early next year .
The Hispanic caucus 's parameters will include the bedrock goals of Democrats and immigrant advocates , such as a path to legal status if not outright citizenship , and requirements such as learning English and paying back taxes . Also included will be conservative priorities such as securing U.S. borders and worker verification .
Gutierrez , who is a member of the caucus , says now is the time `` to let the process work amongst our Democratic and Republican members . Will they come to some kind of flowering ? I think so . ''
So far , the new esprit de corps has n't spread to Republicans on the House immigration subcommittee , which could act as the conservative firewall against new legislation . The committee is packed with members who support limited immigration and oppose legal status for illegal immigrants .
The retirement of subcommittee chairman Elton Gallegly , R-Calif. , at the end of the year could lead to the elevation of vice chairman Steve King , R-Iowa . King has been an archenemy of immigrant advocates and last year introduced a bill to eliminate automatic citizenship for children born in the United States to illegal immigrants .
In recent days , Boehner has backed off the idea , preferred by Democrats , of a single immigration bill and suggested that revisions could be divided into several smaller measures . That approach is favored by conservatives , whose support Boehner must have for any deal .
`` There 's a lot of distrust on both sides of this debate , and I think a lot of distrust in the American electorate on this debate , '' says Matthew Spalding , vice president of American Studies at the Heritage Foundation , a conservative think tank . `` The potential problem is if this immediately becomes framed as the same pre-existing alternatives , like , 'Let 's do everything in one big piece of legislation , ' which is complicated , expensive and hard to do , I 'm not sure trying it for a third time would work . ''
Spalding says the bills could separately target issues such as border security , problems in the immigration system , such as visa backlogs , and the status of people already in the United States .
The first test could come with the introduction of a Republican immigration bill during the current lame-duck session of Congress . The STEM Jobs Act would increase the number of green cards for foreign-born graduates in the United States with doctorates in science , technology , engineering and mathematics . The bill failed to pass the House in September , despite 30 Democrats having voted for it .
There 's a lot of distrust on both sides of this debate , and I think a lot of distrust in the American electorate on this debate .
But it 's not the olive branch many Democrats want . Its author , conservative Rep. Lamar Smith ( R-Texas ) , has been a staunch opponent of immigrant advocates , favoring a limited flow of foreigners and opposing a path to citizenship for those already in the United States .
In an editorial letter published by Politico on Tuesday , Smith criticized as flawed a recent ABC News/Washington Post poll in which 57 percent of all respondents said they support a path to citizenship . Smith wrote that the results merely support `` the media 's predetermined notions . ''
Smith cited Rasmussen Reports polls from 2011 in which majorities of respondents favored securing U.S. borders over granting legal status — or amnesty , as Smith put it — to illegal immigrants .
Democrats oppose Smith 's bill because they say it would n't significantly relieve the backlog of more than 400,000 high-skilled immigrants awaiting permanent green cards and would take 55,000 green cards per year from the diversity visa category , eliminating that program . Diversity green cards are issued to people from African nations and other countries with low rates of emigration to the United States .
Democratic Rep. Zoe Lofgren of California has proposed a similar bill that instead would add new green cards for high-skilled workers while preserving the diversity visa program .
Some Democrats , preferring not to poison the potential for a bipartisan compromise , quietly bristle at the possibility that Republicans could bring Smith 's bill to the House floor for a vote by using a `` closed '' rule , which would prevent Democrats from attaching amendments .
In the Democratic-controlled Senate , members in both parties already have pledged action on immigration . Sens . Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , who is expected to return as chairman of the chamber 's immigration subcommittee , and Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , want to revive their 2010 wide-ranging proposal that would include a guest-worker program , automatic visas for foreign-born graduates with advance degrees in high-tech fields , and legal status for those with no criminal records who pay a fine .
Several Republican senators , such as Marco Rubio and Susan Collins , want to pass an updated DREAM Act , which would offer a path to citizenship for young adults brought to the United States as children . The original bill , drafted by Democrats , failed in the Senate in 2010 .
Collins , of Maine , was among the Republicans who defeated the DREAM Act in 2010 . Rubio , of Florida , who is Cuban-American , has been working on his own version but has n't released details .
Republican Sens . Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas and Jon Kyl of Arizona , who are retiring at the end of this year , have proposed a pared-down version of the DREAM Act , called the ACHIEVE Act , which would offer legal status but not citizenship .
Immigrant activist Cesar Vargas , director of the DREAM Action Coalition , said in a recent blog post in The Hill , that the ACHIEVE Act would be `` untenable '' for young people .
`` The American people certainly appreciate the proactive efforts of the Republican leadership for beginning to engage in the conversation of immigration , '' Vargas said in the post . `` However , voters , specifically Latino voters , spoke clearly on election day that they support the original DREAM Act . Mitt Romney garnered only 27 percent of the Latino vote , primarily due to his threat to veto the DREAM Act . ''
Obama 's deferred deportation program targets DREAM Act-eligible people , though Rubio and most other Republicans have criticized the effort as a politically opportunistic quick fix . Since the program began in August , more than 309,000 people have applied and more than 53,000 have been approved for the two-year reprieve , according to the latest government figures .