A federal appeals court said President Obama ’ s own words claiming powers to “ change the law ” were part of the reason it struck down his deportation amnesty , in a ruling late Monday that reaffirmed the president must carry out laws and doesn ’ t have blanket powers to waive them .
The 2-1 ruling by the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals punctures Mr. Obama ’ s immigration plans and is the latest in a series of major court rulings putting limits on the president ’ s claims of expansive executive powers to enact his agenda without having to get congressional buy-in .
In an opinion freighted with meaning for the separation of powers battles , Judge Jerry E. Smith , writing for himself and Judge Jennifer Walker Elrod , singled out Mr. Obama ’ s own claim that he acted to rewrite the law because Congress wouldn ’ t pass the bill he wanted .
The key remark came in a speech in Chicago just days after his Nov. 20 , 2014 , announcement detailing his executive actions . Fed up with a heckler who was chiding him for boosting the number of deportations , Mr. Obama fired back , agreeing that he ’ d overseen a spike in deportations .
“ But what you are not paying attention to is the fact that I just took an action to change the law , ” the president said .
The two judges said the Justice Department failed to explain away Mr. Obama ’ s remarks .
“ At oral argument , and despite being given several opportunities , the attorney for the United States was unable to reconcile that remark with the position that the government now takes , ” Judge Smith wrote .
Whether Mr. Obama acted within the law is the crux of the case .
Texas and 25 other states , which sued to stop the amnesty , argue Mr. Obama went beyond the boundaries set in the Immigration and Nationality Act , which sets out specific instances where , on a case-by-case basis , the Homeland Security secretary can waive penalties and allow illegal immigrants to stay , granting them work permits which then entitle them to Social Security cards , tax credits and state driver ’ s licenses .
A federal district court in Texas agreed with the states , halting Mr. Obama ’ s policy , and now an appeals court has also sided with the states .
Writing in dissent on Monday , Judge Carolyn Dineen King dismissed Mr. Obama ’ s claim that he changed the law , saying presidents often use imprecise language when talking about laws . She said Mr. Obama wasn ’ t making a legal argument in his response to the heckler .
Mr. Obama ’ s plan , known officially as Deferred Action for Parental Arrivals , or DAPA , was intended to grant up to 5 million illegal immigrants a proactive three-year stay of deportation and to give them work permits , allowing them to come out of the shadows and join American society — though they were still considered to be in the country illegally . To qualify , illegal immigrants had to be parents of U.S. citizens or legal permanent resident children .
The president characterized his plan as a use of prosecutorial discretion , reasoning that he was never going to deport them anyway , so they should be granted some more firm status .
But the court ruled that he not only didn ’ t follow the usual rules in making a major policy change , but that his claims of power to grant tentative legal status to a massive class of people went beyond the waiver powers Congress granted him in the law .
Monday ’ s decision is already reverberating across the presidential debate , with Hispanic-rights activists insisting Mr. Obama file an immediate appeal to the Supreme Court , and vowing to make immigration an issue in the 2016 election .
The top three Democratic candidates for president had already said they not only thought what Mr. Obama was doing was legal , but they had vowed to go beyond it and expand the amnesty to still more illegal immigrants . GOP candidates , meanwhile , have vowed to repeal Mr. Obama ’ s policies .