Immigration reform got a substantial boost in the Senate Thursday , as Republican Sens . Bob Corker of Tennessee and John Hoeven of North Dakota helped craft a compromise proposal on border security that could pave the way for an overwhelming approval of the bill when it comes to a final vote next week .
The amendment , together with a handful of others still under negotiation but whose prospects appear favorable , could push the vote total toward 70 senators . That is something of a magic number for proponents of immigration reform , who think a huge , bipartisan vote in the Senate could compel the House to act . Many Republicans in the House have so far shown little enthusiasm for comprehensive immigration reform .
Yet border security has been among the primary stumbling blocks for Republicans , both in the House and Senate , and Senator Corker is confident that his amendment should allay any concerns .
“ If anybody on either side of the aisle had any concerns whatsoever about the border being secure – certainly securing the border should not be an issue if this amendment passes , ” he said Thursday .
The `` Gang of Eight '' senators that crafted the immigration bill also also hailed the importance of the compromise amendment .
“ If this amendment doesn ’ t convince people we are securing the border , nothing will , ” says Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D ) of New York , one of the bill ’ s authors .
The amendment , which will likely come up for a vote early next week , would double the number of border security agents along the US-Mexico divide to 40,000 and require the completion of 700 miles of border fencing , up from 350 in the initial border plan . The measure explicitly spells out the types of technology ( including unmanned aerial vehicles and special radar ) and infrastructure to be deployed by the Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) , which will have to provide a border security strategy six months after the bill is enacted .
The Corker-Hoeven compromise addressed concerns on both sides of the aisle .
Republicans pointed out that the DHS has failed to enforce immigration laws in the past . They also were concerned that , under the original bill , DHS was tasked with devising its own border security plan . What if that plan was n't up to snuff ? Republicans said .
Democrats , on the other hand , feared that an alternative – putting specific border-security goals in place and then making the pathway to citizenship contingent on their fulfillment – would allow a future Congress to short-circuit the route to citizenship for the nation ’ s 11 million undocumented immigrants .
Corker-Hoeven ’ s answer was to establish five `` triggers '' that will increase border security significantly , but which can be definitively implemented in a relatively short period . These are :
The implementation of electronic scanning systems for foreigners entering and exiting the US at all air and seaports .
“ What we ’ ve done is changed the paradigm away from something that is more subjective and can be gamed to something that is very tangible and every American can see and understand , ” Corker said .
Corker estimates that as many as 15 GOP senators could back the bill if the Corker-Hoeven amendments are added . Given that five Republican senators were already backing the bill openly , that would mean an addition of 10 , and perhaps more . Two of the potentially new `` ayes '' – Republican Sens . Mark Kirk of Illinois and Dean Heller of Nevada – announced Thursday that they would all but certainly back an immigration reform bill with the Corker-Hoeven amendments .
The ramped up personnel requirement of the Corker-Hoeven package would boost the cost of the overall bill number by more than $ 30 billion . Previously , members of the Gang of Eight had balked at other Republican proposals for more border agents . But on Tuesday , the Congressional Budget Office found the legislation would cut the deficit by nearly $ 200 billion over the next decade and as much as $ 1 trillion in the subsequent 10 years , opening the way for senators to plow some of those projected deficit savings into more border security personnel .
But some opponents of the immigration bill are not swayed .
The Corker-Hoeven compromise is “ designed to pass the bill , not to fix the bill , ” said Sen. David Vitter ( R ) of Louisiana .
Detractors say that allowing any of the nation ’ s 11 million undocumented immigrants to gain legal status before border security goals are met is a recipe for a repeat of the broken immigration promises of the past .
“ Unless the Gang of Eight is willing to reconsider their legalization-first approach , their legislation is beyond repair . Amnesty can not be improved , ” Michael Needham , CEO of Heritage Action , a conservative advocacy group , said in a statement . The group “ will oppose amendments that , if adopted , will serve as political cover for those Senators seeking to justify their support for amnesty . ”
Democrats weren ’ t thrilled with the proposal either . They see it as an expensive bit of border-security overkill . But they could live with it .
“ It was better than some of the alternatives , ” said Sen. Dick Durbin ( D ) of Illinois , one of the bill ’ s authors . “ You couldn ’ t leave the fate of millions of undocumented Americans in the balance on something so difficult to define and to achieve . ”
And with time growing short before the July 4 recess – Senate majority leader Harry Reid ’ s self-imposed deadline to pass the bill – the Corker-Hoeven amendment was almost certainly the last , best shot for Republicans to make their move on immigration reform .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Asked whether Republicans were facing a make-or-break moment on immigration reform on Thursday , Sen. Bob Menendez ( D ) of New Jersey , another of the bill ’ s authors , motioned to a the open door of a nearby Senate subway car .