For now , most Republicans think Graham can avoid a serious primary challenge . Graham goes all-in on immigration
A red-state Republican senator up for reelection and seen as vulnerable to a primary challenge from the right embraces a plan to allow illegal immigrants to gain U.S. citizenship — a lightning rod for GOP primary voters if there ever was one .
Seems unthinkable on its face . Yet that ’ s precisely what Lindsey Graham did last week . And the remarkable thing is , there ’ s no sign of a backlash in his home state , South Carolina — at least not yet .
It ’ s a reflection of both Graham ’ s political strength and his party ’ s rapid evolution on immigration since its November licking among Latinos .
Long viewed with suspicion among the right wing — in no small part because of his 2007 endorsement of the Kennedy-McCain immigration reform bill — Graham apparently feels safe enough heading into 2014 to stick his neck out again on a politically perilous debate he obviously cares about deeply .
The two-term senator is also convinced the dynamic has changed since 2007 . Immediately after the November election , Graham called Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) and told him he wanted to try to cut a sweeping bipartisan deal on the issue , which few Republicans have wanted to touch in recent years .
Back then , Graham was booed at town halls for supporting reform pushed by President George W. Bush . County parties censured him . Rush Limbaugh described his proposal as “ Grahamnesty . ”
“ There are going to be people who are upset , I understand that , ” Graham told ███ last week . “ I do believe that people in the Republican Party are beginning to understand the politics of immigration . But people do want the borders secured ; they want to get this issue behind us ; and I think I ’ m in a good spot to go back home and tell people that now is the time to get this done . ”
Florida Sen. Marco Rubio , a member , along with Graham , of the Gang of Eight , provides the South Carolina senator some cover on his right flank . And the 2012 electoral thumping that the GOP took , driven partly by Mitt Romney ’ s 27 percent showing with Hispanics , has prompted many Republicans to rethink the party ’ s opposition to a comprehensive overhaul .
One of them is Randy Page , chairman of the GOP committee in South Carolina ’ s 2nd Congressional District . He voted last summer to include tough language in the GOP national platform as South Carolina ’ s representative on the committee that drafted its contents .
“ A number of us , myself included , have looked at the message that the Republican Party has been sending and looking at the message that the Hispanic community sent us in November , and we ’ ve started to listen to what Sen. Rubio and Sen. Graham have been saying , ” he said .
“ Looking specifically at Hispanics , most of them support us on other issues — whether social issues or fiscal issues , ” he added . “ They ’ re saying , ‘ We agree with you on life and school choice and so many other things , ’ but yet we ’ re saying , ‘ You ’ re not welcome . And we want you to go back and self-deport yourself ’ ? That ’ s the wrong rhetoric , and it ’ s , frankly , the wrong solution . ”
What ’ s happening in South Carolina mirrors what ’ s happened among conservative thought leaders nationally . Television host Sean Hannity , columnist Charles Krauthammer and others have announced changes in heart on immigration reform since the election .