Just one month after President Obama signed a back door amnesty executive order for hundreds of thousands of young illegal aliens , his administration is now planning to shut down nine Border Patrol stations , something the people living in border states , Border Patrol agents , local Sheriffs and some Congressman are up in arms about .
Critics of the move warn the closures will undercut efforts to intercept drug and human traffickers in well-traveled corridors north of the U.S.-Mexico border . Though the affected stations are scattered throughout northern and central Texas , and three other states , the coverage areas still see plenty of illegal immigrant activity -- one soon-to-be-shuttered station in Amarillo , Texas , is right in the middle of the I-40 corridor ; another in Riverside , Calif. , is outside Los Angeles .
So what 's the reason for the move ? Homeland Security says it is to reallocate resources to other hot spots but illegal immigration , along with drug and human trafficking , are like water and they flow where the openings are .
`` These deactivations are consistent with the strategic goal of securing America 's borders , and our objective of increasing and sustaining the certainty of arrest of those trying to enter our country illegally , '' CBP spokesman Bill Brooks said in a statement . `` By redeploying and reallocating resources at or near the border , CBP will maximize the effectiveness of its enforcement mandate and align our investments with our mission . ''
But at least one Border Patrol supervisor in Texas has called on local officers to `` voice your concerns '' to elected officials , warning that the `` deactivation '' will remove agents from the Texas Panhandle , among other places . Several members of Congress have asked Border Patrol Chief Michael Fisher to reconsider the plan . And local officials are getting worried about what will happen once the Border Patrol leaves town , since they rely on those federal officials to assist in making immigration arrests .
And as usual , local law enforcement will suffer the consequences of the move .