After one of its locations was accused of tipping off Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) agents about patrons who may have been in the U.S. illegally staying at its locations , Motel 6
The motel chain confirmed on Twitter that company employees were providing daily guest lists to ICE .
`` Over the past several days , it was brought to our attentio that certain local Motel 6 properties in the Phoenix-area were voluntarily providing daily guest lists to Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) . As previously stated , this was undertaken at the local level without the knowledge of senior management . When we became aware of it , it was discontinued , '' the statement read .
Motel 6 added that the company is issuing a directive to all of its locations that sending ICE daily lists of guests staying at Motel 6s is `` prohibited . ''
At least 20 arrests were made by ICE agents at two Phoenix Motel 6s between February and August , the Phoenix News Times reported . The motels were located in regions with a high Latino population .
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS GET OK TO VOTE IN MARYLAND CITY 'S ELECTION
Robert McWhirter , an attorney for a former guest of the motel , Jose Renteria Alvarado , said the business shared its guest logs with the agents , KPHO reported . Alvarado was arrested in June while staying at the motel and could face deportation .
`` I imagine what went on here is they probably took a look at the names on the guest registry and compared that to a database of people that have been deported , '' McWhirter told KPHO .
Alvarado has been deported once previously due to a criminal record , and could now face six months in prison and then be deported .
WHAT IS DACA AND WHY IS THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION ENDING IT ?
Virginia Kice , a spokeswoman for ICE , told KPHO she could not disclose where the agents get their information .
`` The agency receives viable enforcement tips from a host of sources , including other law enforcement agencies , relevant databases , crime victims , and the general public via the agency ’ s tip line and online tip form… ” Kice said .
She added : `` It ’ s worth noting that hotels and motels , including those in the Phoenix area , have frequently been exploited by criminal organizations engaged in highly dangerous illegal enterprises , including human trafficking and human smuggling . ''
Motel 6 's statement said the company apologizes for the incident , and that it will be reviewing and reissuing updates company guidelines .