President Obama , following through on his vow to sidestep Congress , will announce in a prime time TV speech Thursday the executive actions he will take to change U.S. immigration law .
Obama will make his announcement , expected to protect roughly 5 million illegal immigrants from deportation , from the White House at 8 p.m. EST .
The president will go ahead with his plan despite widespread opposition from Capitol Hill Republicans , who have asked him to wait until next year when the GOP controls the House and Senate to try to reform the country ’ s broken immigration system .
Obama is also under intense pressure from Hispanics and much of his liberal base to act now , after promising to act by September , then disappointing them by waiting until after the midterms .
Immigration lawyer Margaret Wong released a statement saying that she had been invited to the White House for a holiday party Wednesday night and that Obama had told her `` I had promised . I had promised . ''
`` He was actually very proud that he 's been able to keep his word , '' Wong said .
At least some of the estimated 5 million illegal immigrants who would be spared from deportation also are expected to be made eligible for work permits . But the eligible immigrants would not be entitled to federal benefits -- including health care tax credits -- under the plan , administration officials said Wednesday .
Late Wednesday , the United Farm Workers announced that Obama had told union President Arturo Rodriguez that at least 250,000 unionized farm workers would be eligible for deportation relief , with at least half that eligible number based in California .
The president in 2012 used executive action to delay deportation for some of the millions of young people brought to the U.S. illegally by their parents .
House Speaker John Boehner has warned Obama that taking executive action on the immigration issue before January would be tantamount to `` playing with fire . ''
And on Wednesday , before the announcement , Boehner aide Michael Steel referred to the president as “ Emperor Obama , ” referring to his attempt to govern alone .
The Democrat-controlled Senate last year passed bipartisan , comprehensive immigration-reform legislation . However , the GOP-controlled House has not passed such a bill .
“ We 've been waiting for a year for House Republicans to come to a vote , ” White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said Wednesday . “ We 're confident it would pass with bipartisan support . ”
He also said the president chose to act because the House has indicated it will not address immigration reform in the next Congress .
Congressional Republicans are already working on a strategy to stop Obama from using executive action , including a plan to submit a temporary spending bill that would cut any funding for related efforts -- like issuing Social Security cards for those to be protected under the Obama change .
The federal government technically runs out of money by December 11 . So the president and Congress failing to promptly reach a budget deal could result in a partial government shutdown . However , Republicans have said they do not intend to submit a budget that Obama would veto and result in a shutdown .
`` What I 'm going to be laying out is the things that I can do with my lawful authority as president to make the system better , even as I continue to work with Congress and encourage them to get a bipartisan , comprehensive bill that can solve the entire problem , '' Obama said in a video posted on Facebook on Wednesday .
Obama is scheduled to host a White House dinner before the speech for 18 congressional Democrats to talk about immigration and other second-term priorities , then travel to Las Vegas to tout his changes .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid is expected to join the president in his home state of Nevada .
Reid said Tuesday that Obama should take executive action as quickly as possible , a shift from last week when he said the president should wait to act until Congress had completed work on the must-pass spending legislation .
`` I believe that when the president decides to do his executive order , he should go big , as big as he can , '' Reid said , adding that he had spoken with Obama on Monday . `` I said he should do something as quickly as he can . ''
However , other Democrats still want Obama to wait on unilateral action for fear such a move will poison spending-bill negotiations .
`` I wish he would let the process work for a few months before he did this , '' said Sen. Jon Tester , D-Montana .