The fear of doing nothing is real . Big week in House on border crisis
House Republicans fear the backlash . They know their summer will be long if they can not pass a bill to deal with the influx of migrant children at the Texas-Mexico border . Most of them know it ’ s the right thing to do — especially in an election year .
But it ’ s still far from clear it can get done .
This week , Republicans find themselves with the opportunity to set the narrative for the August recess . They will either go home having passed a bill to deal with the unaccompanied children coming primarily from Central America — and spend August talking about how Democrats didn ’ t help . Or they will fail , giving way to renewed criticism about their inability to rally around legislation to resolve what they themselves called a crisis .
The course Republicans choose will become clear in a small window of four days .
“ I ’ m encouraged , and I ’ m cautiously optimistic , ” House Homeland Security Chairman Michael McCaul ( R-Texas ) said in an interview . The plan is a “ little more narrow and targeted toward the root cause of the problem , and I think the change in the 2008 law is going to be absolutely essential . ”
But this process , while important , is increasingly looking like a political exercise .
Even if a bill ekes through the House , it ’ s most likely going to die in the Senate . Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) is having trouble passing the Senate ’ s own $ 2.7 billion emergency funding bill . Sen. Mary Landrieu ( D-La . ) , who is facing a tough reelection bid this fall , has already said she will oppose the package , and Sen. Joe Manchin ( D-W.Va. ) signaled concern that the Senate Democratic bill did not touch the 2008 law .
No Senate Republicans have said they support the Senate Democrats ’ legislation — depriving Democrats of additional votes they need to break the 60-vote filibuster barrier .
The Obama administration ’ s request for nearly $ 4 billion in funding for the border crisis is dead , but the GOP is moving with some measure of confidence on its own plan . Initial canvassing by the GOP whip team has shown surprising support for the scaled-back package , which was authored by Texas Rep. Kay Granger .
A House GOP Conference meeting Friday morning was far more calm than Republican leadership expected . Republicans are now focusing on the pared-back bill , which includes changes to a 2008 trafficking law that automatically guarantees unaccompanied children from Central America court hearings , instead of being deported quickly .
The legislation has been trimmed significantly — the boost in funding has gone from $ 1.5 billion to less than $ 1 billion .
The fear of doing nothing is real . Many House Republicans seem more worried about not passing a border crisis bill than they were about the potential of a debt default . Lawmakers don ’ t want to go home for four weeks having passed nothing , with President Barack Obama using his bully pulpit to point out the inaction .
That concern is especially acute from lawmakers representing border states .
“ Have you ever been to a town hall meeting ? ” said Rep. John Carter ( R-Texas ) , when asked why it was important to pass a bill this week .
“ I think we have a big political risk if we leave without doing anything , ” said Rep. Bill Flores ( R-Texas ) . “ The president is a master at trying to deflect his failures onto the Congress . I don ’ t know that this one would stick , but why put us in that situation ? ”
Time is running out . Congress is in session for just 3½ days this week . Republicans have promised to post most bills online three days before a vote , so they need to move quickly . If they post their bill on Monday , they can vote on Wednesday or Thursday .
That leaves just days to lock up the whip process and find 218 Republicans who will vote yes . Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) , incoming Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) and incoming Whip Steve Scalise ( R-La . ) can afford only 16 defections on the bill . Most Democrats aren ’ t expected to vote for it .
Rep. Steve King ( R-Iowa ) , one of the most ardent conservatives in Congress , is advocating for the House to pass a resolution condemning Obama and then pass multiple bills dealing with the border .
“ We need to do something that the House can put its imprimatur on , and that ’ s a resolution , ” King said in an interview . “ This is a man-caused disaster . It ’ s the president , so we need to articulate that before we could move forward with anything . ”
This group of immigration hard-liners is also concerned that a border-crisis bill could be used as a vehicle to approve the Senate ’ s immigration bill . That worry was apparently prevalent enough that Boehner told Republicans in a closed-door meeting Friday there would be no conference over the Senate Gang of Eight ’ s bill and the House GOP ’ s border legislation , according to Rep. Matt Salmon ( R-Ariz. ) .
The leadership is trying to throw this group a bone . It is spreading the word that members might vote on a bill that would roll back an Obama administration program that shields many young undocumented immigrants from deportations — though it ’ s unclear when that vote would occur .