Reports that Donald Trump cut a deal on immigration that did not include funding for a wall raised a red flag for voters in one Pennsylvania district
Reports of a deal between Donald Trump and Democratic leaders to protect undocumented migrants who arrived in the US as children have generated ripples of doubt among the president ’ s supporters , some of whom were alarmed by Trump ’ s statement on Thursday that “ a wall will come later ” .
Dreamers : Trump seems to confirm he 's 'working on a plan ' with Democrats Read more
Trump ’ s campaign promise to build a wall along the US border with Mexico was a main selling point that led conservative elected officials such as Justin Simmons , a state representative in Pennsylvania , to throw their support behind the real-estate developer turned politician .
For Simmons and others , reports that Trump had cut some sort of deal on immigration – one that apparently did not include funding for a border wall – over a cozy White House dinner with House minority leader Nancy Pelosi and Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer raised a red flag .
“ I ’ m actually disappointed in that deal by the president , ” Simmons said . “ I think a lot of people are starting to wonder if he ’ s going soft on that issue . I do not agree with that deal . I think had the wall been a part of the deal , I ’ d be fine with it , but I ’ m not OK with it at all . ”
Before flying to Florida on Thursday to review damage from Hurricane Irma , Trump described his agreement with the Democrats as an exchange of concessions on border security spending for his willingness to sign legislation protecting the 670,000 recipients of the Obama-era Deferred Action on Childhood Arrivals program , or Daca .
“ Subject to getting massive border control , we ’ re working on a plan for Daca . People want to see that happen , ” Trump said , adding : “ The wall will come later . We ’ re right now renovating large sections of wall . ”
Immigration hawks interviewed by ███ on Thursday in a swing district in Pennsylvania that voted for Trump last November raised an eyebrow at the deal as the president described it .
Dean Browning , chairman of the immigration committee of the Lehigh Valley Tea Party , said “ the wall has to come first ” before any move to protect Dreamers , as Daca recipients are known .
“ Before we have any settlement of the Dreamer situation , we need to take steps to make sure that we seal our border , which means build the wall , ” Browning said . “ As long as any deal includes funding for the wall , then I ’ m fine with it . ”
Trump did not appear to be facing a fully-fledged mutiny , yet , over his seeming willingness to put the border wall project on the back burner . A prominent Trump supporter in Pennsylvania , US representative Lou Barletta , an immigration hard-liner who cheered the president ’ s Muslim travel ban and repeal of Daca , declined to criticize Trump on the issue on Thursday .
“ I have no idea what happened in that room last night , so I ’ m not going to even speculate , ” Barletta told reporters .
Browning and others said that they had no problem with the president working with Democrats , if that was the only way forward .
It 's an alpha male thing : what dominant chimpanzees and Donald Trump have in common Read more
“ The president was elected to make progress and he was elected specifically for saying he was going to build the wall , ” said Browning . “ If the Republicans will not cooperate , then he needs to put together whatever coalition to accomplish that . ”
Simmons said : “ I understand the president ’ s frustration with his own party . I understand exactly what he ’ s doing . I ’ m not really OK with it , but I understand it . ”
Both even conservative political activists particularly focused on immigration said there was room in the US on “ humanitarian ” grounds for Dreamers – a view that if polls are correct , reflects the opinion of a majority of Americans .
And if Trump really does put the wall second ? “ I would not be happy with him , ” Browning said .
“ But I ’ m not going to suddenly say I no longer support Donald Trump , and wish we had Hillary Clinton . I would be extremely disappointed in him – but that ’ s not a deal-breaker . ”