Top Republicans are rushing to blunt the growing support for Cornyn 's plan . Gang of Eight seeks alternative border plan
Sen. Marco Rubio initially praised a border security proposal from Sen. John Cornyn , helping to make it the leading choice of conservatives demanding tighter enforcement measures .
Now others in the Gang of Eight fear Cornyn ’ s plan could sink their entire immigration deal .
Sen. John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) is beginning to speak out forcefully against the Cornyn language , bombarding the Texas Republican with critical comments from the Senate floor . Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) is lobbying other Republicans on potential compromises . And Rubio , although he said Wednesday that the Cornyn plan “ dramatically improves the bill , ” is working on a package that others in the Gang of Eight hope could emerge as an alternative .
The fear of some bill proponents : the longer the Cornyn plan hangs out there , the more likely it will become a magnet for Republicans — and accepting anything short of it will be considered a sacrifice . If that happens , then the Gang of Eight won ’ t be able to get the large bipartisan majority that its leaders , including McCain and Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , are seeking .
The border security showdown is the first major challenge to the Senate ’ s bipartisan immigration overhaul since it hit the floor this week , dividing the GOP and testing the ability of the Gang of Eight to negotiate a solution that picks up key Republicans without alienating Democrats .
“ It ’ s a poison pill , ” McCain said of the Cornyn plan . “ Hopefully we can have an alternative that satisfies some of the concerns without killing the bill . … It ’ s not possible for us to support his amendment as it is presently written because it is a poison pill . ”
But with no Gang-sanctioned alternative yet , a number of Republicans — including some viewed as swing votes — are gravitating toward the Cornyn plan . It would block undocumented immigrants from gaining green cards until the government meets certain border security metrics , which Democrats view as so subjective that they may never be reached .
There is grumbling among some Democrats that they ’ re in this bind because Rubio — a key Gang member — made border security an issue by saying it needed to be tightened in order to get 60 Senate votes . Then , the Florida Republican embraced the Cornyn plan when it was announced last week . And on Sean Hannity ’ s radio show Wednesday , Rubio described it as “ an excellent place to start in terms of having that conversation . ”
But when pressed by Hannity to say he wouldn ’ t back reform unless complete control of the border is guaranteed , Rubio hedged .
“ The thing I ’ m trying to avoid is all that ultimatum language because I think it undermines what we ’ re trying to do , ” he said . “ I ’ m not here to blow anything up . I want to make this thing better . ”
Throughout the debate , Rubio has sought to publicly align himself with conservatives and keep his distance from the Gang of Eight , even as he continues to privately work with the group . The members have tolerated the seemingly-conflicting messages at times from Rubio because his continued involvement is critical to lining up GOP votes – and the Gang still truly believe that Rubio is committed to the bill and won ’ t agree to changes that gut the delicate compromise .
But the machinations on border security is sharpening the divide , at least publicly , between Rubio and the rest of the group .