Community outrage forced the federal government to nix its plans to house illegal immigrant children at a defunct college in rural Virginia , but the school fought back this month with discrimination complaints accusing both the Obama administration and its own neighbors of bigotry .
St. Paul ’ s College and nonprofit Housing Opportunities Made Equal ( HOME ) of Virginia say local officials in Lawrenceville , Virginia , and surrounding Brunswick County stirred up racial animosity against the children . In a separate complaint , they accused the federal Health and Human Services Department of caving to pressure and canceling a lease , also violating anti-discrimination rules .
“ No one should block someone ’ s housing opportunity based on race or national origin , ” said Helen O ’ Beirne Hardiman , the fair housing director for HOME . “ It ’ s unfair , and it ’ s completely illegal for government officials to step in to a private deal and say we don ’ t want Central American children coming to this community . ”
She and St. Paul ’ s lodged a complaint with the Housing and Urban Development Department , targeting the local officials , and filed another discrimination complaint with HHS ’ s own Office for Civil Rights , arguing the department broke the law by canceling the deal .
Local officials bristled at the notion they did anything wrong , saying they merely asked for a community meeting so HHS and the college could explain their plans . More than 1,000 people showed up , and sentiment ran strongly against housing the children .
“ I don ’ t have anything to hide or run from . I don ’ t think I did anything wrong , ” said Brunswick County Sheriff B.K . Roberts , whom the complaints accused of stirring opposition . “ I think the U.S. Constitution clearly says that I have the opportunity for freedom of speech . I spoke to oppose . That ’ s what I did . I still oppose it . ”
He said that his opposition to the plan was based on the federal government ’ s “ mishandling ” of the situation .
“ There were too many questions left unanswered . There were too many inconsistencies , ” said Sheriff Roberts . “ It was just poorly handled by the federal government . The result was that we had a public forum and the general sentiment there was opposition . ”
The surge of children — more than 66,000 have crossed the border and been detained by the Homeland Security Department from Oct. 1 , 2013 , through Aug. 31 — has strained federal budgets and tested local governments in all sorts of ways , including having to face community backlash .
Some of the antipathy stems from reports of communicable diseases within the illegal immigrant population , but much of the backlash is a reaction to the broader illegal immigration debate , according to those on both sides of that fight .
The public forum Sheriff Roberts and other local community leaders called saw more than 1,000 people show up , with sentiment overwhelmingly opposed .
“ No way do I want to be living anywhere with armed guards and a security fence , ” said Donna Lewis , who said she moved with her grandchildren from Washington , D.C. , to Lawrenceville seeking a quiet life .
HHS had planned to send about 500 children , most of them males age 15 to 17 , to the campus , where they would benefit from St. Paul ’ s dormitories , cafeteria , classrooms , gymnasium and athletic fields .
College President Millard “ Pete ” Stith thought it was a win-win — the feds needed the space , the college needed the money , and the community needed jobs . He alerted both town and county officials , whom he said didn ’ t give him any pushback .
“ This is like manna from heaven , ” he said . “ I ’ m walking around with my chest sticking out , because I ’ m saying me and my partners in the county and town are going to be benefitting from this project . Silly me . ”
In the complaints , filed with both HUD and HHS , Mr. Stith and the HOME group point to a chain of events that they said show the local officials reacted to discriminatory impulses from the community , which were captured in some of the more pointed comments at the June 19 town meeting about potential diseases or gang affiliations .
“ They shouted down people who got up and even came close to saying this is a good deal , ” Mr. Stith said . “ It was horrible . I know that if I were an official from these communities , I would not have wanted the world to see how my folks reacted to other people coming in who were different from me . ”
In their official complaint with HUD , Mr. Stith and the HOME group said some of the statements made by residents were “ facially discriminatory ” while others were “ thinly veiled coded language ” showing antipathy based on national origin .
The local officials had also fired off a letter to Rep. Robert Hurt , the congressman who represents the area . Mr. Hurt then wrote to HHS on June 16 asking them to suspend the lease and provide any information the local officials wanted .
A day after the town hall meeting , on June 20 , HHS said it was canceling the lease .
Canceling the contract put St. Paul ’ s out the $ 160,000 a month it had been promised and put the school back in the financial straits that had caused it to shut its doors to college students in 2013 .
Mr. Hurt ’ s office declined to comment . He is not the subject of either of the complaints , which focus on the local officials and HHS , which is charged under federal law with caring for the children .
Ms. Hardiman , the official from HOME , said documents that the nonprofit group has obtained under the Freedom of Information Act indicate to them that the local officials instigated the backlash through what she called “ unofficial actions behind the scenes . ”
“ The causation , if you look at the time line , it ’ s so clear they were behind the backlash , and so our position is they were responsible for that discrimination , ” she said .
She said the local officials never should have had any say in the decisions , since St. Paul ’ s was already zoned to be able to handle the children .
Lawrenceville Mayor William H. “ Bill ” Herrington said he would reserve comment until the town receives an official notice of the complaint . However , he said that he didn ’ t think conducting a community meeting for residents to learn about the federal government plan was inappropriate .
Mr. Herrington was mayor-elect when the community meeting was held in June and helped conduct the meeting . He said the community meeting was advertised as an a forum for residents to get information from federal officials about the plans to shelter the children .
Mr. Herrington also insisted that the town and the college remain on good terms .
“ Our relationship with the college is great . It ’ s my alma mater , ” he said . “ We ’ ve been asked by the college recently to work out something , really to forgive the water bill , ” he said . “ So we ’ re working with them . They are trying to get that resolved . ”