On Wednesday morning , Dianne received an alarming call . It was her fiancé , dialing her from the chicken processing plant in a nearby central Mississippi town where he worked long shifts deboning meat .
“ ICE is here ! ” he yelled . In the background , Dianne could hear other laborers terrified . The panic was palpable . One worker called out in Spanish , “ Ayúdame ! [ Help me ! ] ”
Dianne ’ s fiancé , who came to the country more than two decades ago from Mexico without authorization , told her he had no way out and would not be able to escape immigration enforcement agents . His voice trembling , he told Dianne that she needed to make a promise before he got off the line : “ Take care of my kids . ”
What the workers at the plant didn ’ t realize in that moment was they were about to be arrested in one of the largest worksite operations ever conducted by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents . In total , some 680 suspected undocumented workers were arrested Wednesday after ICE ’ s Homeland Security Investigations agents swept through seven agricultural plants in the state as part of a criminal investigation . Deportation officers and HSI agents arrested the workers as they served criminal search warrants at the food plants .
Dianne ’ s fiancé is the father to three children , ages 13 , 15 , and 19 , with his ex-wife , who was also undocumented and worked at a separate food plant in the area .
Not long after Dianne ’ s phone call with her fiancé , she found out that the kids ’ mother was also arrested . Dianne , who requested her last name not be used for fear of consequences for her fiancé , sped to the local school , where she witnessed other adults coming to pick up children whose parents had been arrested . Some parents , she said , weren ’ t able to retrieve kids because they hadn ’ t been listed as authorized guardians .
On her way out of the school , she saw one girl looking confused , not knowing where to go because her parents had been arrested too .
“ They were crying . They were shocked . They ’ re just worried , ” Dianne said of her fiancé ’ s children . “ I ’ m just trying to stay strong for them . I ’ m trying to remain as calm as possible . It ’ s one thing to know this could happen but it is another to see it happening . This is heart-wrenching . They are scared . ”
Details of the targets of the immigration operation , which was conducted in partnership with the local US attorney ’ s office , were not immediately available as officials said the investigation was ongoing .
“ We are a nation of laws , and we will remain so by continuing to enforce our laws and ensuring that justice is done , ” said US Attorney Mike Hurst .
ICE officials said that each worker arrested would be evaluated for potential release on humanitarian grounds .