ALBANY , N.Y. – Federal immigration and border officials have been blocked from New York 's DMV database , a move that keeps them from accessing data that can be used to help determine whether a vehicle owner has a criminal history or a warrant for their arrest .
New York 's Green Light Law took effect Saturday , allowing those without legal immigration status to apply for driver 's licenses in New York .
But the law also included a provision prohibiting state DMV officials from providing any of its data to entities that enforce immigration law unless a judge orders them to , leading the state to cut off database access to at least three federal agencies last week .
Among them were U.S. Customs and Border Protection , or CBP — which patrols the U.S.-Canada border in New York — and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement , or ICE .
Federal officials appeared caught off guard by the change last week , which was laid out in the state law approved in June .
The information federal officers can access from the database is important to keep them and the public safe , said Mark Morgan , CBP 's acting commissioner .
“ New York ’ s Green Light Law is detrimental to CBP and ICE , '' Morgan said in a statement Tuesday .
`` The information we receive from New York state is vital to our missions , and blocking federal law enforcement officers from accessing it creates a significant threat to both officer and public safety . ”
The data is `` vital to building out these criminal cases , identifying criminal suspects , and enhancing officer safety , '' according to the Department of Homeland Security .
Border crisis : One deadly week reveals where the immigration crisis begins — and where it ends
The DMV database allows officers to quickly access information about a vehicle registration holder , including their traffic history . The data can then be used to determine whether a driver is on a sex-offender registry or has a criminal history and whether they have outstanding warrants .
Officers often run license plates through the database during traffic stops and similar encounters .
New York 's Democratic-led Legislature and Gov . Andrew Cuomo approved the Green Light Law in June , allowing immigrants living in the country without legal permission to use foreign-issued documents to prove their age and identity so they can apply for driving privileges .
The law reversed the state 's post-9/11 policy of denying driving privileges to immigrants without legal immigration status .
State lawmakers inserted the data-blocking provision into the bill a week before it passed , when immigrant organizations and Cuomo expressed concern that ICE and CBP would be able to easily obtain information about immigrants seeking a license , perhaps making it easier for them to be deported .
Specifically , the provision says DMV `` shall not disclose '' any records or information to `` any agency that primarily enforces immigration law . ''
The only exceptions are if the DMV commissioner is served with `` a lawful court order or judicial warrant , '' according to the law .
Even then , the DMV has to notify the person at the center of a federal agency 's inquiry within three days .
DMV spokeswoman Lisa Koumjian said the state agency is bound by the law . No negotiations are underway to restore the federal agencies ' access to the database , she said .
`` Under the Green Light Law , no DMV data of any kind can be shared with an agency that primarily enforces immigration law , which means ICE , Customs and Border Protection and Citizenship and Immigration Services do not have access to data unless the DMV is presented with a valid judge-signed court order , subpoena or judicial warrant , '' Koumjian said in a statement .
Report : US to send asylum seekers to Honduras , blocking them from making a claim in America
Anu Joshi , the New York Immigration Coalition 's senior director of immigration policy , said supporters of the Green Light Law are proud it has `` some of the strongest privacy protections of any such law in the country . ''
At least a dozen other states allow undocumented immigrants to apply for driving privileges .
`` We should be clear that this law does n't just protect the data of undocumented immigrants ; it protects the data of all New Yorkers who are applying for a standard license , '' Joshi said Tuesday . `` It treats all New Yorkers who are applying for a standard license the same . ''
President Donald Trump 's Department of Justice weighed in earlier this month , intervening in Rensselaer County Clerk Frank Merola 's lawsuit that sought to block the Green Light Law from taking effect .
Trump , a Republican , has made tough immigration policies a central piece of his presidency .
The DOJ only weighed in on the data-blocking provision , calling it `` legally suspect '' and questioning whether it violates federal law .
But U.S. District Judge Gary Sharpe later dismissed Merola 's lawsuit entirely without considering the DOJ questions , deciding Merola did n't have the legal capacity to sue .
U.S. Rep. Elise Stefanik , R-N.Y. , wrote a letter Friday to Cuomo , a Democrat , urging him to restore the federal agencies ' access to the DMV information .
She questioned whether citizens with enhanced driver 's licenses — which allow the license holder to cross the Canadian border — would be able to re-enter the U.S. if Customs agents do n't have access to the database .
A CBP spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment on whether that 's the case .
`` Hamstringing ( Border Patrol agents ' ) ability to effectively execute their jobs is a huge mistake and I urge you to consider the safety of all Americans by immediately reversing this decision , '' Stefanik wrote .