Washington ( CNN ) – Making an argument for overhauling the nation 's immigration system Friday to a crowd of conservative activists , former Florida Gov . Jeb Bush claimed immigrants were `` more fertile '' and thus a great benefit to American society .
His remark appeared to be an inarticulate reference to immigrants ' fertility rates , which data show are higher than native-born Americans .
`` Immigrants create far more businesses than native-born Americans over the last 20 years . Immigrants are more fertile , and they love families , and they have more intact families , and they bring a younger population . Immigrants create an engine of economic prosperity , '' Bush said at the annual Faith and Freedom conference in the nation 's capital .
He prefaced his remarks with an analysis of America 's demographic struggles , saying that the rate of Americans entering retirement could n't be sustained by the current size of the workforce . Economists have long warned that government programs for seniors like Social Security and Medicare face long-term funding problems .
Last year , trustees projected Social Security could pay promised benefits in full through 2036 , after which the program could only afford to pay 77 % of them . Social Security has already begun paying out more in benefits than it takes in from workers ' payroll taxes .
Bush argued Friday the problem lay in an imbalance between working Americans paying taxes and the number of older Americans – living longer – who have been promised government support in their retirement .
`` We 're going to have fewer workers taking care of a larger number of people the country has a social contract with to be able to allow them to retire with dignity and purpose , '' Bush said . `` We can not do that with the fertility rates that we have in our country . We 're below break-even today . ''
Part of the solution , he said , was encouraging more legal immigration that would add people to the workforce , thereby creating more payroll tax revenue .
`` The one way that we can rebuild the demographic pyramid is to fix a broken immigration system to allow for people to come and learn English and play by our rules , to embrace our values and to pursue their dreams in our country with a vengeance to create more opportunities for all of us , '' said Bush , a longtime proponent for comprehensive immigration reform .
`` This is a conservative idea , '' he continued . `` If we do this we will rebuild our country in a way that will allow us to grow . If we do n't do it we will be in decline , since productivity of this country is dependent upon young people who are equipped to work hard . ''
Bush , unlike many Republicans , has backed a pathway to legal status for undocumented immigrants , provided they pay fines and learn English . Such measures have been staunchly opposed by conservatives , who say allowing people who came to the United States illegally to remain here amounts to amnesty .
Bush 's arguments for immigration reform were met with near silence from the conservative crowd Friday , and following his speech the former Florida governor received a polite standing ovation . Comparatively , Rep. Michele Bachmann , who used parts of her speech to decry the bill backed by a bipartisan group of eight senators as `` amnesty '' for undocumented immigrants , received loud applause .
Bush , who is speculated to be considering a run for the 2016 GOP presidential nomination , made his remarks the same week U.S. census data indicated rapid demographic changes , including showing for the first time that more non-Hispanic Whites died last year than were born .
The data also showed that Asians were the nation 's fastest-growing demographic group , rising in population 2.9 % last year . The Hispanic population grew by 2.2 % , which the Census Bureau primarily attributed to a greater number of births than deaths .
In total , non-Hispanic Whites were the only racial group to have a negative rate of `` natural increase '' last year – meaning there were more deaths than births . Hispanics had 872,840 more births than deaths ; African-Americans had 435,182 ; and Asians had 211,537 .
Here 's a glimpse of how Twitter users reacted to Bush 's comment :
Jeb Bush : `` Immigrants are more fertile . '' Really ? Because every time I turn around , there 's another Bush running for president . — CC : Indecision ( @ indecision ) June 14 , 2013
`` Immigrants are more fertile , '' said Jeb Bush , the smartest member of the Bush family . — CC : Indecision ( @ indecision ) June 14 , 2013
Well it 's a bit of a relief to know Jeb Bush has no interest in ever being president . — John Fugelsang ( @ JohnFugelsang ) June 14 , 2013
So according to @ JebBush , I am much more fertile than my US born white counterparts . Hmmm . # Stuffthatshouldntcomeoutofyourmouth . — Maria Cardona ( @ MariaTCardona ) June 14 , 2013
Jeb Bush : if we had to have a Bush , why not THAT one ? — Ororo Monroe ( @ DearLeader10 ) June 14 , 2013
Jeb Bush gets things wrong even when he gets them right . Supports immigration bill . Why ? Because immigrants are `` more fertile '' . # facepalm — Rich Brony Quan ( @ blunted215 ) June 14 , 2013
Neato RT @ AaronBlakeWP : Jeb Bush : U.S. economy needs immigrants because they ’ re ‘ more fertile ’ http : //t.co/PAsxeu0D0q — Nigel Cameron ( @ nigelcameron ) June 14 , 2013
Jeb Bush thinks immigration is good for the economy ( which I agree with ) because immigrants are more fertile ( ... and then there 's that ) . — Flick ( @ FlickFM ) June 14 , 2013
Stay classy Jeb Bush .... lol — Kevin Linney ( @ kevinlinney ) June 14 , 2013