Schumer , McCain , Bennet and Flake are among those negotiating the details . The next immigration hurdle
It ’ s not the inclusion of a pathway to citizenship that has immigration reform proponents worried — at this point , it ’ s clear that this will be part of any deal Senate negotiators produce .
The prospects of a bipartisan immigration deal improved dramatically with the weekend announcement of an agreement between labor and business on a visa program for low-skilled workers . But the real test will come after the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight reveals the fine print of the entire reform package next week .
Nowhere is that more true than on the pathway to citizenship .
The arcane details and sensitive politics in the decision to go hard , soft or somewhere in between on the hurdles to legalization has so far been part of an under-the-radar debate , while attention has focused on sticking points such as the low-skilled visas .
But with the Gang of Eight taking another step closer to a deal , the balance it strikes on the path to citizenship details — including penalties , fees and requirements for legal permanent residence — now will be as consequential as any of the higher-profile issues . It will help determine both the political viability of the bill and how many of the country ’ s 11 million undocumented immigrants ultimately get a shot at citizenship .
“ The sleeper issue in immigration reform is , do all 11 million people qualify for legal status or is it a fraction ? ” said Deepak Bhargava , executive director of the Center for Community Change , a pro-reform group . “ This issue is the potential deal-breaker in the whole mix . If the requirements are so onerous that only a fraction of eligible people can actually adjust their status and get legal , there will be a hugely negative reaction to the bill in the immigrant community . ”
The Gang of Eight has sought to make the pathway tough enough so that Republicans can convince their party that it ’ s not amnesty — but not so onerous that they lose support from the left , and risk repeating mistakes from past reform efforts .
Democrats are under intense pressure from the White House , labor unions and immigrant advocates to craft as clear of a path as possible to legal status and citizenship . That means no border-security benchmarks that must be met before undocumented immigrants can secure citizenship . No exorbitant fines and fees . And realistic requirements for proving work history , learning English and passing criminal background checks .