After saying he would sign a Dream Act in New Jersey , Gov . Chris Christie on Tuesday raised new objections to the version his state Assembly is getting ready to send him — raising questions about whether he is playing politics or trying to win the best possible deal from the Legislature .
Mr. Christie said during his recent re-election campaign that he would sign a bill granting in-state tuition to illegal immigrants , but has balked at the specific bill winding its way through the Legislature .
The Republican governor said he has three objections : The bill allows financial aid in addition to in-state tuition , treats out-of-state illegal immigrants who attend private school in New Jersey better than out-of-state citizens who do the same , and doesn ’ t have a sunset date .
“ I ’ m for tuition equality . I ’ m not for adding tuition aid grants , ” Mr. Christie said at a news conference Monday .
The governor won re-election a month ago with significant Hispanic support — 51 percent according to exit polls .
Immigrant rights groups cheered Mr. Christie ’ s victory as a sign that Republicans can compete for Hispanic votes if they soften their stance on immigration . They compared that with the loss of GOP gubernatorial nominee Kenneth T. Cuccinelli II in Virginia , who took a stricter stance on immigration en route to a narrow defeat .
But Mr. Christie ’ s new hurdles could complicate his pitch to Hispanics , particularly since in-state tuition has become one of several key immigration litmus tests for governors eyeing presidential runs .
Giancarlo Tello , a leader with the New Jersey Dream Act Coalition , said it ’ s up to Mr. Christie to be constructive in the debate . Speaking before Mr. Christie ’ s news conference , he said activists were looking to the governor for guidance .
“ If he ’ s truly genuine about wanting those issues to pass , he should come work with the Assembly and the advocates and say this is what I want , ” Mr. Tello said .
The state Senate last month passed its version of the bill , which had been pending for months .
It would grant in-state tuition rates to students who attended New Jersey high schools for at least three years , who graduated from a school in the state , and who said they were trying to seek legal status .
If Mr. Christie objected to that language , Senate leaders said , he could have said something earlier .
But speaking to reporters Monday , Mr. Christie said he never meant during the campaign to say he supported a specific bill .
“ I thought the Legislature should move in the lame-duck session toward tuition equality in New Jersey — period . That ’ s what I said . I didn ’ t support any particular piece of legislation , ” the governor said .
In an interview with The ███ before Mr. Christie spoke , Assemblyman Gordon Johnson , who is chief sponsor of the Dream Act in the state ’ s lower house , said he plans to take up the Senate version .
The only change he would seek — and it ’ s unclear whether it would need to be amended to the Senate bill or added as a budget item — would be to find enough money so that Dream Act students don ’ t siphon limited funds away from others who are receiving financial aid .
He dismissed Mr. Christie ’ s concern about out-of-state Dream Act youths getting special treatment by saying that if they are attending private schools , their families are wealthy enough that they won ’ t need in-state college tuition rates .
Mr. Johnson said a bill will reach Mr. Christie ’ s desk and the governor will have a decision to make .
“ He made two public statements supporting the bill . Now he has one . He has to do what he has to do now , ” Mr. Johnson said .
At his news conference , Mr. Christie said the burden is on the Legislature .
“ If they send me a clean tuition equity bill , I will sign it , ” he said . “ If they don ’ t , I won ’ t sign it . ”
The New Jersey Office of Legislative Services said it was unable to calculate how much the Dream Act would cost the state ’ s public college system in lost tuition payments . The office said state schools might end up increasing the number of out-of-state students they accept in order to make up for that lost revenue .
Mr. Christie is facing pressure from editorial boards in his state that have accused him of a “ flip-flop . ”
“ The real reason for his flip-flop ? Christie has his eyes on the presidency . And if he has to roll over Latinos to get there , he ’ ll do it , ” The Star-Ledger said in an editorial Sunday .
In the 2012 Republican presidential primary , Texas Gov . Rick Perry took heat for having signed the country ’ s first in-state tuition bill more than a decade earlier .
Mr. Christie appeared to be opposed to in-state tuition early on . According to press accounts , he criticized the federal Dream Act , which would have legalized young illegal immigrants and granted them eligibility for in-state tuition rates , saying that would have amounted to “ subsidizing ” them with taxpayers ’ money .
But in an appearance in October with the Latino Leadership Alliance of New Jersey , Mr. Christie announced that he supported the state Dream Act and said he wanted it to pass in the lame-duck legislative session , which runs through mid-January .