Even as President Obama extolled the contributions of gay citizens Thursday , a clash over gay rights on Capitol Hill was threatening to unravel his cherished goal of immigration reform .
Mr. Obama celebrated Lesbian , Gay , Bisexual and Transgender Pride Month at the White House with champagne served to same-sex couples , gay administration officials and other guests .
“ From Minnesota to Maryland , from the United States Senate to the NBA , it ’ s clear we ’ re reaching a turning point , ” Mr. Obama said . “ We have become not just more accepting ; we ’ ve become more loving as a country and as a people . Hearts and minds change with time ; laws do too . ”
The bond between Mr. Obama and gays is clear . A Pew Research poll released Thursday found that 76 percent of LGBT adults view Mr. Obama favorably , while his approval rating with the general public is 47 percent . But the president who ended the military ’ s policy of “ don ’ t ask , don ’ t tell ” is in a jam with gay-rights groups over immigration .
Activists are pressuring the president to take a stronger stand on an amendment to the Senate immigration reform bill that would extend benefits to gay partners of American citizens in states where gay marriages are legal . Federal law doesn ’ t recognize gay marriages .
The proposal was introduced by Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick J. Leahy , Vermont Democrat , who also wants to ensure that same-sex partners of American citizens can remain in the U.S. without fear of being separated and deported by the government . Several key Republican senators say Mr. Leahy ’ s proposals would kill overall immigration reform .
“ If this bill has something in it that gives gay couples immigration rights and so forth , it kills the bill . I ’ m done , ” said Sen. Marco Rubio , Florida Republican and a key member of the bipartisan “ Gang of Eight ” senators who wrote the legislation . “ I don ’ t think that ’ s going to happen , and it shouldn ’ t happen . This is already a difficult enough issue as it is . ”
Sen. Lindsey Graham , South Carolina Republican , said that adding gay marriage benefits would dissolve the coalition of religious groups that is supporting the bill .
The collapse of the immigration bill would be another huge blow to Mr. Obama , who lost a high-profile fight this spring on gun control and is eager to pocket a significant legislative achievement in his second term .
Mr. Obama has pointed to the legislation , written by four Republicans and four Democrats , as proof that he and congressional Republicans are capable of working together . Such examples are few , and it ’ s not clear whether a more active and visible role by Mr. Obama would help or hurt the bill ’ s chances on Capitol Hill .
Although Mr. Obama is fond of saying he has run his last race for public office , he also knows that gays provided significant financial support for his re-election . By one estimate , gays accounted for one out of five “ bundlers ” who raised at least $ 500,000 for Mr. Obama ’ s campaign last year .
The leader of a gay Republican group said Mr. Obama should take a stronger stand on the proposal to allow same-sex partners to stay in the U.S .
“ If an immigration bill is passed by Congress this year , then it should include this important provision , ” said Jimmy LaSalvia , executive director of GOProud Inc. , a group of gay Republicans . “ The president could do more to push for inclusion of the gay provision , but he doesn ’ t appear to be very involved in the process at all , not just on that issue . ”
Mr. LaSalvia said the proposal should not be considered a “ poison pill ” for the overall bill .
“ I can ’ t understand why allowing a few thousand gay American citizens to sponsor their partners for legal immigration is more objectionable than granting amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants , ” he said .
White House spokesman Jay Carney said the president ’ s interest is to make sure the Senate doesn ’ t squander “ a unique opportunity ” to reform the nation ’ s immigration system .
“ There are obviously a lot of amendments that will be considered , ” Mr. Carney said . “ We urge every senator as he or she considers this legislation to understand that no one can get everything they want out of this process . ”
Mr. Leahy has not said whether he will demand a vote on his amendment . He withheld his proposal when the bill was before the Judiciary Committee , because adding it in there almost certainly would have scuttled the legislation .
The gay-rights amendment is one of about 100 amendments filed in the first 48 hours of the immigration debate .
The Senate held its first vote on amendments Thursday and rejected a Republican proposal for stiffer border security standards .
As written , the bill grants legal status to illegal immigrants in six months , but withholds a full pathway to citizenship for at least a decade while the government takes steps to improve security along the border with Mexico .
But Sen. Chuck Grassley , Iowa Republican , said enhanced border security should come even before legalization . Mr. Grassley said tying the two together is the only way to make sure the government follows through on its security promises .
Sen. Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat and one of the bill ’ s chief authors , said putting security first would ruin the bill . He argued that full security would take too long and leave illegal immigrants in limbo .
“ What do we do for five , six years until the border is fully secure ? It ’ s going to take awhile to do it . We need to bring equipment there , we need to build fences there , ” he said .