As Caravan Of Migrants Heads North , Trump Threatens To Close Southern U.S. Border
A large group of mostly Honduran refugees , reportedly numbering into the thousands , has crossed into Guatemala in a caravan that is believed headed to the U.S. border .
Hundreds of migrants have arrived at the Guatemalan border town of Tecún Umán , along the southern border of Mexico , James Fredrick reports for NPR . Organizers of the caravan say they are waiting for thousands more to join them in the coming days , before attempting to cross the Mexican border .
Mexico has ramped up security along its southern border and says that only migrants with valid paperwork will be allowed to enter Mexico — namely , a passport , which most of those in the caravan do not have .
`` You can tell Mexican security forces are preparing because there are dozens of police in riot gear waiting here for the imminent arrival of this caravan , '' Frederick told NPR , while standing on a bridge that links Mexico and Guatemala .
Most of those who had gathered were from Honduras , he said , but there were also people from El Salvador and Guatemala .
Judy , a 34-year-old woman in the group who requested that her last name not be used , said that her home country of Honduras has become very dangerous : no safety , jobs , and the hospitals lack medicine . Basic freedoms are being oppressed by the government of Juan Orlando Hernández , she said , and Honduras simply feels unlivable for her right now .
Mexico 's interior ministry said it would ask the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for support , as it prepares to receive possibly thousands of refugee requests in the coming days .
The Mexican government says that the migrants may apply for asylum in Mexico , but that they 'll have to do so from a detention center . Mexico warned that if migrants are caught crossing illegally , they will be detained and deported .
With the midterm elections in the U.S. just weeks away , President Donald Trump kept immigration front and center , by threatening to close the entire U.S. border with Mexico to prevent the migrants from entering .
`` I will call up the U.S. Military and CLOSE OUR SOUTHERN BORDER ! '' he tweeted Thursday .
In the spring , Trump tweeted angrily when an earlier caravan of Central Americans made their way through Mexico with the intention of crossing into the U.S . He threatened to cut foreign aid to Honduras and send the military to the border . In the end , some of the migrants went home and a few hundred crossed the San Ysidro port of entry , south of San Diego , and requested asylum .
It 's uncertain how the president would block the current group of immigrants from crossing at a legal port of entry .
Longstanding federal and international laws allow immigrants to present themselves at a border crossing and seek protection as refugees . They are referred for a `` credible fear '' of persecution or torture screening to an asylum officer , who decides if they should be deported or continue the asylum process .
Recent presidents , including Trump , have deployed National Guard troops to the southwestern boundary to assist Border Patrol in catching and processing unauthorized immigrants . But they have not blocked the ports of entry , which are under the control of agents from U.S. Customs and Border Protection .
President Woodrow Wilson sent active-duty troops to the border during the Mexican Revolution , roughly 100 years ago , to stop raiders such as Pancho Villa from crossing into border states . Today , the migrants Trump wants to keep out appear to be mainly young Hondurans , including parents with small children , who are seeking asylum in the United States . Trump tweeted there are `` MANY CRIMINALS '' in the caravan , without providing evidence .
Trump has long maintained that `` catch-and-release loopholes '' in U.S. immigration laws lure immigrants here from Central America .
The Department of Homeland Security is compiling year-end figures for apprehensions at the southern border . DHS Spokeswoman Katie Waldman wrote in an email to NPR that the department 's totals will likely show `` record numbers of families arriving illegally in the United States this year . ''
While thousands of immigrant families are being arrested at the border every week in places like Texas ' Rio Grande Valley and Nogales , Arizona , the numbers are still far below the peak in 2000 , when 1.6 million unauthorized immigrants were arrested .
The difference is that the big numbers 18 years ago were mainly single Mexican males who were quickly deported , whereas the current surge is primarily made up of families seeking amnesty , which allows them to remain in the U.S. for months or years while their case grinds through the backlogged immigration courts .
Waldman added that the agency `` is examining all options to secure the border . ''