California became the first state to sue the Trump administration over a new visa rule that says international students must leave the United States if all their classes are online , the state ’ s Attorney General Xavier Becerra announced Thursday .
The suit , which is supported by California State University system ( CSU ) and California Community Colleges officials , claims it unfairly harms international students and puts `` themselves , teachers , other students and the community at large at risk of getting and spreading the coronavirus -- or be subject to deportation . ''
`` Shame on the Trump Administration for risking not only the education opportunities for students who earned the chance to go to college , but now their health and well-being as well , ” Becerra said in a statement . “ Not on our watch…Today ’ s lawsuit rests on America ’ s enduring principle that everyone who works hard and plays by the rules can earn a chance to get ahead . We 'll see the Trump Administration in court . ''
CSU schools plan to mainly hold online classes in the fall due to the virus , The Los Angeles Times reported .
Cal State Chancellor Timothy White called the policy “ callous and inflexible , ” adding it places thousands of international students into an “ extremely difficult position , ” The Times reported .
COLLINS URGES DHS TO 'IMMEDIATELY RESCIND ' NEW ICE POLICY ON FOREIGN STUDENTS , WARNS OF 'LONG-LASTING HARM '
Under the new policy , F-1 and M-1 visa holders `` must depart the country or take other measures , such as transferring to a school with in-person instruction to remain in lawful status , '' Immigration and Customs Enforcement said in a statement , according to NBC News .
Sen. Susan Collins , R-Maine , in a letter to Acting Homeland Security Secretary Chad Wolf , called for the extension of an exemption adopted by ICE in March through the end of the 2020-2021 school year . The ICE exemption allowed international students with F-1 visas to attend classes online while retaining their visa status .
`` The exemption worked and ought to be extended , ” Collins wrote . “ Its termination on short-notice is especially troubling given that the Student and Exchange Visitor Program ’ s ( SEVP ) new guidance requires colleges and universities to certify by July 15—just one week from now—whether to not fall semester courses will be offered online only , in-person only , or using a hybrid model . ”
The rules would also hurt colleges already struggling financially amid the outbreak since many colleges rely on international student tuition . California has more students on international visas than any other state , NBC reported .
“ In addition to being cruel , Defendants ’ attempt at a policy change to force in-person learning in the middle of a pandemic is absurd and the essence of arbitrary and capricious conduct in violation of the Administrative Procedure Act , ” the suit says , according to the Times .
The lawsuit seeks an injunction to block the policy and separately the University of California plans to seek a restraining order as well .
Becerra said it is the 86th lawsuit he ’ s filed against the administration .