President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE on Monday urged Mexico to deport Central American migrants who are attempting to reach the U.S. and threatened to permanently shut down the southern border .
`` Mexico should move the flag waving Migrants , many of whom are stone cold criminals , back to their countries , '' Trump wrote on Twitter . `` Do it by plane , do it by bus , do it anyway you want , but they are NOT coming into the U.S.A. We will close the Border permanently if need be . Congress , fund the WALL ! ''
Mexico should move the flag waving Migrants , many of whom are stone cold criminals , back to their countries . Do it by plane , do it by bus , do it anyway you want , but they are NOT coming into the U.S.A. We will close the Border permanently if need be . Congress , fund the WALL ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) November 26 , 2018
The president 's tweet came the morning after Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) agents clashed with a group of migrants who rushed the southern border .
CBP on Sunday shut down the busy San Ysidro port of entry near San Diego as the migrants approached . Tensions flared further when dozens of migrants broke away from a larger group to try and cross the border .
CBP said in a statement that officers fired tear gas into the crowd after attempted illegal crossings and after some migrants threw rocks at border agents .
Photos quickly circulated on Twitter of women and children fleeing the tear gas , providing a stark contrast to Trump 's repeated claims that the group of migrants is filled with `` criminals '' and `` thugs . ''
A migrant family , part of a caravan of thousands traveling from Central America en route to the United States , runs away from tear gas in front of the U.S.-Mexico border wall in Tijuana , Mexico .
( : Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters ) pic.twitter.com/pz7hkxsN9g — NBC News ( @ NBCNews ) November 25 , 2018
Hundreds of migrants have been camped out in Tijuana , Mexico , as they wait to enter the U.S . Many are fleeing violence and poverty in Honduras , Guatemala and El Salvador . Trump has said those migrants will remain in Mexico while their asylum claims are processed by the U.S .
The president has for weeks painted the caravan of Central American migrants as an imminent security threat . He has vowed to close down the border , deployed thousands of troops to the border in anticipation of the groups arrival and signed a proclamation blocking certain immigrants from claiming asylum .
UPDATE 4:13 p.m. : Trump later spoke with reporters on the White House lawn about the incident as he set out for a campaign rally in Mississippi .
The president against suggested the border could be closed as he insisted members of the immigrant caravan would not be let into the United States .
`` We 've during certain times , as you know , closed the border . They 're not coming into the United States . They will not be coming into our country , '' Trump said .
Asked if he was comfortable with the use of tear gas at the border , Trump said authorities at the border were forced to do so .
`` They had to use because they were being rushed by some very tough people and they used tear gas . And here 's the bottom line : nobody 's coming into our country unless they come in legally , '' he said .