Republican lawmakers blasted the White House on the heels of a ███ report that President Obama is planning to unveil a 10-part plan for overhauling U.S. immigration policy via executive action as early as next week – with one GOP leader warning there will be “ an explosion ” if the president moves too soon .
A source close to the White House told ███ that Obama could announce as early as next Friday . The president 's plans were contained in a draft proposal from a U.S. government agency – it includes a plan to suspend deportations for millions .
As Democratic lawmakers and immigrant advocacy groups urge Obama to act as soon as possible , Republicans bristled at the apparently looming announcement .
`` He will make the issue absolutely toxic for a decade , ” Rep. David Schweikert , R-Ariz. , said Thursday .
One concern is that Obama would act before a Dec. 11 deadline for passing a new spending bill . Doing so could thrust the immigration debate into the budget process , with conservatives threatening to yank money from the immigration effort – and potentially triggering another showdown that could result in a partial government shutdown .
Indeed , Rep. Matt Salmon , R-Ariz. , already has gathered dozens of signatures on a letter calling for no funding for “ the President ’ s reported intentions to create work permits and green cards for undocumented immigrants currently in the United States . ”
House Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers , R-Ky. , said Thursday if Obama acts before the spending bill is done , there will be an “ explosion . ”
Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Ala. , meanwhile , reiterated his concerns that the president would be acting outside the law .
“ The president has no authority to do this . It 's against the law , ” he told ███ .
The draft plan contains 10 initiatives that span everything from boosting border security to improving pay for immigration officers . But the most controversial pertain to the millions who could get a deportation reprieve under what is known as `` deferred action . ''
The plan calls for expanding deferred action for illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. as children -- but also for the parents of U.S. citizens and legal permanent residents .
The latter could allow upwards of 4.5 million illegal immigrant adults with U.S.-born children to stay , according to estimates .
Sessions voiced concerns that illegal immigrants could simply fib in order to meet the criteria for the program . Further , he said millions more people would then be “ entitled ” to U.S. privileges including health care .
White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest , traveling with the president in Burma , stressed that the president “ has not made a final decision at this point about exactly what will be included in the administrative steps that he will take . ”
He would not specify the timing , but reiterated that Obama plans to make an announcement before the end of the year . “ That should be an indication to you that the president is nearing a final decision , ” he said .
Earnest also said that Obama would “ retract ” his executive actions if the House passes an immigration overhaul previously passed by the Senate .
The planning comes as immigrant advocates and Democratic lawmakers urge Obama to act .
Rep. Rubén Hinojosa , D-Texas , chairman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus , said in a statement to ███ Latino that they are urging the president to “ go big and bold . ”
He said “ White House senior officials have assured our Caucus that the President will announce executive actions before the end of the holiday season . ”
Angela Maria Kelley , vice president for immigration policy at the Center for American Progress , touted executive action as a `` tried and true component of immigration policy used by 11 presidents , 39 times in the last 60 years . ''
She said for many undocumented immigrants who have been here for years , `` there is no line for people to get into . ''