Mitt Romney declined to say whether , if elected president , he would nix the Obama administration 's controversial new order allowing potentially hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants who came to the United States as children to avoid deportation .
In an interview broadcast Sunday on CBS ' `` Face the Nation , '' Romney criticized the move by the Department of Homeland Security as political and a short-term fix .
`` I do n't know why ( Obama ) feels stopgap measures are the right way to go , '' Romney said .
He said he wants to pursue long-term legislation if elected that would address the status of illegal immigrants who were brought to the United States when they were young .
Still , the Republican presidential candidate would not say whether he would overturn the Obama administration 's policy while such a long-term solution is being worked out .
More On This ... Republicans , Democrats spar on allowing illegal immigrants with criminal pasts to avoid deportation
`` We 'll look at that setting as we reach it , '' Romney said , noting that the immigration order would eventually be `` overtaken '' by long-term legislation .
Speaking on `` ███ Sunday , '' White House adviser David Plouffe acknowledged that the Obama administration order is not a `` permanent fix . '' But he also alleged that voters will not be able to `` trust '' Romney when it comes to fixing the immigration system .
`` I think that 's a clear choice just not for the Latino community , but for the American electorate at large , '' Plouffe said .
Romney , though , accused the president of having `` saved '' the policy change for an election year , suggesting it was a sop to Hispanic voters . `` If he felt seriously about this , he should have taken action when he had a Democrat House and Senate , '' Romney said .
Romney is in a tough spot on the immigration policy change .
His positions on immigration during the GOP primary battle were among the most conservative in the field . But Hispanics remain a critical voting bloc going into November . And while Romney said earlier that he 'd veto the DREAM Act -- a stalled bill that was meant to let some illegal immigrants who came here as children stay so long as they attend college or serve in the military -- a key ally , Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , has been working on a legislative alternative to that bill .
Romney said Friday that he agrees with Rubio that he 'd `` like to see legislation that deals with this issue . ''
On `` Face the Nation '' Sunday , former Democratic presidential candidate Howard Dean described the DHS announcement as a `` brilliant move '' by the president considering the position it puts Romney in .
`` If he says anything in favor of what the president wants to do , he alienates the right wing ... and if he denies what the president has said and ( says ) it 's a terrible idea , he digs himself an even deeper hole with Latinos , '' Dean said .
But Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , said all the order does is take the `` breathtaking '' step of having a federal agency stop enforcing the law without addressing the status of most of the illegal immigrants in the country .
`` You 're going to have 800,000 work permits issued by the stroke of a pen . You 're going around Congress and the American people . And you 're doing nothing about a broken immigration system , '' he said .
The Obama administration said the policy change announced Friday will affect as many as 800,000 immigrants who have lived in fear of deportation . Obama 's move bypasses Congress and partially achieves the goals of the Democrats ' long-stalled legislation aimed at young illegal immigrants who went to college or served in the military .
Under the administration plan , illegal immigrants will be able to avoid deportation if they can prove they were brought to the United States before they turned 16 and are younger than 30 , have been in the country for at least five continuous years , have no major criminal history , graduated from a U.S. high school or earned a GED diploma or certificate , or served in the military . They also can apply for a work permit that will be good for two years with no limits on how many times it can be renewed .
The broadcast interview was conducted Saturday while Romney 's Rust Belt bus tour stopped in Pennsylvania .