“ He is a lightning rod , but is he doing it for cover ? ” asked Hogan Gidley , a Republican strategist based in South Carolina and a former executive director of the state ’ s Republican Party . “ Looking at his record would suggest otherwise . He is a defense hawk , he is an Israel ally , he was always going to be against Hagel . It just so happens that it also falls politically perfectly for him in the state . ”
Mr. Graham is up for re-election in 2014 , and though there have been rumblings about a primary challenge from the right , Democrats and Republicans both privately and publicly say Mr. Graham is unlikely to get a credible opponent .
“ There ’ s 67 million reasons not to run against Lindsey Graham , ” said Chad Connelly , the chairman of the South Carolina Republican Party , using an arbitrarily large number for emphasis . “ You ’ re going to have a heck of a run . ”
Richard Quinn , a longtime consultant to Mr. Graham and a Republican pollster based in South Carolina , said that in a recent poll he conducted , the South Carolinian view of immigration seemed largely in line with that of the nation ; only 21 percent of likely Republican primary voters said that the 11 million illegal immigrants already in the country should be deported , while 73 percent said they should be offered a path to citizenship provided they pay a fine , go to the back of the line , and learn English .
“ Lindsey does not run from controversy , ” Mr. Quinn said . “ Difficult problems don ’ t intimidate him , and he ’ s a guy who ’ s willing to take chances when others are trying to hide in the tall grass , and that makes him a target from time to time . ”
By Mr. Graham ’ s own admission , South Carolina has become “ ground zero for the immigration debate , ” and ads tied to the issue have already hit the airwaves here . Speaking at an event last week with two faith leaders , who have also gotten behind immigration reform , Mr. Graham sounded a defiant note .
“ If you want to run ads , spend all the money you want to spend , ” he said . “ I ’ m not backing off . ”
A bit later , he added , “ When people come up to me and say , ‘ You ’ ve got to send them all back , ’ I say , ‘ Thank you very much , that ain ’ t gon na work . ’ ”