Democratic leaders have told the House to pass the Senate immigration bill as is , but they can ’ t — because Majority Leader Harry Reid hasn ’ t actually sent the bill over to the House yet .
Two weeks after senators voted 68-32 to pass the bill , Mr. Reid is still holding the 1,200-page measure in his chamber , which means there is no Senate bill for the House to consider .
House Republicans said they don ’ t expect Mr. Reid to ever send the bill over to them because it would set up an embarrassing vote that would deem the bill unconstitutional , since it raised revenue — a power the Constitution gives to the House , not the Senate .
“ The Senate-passed immigration bill is a clear violation of the ‘ origination ’ clause of the Constitution , which states ‘ All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives ; but the Senate may propose or concur with Amendments as on other Bills , ’ ” Rep. Steve Stockman , a Texas Republican , said in a letter to colleagues on Wednesday .
Mr. Stockman got some powerful support Wednesday evening when Congress ’ s chief tax-writer , House Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp , agreed : “ Chairman Camp : Senate immigration bill a revenue bill ; unconstitutional and can not be taken up by the House , ” his committee said in a Twitter message .
If Mr. Reid were to send the bill over , Republicans could schedule a vote to assert the House ’ s constitutional prerogatives in a move known as issuing a blue slip — a designation that officially rejects the bill and forces it back to the Senate .
The Senate bill has become the focus on an intense debate after it passed the chamber last month .
House Speaker John A. Boehner has repeatedly said the bill is dead , and on Wednesday he and his GOP colleagues laid out a strategy that moves the other direction , splitting the issue up into smaller pieces rather than passing a giant legalization bill as the Senate did .
But Mr. Reid and Sen. Charles E. Schumer , the New York Democrat who is chief author of the Senate bill , have both said they doubt the House can pass its own bills , and have predicted that eventually the GOP will relent and put the Senate bill up for a House vote .
Mr. Reid repeated that challenge as he kicked off the July legislative session on Monday , touting the 68-32 bipartisan vote that cleared the bill through the Senate late last month .
“ Our responsibility didn ’ t end with that vote . Now it ’ s our responsibility to convince our colleagues in the House they should vote with us , ” Mr. Reid said .
Mr. Reid ’ s office didn ’ t return a message seeking comment on why he hasn ’ t sent the bill over to the House .
A senior Democratic aide , however , said the issue of the Senate bill being ruled out of order by the House shouldn ’ t stop House lawmakers from passing the same legislation .
“ It ’ s not an issue . The House can simply cut and paste the text , ” the aide said .
Under that scenario , which has happened in the past , the House would take the Senate ’ s language and re-introduce it as a House bill , which could then pass .
But there are signs the Senate bill may not be as popular in the House as Mr. Reid and Mr. Schumer think .
While the bill won unanimous support of Senate Democrats , some House Democrats have objected to the massive boost in Border Patrol agents along the U.S.-Mexico border .
And in a letter on Wednesday , House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi shied away from backing the Senate bill , instead saying it moved the country “ one step closer ” to a final agreement .
In a letter to Mr. Boehner , she urged the House to work on its own solution in a bipartisan way .