Nearly 200 Central American migrants attempting to seek asylum in the United States are stuck at the US-Mexico border after officials said a crossing facility did not have enough space to accommodate them .
Last week , President Donald Trump vowed to “ stop ” the caravan , while Cabinet members said they would deliver a swift response . The asylum seekers held firm , setting up a possible showdown .
In an anticlimactic twist , about 50 asylum seekers were allowed past a gate controlled by Mexican officials to walk across a long bridge but were stopped at the entrance to the US inspection facility at the other end .
A caravan of Central American migrants walk towards the Mexico-US border ( Hans-Maximo Musielik/AP )
They were allowed to wait outside the building , technically on Mexican soil , without word of when US officials would let them claim asylum .
Another 50 or so camped on blankets and backpacks in Tijuana outside the Mexican side of the crossing , prohibited from even getting close to the US inspection building .
The asylum-seekers began the day with anticipation , travelling in red-and-white school buses under police escort to a beachfront rally in Tijuana , where a steel fence juts out into the Pacific Ocean .
Asylum-seekers sit on top of the border wall waving a Honduran and banners ( Chris Carlson/AP )
They sang the Honduran national anthem , and supporters on the San Diego side of the fence waved a Honduran flag .
After a final briefing from lawyers , and minutes before they were to begin a short walk to the border crossing , US Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAleenan announced that the San Ysidro border crossing , the nation ’ s busiest , had “ reached capacity ” for people without legal documents and that asylum-seekers may need to wait in Mexico temporarily .
Mr Trump has commented frequently on the caravan since it started in Mexico on March 25 near the Guatemala border and headed north to Tijuana .
His broadsides came as his administration vowed to end what officials call “ legal loopholes ” and “ catch-and-release ” policies that allow people requesting asylum to be released from custody into the US while their claims make their way through the courts , which can take years .
Central Americans who travelled with a caravan of migrants embrace in Tijuana , Mexico , before trying to cross the border and request asylum in the US ( Hans-Maximo Musielik/AP )
Attorney General Jeff Sessions has called the caravan “ a deliberate attempt to undermine our laws and overwhelm our system ” .
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said asylum claims will be resolved “ efficiently and expeditiously ” and warned that anyone making false claims could be prosecuted .
The administration ’ s stern warnings left organisers in disbelief that border inspectors were not ready for them .
“ They have been well aware that a caravan is going to arrive at the border , ” Nicole Ramos , an attorney working on behalf of caravan members , said at a news conference .
“ The failure to prepare and failure to get sufficient agents and resources is not the fault of the most vulnerable among us . We can build a base in Iraq in under a week . We can ’ t process 200 refugees . I don ’ t believe it . ”
Some members of the caravan of migrants wait in Tijuana , Mexico ( Hans-Maximo Musielik/AP )
The San Ysidro border inspection facility can hold about 300 people , according to Pete Flores , Customs and Border Protection ’ s San Diego field office director , suggesting the bottleneck may be short-lived . The agency processed about 8,000 asylum cases from October to February , or about 50 a day .
Asylum-seekers are typically held for up to three days at the border and then turned over to US Immigration and Customs Enforcement . If they pass an asylum officer ’ s initial screening , they may be detained or released into the US with ankle monitors .
Asylum seekers did not appear to be thrown by the delay .
Wendi Yaneri Garcia said she was confident she will be released while her asylum case is pending because she is travelling alone with her two-year-old son , who has been sick .
She said police in her hometown of Atlantida , Honduras , jailed her for protesting construction of a hydroelectric plant and that she received death threats after being released .
“ All I want is a place where I can work and raise my son , ” the 36-year-old said .
Demonstrators march to meet the Central American migrants where the border wall ends in the ocean ( Chris Carlson/AP )
Elin Orrellana , a 23-year-old pregnant woman from El Salvador , said she is fleeing the violent MS-13 street gang , a favourite target of both Mr Sessions and Mr Trump because of their brutal killings in communities in the US .
She said her older sister had been killed by the gang in El Salvador , so she is attempting to join other family members in the Kansas City area .
“ Fighting on is worth it , ” she said as she camped out for chilly night outside the border crossing .