WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. President Donald Trump on Wednesday backed down and abandoned his policy of separating immigrant children from their parents on the U.S.-Mexico border , after images of youngsters in cages sparked outrage at home and abroad .
Trump signed an executive order requiring immigrant families be detained together when they are caught entering the country illegally for as long as their criminal proceedings take .
While that may end a policy that drew a rebuke from Pope Francis and everyone else from human rights advocates to business leaders , it may also mean immigrant children remain in custody indefinitely .
The Trump administration still faces legal challenges because of a court order that put a 20-day cap on how long immigration authorities may detain minors , and trigger fresh criticism of Trump ’ s hardline immigration policies , which were central to his 2016 election campaign and now his presidency .
Administration officials were unable to clarify whether family separations would end immediately or when and how families now separated would be reunited .
“ It is still very early and we are awaiting further guidance on the matter , ” Brian Marriott , a spokesman for the Health and Human Services Department ’ s Administration for Children and Families . “ Reunification is always the ultimate goal of those entrusted with the care of ” unaccompanied children and “ the administration is working towards that ” for those in custody .
The Trump order , an unusual reversal by him , moves parents with children to the front of the line for immigration proceedings but it does not end a 10-week-old “ zero tolerance ” policy that calls for prosecution of immigrants crossing the border illegally under the country ’ s criminal entry statute .
“ It ’ s about keeping families together while at the same time making sure that we have a very powerful , very strong border , ” Trump said as he signed the order in a hastily arranged Oval Office gathering .
Video footage of children sitting in cages and an audiotape of wailing children had sparked anger as the images were broadcast worldwide .
Governments from Central America and Mexico welcomed Trump ’ s decision on Wednesday , but said they would remain vigilant to ensure the rights of their citizens were respected .
An avid viewer of cable television news , Trump recognized that the family separation issue was a growing political problem , White House sources said .
Trump ’ s wife , Melania Trump , in private conversations with the president , urged him to do something to end the humanitarian crisis , a White House official said .
In the Oval Office , Trump said he had also heard from his daughter and aide , Ivanka Trump , about the policy .
“ Ivanka feels very strongly . My wife feels very strongly about it . I feel very strongly about it . I think anybody with a heart would feel very strongly about it , ” Trump said .
Wednesday ’ s move was the most significant policy reversal by Trump since he took office in January 2017 . Instinctively combative and fond of chaos , Trump usually digs in on controversial policies , rather than backing down .
He had tried to blame Democrats for the separations policy and force them into concessions , including funding for a wall he wants to build along the border with Mexico . Just in the past few days he had insisted his hands were tied by law on the issue of family separations even though his administration implemented a “ zero tolerance ” policy .
But the volume of condemnation on breaking up families , from inside and outside the White House , finally overwhelmed Trump .
Gene Hamilton , counselor to U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions , told reporters the Justice Department will seek changes to a 1997 settlement known as the Flores agreement , which set nationwide policy for the detention of minors in the custody of immigration officials .
A federal appeals court has interpreted the Flores agreement to allow immigration officials to detain families for only 20 days .
Pratheepan Gulasekaram , an immigration law professor at Santa Clara University , said the Los Angeles federal court with jurisdiction over the Flores settlement is unlikely to grant the government ’ s request to modify it .
“ There has to be some substantial change in circumstances that merits a change in the agreement , ” said Gulasekaram . The judge previously rejected an Obama administration request to modify the consent decree in light of a surge of immigrants from Central America .
“ If that wasn ’ t enough to change the agreement then it ’ s not clear why anything now would be enough either , ” he said .
Trump ’ s reversal also creates a series of new headaches for the administration , as it wrestles with where to house families that are detained together , possibly for long periods , and how to reunite families that already have been separated .
“ This executive order would replace one crisis for another . Children don ’ t belong in jail at all , even with their parents , under any set of circumstances . If the president thinks placing families in jail indefinitely is what people have been asking for , he is grossly mistaken , ” Anthony Romero , executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union , said in a statement .
Parents referred by border agents for prosecution are held in federal jails , while their children have remained in U.S. Customs and Border Protection custody or have been moved into facilities managed by the Office of Refugee Resettlement , a Department of Health and Human Services agency .
U.S. Customs and Border Protection said on Tuesday that 2,342 children had been separated from their parents at the border between May 5 and June 9 .
The Republican-controlled U.S. Congress is considering legislation to address the issue . The House of Representatives planned to vote on Thursday on two bills designed to halt family separations and address a range of other immigration issues .
Republicans said they were uncertain if either House measure would have enough votes to pass .
Both House bills , backed by Trump but opposed by Democrats and immigration advocacy groups , would fund Trump ’ s proposed wall and reduce legal migration , in part by denying visas for some relatives of U.S. residents and citizens living abroad .
The more conservative bill would deny the chance of future citizenship to “ Dreamers , ” who are immigrants brought illegally into the United States years ago as children .