The Trump administration has lost track of nearly 1,500 more immigrant children who crossed illegally into the U.S. by themselves earlier this year , according to congressional findings .
The development follows an admission in April by federal officials that they did not know the whereabouts of 1,475 immigrant children , according to The New York Times .
As in that instance , the Department of Health and Human Services had moved the children out of federal shelters and placed them with sponsors , but since then officials remain uncertain where the latest 1,488 kids are located .
Immigrant children are led by staff in single file between tents at a detention facility next to the Mexican border in Tornillo , Texas in June 2018
The missing children account for about 13 percent of the 11,254 children that DHS has placed with sponsors so far in 2018 .
DHS has a method of calling sponsors who have taken the children 30 days after placement , and those calls have been fruitless in the cases of the lost migrant children .
However , department officials have said they are no longer responsible for the minors once they have been placed outside of DHS custody .
'These children are not 'lost , '' ' DHS spokeswoman Caitlin Oakley told The Times . 'Their sponsors — who are usually parents or family members and in all cases have been vetted for criminality and ability to provide for them — simply did not respond or could not be reached when this voluntary call was made . '
The new developments came as Republican and Democrat lawmakers proposed new legislation on Tuesday that would create clear parameters defining DHS 's responsibility to the immigrant children , before and after being placed with a sponsor .
The draft bill would require DHS to conduct background checks on sponsors before placing children with them , and mandate that the agency would have to ensure sponsors appropriately care for the children and appear at hearings in immigration court .
The legislation would also mandate that DHS notifies the states where migrant children are placed in advance , and further increase the number of immigration judges to offset a massive backlog of nearly 750,000 cases .
Migrant children are seen walking outside of the Homestead Temporary Shelter for Unaccompanied Children in June 2018 in Homestead , Florida
'This bill will ensure that we keep track of unaccompanied minors in our country , which will both help protect them from trafficking and abuse as well as help ensure they appear for their immigration court proceedings , ' said Sen . Rob Portman , a Republican from Ohio and the bill 's co-sponsor . 'These efforts are critical for safeguarding these children and upholding our immigration system . This is n't a partisan issue . '
Fellow co-sponsor Sen. Richard Blumenthal , a Democrat from Connecticut echoed Portman 's sentiments .
'Children who risk their lives to make a dangerous journey in pursuit of asylum should n't then have to worry about falling victim to human trafficking or being handed over to abusive or neglectful adults in the United States , ' Blumenthal said .
DHS has placed more than 135,000 unaccompanied migrant children with sponsors in the U.S. since October 2014 .