A man who authorities believe is the last known Nazi collaborator living in the U.S. has been arrested and deported to Germany .
At the order of President Donald Trump , Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents removed 95-year-old Jakiw Palij from his Queens , New York , home on Monday .
Justice Department officials say Palij served as an armed guard at a death camp in Nazi-occupied Poland and later lied to American immigration officials about his role in those atrocities when he entered the U.S. after the war .
███ was there when Palij was removed by wheelchair from his home on Monday , but he did not answer any questions . Looking frail with missing front teeth visible through his white beard , the only noise he made was a pained howl as agents hoisted him from his wheelchair onto the ambulance stretcher .
Representatives for Palij did n't respond to ███ request for comment .
The administration released a statement after Palij landed in Germany early Tuesday :
`` President Trump commends his Administration ’ s comprehensive actions , especially ICE ’ s actions , in removing this war criminal from United States soil , '' the statement read . `` Despite a court ordering his deportation in 2004 , past administrations were unsuccessful in removing Palij . To protect the promise of freedom for Holocaust survivors and their families , President Trump prioritized the removal of Palij . Through extensive negotiations , President Trump and his team secured Palij ’ s deportation to Germany and advanced the United States ’ collaborative efforts with a key European ally . ''
He 'd been accused of working at the Treblinka death camp -- including on an infamous day in November 1943 in which 6,000 prisoners were killed , according to the Justice Department 's Office of Legislative Affairs . The U.S . Holocaust Memorial Museum writes that SS police unit shot all 6,000 prisoners . An attachment of Jewish laborers was brought in to burn and bury the corpses . `` After completing this dreadful work , the Jewish laborers were shot and their bodies burned , '' the website reads .
After falsely telling authorities he spent the war at his hometown in Germany , Palij gained entry into the U.S. in 1949 . He was eventually granted U.S. citizenship in 1957 .
It was n't until 2003 that he was tracked down by federal authorities and exposed . A New York immigration judge revoked Palij 's U.S. citizenship and ordered him to be deported in 2005 .
At the time , Palij denied that he was a collaborator , telling The New York Times , he was conscripted at 18 when the Nazis took over his farm .
`` I know what they say , but I was never a collaborator , '' Palij told the paper at the time .
The U.S. said in the statement about his deportation that he lied about not being involved .
`` Palij had lied about being a Nazi and remained in the United States for decades , '' the statement said . `` Palij ’ s removal sends a strong message : The United States will not tolerate those who facilitated Nazi crimes and other human rights violations , and they will not find a safe haven on American soil . ''
The Department of Justice also lauded the deportation in an early morning email .
`` Jakiw Palij lied about his Nazi past to immigrate to this country and then fraudulently become an American citizen , '' Attorney General Jeff Sessions said in the statement . `` He had no right to citizenship or to even be in this country . Today , the Justice Department -- led by Eli Rosenbaum and our fabulous team in the Human Rights and Special Prosecutions Section , formerly the Office of Special Investigations -- successfully helped remove him from the United States , as we have done with 67 other Nazis in the past . ''
U.S. officials say his deportation had long been stymied by Germany 's reluctance to take him in .
According to a source familiar with the matter , Trump told U.S . Ambassador to Germany Richard Grenell to make Palij 's deportation his number one priority when he got to Berlin .
In meetings with senior officials this week , Ambassador @ RichardGrenell continued the 12-year U.S. government push for Germany to accept Nazi collaborator Jakiw Palij . — US-Botschaft Berlin ( @ usbotschaft ) May 18 , 2018
It 's unclear if Palij will face prosecution in Germany , which had previously maintained that they were not in a position to accept him because he 's not a German citizen .
Palij , who is Ukranian-born , had been living in the Jackson Heights , Queens neighborhood for 13 years . Protesters have regularly gathered outside of Palij 's house and the push for his deportation has garnered bipartisan support . In 2017 , every congressional member of the New York delegation wrote a letter to former Secretary of State Rex Tillerson urging him to deport Palij before he dies .
The president made no mention of Palij 's deportation during an event Monday honoring ICE employees .
Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , who was among those calling for Pal 's deportation told ███ the U.S. is `` no place for a war criminal . ''
`` I ’ m glad this man is finally being sent back . He ’ s a war criminal and did not deserve to live in the US . He doesn ’ t deserve to die in the U.S. , a place of freedom and equality where we respect each other ’ s differences . ''