WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Nearly 1,800 immigrant families were separated at the U.S.-Mexico border from October 2016 through February of this year , according to a senior government official , as President Donald Trump implemented stricter border enforcement policies .
The numbers are the first comprehensive disclosure by the administration of how many families have been affected by the policies . Previously , the only numbers provided by federal officials on family separations covered a single two-week period in May .
The government official , who agreed to speak only on condition of anonymity , said he could not provide up-to-date statistics , but acknowledged the number of separations had risen sharply in recent weeks , largely because of new administration policies .
In May , U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a ‘ zero tolerance ’ policy in which all those apprehended entering the United States illegally would be criminally charged , which generally leads to children being separated from their parents .
A U.S. Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) official testified last month to Congress that between May 6 and May 19 , 658 children were separated from 638 parents because of the stepped-up prosecutions . That brings the total of officially acknowledged separations to more than 2,400 , though that does not include recent weeks or the period from March 1 to May 6 .
Immigration and child advocates , Democratic lawmakers and the United Nations have all condemned the practice of separating families at the border , but the administration has defended its actions saying it is protecting children and making clear that illegal border crossers will be prosecuted regardless of their family circumstances .
In most of the 1,768 cases of families separated by border agents between October 2016 and February , children were removed from parents for medical reasons or because of security concerns , the official said , citing examples such as parents needing hospitalization or officials discovering the parent had a criminal record either in the United States or in their home country .
In 237 cases , the official said , children were removed because border agents suspected adults were falsely posing as the parents of minors in their charge .
The period for which statistics were provided included the final three months of the Obama administration in 2016 , but the official could not say whether any of the separations occurred then .
The practice of separating families has not been systematically tracked until now , the official said , and the figures given to ███ had to be compiled manually .
“ Why weren ’ t we pulling these statistics before ? Because it wasn ’ t a big enough phenomenon that had public interest , ” the official said . “ Now it ’ s increasing and it ’ s of public interest . ”
The bulk of the separations involved Central Americans , who make up the majority of families crossing the southwest border . Some were apprehended trying to cross the border illegally , while others crossed illegally and then presented themselves to border patrol agents asking for asylum because they feared returning home .
Immigrants can also go to an official port of entry to request asylum before crossing the border . The official said separations in such circumstances are rare , but that the numbers are not tracked separately .
The official noted that the number of separations from October 2016 to February this year represented less than 2 percent of the 106,700 family units arrested along the southwest border during that same period .
The American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) is suing the government on behalf of a Congolese asylum seeker who turned herself in to border guards in California only to have her 7-year-old daughter taken from her and housed in government custody more than 2,000 miles away in Chicago for months .
The government said in legal papers that it took the child into custody because it could not corroborate the two were related . The ACLU argued the question could have been quickly resolved by a DNA test , which was only done much later .
Lee Gelernt , the ACLU attorney representing the woman and other parents in similar situations , said the Trump administration is using allegations of fraud and security concerns to justify a policy that is actually aimed not at protecting children but at deterring future border crossers .
“ Taking a child away from their parent and interfering with the basic constitutional right to family unity , that ’ s about the most draconian thing you can do and it needs the most compelling reason possible , ” Gelernt said . “ Deterrence is a policy measure that uses these children as pawns and violates the basic fundamental notion of what ’ s in the child ’ s best interest . ”
The official said some families were separated because human smugglers had tried to game the system by placing children with unrelated adults , hoping the adults would fare better if caught .
Only a few immigration detention centers have the capacity to house parents and children together , so families caught at the border have often been freed to await court hearings while living in the United States .
On Friday , Senator Dianne Feinstein , the senior Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee , along with 26 other Democrats and two independents introduced a bill that would put new limits on federal law enforcement ’ s ability to separate immigrant children from their families unless a court decides that would be best for the child .
The bill specifically states that a minor can not be removed from a parent or legal guardian “ solely for the policy goal of deterring individuals from migrating to the United States . ”