Sen. Elizabeth Warren called Saturday for the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency to be replaced as anti-ICE sentiment continued its rapid migration from the far left to the Democratic mainstream .
“ The president ’ s deeply immoral actions have made it obvious : We need to rebuild our immigration system from top to bottom , starting by replacing ICE with something that reflects our morality , ” the Massachusetts Democrat told a crowd at Boston City Hall Plaza .
Her comments , delivered as she stood on the back of a white pick-up truck , make her the latest potential Democratic presidential contender to follow the left ’ s lead by scrambling onto the anti-ICE bandwagon .
Both Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio called Friday for dismantling the nation ’ s leading border-enforcement agency .
Protesters chanted “ abolish ICE ” and “ chinga la migra , ” which translates to “ f– the border patrol , ” at many of the Families Belong Together rallies held Saturday in hundreds of U.S. cities .
The demonstrations went off as planned even though President Trump signed an order June 20 ending the separation of parents and children detained at the border .
“ This is about children held in cages , this is about babies scattered all across this country , this is about mamas who want their children back , ” said Ms. Warren in video posted by MassLive . “ President Trump seems to think that the only way to have immigration rules is to rip parents from their families , is to treat rape victims and refugees like terrorists , and to put children in cages . ”
President Trump came to ICE ’ s rescue in a pair of Saturday tweets , calling the agency “ one of the smartest , toughest and most spirited law enforcement groups of men and women that I have ever seen . ”
To the great and brave men and women of ICE , do not worry or lose your spirit . You are doing a fantastic job of keeping us safe by eradicating the worst criminal elements . So brave ! The radical left Dems want you out . Next it will be all police . Zero chance , It will never happen ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 30 , 2018