Central American migrants traveling with a caravan to the U.S. make their way to Pijijiapan , Mexico , Thursday , Oct. 25 , 2018 . The sprawling caravan of migrants hoping to make their way to the United States set off again , forming a column more than a mile long as the group trekked out of the town of Mapastepec in southern Mexico before dawn . ( AP Photo/Rodrigo Abd )
Central American migrants traveling with a caravan to the U.S. make their way to Pijijiapan , Mexico , Thursday , Oct. 25 , 2018 . The sprawling caravan of migrants hoping to make their way to the United States set off again , forming a column more than a mile long as the group trekked out of the town of Mapastepec in southern Mexico before dawn . ( AP Photo/Rodrigo Abd )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — The Trump administration is planning to dispatch at least 800 active duty troops to the southern border at the direction of a president who has sought to transform fears about immigration into electoral gains in the midterms as a caravan of thousands of migrants makes its way through Mexico .
Defense Secretary Jim Mattis is expected to sign an order sending the troops to the border , bolstering National Guard forces already there , an official said Thursday . The action comes as President Donald Trump has spent recent days calling attention to the caravan of Central Americans slowly making their way by foot into southern Mexico , but still more than 1,000 miles from U.S. soil .
Trump , who made fear about immigrants a major theme of his 2016 election campaign , has been eager to make it a top issue heading into the Nov. 6 midterm elections , which will determine control of Congress . The president and senior White House officials have long believed the issue is key to turning out his base of supporters .
The additional troops would provide logistical and other support to the Border Patrol , said the U.S. official , who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss a plan that had not been finalized and formally announced .
It ’ s not unusual for the National Guard to help with border security . Active duty troops , however , are rarely deployed within the United States except for domestic emergencies like hurricanes or floods . Fears of militarizing the border were fanned by a May 1997 incident in which a Marine on a counter-narcotics mission shot to death an 18-year-old who was herding goats in Redford , Texas .
Troops being sent at Trump ’ s direction would not be on armed security missions . They would assist the Border Patrol by providing things such as vehicles , tents and equipment . There already are about 2,000 National Guard members there under a previous Pentagon arrangement .
Trump has used the caravan to bolster his election-season warnings that the U.S. is being infiltrated by illegal immigrants “ pouring across the border , ” whom he has painted with a sinister brush .
He has claimed , without any apparent basis in fact , that “ Middle Easterners ” were among the group . At rallies and on Twitter , Trump has tried to portray the Democrats as pro-illegal immigration , even claiming , with no evidence , that Democrats organized the caravan .
He tweeted Thursday that , “ Democrat inspired laws make it tough for us to stop people at the border ” and said he was using the military to respond to what he called a “ National Emergency . ”
The migrants in the sprawling caravan — once estimated by the United Nations to number more than 7,000 — are hoping to make it to the United States . Most are Hondurans , seeking to escape poverty and violence , and include families with children .
The caravan swelled dramatically soon after crossing the Mexican border on Oct. 19 , but sickness , fear and police harassment have whittled down its numbers .
Trump tweeted a direct message to the migrants Thursday , urging them to return home .
“ To those in the Caravan , turnaround , ” he wrote . “ We are not letting people into the United States illegally . Go back to your Country and if you want , apply for citizenship like millions of others are doing ! ”
The migrants have largely been disconnected from news reports about them . When asked about Trump ’ s tweets , they have generally responded that he should stop attacking them and said they would keep heading north .
Candy Guillermo , a 37-year-old migrant in the caravan who had heard about the plan to deploy troops , was surprised she and the children in group would be considered a threat . “ Trump should be more humanitarian , ” she said . “ We only want to give our kids a better future . ”
Migrants who do reach the U.S. border can claim asylum under U.S. and international law . Those who clear an initial screening are often released until their cases are decided in immigration court , which can take several years .
The U.S. had 331,700 asylum claims in 2017 , more than any country in the world , according to the U.N . Refugee Agency . That ’ s nearly double the asylum claims the U.S. fielded in 2015 and nearly quadruple the claims in 2013 .
Trump ordered the deployment of the National Guard earlier this year to respond to a spike in illegal crossings . Those troops are under the control of state governors and are limited to support roles such as providing surveillance .
The planned deployment of active duty troops is in response to a request from the Department of Homeland Security , which manages the Border Patrol , a U.S. official said .
DHS asked for help in various forms , the official said , including air transport and other logistical assistance . It was not immediately clear why active duty forces were sought because National Guard troops can perform the same functions . Earlier this year Mattis authorized Pentagon funding for up to 4,000 National Guard troops on the border and thus far only a little over 2,000 have been used .
Federal law prohibits the use of active duty service members for law enforcement inside the U.S. unless specifically authorized by Congress .
Trump seemed to hint at the troop announcement to a rally in Wisconsin on Wednesday . “ Wait ’ ll you see what happens over the next couple of weeks . You ’ re going to see a very secure border , ” he said . “ You just watch . ”