Bernie Sanders sparked a furor Sunday when he announced he would not attend the American Israel Public Affairs Committee ’ s annual conference because the organization provides a platform “ for leaders who express bigotry and oppose basic Palestinian rights. ” AIPAC—a powerful pro-Israel organization—issued a furious response , pointing out that its events are bipartisan . The speaker list for this year ’ s conference , set to begin on March 1 , includes Vice President Mike Pence , Democratic presidential candidate Michael Bloomberg , former presidential hopeful Sen. Cory Booker ( D-N.J. ) , and other members of Congress and policy officials . Barack Obama spoke at multiple AIPAC events .
But this year ’ s AIPAC conference will also feature some deeply controversial speakers . That includes Austrian chancellor Sebastian Kurz , an anti-immigrant politician who has sought to ban girls under 14 from wearing headscarves in schools . Even more awkwardly for AIPAC , Kurtz ’ s rise to power was initially aided by his alliance with a far-right party with a history of anti-Semitism . Also in attendance will be Serbian president Aleksandar Vučić , a nationalist politician who has praised accused war criminal Slobodan Milošević .
To be sure , both Kurz and Vučić have records that would make them appealing to AIPAC . Since entering politics , Kurz has positioned himself as a strong supporter of the Israeli government , making multiple visits to the country and forging a close relationship with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu . And despite his past political alliances , he ’ s been an outspoken voice against anti-Semitism . Vučić , too , has sought to raise awareness about anti-Semitism and the holocaust . Still , AIPAC ’ s critics say those gestures don ’ t erase the more troubling aspects of the two leaders ’ politics .
“ AIPAC ’ s modus operandi is to valorize anyone who ’ s willing to unequivocally praise the Israeli government without meaningfully criticizing the ongoing occupation , and without insisting on the importance of Palestinian rights alongside Israeli security . These days , the most prominent voices willing to do that are most often coming from the ethno-nationalist , xenophobic right wing , ” said Logan Bayroff , a spokesperson for J Street , an American Jewish advocacy group that seeks to end the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories .
Xenophobia—and specifically warnings that immigrants pose a threat to European identity—has indeed been a hallmark of Kurz ’ s rhetoric . Most of the migrants seeking refuge in Europe are from Muslim-majority countries , and four of the top five origin nations of newly naturalized EU citizens are majority Muslim . In January , Kurz told the Financial Times that he was proud of Austria ’ s status as a “ Christian-dominated ” country . “ If we do not fight against illegal migration , Europe will not be the same in five , 10 or 20 years , ” he told the paper . “ If we do not control who is allowed to come we will not be able to live in security…and we will not be able to keep our identity . ”
In 2017 Kurz formed a coalition government between his center-right Austrian Peoples ’ Party and the Freedom Party , an extreme right-wing party that was originally founded after the Second World War by a former Austrian SS officer . Though the Freedom Party ’ s agenda has shifted from its origins and is now focused on demonizing Muslims , it has still been associated with a number of anti-Semitic incidents in recent years . ( Kurz , on the other hand , has used his platform to speak out against the persecution of Jews—and has promoted events highlighting Jewish identity . )
Kurz ’ s coalition with the Freedom Party finally came to an end in May 2019 , when Freedom Party leader Heinz-Christian Strache became embroiled in a scandal that dominated the Austrian press . Video of a sting operation orchestrated by an unknown party showed Strache speaking with someone claiming to be an associate of a Russian oligarch ; Strache appeared to offer public contracts in return for political campaign support . After a vote of no confidence , Kurz stepped down , only to return after his party won new elections in September 2019 .
The Freedom Party ’ s stint as a partner in the governing coalition may not have lasted for long , but it coincided with a troubling time in Austria . The European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights reported 88 anti-Semitic incidents in Austria perpetrated by right-wing extremists between 2017 and 2018—similar numbers to earlier in the 2010s , but a marked increase from proceeding decade . In fact , Austrian intelligence organizations—responsible for preventing such attacks—found themselves in the awkward position of being overseen by a party with political ideals resembling the fringe groups they were tasked with monitoring . According to a May 2019 New York Times article , “ Inside the agency , senior operatives described a situation in which they now find themselves protecting informants and information not only from hostile states—but from members of their own government. ” During the Freedom Party ’ s tenure , Jewish groups in Austria maintained a no-contact policy with the party , and one Jewish Austrian community leader called the party ’ s eventual ouster a “ validation of the Jewish community . ”
Since January , Kurz ’ s Austrian People ’ s Party has been partnered in a governing coalition with the Austrian Green party , but his anti-migrant agenda is still present . The 300-page contract between the two parties includes plans for Kurtz ’ s head scarf ban in schools . Kurz recently described illegal immigration as a threat of equal stature to that posed by climate change .
Much like Kurz , Vučić has embraced nationalism . He began his political career in 1998 as information minister for the government during violent clashes with ethnic Albanian separatists in Kosovo . According to Foreign Policy , that job entailed downplaying the brutality : “ Serbia needed a lot of explaining , and Vučić cut his teeth defending Belgrade in the face of foreign criticism . ”
Vučić ’ s efforts to downplay Serbian military violence against ethnic minorities isn ’ t just a thing of the past . During a 2018 speech while visiting ethnic Serbs in Kosovo , Vučić—whose leadership has been marked by a growing authoritarianism—sparked outrage by praising Milosevic . “ Milosevic was a great Serbian leader whose intentions were certainly for the best , but our results were very poor , ” Vučić said , according to the Associated Press . “ Not because he wanted that , but because our wishes were unrealistic , while we neglected and underestimated the interests and aspirations of other nations . ”
Milosevic , who died in 2006 while on trial for war crimes , is considered largely responsible for the bloody war that killed an estimated 100,000 people and led to the genocide of thousands of Bosnian Muslims during the 1990s . He also green-lit military suppression in Kosovo that killed an estimated 10,000 people .
For Bayroff , the elevation of figures like Kurz and Vučić is a worrying development . When the rhetoric of such leaders becomes legitimized , he says , “ it never ends up being good for the Jewish people . ”