The Senate immigration bill survived its first tests Thursday as a core group of Republicans and Democrats held together , killing efforts to require full border security requirements before legalizing illegal immigrants .
Kicking off the first votes on immigration this year , the Judiciary Committee held a daylong session on border security where senators agreed to require that the entire southwestern border be secured to 90 percent “ efficiency . ”
But the committee defeated Republican efforts to put that requirement and others before legalization . Members also rejected following through on a 2006 law that ordered the government to build 700 miles of two-tier fencing on the 2,000-mile-long border .
“ I very much want to see the border shut down . I dislike illegal immigration , ” said Sen. Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat and one of those who led opposition . “ But let ’ s do it in a smart way . Let ’ s do it in a way that ’ s cost-effective . Let ’ s do it in a way that doesn ’ t blow a hole in our budget . And let the experts decide . ”
The votes marked the first test for the coalition of Republicans and Democrats pushing immigration reform .
Sens . Jeff Flake of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina , who were among the Republicans on the bipartisan “ Gang of Eight ” that wrote the bill , said they want tough border security . They voted repeatedly against other Republican amendments , arguing that they could upset the balance of the deal they struck with Democrats and saying the proposal sufficiently increases border enforcement .
“ The key to me is not 2,200 miles of fence , it ’ s not 90 percent operational control , it ’ s stopping the reason they come , and that is to get jobs , ” Mr. Graham said . “ You control jobs , you will turn everything into a trickle . ”
The crux of the immigration deal is that it offers illegal immigrants quick legal status but withholds a full path to citizenship until after the Homeland Security Department spends more money on border security , begins to check visas of those leaving by air and sea , and creates a mandatory system for employers to check immigration status before they hire .
The bill ’ s authors said those steps should be enough to give Americans confidence . Mr. Schumer said the bill “ is tough as nails on border security . ”
Republican opponents scoffed , saying they wanted the bill tied to final results , not to promises of spending . They also made clear that they don ’ t trust the Obama administration to be the final arbiter of security , particularly since Homeland Security Secretary Janet A. Napolitano said she believes the border is secure .
“ The committee has voted down every serious border security amendment that has been presented here today , ” said Sen. Ted Cruz , Texas Republican . “ The bill before this committee that relies entirely on subjective assessments from the secretary of Homeland Security that have no teeth . ”
The last immigration bill debated by senators failed in 2007 partly because voters didn ’ t believe the government was serious about enforcing the law .
Lawmakers said voters remembered the lesson of the 1986 amnesty , when millions of illegal immigrants were promised citizenship and voters were promised stiffer security . The citizenship was granted , but not the security .
“ We screwed up and shouldn ’ t do it again , ” said Sen. Chuck Grassley , an Iowa Republican who voted for the 1986 amnesty but is a leading opponent of this year ’ s bill .
The committee plowed through 32 amendments dealing with border security , closing out that part of the bill .
They defeated a proposal by Sen. Jeff Sessions , Alabama Republican , to build 700 miles of two-tier fencing along the border on a 12-6 vote , and turned back Mr. Cruz ’ s amendment , by a 13-5 vote , to triple Border Patrol forces and quadruple spending on equipment .
Senators also killed an amendment by Mr. Grassley to require a secure border before immigrant legalization , and by Sen. Mike Lee , Utah Republican , to make Congress have to certify that the border is secure . Both were defeated by 12-6 votes .
Democrats , joined by Mr. Graham and Mr. Flake , said making anything dependent on a vote in Congress is risky , given the record for gridlock .
Lawmakers will return to work Tuesday to begin debating the legalization program and the bill ’ s rewrite of future legal immigration .
Still to come are major tests such as a Democratic amendment to allow gay couples the same immigration rights as other married couples . The Republicans who negotiated the bill said that would be a deal-breaker , while Democrats said to treat gay couples differently would be unconscionable discrimination .
The bill is almost certain to clear the Judiciary Committee , which is stacked with supporters . It will face a bigger challenge on the Senate floor , where it will need 60 votes to clear , and where some Democrats may join Republicans in opposition .
Overhanging Thursday ’ s hearing was a lawmaker who wasn ’ t in the room : Sen. Marco Rubio , a Florida Republican who was a key part of the Gang of Eight . Republicans are counting on him to sell the bill to wary conservatives .
Some Republicans who oppose the bill pointed to Mr. Rubio ’ s comments that he was willing to do more to secure the border and said that opened the door to their amendments .
Mr. Rubio said he believes the bill will work as written , but he is open to changes if they will earn voters ’ confidence .
“ I want us to get a consensus on that issue that I ’ ve outlined , which is this balance between , does Congress dictate to [ the Homeland Security Department ] specifically what it needs to do on the border , versus allowing them the flexibility — the people on the ground — to decide what the best practices are . ”