Harry Reid hopes for agreement with Mitch McConnell on votes by Monday . | AP Photos On immigration , hurry up and wait
The Senate finished its first week of debate Thursday on a massive immigration reform bill — with almost nothing to show for it .
Senators delivered hours of speeches and filed dozens of amendments . But they never figured out a way to begin casting votes on all of those proposed changes .
The most anticipated policy fight in years got off to a slow start because Democrats and Republicans deadlocked over process . The world ’ s greatest deliberative body was forced to do just that — deliberate — while its leaders quarreled over how to perform its most basic function : vote .
The lack of any serious progress this week means that the Senate will need to make up for it over the next two weeks , raising the likelihood of weekend voting sessions and a late rush to finish the bill before the July 4 recess .
The risk of delay is that unless the voting starts soon , senators who have been waiting months to get a chance to shape the legislation can argue they ’ ve been cut out the process and potentially oppose the bill because they ’ re not securing changes they need .
“ I was hoping we would move faster because everybody agreed we should have votes ; maybe it will pick up next week , ” said Sen. John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) , a leader of the Gang of Eight . “ One senator can block progress in the Senate — proven again . ”
The Senate is a body in which everything operates under the concept of unanimous consent — meaning any one senator can object and effectively bring the Senate to a halt if the lawmaker disagrees with something . That means scheduling votes on amendments requires the hyperpartisan body to agree .
Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) can get around those objections by filing for cloture , but it takes 60 votes and days of waiting to overcome each objection . He would rather work out a series of vote agreements with Minority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) to dispense with bundles of amendments at a time .
It ’ s possible Reid can move to table — or kill — amendments as he did Thursday with a border security proposal sponsored by Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R-Iowa ) . But there ’ s a peril to that : Proponents want to make modifications to appease concerns of fence-sitting senators not simply to keep the bill intact .
Reid hopes to get an agreement with McConnell for the first major series of votes by Monday and then repeat that process until senators don ’ t have any more amendments to offer .
The dispute this week boiled down to the terms of passage .
Reid wanted the amendments to have to clear a 60-vote bar . Grassley argued that it should be a simple majority .
It was a political role reversal : Republicans , as the minority party , usually demand the higher threshold . But in this case , the lower bar could help them pass key changes to the bill .
“ How many times have you heard the Republican leader say on the floor and publicly that the new reality in the United States Senate is 60 ? ” Reid asked Wednesday from the Senate floor .