As our thoughts and prayers continue to go out to the victims affected by the Boston Marathon bombing , we should also note that this tragedy has yet again exposed long-standing weaknesses in our national security . Congress should now take the opportunity to finally address these problems .
This should be incorporated into the current debate over comprehensive immigration reform .
Any meaningful immigration reform must implement strong national security protections . After the Boston tragedy , there are basic questions : How did two individuals immigrate to the United States from a known hotbed of Islamic extremism , the Chechen Republic in Russia , to then allegedly commit acts of terrorism ? Were there any safeguards ? Could this have been prevented ?
Our immigration and visa system should give more scrutiny to individuals from high-risk areas of the world . We know that our flawed visa system was a significant part of the intelligence failure that led to Sept. 11 . As National Review ’ s Kevin Williamson noted , “ If our law enforcement and intelligence agencies , particularly the State Department , had been doing a minimally competent job vis-a-vis visa overstays and application screening , at least 15 of the 19 [ hijackers on 9/11 ] would have been caught . ”
After Sept. 11 , there was comprehensive reform of our intelligence-gathering system , but our current system still did not adequately detect these latest extremists . We know they immigrated to the United States as children , but their background , combined with suspicious activities , did catch the attention of a foreign government two years ago . According to media reports , the FBI had interviewed the deceased Boston attack suspect at the request of that foreign government .
As far as we know , there was no follow-up to the interview . What were the details of this interview ? Was there anything that might have given investigators cause for suspicion ? Should there have been further inquiry ? Did a foreign government detect something our own government failed to ? And if so , why ?
It has been reported that both suspects were legal permanent residents , that one was a naturalized citizen and the other was on the path to becoming a citizen . What deficiencies are there in our immigration and visa system that would have allowed this ? We have already seen radicalized citizens , but is there a way to detect extremist behavior in those still on the path to citizenship ? What kind of safeguards can we implement that might prevent granting them citizenship ?
In 2002 , Congress created the National Security Registration System , but it was suspended in 2011 by Department of Homeland Security Secretary Janet A. Napolitano . We know that system had problems , but the basic premise behind it — that extra screening is necessary for immigrants from nations that have a higher population of extremists — needs to be revisited and reinstituted . This should be a part of any comprehensive immigration reform .
In my home state of Kentucky , our refugee program has proven to be a problem . On Jan. 29 , two Iraqi citizens living in Bowling Green , Ky. , were sentenced to long prison terms for participating in terrorism and providing material support to terrorists while living in the United States . Does the current immigration reform address how this might have happened ? Regardless , we need more scrutiny when accepting refugees from high-risk nations .
We should take a hard look at student visas . We should examine whether we should suspend visas from high-risk areas , pending an investigation into the national security implications of this program . Any new legislation must address the visa entry and exit programs , in addition to refugee programs that have proven problematic in Bowling Green . We should have a thorough examination of the facts in the Massachusetts case to see if legislation is necessary to prevent a similar situation in the future .
These national security concerns must be part of the comprehensive immigration-reform debate . It is Congress ‘ job to make sure the federal government is doing everything it can to prevent any would-be terrorists from using a flawed immigration system against us .
Sen. Rand Paul , Kentucky Republican , is a member of the Senate Foreign Relations and Homeland Security committees .