( CNN ) - Members of the bipartisan Gang of Eight senators working out immigration overhaul legislation said Sunday they expect to have a draft bill agreeable to their circle by the end of this week . But Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Florida , a member of the group , issued a statement saying it was too soon to consider the deal struck .
`` I 'm encouraged by reports of an agreement between business groups and unions on the issue of guest workers . However , reports that the bipartisan group of eight senators have agreed on a legislative proposal are premature , '' he wrote .
Shortly after that statement was released , Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-South Carolina , signaled on CNN 's `` State of the Union with Candy Crowley '' that the deal will be reached within days .
`` It 's got to be written up . We have n't signed off , '' he said . `` There are a few details yet , but conceptual - we have an agreement between business and labor , between ourselves . It has to be drafted . It will be rolled out next week . ''
Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-New York , concurred on the timeline and but acknowledged a few issues remained to be settled .
`` As Sen. Rubio correctly says , we have said we will not come to final agreement until we look at all of the legislative language , and he 's correctly pointing out that that language has n't been fully drafted . There will be little kerfuffles , but I do n't think any of us expect there to be problems , '' he said on NBC 's `` Meet the Press . ''
Sen. Jeff Flake , R-Arizona , also sounded optimistic a deal would be reached but said on NBC , `` We 've still got a ways to go with the language . ''
Both Schumer and Rubio are seen as particularly important in this process , with Schumer the Democratic deal-maker who is bringing the sides together and Rubio key to bringing on board conservative members of both the House and Senate .
Schumer said any difference between his view and Rubio 's view of progress toward a deal is just `` semantics . ''
`` I do n't think he 'll walk away , '' Schumer said when asked , adding , `` He 's had a lot of input into the bill . Obviously his views are not the same as the other seven of us . Every one of us has different views . ... He is protecting some of the things that he thinks are very important in the bill , but I do n't think that will stand in the way in any way of any agreement . ''
On Saturday , leaders of labor and business groups reached consensus on the outlines of a guest worker program - a sticking point in the area of immigration between influential lobbies including the AFL-CIO and Chamber of Commerce - a source familiar with those talks told CNN .
The consent of business and labor groups is important not only because it means neither side will fight the bill , but also because a key goal of the Gang of Eight is to restructure the current system for allocating U.S. visas . Graham said on CNN that the Gang of Eight would propose legislation that prioritizes visas for business purposes over visas for family members , as well as preventing a future wave of illegal immigration once the path to citizenship is implemented for those currently undocumented and in the U.S .
Schumer said with those groups in agreement , `` every major policy issue has been resolved on the Gang of Eight , '' meaning a deal would emerge this week , followed by `` extensive markup and debate on the bill in April ( in the Senate Judiciary Committee ) and then we go to the floor , God willing , in May . I think we 're on track . ''
After a series of legislative backroom deals on fiscal matters , Rubio underlined with his statement the importance of bringing this deal through what members call `` regular order , '' the process of amending draft legislation in committee , on the floor , and eventually a meeting of the two houses to reconcile any differences .
`` We will need a healthy public debate that includes committee hearings and the opportunity for other senators to improve our legislation with their own amendments , '' Rubio wrote . `` Eight senators from seven states have worked on this bill to serve as a starting point for discussion about fixing our broken immigration system . But arriving at a final product will require it to be properly submitted for the American people 's consideration , through the other 92 senators from 43 states that were n't part of this initial drafting process .
`` In order to succeed , this process can not be rushed or done in secret , '' he wrote .
In addition to Rubio , Graham , Schumer and Flake , the Gang of Eight includes Sens . Michael Bennet , D-Colorado ; Dick Durbin , D-Illinois ; John McCain , R-Arizona ; and Robert Menendez , D-New Jersey .
President Barack Obama has described immigration as a top priority of his , but appears to have left the negotiating largely up to Capitol Hill , especially after a draft administration plan for immigration reform was reported publicly and drew criticism from Republicans , including Rubio .
A White House official said Saturday the president `` continues to be encouraged by progress being made by the bipartisan group of senators . ''
`` We look forward to seeing language once it is introduced , and expect legislation to move forward as soon as possible , '' the official said .
- CNN 's Kevin Liptak , Jessica Yellin and Kevin Bohn contributed to this report
Watch State of the Union with Candy Crowley Sundays at 9am ET . For the latest from State of the Union click here .