President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE on Friday told Republican lawmakers to `` stop wasting their time '' on immigration legislation , even as the House grapples to reach a compromise .
`` Republicans should stop wasting their time on Immigration until after we elect more Senators and Congressmen/women in November , '' the president wrote on Twitter . `` Dems are just playing games , have no intention of doing anything to solves this decades old problem . We can pass great legislation after the Red Wave ! ''
Republicans should stop wasting their time on Immigration until after we elect more Senators and Congressmen/women in November . Dems are just playing games , have no intention of doing anything to solves this decades old problem . We can pass great legislation after the Red Wave ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 22 , 2018
The tweet comes while Republicans in Congress are scrambling to address immigration issues , reportedly with the president 's support . But Trump has been fuming over the lack of action . The House rejected a hard-line immigration bill Thursday , and Republican leaders delayed the vote on a separate , more moderate bill until next week .
`` Elect more Republicans in November and we will pass the finest , fairest and most comprehensive Immigration Bills anywhere in the world , '' Trump said Friday .
`` Right now we have the dumbest and the worst . Dems are doing nothing but Obstructing . Remember their motto , RESIST ! Ours is PRODUCE ! ''
Elect more Republicans in November and we will pass the finest , fairest and most comprehensive Immigration Bills anywhere in the world . Right now we have the dumbest and the worst . Dems are doing nothing but Obstructing . Remember their motto , RESIST ! Ours is PRODUCE ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 22 , 2018
The president 's tweets also come amid the fallout over the administration 's `` zero tolerance '' immigration policy , which caused the separation of children from their families at the border .
Trump on Wednesday signed an executive order permitting families to remain together after facing mounting political pressure . Attorney General Jeff Sessions Jefferson ( Jeff ) Beauregard SessionsLewandowski says he 's open to role defending Trump against impeachment Trump reignites court fight with Ninth Circuit pick Democrats press Nadler to hold Lewandowski in contempt MORE in April had directed the Justice Department to prioritize the criminal prosecution of individuals who try to unlawfully cross the U.S.-Mexico border .
Meanwhile , the House for weeks has been locked in a debate over immigration legislation . While the hard-line bill failed in the lower chamber Thursday , lawmakers are negotiating in hopes of achieving passage for a compromise bill .
The president on Thursday phoned House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte Robert ( Bob ) William GoodlatteUSCIS chief Cuccinelli blames Paul Ryan for immigration inaction Immigrant advocacy groups should n't be opposing Trump 's raids Top Republican releases full transcript of Bruce Ohr interview MORE ( R-Va. ) to tell him he supports the compromise legislation , according to The Washington Post .
The president also noted that Republicans need several Democrats on board with any legislation for it to pass the Senate , an outcome he suggested is unlikely .
`` Even if we get 100 % Republican votes in the Senate , we need 10 Democrat votes to get a much needed Immigration Bill — & the Dems are Obstructionists who won ’ t give votes for political reasons & because they don ’ t care about Crime coming from Border ! '' Trump said . So we need to elect more R ’ s ! ''
Even if we get 100 % Republican votes in the Senate , we need 10 Democrat votes to get a much needed Immigration Bill - & the Dems are Obstructionists who won ’ t give votes for political reasons & because they don ’ t care about Crime coming from Border ! So we need to elect more R ’ s ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 22 , 2018
Moderate members of the Senate gathered on Wednesday to discuss a compromise bill on the issue of family separations after Trump signed his executive order .