Donald Trump 's new line on immigration – `` fair , but firm '' – is leaving both Republicans and Democrats with the same question : Is the famously hard-line GOP nominee softening his approach ?
His campaign insists his position is `` exactly the same '' in principle . But even Trump acknowledged Tuesday there `` could certainly be a softening , because we 're not looking to hurt people . ''
And in the course of just a few days , Trump has gone from calling for mass deportations for millions – a position to the right of even many Republicans – to arguing deportations should focus on those who commit crimes , veering into the same territory as President Barack Obama and Democrat Hillary Clinton .
If this week 's string of vague and contradictory statements by Trump and his team is revealing anything , it 's that his immigration policy is still evolving . Just days ago Trump reshuffled his campaign staff as part of an effort to recalibrate his message for the general election , in which his tough stance on immigration may be more of a liability than it was in the Republican primary .
This week , Trump 's campaign postponed a major immigration speech scheduled for this week , but announced he 'd hold two events highlighting border security needs and crimes committed by immigrants in the U.S. illegally .
A look at what Trump has proposed , compared to Clinton 's policies and Obama 's record in office :
Trump : From the start , the brash billionaire 's campaign has been rooted in the promise of a dramatically different approach to immigration . He presented a detailed deportation plan for 11 million immigrants in the U.S. illegally , complete with estimated timeframes and references to a `` deportation force . '' Trump argued all would have to return to their country of origin but that the `` good people '' could come back through legal processes .
His tune seems to have changed . On Monday , Trump said his first focus would be to get rid of `` the bad ones . '' Campaign manager Kellyanne Conway said Trump wanted to deport immigrants with criminal records , not all 11 million . What about that deportation force ? `` He has not said that for a while , '' Conway said .
Clinton : The Democratic nominee has said overhauling immigration laws will be a top priority , but in the meantime , she says current laws should be enforced `` humanely . '' Her campaign says deportations would focus on immigrants `` who pose a violent threat to public safety . '' Clinton wants to shut down privately run detention centers .
Obama : Immigration advocates have railed against Obama for deporting huge numbers – more than 2.5 million in all – and dubbed him the `` deporter in chief . '' In 2012 , Immigration and Customs Enforcement set a record of removing 409,000 immigrants . Since then , though , the numbers have declined to just 235,413 in the 2016 budget year .
Trump : He 's offered conflicting takes on how he 'd deal with immigrants brought here illegally as children , and their parents . He praised the Supreme Court 's move in June that halted Obama 's second wave of executive actions on that issue , actions Trump decried as `` executive amnesty . '' His campaign says he 'd reverse Obama 's remaining actions .
On the other hand , Trump has said he would n't split up families , though he has n't explained how he 'd reconcile those policies . He also supports eliminating birthright citizenship for children born in the U.S. to parents who came here illegally .
Clinton : She wants to preserve Obama 's executive actions – both those affecting children and those affecting their parents . Clinton also wants to expand those actions to immigrants who have contributed to their communities or faced `` extreme labor violations . ''
Obama : Obama 's position , like Trump 's recent comments , is rooted in the notion that limited law enforcement resources should be focused on law-breaking immigrants , not kids and families .
The president 's first set of executive actions has shielded more than 800,000 young immigrants from deportation since 2012 . After Republicans won the Senate in 2014 and the prospect of an immigration overhaul grew dimmer , Obama acted again to protect up to 4 million parents of U.S. citizens or permanent residents and let them work legally . The courts have put the more recent actions on hold .
Trump : He says the border is n't adequately protected . Trump has called for tripling the number of Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers , who handle deportations .
And then , of course , there 's the wall . Trump is standing firm behind his plans to build a `` real wall '' on the Mexican border and to force Mexico to fund it . He says until Mexico pays up , the U.S. will increase visa and border crossing fees , `` impound all remittance payments '' from immigrants here illegally , and possibly increase tariffs or cut foreign aid .
Clinton : She 's called for securing U.S. borders , but has also said the U.S. is already doing `` a really good job . '' In March , Clinton said increased border security staffing , new fencing and lower immigration rates have lessened the problem .
Obama : In the 2008 budget year , before Obama took office , the U.S. had about 17,000 Border Patrol agents , reflecting an increase under President George W. Bush from the 9,212 the U.S. had in 2000 . Obama increased it to 20,199 in 2009 , and the numbers have hovered around there ever since . Border apprehensions dropped significantly during that time .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Meanwhile , billions of taxpayer dollars have gone toward border fencing and technology to secure the border , another project that started under Bush .