House Republicansd voted against an amendment that would end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . | AP Photo/seattlepi.com , Jordan Stead House votes to roll back Obama 's immigration actions But this version of the Homeland Security spending bill has no hope of getting through the Senate .
House Republicans mounted a furious assault on four years of President Barack Obama ’ s immigration policies Wednesday — satisfying hard-liners on the issue but prompting resistance among some moderates concerned that the party ’ s leadership has gone too far .
The GOP-led chamber voted 236-191 to pass legislation funding the Department of Homeland Security through the end of September , with measures attached that would effectively kill the administration ’ s efforts to unilaterally shield millions of undocumented immigrations from deportations . It would also thwart Obama administration enforcement policies that limited deportations of people who weren ’ t criminals or serial immigration violators .
But given the qualms of moderates in the Senate and a presidential veto threat , the all-out rollback doesn ’ t stand a chance of becoming law . So even with the legislation passing the House , Republican leadership — in both chambers — will face the complicated calculus of trying to keep DHS funded while registering the GOP ’ s broad disapproval of Obama ’ s unilateral moves on immigration .
“ We do not take this action lightly , but simply there is no alternative , ” Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) said on the floor Wednesday . “ This executive overreach is an affront to the rule of law and to the Constitution itself . ”
Potential signs of trouble began erupting Tuesday , when House Republicans began telling the leadership ’ s whip operation that they planned to vote against an amendment from Rep. Marsha Blackburn ( R-Tenn. ) that would end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . That program , which Obama announced in 2012 , has stopped some 600,000 young undocumented immigrants from being deported and allowed them to work legally .
Ultimately , 26 House Republicans voted against the measure killing DACA — mostly moderates on immigration who represent states with significant Latino populations , such as California , Florida , Nevada and New York . Some members were also irritated at the leadership ’ s courting of the hard-liners — particularly those who had mounted a failed coup against Boehner on the vote for speaker last week .
“ This is rewarding bad behavior , ” one frustrated GOP lawmaker said .
DACA was the model for an even broader executive action announced by Obama last November , in which similar protections would be offered to roughly 4 million immigrants without legal status who have been here for at least five years and have children who are U.S. citizens or green-card holders . The administration also expanded DACA itself to a much larger pool of undocumented immigrants who came to the United States illegally at a young age .
To be sure , Wednesday ’ s plan had broad support from the GOP conference . But with near-unanimous Democratic opposition , the Republican leadership had to ensure it didn ’ t lose too many of its moderate members on the immigration policies , or else the overall bill could have sunk .
“ If President Obama ’ s unilateral immigration amendments are not stopped , future presidents will continue to expand the power of the executive branch and encroach upon individual liberty , ” House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte ( R-Va. ) , who helped craft the party ’ s response to Obama ’ s executive action , said on the House floor Tuesday . “ The time is now for Congress to take a stand against these abusive actions . ”
With the Obama administration ’ s veto threat and the near-certain prospect that the GOP-held Senate would not have 60 votes for it , the House Republican legislation essentially has no chance of becoming law . Still , some Democrats privately worry that the heated debate in Washington over killing Obama ’ s executive actions could scare off immigrants who could qualify for the program , which would give a three-year deportation reprieve and work permits to nearly 5 million undocumented immigrants .
House Democrats discussed their strategy at a weekly party meeting on Tuesday , and they reached a consensus that if any of the five immigration amendments slated for a vote Wednesday gets attached , they would oppose final passage on the funding bill , according to an aide .
“ These amendments are foolish and a step backwards , ” Rep. Zoe Lofgren ( D-Calif. ) said on the House floor Tuesday night . “ And not funding DHS is dumb and dangerous . ”
Democrats also took issue with other amendments that passed on Wednesday . For instance , Rep. Ron DeSantis ( R-Fla. ) and Martha Roby ( R-Ala. ) have language requiring immigration officials to treat immigrants convicted of domestic violence or sex offenses as highest priorities for deportations .
But Lofgren circulated a Dear Colleague letter Tuesday that argued the legislation was , in part , redundant — because such immigrants already are included in the administration ’ s enforcement policies — but it doesn ’ t include an existing provision that requires officials to ask if the immigrant is a domestic violence victim . That , Lofgren argued , could open up potential domestic violence victims to deportations .
The Republican plan also ramps up immigration enforcement by reviving Secure Communities — the controversial federal fingerprint-swapping program on immigrants that Obama ’ s executive actions ended and replaced — and forces state and local officials to comply with so-called ICE detainers , in which Immigration and Customs Enforcement requests local law enforcement agencies to keep an immigrant in custody , even if they would otherwise be released .