( ███ ) - A U.S. judge in California on Friday ordered President Donald Trump ’ s administration to pay the costs of reuniting immigrant parents with children separated from them by officials at the U.S.-Mexican border , rather than forcing the parents to pay .
The U.S. government is working to reunite around 2,000 children with their parents , who were detained and separated as part of Trump ’ s “ zero tolerance ” approach to deter illegal immigration .
“ It doesn ’ t make any sense for any of the parents who have been separated to pay for anything , ” U.S. District Judge Dana Sabraw , who last month ordered that the children be reunited with their parents by July 26 , said at a hearing in San Diego .
The government missed a deadline this week for getting the youngest of the children back with their parents .
Trump has made his hardline immigration policies a central part of his presidency . His administration adopted the family separation policy as part of its effort to discourage illegal immigration , but Trump bowed to intense political pressure and abandoned the policy on June 20 .
A lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union , which has sued the administration over the family separations , said at the hearing that immigrant parents had been told by immigration officials they had to pay for their travel . One parent was initially asked to pay $ 1,900 to be reunited with a child , according to ACLU court papers .
Trump administration lawyer Sarah Fabian called the judge ’ s order on paying for the reunifications “ a huge ask on HHS , ” referring to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services . Fabian said those decisions were handled at the field level , adding that HHS , which houses the detained children , had limited resources .
The judge also agreed to impose timelines on the government for reporting details about its reunification efforts .
The administration has said its initial reunifications were slowed by the need for DNA testing and criminal background checks on parents , and to determine their fitness to care for their children .
In a filing with the court , HHS official Chris Meekins said the administration had streamlined its vetting procedures to comply with a July 10 court order , but that the swifter process could put children at risk .
Adults are no longer being DNA tested to verify parentage , Meekins said , and background checks are not being performed on adults who will be living with the children . Meekins said that , while abbreviated vetting speeds up the reunification process , it also “ materially increases the risk of harm to children ” and could result in children being placed in abusive environments or with adults who are not their parents .
The government said it intends to identify between six and eight locations where all reunifications will take place . The government ’ s filing did not say whether it intends to release families after reunification , deport them or keep them together in detention .