President Obama began his Fourth of July celebration Wednesday by naturalizing 25 active-duty service members , using the event to highlight his recent executive order to spare hundreds of thousands from deportation and press lawmakers to pass a comprehensive immigration overhaul .
After Homeland Security Secretary Janet A. Napolitano swore in the new citizens in the East Room of the White House , Mr. Obama congratulated the individuals and their families .
“ What a perfect way to celebrate America ’ s birthday - the world ’ s oldest democracy - with some of our newest citizens , ” he said .
“ I have to tell you , just personally , this is one of my favorite things to do . It brings me great joy and inspiration , because it reminds us that we are a country that is bound together not simply by our ethnicity or bloodlines , but by fidelity to a set of ideas , ” he continued .
Mr. Obama said he was particularly proud to welcome the group of service members as fellow citizens because they chose to serve the country “ that was not yet fully your own ” in a time of war .
Stressing that America is a nation of immigrants and the important role each generation has played in helping build and shape the country , Mr. Obama called on Congress to pass the Dream Act , which would grant citizenship to certain illegal immigrants who arrived here as children and remain in good moral standing , as well as a comprehensive overhaul of the nation ’ s immigration laws .
“ For just as we remain a nation of laws , we have to remain a nation of immigrants ” he said . “ And that ’ s why , as another step forward , we ’ re lifting the shadow of deportation from deserving young people who were brought to this country as children .
“ It ’ s why we still need a Dream Act - to keep talented young people who want to contribute to our society and serve our country , ” he said . “ It ’ s why we need - why America ’ s success demands - comprehensive immigration reform . ”
In mid-June , Mr. Obama bypassed Congress and issued a directive allowing potentially more than 800,000 young people to remain in the United States without the risk of being deported .
The politically charged decision came as Mr. Obama faces a tough re-election fight against likely Republican nominee Mitt Romney , and Hispanic voters in swing states will play a critical role in determining who occupies the Oval Office next year .
Mr. Romney has said he would veto the Dream Act . He said he favors a path to citizenship only for illegal immigrant young adults who join the military .
Hours after the Obama announcement , Mr. Romney said the move could make it harder to find a long-term fix to the immigration issue .
In the weeks since , Mr. Romney has been vague about his position , but he recently told supporters in a private meeting that he would not modify the hard-line immigration stance and opposition to amnesty he took during the Republican presidential primaries , according to a report earlier this week in Politico .
The Dream Act last came before Congress in 2010 when it was defeated on a bipartisan filibuster .
Democrats have introduced their own legislation again this year , and called for the GOP to work with them .
Mr. Romney has enlisted the campaign trail help of Sen. Marco Rubio , Florida Republican , a Cuban-American and rising star in the GOP who is working on his own version of a Dream Act .
Mr. Obama and the first family planned to spend the afternoon and evening with military families at a USO concert on the White House ’ s South Lawn featuring country music star Brad Paisley and the Marine Corps Band .
The president will jump on a campaign bus Thursday for a two-day “ Betting on America ” tour that will take him through several northern Ohio communities that were instrumental to his 2008 win in the state and then onto Pennsylvania , another state he previously won , for an event in Pittsburgh .
Mr. Romney , who has been campaigning nearly nonstop since the end of primaries in the spring , was planning to spend the entire week with his family at their lakeside home in Wolfeboro , N.H. , where he has been seen aboard a personal watercraft with his wife , playing volleyball with his five sons and taking his grandchildren out for ice cream .
While he may be technically on vacation , but he is still staying focused on November . Mr. Romney huddled with campaign advisers Wednesday , as well as the aide overseeing his vice-presidential search . He made his first official public appearance of the week marching in Wolfeboro ’ s July Fourth parade , shaking hands and speaking from the bed of a pickup truck .