This is a rush transcript . Copy may not be in its final form .
JUAN GONZÁLEZ : Immigrant communities across the country are on edge after federal immigration agents arrested over 600 people in the past week in the largest raids since Donald Trump became president . Raids were reported in at least 11 states , including California , New York , Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina , Illinois , Indiana , Kansas , Kentucky , Missouri and Wisconsin . It is not clear if ICE , or Immigration and Customs Enforcement , is continuing routine operations or stepping up its deportations in line with President Trump ’ s policies . On Sunday , Trump tweeted , quote , “ The crackdown on illegal criminals is merely the keeping of my campaign promise . Gang members , drug dealers & others are being removed ! ” But the Department of Homeland Security has said the arrests were long planned and routine .
AMY GOODMAN : Immigrant rights activists say the actions signal a clear shift by the Trump administration to deport people who were considered a “ low priority ” for removal under President Obama . An executive order issued during the first week of Trump ’ s presidency expanded the group of immigrants considered priorities for deportation , including those without criminal records as well as those accused of crimes but not convicted . President of the California state Senate Kevin de León , who will be joining us in a minute , spoke out against the raids .
SEN. KEVIN DE LEÓN : I can tell you half of my family would be eligible for deportation under the executive order , because if they got a false Social Security card , if they got a false identification , if they got a false driver ’ s license prior to us passing AB 60 , if they got a false green card—and anyone who has family members , you know , who are undocumented knows that almost entirely everybody has secured some sort of false identification . That ’ s what you need to survive , to work .
AMY GOODMAN : To talk more about the arrests , we go to Sacramento , where we ’ re joined by California state Senate President Kevin de León . We ’ re also joined by Steven Choi here in New York , the executive director of the New York Immigration Coalition .
We welcome you both to ███ ! Senator de León , talk about what you were describing in this clip , so that when President Trump says , “ We only arrest—we ’ re deporting criminals , ” what it means to have a criminal record when you ’ re undocumented .
SEN. KEVIN DE LEÓN : Well , good morning , Amy . And that was a testimony during a Senate public safety hearing in Sacramento at the State Capitol , with regards to my measure , the California Values Act .
The reality is this , is that the vast majority of very hard-working , law-abiding , taxpayer residents of California and of the nation who currently are undocumented , many of them do possess , in some form—some form , identification that they probably secured to get access to employment . This is quite common . And you wouldn ’ t be able to do so , say , for example , work at Carl ’ s Jr. , if you ’ re undocumented , without securing some type of identification .
The reality is this , is that there ’ s a lot of fear , there ’ s a lot of panic . The levels of anxiety are extremely high , especially among children , the American-born children of these law-abiding , tax-paying residents of California , because of the most recent raids that have taken place during the past week . When President Trump campaigned on deporting the most violent , those who are criminal felons , he made it very clear just recently , through his executive order , that he ’ s going to actually broaden the eligibility , the criteria for deportation . And the reality is this : We have innocent mothers , we have innocent fathers , hard-working individuals , who will be rounded up because of the broadening of the criteria . And they ’ re making—or , they will be making children fatherless , as well as motherless , separating children from their mothers , and mothers from their children .
So , what I ’ m trying to do with my colleagues in California is to make sure that the federal government does not commandeer our local police agencies , our state police agencies , and use our tax dollars to be an extension of the Trump deportation machine .
JUAN GONZÁLEZ : Well , you were mentioning families separated . We reported last week on the case of Guadalupe García de Rayos in Phoenix , Arizona . The felony conviction that they referred to in her case was the—the only crime was that she had been rounded up several years ago in a raid by Sheriff Joe Arpaio and convicted on a felony count of having false identification , and that was the basis by which then , suddenly now , she ’ s been deported with her two U.S.-born children , and her husband here still in the United States . So this is obviously a growing problem if you expand the definition of the dangerous felony folks that are subject to deportation to include , as you say , hundreds of thousands , if not millions , of people who have had to resort to a false identification in order to be able to work , which is why they came here in the first place , isn ’ t it ?
SEN. KEVIN DE LEÓN : That is correct , Juan . Again , you know , President Trump campaigned on the promise that he would actually deport very dangerous criminal felons . But the reality is this : With the executive orders and with Kris Kobach , Stephen Miller , as well as Steve Bannon , they have their sights set on hard-working residents of California and other parts of the country—New York , Florida , Texas and elsewhere .
The case in Arizona , the case of this young woman , Guadalupe , who is married , who has been a resident of Arizona for a very long time , since childhood , who has two American-born children , teenagers , I believe , routinely checked in with ICE authorities . And then , all of a sudden , the tone , tenor , the attitude of ICE changed quite dramatically after the January 20th inauguration of President Donald Trump . She clearly is not a gang member . She ’ s clearly not a violent offender . She ’ s clearly not a rapist or a thug or a murderer . But nonetheless , ICE detained her . She submitted herself to check in with them on a voluntary basis , and now has been deported .
This is not who we are as a nation , and this not who we are as a state , like California . We don ’ t separate children from their mothers , and mothers from their children . It ’ s un-American . And these are not the values that we uphold as the greatest nation in the entire world . It is my deep concern that he is instilling , he is planting the seeds of fear , of mistrust , of anxiety , of chaos . But I am especially concerned about young children , because you have young children , boys and girls , who are deeply fearful that at the curbside , when they ’ re waiting for their mothers or their fathers , will they actually show up to pick them up , or have they been detained by ICE agents because they have a broken taillight or they have an expired driver ’ s license ? These are not criminals . These are individuals who make up the fabric of who we are as the greatest nation and the greatest state in the world .
JUAN GONZÁLEZ : And , Steve Choi , I ’ d like to ask you , in terms of what ’ s happening here in New York , and also is there really a substantial difference between what ’ s going on now in the first weeks of the Trump administration and what was occurring under the Obama administration ?
STEVEN CHOI : Well , there ’ s a little bit of a difference here . I mean , the fact is , under the Obama administration , you saw hundreds of thousands of people being deported . And I think that ’ s a problem that we need to really understand in terms of context .
STEVEN CHOI : Millions , hundreds of thousands of people every single year . In fact , the Obama administration , at one point , in one year , deported nearly 400,000 people . So this kind of activity has been occurring . The problem , though , with ICE saying that these are simply routine operations is that we are in a moment that is anything but routine . We have a president who , as candidate , ran the single most anti-immigrant campaign in the history of the United States . And it ’ s a president who , in his very first week of his presidency , declared war on immigrant communities . He has said that he is going to ramp up enforcement activity and deportations , he ’ s going to triple the ICE force , he ’ s going to expand greatly the number of kinds of offenses that people can commit . And we ’ re really talking about potentially 25 million people in this country who potentially could be deported , according to his executive order . So the idea that ICE turns around and says , “ Look , these are just routine operations . We should not be in fear . People should not be engaging in hysteria , ” there ’ s a little bit of blaming the victim going on . It ’ s their actions in this moment , and in this time of the administration , that is causing this kind of fear .