Tijuana , Mexico ( CNN ) They 'd all traveled hundreds of miles -- by bus , by train , on foot . All had left their homes and scrounged for food and braved the rain and the chill to make it to the US border crossing at Tijuana , Mexico . And they all planned to seek asylum in the United States .
But someone had to be at the front of the line . And in the end , they picked her .
Gabriela Hernandez , a 27-year-old , pregnant mother of two whose journey CNN has followed for weeks , was among eight people chosen Monday by her fellow migrants to begin the process of seeking asylum in the United States .
Gabriela Hernandez carries Jonathan , 2 , while Omar , 6 , walks beside her before they presented themselves to US border officials .
Hernandez had fled a threat of violence in Honduras with her sons , ages 6 and 2 . But after a month on the road -- just as they reached the port of entry at San Ysidro -- officials there said they 'd reached capacity and were `` temporarily unable to bring additional persons traveling without appropriate entry documentation into the port of entry for processing . ''
Dozens of migrants vowed to camp outside the center , just a stone 's hurl from San Diego , until `` every last one is admitted into the United States , '' an organizer said .
When customs officials on Monday again began processing the cases of people they termed `` undocumented arrivals , '' the migrants looked among themselves for who should step to the fore .
Hernandez had come 3,000 miles to get to this place , two small boys in tow as a third child , in just its second trimester , grew in her belly . They 'd gotten so close , and yet , were still far from a celebration .
On the last Sunday of April , Hernandez was standing in a windy walkway outside the US border crossing facility , when a passerby recognized her from CNN and gave her a bill that she tucked away in her pocket .
After he left , she unraveled the note and was shocked that it was $ 50 .
Hernandez , a fellow mother from the caravan , Tesla Rich , and Omar hailed a cab to a Domino 's franchise on Avenida Revolución . They ordered two large pepperonis -- $ 5 each -- plus a ham and cheese pizza -- a favorite of her other son , Jonathan -- and some fries and wings .
Rich had left her 9-month-old daughter Valentina with someone at the crossing .
`` Do you think she 's OK ? '' she asked Hernandez . `` I 've never left her with a stranger like this before . ''
Rich , 19 , soon would find baby Valentina just fine . What she could n't know -- at least not at this moment -- was the fate of another daughter back in Honduras , where violence recently had claimed Rich 's uncle and sister , and where finding work amounted to only a dream .
Taken together , the elements of that nightmare had spurred her trip north -- and her wait , right now , for pizza .
Mexican officials let Gaby and Tesla out of the processing center to buy pizzas for the kids . They 're going back up the bridge to rejoin those with the caravan seeking asylum . @ CNN pic.twitter.com/7S99VGWP8Y — Khushbu Shah ( @ KhushbuOShea ) April 30 , 2018
`` My love , eat this carefully , '' Hernandez told Omar , who still burned his tongue .
Hours later , back in line , they 'd moved into a sloping , spiral walkway , past huge California and US flags . The air had grown colder . Hernandez had her boys pile on every stitch of clothing they had . She and Rich begged each volunteer who went by for more blankets .
A legal volunteer gave Omar and Jonathan his phone to watch Spanish-language cartoons . They stopped their sibling squabbles until the phone died . Then , Omar wailed . They 'd been in `` the pen '' for eight hours .
Hernandez made coffee , which little Jonathan loves . Omar squirreled away the sugar and Splenda . Then , a coffee cup tipped , soaking the blankets .
`` I just ca n't with you right now , '' Hernandez said in an echo of any mother , anywhere . She used her last baby wipes -- the ones she 'd been hoarding -- to sop up the mess .
Then , rain began to fall . The women hauled the blankets , the backpacks , the extra pairs of shoes , the children up under a bridge walkway lit by bright floodlights . As Rich nursed Valentina , people crossing into the United States eyed them all .
Hernandez 's eyes drooped . She 'd lost patience for her active boys . She 'd begun to lose faith .
`` I 'm still hopeful , but I 'm getting worried , '' she said . `` I 'm not going anywhere . ''
That evening , a border protection officer walked up to the migrants . Eight people could come forward to be processed , he said .
Would the officer choose , asked Laura Gault , an attorney with Human Rights First . No , he said , it was up to the migrants .
Migrants Tesla Rich , sitting , and Gabriela Hernandez , with sons Jonathan and Omar , try to keep warm as they await border officials to call them for asylum processing .
Soon , the group agreed : Hernandez and Rich , with their children , plus another mother and child , and a teenager traveling alone would go , Gault said .
And with that , Hernandez and her boys disappeared into the processing center , perhaps for hours or days or weeks . A step closer , perhaps , to the United States .
Hernandez 's plan always had been to claim asylum , given the danger to her life and her children in Honduras . Still , she knew it held no guarantees .
`` I do n't know what I 'm going to do , '' she 'd said earlier . `` I can not go back to my country . ''