While President Trump still dominates the sanctuary city conversation , the battleground has shifted from feds versus the states to one that pits states against their own cities and counties .
From California to Texas to Indiana , states that have attempted to set rules for how much cooperation their police are allowed — or required — to give federal officials on immigration cases are finding that those rules are being challenged , evaded or otherwise thwarted by local officials determined to go their own way .
In some cases , the cities and counties are defying Mr. Trump and state leaders who want to support the president . Other times it ’ s the states that are defying Mr. Trump , and cities and counties that are rallying to support him .
The president lent his support to those officials Wednesday , holding a powwow with California officials who are resisting their state ’ s ultra-strict sanctuary law .
“ It ’ s becoming quite popular what you ’ re doing — [ fighting ] a law that forces the release of illegal immigrant criminals , drug dealers , gang members and violent predators into your communities , ” Mr. Trump told the officials .
While Mr. Trump praised the California rebels , elsewhere the local resistance is decidedly against him .
In Indiana , the cities of Gary and East Chicago are battling against lawsuits saying they are breaking a statewide anti-sanctuary policy .
And in Texas a number of cities fought — and lost — a battle against Gov . Greg Abbott ’ s ambitious sanctuary crackdown , which even includes penalties against local officials who try to become sanctuaries .
A Federation for American Immigration Reform report last week found the number of sanctuaries has soared under Mr. Trump , with about half of the country now covered by some noncompliance policy .
Iowa Gov . Kim Reynolds signed a sanctuary ban last month .
In Tennessee , Gov . Bill Haslam is now on the clock , after the Legislature sent him an anti-sanctuary bill last week . Mr. Haslam has until this weekend to decide whether to sign or veto the bill , or let it become law without his signature .
Republican Rep. Diane Black , who is looking for a promotion to the governor , has launched a petition demanding he sign it . Nashville ’ s city council this week urged a veto , warning it would lead to racial profiling .
The experience in Texas , where the state ’ s anti-sanctuary law has been largely in effect for months , suggests it ’ s had little effect . The New York Times in March found that Houston police had made just two immigration status inquiries of people they encountered , while Austin reported just a single status inquiry .
Randy Capps , director of U.S. research at the Center for Migration Policy , said the sanctuary debate reflects the polarized politics of the day , with some on both sides moving away from the center .
But he figures most jurisdictions are probably still somewhere in the middle .
“ You have a lot of places that have really tried to avoid the issue and taken a middle ground , ” he said , though he added it ’ s becoming tougher as the sanctuary debate gets tied in with election campaigns .
Sanctuary defenders say they ’ re not pro-illegal immigration or pro-criminal , but say their job is to enforce local laws , not federal immigration matters .
California Attorney General Xavier Becerra , who is defending his state ’ s policies in court , said Mr. Trump ’ s Wednesday roundtable with sanctuary opponents amounted to “ scapegoating and fear-mongering . ”
“ While President Trump seems to think our local law enforcement agencies should do the job of the federal government , we ’ re in the business of public safety , not deportation , ” he said .
SB 54 , California ’ s main sanctuary law , prohibits state and local police from asking about immigration status , holding people for pickup by immigration authorities , or notifying deportation officers when an illegal immigrant is about to be released from state or local custody . Other state sanctuary laws give immigrants in California custody the right to refuse to talk to federal deportation officers , and limit private businesses in how they are able to cooperate with immigration officers .
Mr. Becerra said the state ’ s law “ works in concert ” with federal laws .
Los Alamitos , a small city in Orange County about 20 miles south of Los Angeles , passed a measure in March exempting itself from the state ’ s SB 54 law , which prohibits local police from offering substantive cooperation to federal immigration authorities .
Huntington Beach , a seaside city of about 200,000 people in Orange County , sued California in state court , hoping to sideline SB 54 .
In yet a third form of resistance , Orange County and a number of other jurisdictions have signed onto a federal lawsuit filed by the Trump administration asking U.S. courts to rule SB 54 is unconstitutional because it tramples on the federal government ’ s power to control immigration .
“ This is your Republican resistance right here , ” Melissa Melendez , a member of the California Assembly , told Mr. Trump at Wednesday ’ s meeting .
Michael Gates , the city attorney in Huntington Beach , said he was “ a little surprised ” the White House didn ’ t invite officials from his city to the meeting with Mr. Trump .
“ What we ’ ve advanced against the state , what we ’ ve filed in court is much much stronger than anything else the other cities have done , ” he told The ███ .
He was confident the sanctuary state law “ on its face ” was unconstitutional .
Mr. Capps , at the Migration Policy Institute , said the big legal question is what level of government is going to win among the localities , the states and the feds .
He said there ’ s a convincing argument that states will prevail , which could leave in force both pro-sanctuary laws , like California ’ s , and anti-sanctuary laws , like Texas ’ s , on the books .
But James Bopp Jr. , an Indiana lawyer representing residents who are challenging the sanctuary policies in Gary and East Chicago , said the order of primacy is clearly on the federal side .
“ States are obligated to follow , and local governments are obligated to follow federal law , and federal law is supreme under the Constitution , ” he said . “ It ’ s not up to individual public officials to decide what laws they ’ re going to follow and what laws they ’ re not going to follow . ”
“ We fought a civil war over the question , ” he added . “ The nullification side lost . Now interestingly , of course , at that time the Democrats were in favor of nullification to protect slavery . Now they ’ re in favor of nullification to protect illegal immigrants . So there is a consistency there . ”
He said the Gary and East Chicago sanctuary policies even order police to avoid arresting illegal immigrants if there ’ s any other alternative . While it ’ s unclear what alternatives there would be in a given case , he said the effect of that policy is to make every officer fear second-guessing by supervisors .
“ In order to protect them from deportation , they want to protect them from being charged with crimes , ” he said .