Mr. McConnell , 76 , is the longest-serving Senate Republican leader in history and is a wily tactician . While he is not generally considered vulnerable , his popularity is lagging at home . A poll by Western Kentucky University last spring found that only 30 percent of Kentuckians approve of his job performance . Sticking with Mr. Trump , whose approval ratings top 50 percent in Kentucky , is in his own political interest .
But if he wants to hang onto his job as majority leader , Mr. McConnell must also be mindful of the political fortunes of Republicans seeking re-election in states won by Mrs. Clinton in 2016 or by Democrats in November . A prolonged government shutdown is the last thing those lawmakers need . And even some Republicans up for re-election in states won by Mr. Trump , like Senator Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia , sound uneasy .
“ A shutdown , in my view , is a no-win proposition , ” Ms. Capito said , adding that she heard complaints from Transportation Security Administration workers as she was returning to Washington for the start of the new Congress this week . Ms. Capito is the chairwoman of the appropriations subcommittee with jurisdiction over the Department of Homeland Security ; the panel has already passed a bill funding the department , including $ 1.6 billion for border security including fencing — but with no money for Mr. Trump ’ s wall .
“ It is just a lot of unneeded stress on a lot of people , ” she said of the shutdown .
“ I would like to see it resolved soon , ” said Senator Joni Ernst , Republican of Iowa , who also faces re-election in 2020 . She repeated herself for emphasis : “ I would like to see it resolved soon . ”
For Mr. McConnell , the shutdown fight presents a dynamic that is likely to become familiar over the next two years , as House Democrats rush to pass long-sought liberal policies and , in many cases , try to use the chamber to highlight Republicans ’ opposition to legislative changes they believe are overwhelmingly popular . Mr. McConnell has already been burned once , having negotiated and passed through the Senate a plan to avoid the shutdown in the first place only to have Mr. Trump pull his support at the last minute .
“ He faces that reality now on every issue : What ’ s the White House going to do with this ? ” said Senator Richard J. Durbin , Democrat of Illinois and Mr. Schumer ’ s No . 2 . He predicted that Mr. McConnell ’ s approach — to simply stand in the way so that Mr. Trump is not forced to use his veto pen — would only change if Republican senators up for re-election begin to fear political costs of carrying the president ’ s water .
Senator John Cornyn of Texas , Mr. McConnell ’ s former No . 2 , compared Mr. McConnell ’ s task to “ threading a needle. ” Mr. McConnell ’ s former chief of staff , Josh Holmes , said it was considerably more simple than that .