A path to citizenship for “ Dreamers ” is emerging as the biggest sticking point in the negotiations over an immigration bill , one day after President Trump and Democratic leaders seemed close to a deal .
Democrats view Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program participants as `` Americans in every way except on paper '' and consider a pathway to citizenship non-negotiable .
But many conservative critics of DACA deem any citizenship benefits for immigrants in the country illegally to be “ amnesty ” for those who broke the law when they entered the country . And Trump on Thursday , after taking a beating in the conservative press , sought to assure his base that he won ’ t cave on one of his biggest campaign promises .
“ We ’ re not looking at citizenship . We ’ re not looking at amnesty . We ’ re looking at allowing people to stay here , ” Trump told reporters as he was headed to Florida to survey the damage from Hurricane Irma .
Those comments came as a surprise to Democratic leaders who dined with the president at the White House on Wednesday night . According to their version of events , they ’ ve insisted at every turn that DACA recipients be protected by legislation , dubbed the Development , Relief and Education for Alien Minors Act , or DREAM Act , which grants eventual citizenship .
“ Our insistence in every conversation — with the Speaker , with the president or with the Dreamers — [ has been ] that it will be the DREAM Act , ” House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) told reporters Thursday at the Capitol .
“ I 'm not here to speak about what the president understands , ” she added . “ But I do believe that there is an understanding that down the road , there is an eventual path to citizenship in the DREAM Act . ”
Other Democrats piled on , emphasizing that the party is virtually united on that issue .
“ I would think the overwhelming sentiment among Democrats is that there must be a path to citizenship — there must be , ” said Rep. G.K. Butterfield George ( G.K. ) Kenneth ButterfieldDemocrats see whistleblower report as smoking gun Democrats dread Kennedy-Markey showdown in 2020 ███ 's Morning Report — Trump 's new controversy MORE ( D-N.C. ) . He suggested the president might not have a full understanding of what the DREAM Act entails .
“ I ’ m not sure he knows what amnesty is , either , ” Butterfield said .
The DREAM Act concept is 16 years old , but it ’ s gained a newfound urgency this month after Trump dismantled DACA , an Obama-era executive program that grants temporary legal rights to some Dreamers — a term often used for people brought to the country illegally as minors .
The version favored by the Democrats was proposed in the House by Reps. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen ( R-Fla. ) and Lucille Roybal-Allard ( D-Calif. ) . According to the Migration Policy Institute ( MPI ) , it would make 1.8 million Dreamers eligible to immediately regularize their immigration status .
`` The only bill the Hispanic Caucus is comfortable with right now , as it 's written , is the DREAM Act , '' said Rep. Tony Cárdenas ( D-Calif. ) .
Rep. Carlos Curbelo ( R-Fla. ) has introduced a similar bill . The Florida Republican said Thursday that he spoke this week with the office of Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanDemocrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Three-way clash set to dominate Democratic debate Krystal Ball touts Sanders odds in Texas MORE ( R-Wis. ) about the proposal — a conversation he continued Thursday with House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) on the chamber floor .
According to the MPI , Curbelo 's bill would make 1 million Dreamers immediately eligible for legalization , leading to criticism from some Democrats who want to protect more people . Rep. Raúl Grijalva ( D-Ariz. ) , chairman of the Progressive Caucus , said Thursday that he wouldn ’ t support the Curbelo bill . Other members of the Hispanic Caucus indicated they would be forced to consider the bill if it came to the floor .
The issue creates a math problem for Ryan and other GOP leaders . Ryan , before accepting the Speaker ’ s gavel almost two years ago , had promised members of the far-right Freedom Caucus that he wouldn ’ t bring any immigration bill to the floor without having the support of more than half the Republican conference .
“ The Speaker has said he ’ s not going to bring something to the floor on immigration that doesn ’ t have the majority of the majority . He made that promise to us , and I ’ m sure that he ’ s not going to go back on his word , ” said Rep. Mark Meadows ( R-N.C. ) , chairman of the Freedom Caucus .
Meadows said he opposes the DREAM Act “ because it ’ s viewed as an amnesty bill. ” But four members of his caucus are working with GOP senators to forge an alternative more favorable to conservatives , he said .
“ We believe we can give some alternatives that will get a majority of the majority , ” Meadows said . He did not say when .
In 2010 , Democrats pushed through a DREAM Act proposal as one of their last acts as the House majority — a bill that won the support of only eight Republicans .
But Rep. Tom Cole ( R-Okla. ) said times have changed since then . He thinks a revised DREAM Act , loaded with border security measures , could win over a majority of the Republican conference .
“ I wouldn ’ t put too much credence in that 2010 vote , ” Cole said .
Ryan , for his part , suggested on Thursday that Trump ’ s support for a DACA fix would , alone , be enough to sway most Republicans to back the measure , as was the case with the debt-limit hike passed by Congress last week .
“ We 're not going to bring a solution to the floor that does not have the support of President Trump , ” Ryan said during a press briefing in the Capitol . “ And if we have the support of President Trump … that , I believe , will get a majority of our members , because our members support President Trump . ”
Since rescinding DACA , Trump has insisted he 'll support some form of legislative relief for DACA recipients , but he 's vacillated on what he 'll demand in exchange for that support .
On Wednesday alone , for instance , Trump seemed to divorce DACA from his proposed border wall , then appeared to condition one on the other within the space of three hours .
`` The wall will come later , we 're right now renovating large sections of wall , massive sections , making it brand new , '' Trump told reporters early Wednesday , when asked if the wall would be a part of a DACA replacement bill .
“ We ’ ll only do it if we get extreme security , not only surveillance but everything that goes with surveillance . If there ’ s not a wall , we ’ re doing nothing , ” he said later in the day .
That 's made Democrats wary of the apparent progress made in negotiations with the White House .
`` He is all over the map , to put it mildly , '' said Cárdenas . `` Until we put something on his desk and he actually signs it , only until then will we see what he 's really doing . ''