The 9th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals upheld an injunction barring enforcement of key provisions of President Donald Trump ’ s second executive order on refugees and migrants Monday , finding the president exceeded his lawful authority in issuing the directive .
The 9th Circuit ’ s decision comes as the Supreme Court reviews a petition submitted by the Department of Justice to review a separate ruling from the 4th Circuit , which also barred enforcement of the order .
The ruling keeps two provisions of the order from taking effect : the first suspends migration from six countries with high instances of terror , and the second reduces the number of refugees the U.S. will accept from 110,000 to 50,000 .
“ [ I ] mmigration , even for the President , is not a one-person show , ” the court wrote . “ The President ’ s authority is subject to certain statutory and constitutional restraints . We conclude that the President , in issuing the Executive Order , exceeded the scope of the authority delegated to him by Congress . ”
The 9th Circuit ’ s ruling is largely restricted to a textual analysis of the relevant immigration law , unlike other federal courts who have concentrated their inquiry on constitutional arguments . The court argues that a careful reading of the Immigration and Nationality Act — the law the administration cites to justify the legality of the travel ban — reveals that the administration has not shown that the order is lawful .
Section 1182 ( f ) requires that the President find that the entry of a class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United States . This section requires that the President ’ s findings support the conclusion that entry of all nationals from the six designated countries , all refugees , and refugees in excess of 50,000 would be harmful to the national interest . There is no sufficient finding in EO2 that the entry of the excluded classes would be detrimental to the interests of the United States .
The court discusses at some length the various ways in which the administration failed to show that migrant and refugee entry would be detrimental to the national interest ; among other claims , the court says the order does not show that nationality alone makes one at heightened security risk , or that current vetting procedures are inadequate for national security .
The court also points out that the order is , in some ways , under inclusive , as it would not hinder a terrorist who was radicalized in one of the six countries named in the order , but was born some place else , from entering the United States .
Though the ruling comes as the Supreme Court is grappling with the travel ban litigation arising from the 4th Circuit , it is still a major development . The 4th Circuit ’ s ruling found that Trump ’ s order creates the perception that the administration ’ s purpose is to pursue a policy that disparages Muslims , a violation of the Constitution ’ s ban on establishing religion .
This ruling put the Supreme Court in a difficult position . The justices will generally avoid weighing in on constitutional questions when it can , — especially where those questions are novel or controversial — and are loath to take up ongoing political controversies . The 9th Circuit ’ s ruling provides a basis for the high court to leave the travel ban on hold without engaging the contentious constitutional issues the 4th Circuit raises .
This is breaking news . Check back for updates as more information becomes available .