The debate is raging over whether the latest immigration bill is an amnesty for illegal immigrants , but one part is clear : The legislation would forgive businesses that have employed those immigrants illegally .
Employers who have allowed illegal immigrants to work off the books can come forward safely and provide their work history without fear of prosecution , and businesses that knowingly employed someone using a bogus or stolen Social Security number likewise would get a pass , according to an analysis of the bill by the Center for Immigration Studies , a think tank that wants a crackdown on immigration .
“ The illegal workers at least have to pay a token fine . The employers of illegal immigrants who violated a whole list of laws themselves don ’ t even have to pay , ” said Mark Krikorian , executive director of the center . “ It ’ s the business side of the amnesty that doesn ’ t get a lot of focus . ”
Business groups ’ support is considered critical to getting a bill passed this year , but attention has been focused mostly on a guest worker program and requirements that all employers would have to meet , such as using an electronic verification system to check potential hires .
Indeed , it wasn ’ t until business groups , led by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , struck a deal with the AFL-CIO on a guest worker program that the final Senate bill came together .
The chamber said the provisions exempting businesses from penalties “ had nothing to do ” with earning their support. ” Our focus in assessing the bill was looking to the good faith compliance and safe harbor provisions and other terms of the E-Verify mandate , the revisions to the high-skilled worker program , and the creation of a workable low-skilled worker program , ” said Blair Holmes , a chamber spokeswoman .
The crux of the Senate bill , negotiated by four Republican senators and four Democrats , would legalize most of the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants in the U.S. , but withhold a full pathway to citizenship for most of them until after the Homeland Security Department takes more steps to secure the border and implements the electronic verification system for employers .
All sides are still combing through the 844-page bill , trying to figure out what it would do . One major fight is over how many foreigners would be let into the country as a result of higher caps on legal immigration .
The Center for Immigration Studies says more attention should be given to the free pass for businesses.It counts four different ways businesses get a break : Employers who have illegal immigrants on their payroll can keep them there with no penalty ; there is no assessment of back taxes for their employees who worked off the books ; those who paid unfair wages will not be prosecuted ; and those who aided fraud by accepting bogus Social Security numbers won ’ t face a penalty .
“ It lets businesses that knowingly violated the law off the hook , ” Mr. Krikorian said . “ If they were not withholding payroll taxes , they ’ re held harmless . If they were violating labor laws , they ’ re held harmless . So this is a boon for crooked business . ”
The word “ amnesty ” itself is loaded . The bill ’ s backers argue that it isn ’ t an amnesty for illegal immigrants because it imposes a penalty of a long wait for citizenship and a nominal fine . Opponents say illegal immigrants are almost immediately safe from deportation , which amounts to an amnesty .
The backers appear to be winning the public relations battle . A poll by MWR Strategies , released last week , found that 38 percent of voters labeled the Senate bill as “ immigration reform , ” compared with 30 percent who labeled it “ amnesty . ”
What to do about businesses that hire illegal immigrants has long been a sticking point in the debate .
The last time Congress granted an amnesty , in 1986 , lawmakers legalized millions of immigrants but vowed to secure the borders and crack down on businesses that were magnets for the flow of people .
Knowingly hiring illegal immigrants became illegal and is punishable by fines ranging from $ 250 per employee for a first offense up to $ 10,000 per employee for a third offense . If prosecutors can demonstrate a pattern , employers can face up to six months in jail .
The current bill again promises to crack down on employers with fines and the potential for jail time .
Numbers are difficult to come by , but the Center for Immigration Studies estimates that 55 percent to 60 percent of illegal immigrants are working on the books , which means their taxes are being paid — though they are credited to bogus or stolen Social Security numbers .
The Obama administration has stepped up enforcement against employers compared with its predecessor , conducting far more reviews of businesses ’ immigration records .
In 2006 , for example , George W. Bush ’ s administration didn ’ t issue any final orders imposing penalties on businesses . But the Obama administration in 2011 issued 385 final orders , for a total of $ 10.5 million in fines.Mr . Krikorian said one question is whether it would be worth the cost to the government to try to go after business scofflaws for back taxes or other penalties . He said that would be difficult given the short time frames written into the Senate bill . If Congress writes a longer-term bill that requires Internal Revenue Service audits of illegal immigrants and businesses , he said , it might be possible .
The Senate Judiciary Committee will begin voting on amendments to the bill next week , once lawmakers return from a weeklong vacation .
The business amnesty could prove tricky to navigate when the bill comes to the Senate floor . Amendments imposing penalties on businesses that broke the law could be attractive for many lawmakers but could upset the delicate balance of the bill .