Nine months ago , the new Homeland Security secretary , Jeh Johnson , received a request from the White House . President Obama wanted him to personally take on perhaps the administration ’ s toughest political assignment : looking for creative ways to fix America ’ s immigration system without congressional action—or executive overreach .
Just four months into the job , Johnson had been prepared to take on tough security issues : Bombs on planes . Deadly diseases . Radical Islamists carrying U.S. passports . As the Pentagon ’ s chief counsel , Johnson had routinely dealt with contentious national security matters , finding himself in the midst of sensitive political fights like whether and how to close Guantanamo Bay , allowing gays in the military , and the rapid expansion of America ’ s killer drone program .
He wasn ’ t prepared for a crisis of purely political making .
Just days earlier Obama had been labeled the “ deporter in chief ” by a top Hispanic leader and ally , furious over the inaction by a president who seemed trapped between the demands of his supporters to allow millions of long-time residents who lacked documentation to stay in the country , and the seemingly endless foot-dragging of Republicans .
That request to Johnson would prove critical : a moment when the president set on the path of a much more ambitious change than the narrow changes in civil enforcement policy he and his aides had initially explored . In the remaining months of 2014 , Obama would come to support a sweeping executive action to allow millions of undocumented immigrants to stay in the country , as Congress lurched from willingness to consider changes to strained immigration laws to refusing to tackle the issue at all . Meanwhile , interest groups from the Congressional Hispanic Caucus to the Business Roundtable , from K Street ’ s shrewdest lobbyists to the most hard-nosed union bosses , intervened to try to shape the direction of the order .
At several key points , Obama wavered under pressure from members of his own party , worried about an electoral collapse that happened anyway when the votes were counted in the midterm elections earlier this month . Throughout , Johnson worked , largely in secret on the grand plan that finally became public this week , convening a small group of former Capitol Hill aides with expertise on immigration to work with Homeland Security officials to draft a policy that all expected would provoke not only fierce opposition from conservatives but from liberals who thought Obama should go further . It was a consuming task : in all , sources said , the immigration issue ate up fully half of the Homeland Security secretary ’ s time in recent months , with Johnson —a high-powered corporate attorney in his previous life — writing the final presidential memorandum himself .
By the time Obama went before the American people to unveil his plan in an Oval Office speech to the nation Thursday night , the White House and DHS had exchanged dozens of drafts and endured months of starts and stops , punctuated by a sharp electoral defeat for their fellow Democrats . Still , they went forward , with the president finally telling aides of his decision in the Roosevelt Room of the White House on Monday night .
Johnson , for his part , seemed anxious to be done with a journey he portrayed as a political lesson .
“ I was new to immigration law and policy…when I came into this job , ” Johnson said this week . “ Before that it was law of armed conflict , national security fiscal law . I ’ ve been disheartened and disappointed with how volatile the issue has become in American politics . I hope that people will look at immigration reform from a common sense point of view , what makes common sense , what ’ s practical , what ’ s pragmatic . ”
Three months after Obama ’ s first overture to Jeh Johnson , Republicans had not given up on the idea of an immigration plan of their own . At least , some argued , there was a political opening to forestall any independent action by the president . June 12 was the day that Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) planned to unveil to House leaders an immigration bill that , he was convinced , many Republicans could get behind .
IMMIGRATION POWER PLAYERS White House Jeh Johnson , secretary of Department of Homeland Security : Barack Obama tasked Johnson with fixing the immigration system . He became so engrossed with the job that he wrote the final legal memorandums for the executive order himself . Neil Eggleston , White House Counsel : Eggleston was a lead negotiator for the White House . He was in meetings with the stakeholders before Obama announced the July pivot to executive action . Obama called Eggleston ‘ his guy ’ on immigration reform , and he was . Esther Olavarria , senior counselor to the secretary : The former aide to Sen. Ted Kennedy , who advised the Massachusetts Democrat on immigration , served as the point person for Capitol Hill and outsiders at the Department of Homeland Security . Cecilia Munoz , director White House domestic policy council : Worked closely with the Hispanic pro-reform groups and helped build out the coalition of supporters to include civil rights groups and others . Valerie Jarrett , senior advisor to the president : Obama confidant tasked with wrangling downtowners and advocates to stay on message . Eric Holder , Attorney General The Justice Department played a key role in the review to ensure the executive actions are legally defensible , and has a point-person in place to coordinate its response to the anticipated legal onslaught . Capitol Hill Red-state Senate Democrats : Nervous about the political impact on their reelection bids , red-state Democrats such as Kay Hagan of North Carolina and Mark Pryor of Arkansas called on the White House to stop executive action on immigration . Obama did , but most lost their races anyway . Sen. Angus King ( Ind.-Maine ) : The Maine independent , who votes mostly with Democrats in the Senate , called the White House chief of staff over the summer hoping to persuade Obama not to take executive action . The call from an ally sent the White House into crisis mode . Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) : The Florida Republican worked aggressively this spring to pull together a bipartisan immigration reform deal , but his efforts were thwarted by Rep. Eric Cantor ’ s primary loss and the border crisis over the summer . Rep. Luis Gutierrez ( D-Ill. ) Perhaps the loudest voice in Congress for immigration reform , Gutierrez repeatedly criticized Obama over deportations and pushed for executive action for months — keeping the issue in front of the president . Capitol Hill Janet Murguia , President and CEO , National Council of La Raza : Murgia called Obama the “ deporter in chief ” at a March gala , setting off the events that ended in executive action . Mary Kay Henry , President of the Service Employees International Union ( SEIU ) : Henry is a key labor advocate who pushed Obama to stay the course and move ahead with executive action before the election . Richard Trumka , President AFL-CIO : Trumka , who heads one of the most powerful labor unions , made statements going back to 2013 that Obama should take executive action on immigration reform . Behind the scenes , the union was for delaying executive action until after the election .
For more than a year since Obama ’ s re-election , in which Hispanic voters had turned out in unprecedented numbers to vote against a Republican nominee who came out hard against undocumented immigrants ( Mitt Romney even memorably called on them to “ self-deport ” ) , Republicans had flirted with — and invariably backed away from — proposals for comprehensive immigration reform . Any bill that could be seen as granting legal status to people who entered or stayed in the country illegally was a non-starter for many conservatives . Senate Republicans like John McCain and Marco Rubio had eventually , carefully , stuck out their necks just far enough to get a comprehensive reform bill through the Democratic-controlled Senate . But the Republican-controlled House was another matter . GOP leaders saw the need for some sort of action , but rank-and-file conservatives were deeply skeptical or outright opposed .
Enter Diaz-Balart , the Floridian whose Hispanic background and solid relationships with conservative members of the House GOP conference made him well-positioned to broker a compromise . In May and early June , Diaz-Balart spent his evenings quietly shopping a PowerPoint presentation of a border enforcement and legalization bill to his colleagues . He poll-tested the proposal . He recruited a whip team of roughly eight lawmakers and they secured soft commitments from at least 120 Republicans , enough to pass Democratic support , according to multiple sources familiar with the process .
He had planned to sit down with House leaders on June 12 , ask for a week to firm up the numbers and secure their commitment to bring the bill to the floor — from which he hoped it would pass with a bipartisan majority . Behind the scenes , he kept the White House informed of his actions . Obama held out hope that Diaz-Balart might succeed where so many others had failed , agreeing to delay the release of a narrow batch of executive actions on immigration to avoid antagonizing conservatives at a delicate moment in Diaz-Balart ’ s negotiations .
But then , just two days before the meeting , Eric Cantor , the House majority leader who had gingerly supported certain immigration reforms , lost the Republican primary for his Virginia House seat to an insurgent candidate who hammered him for his supposed softness on immigration . “ Eric Cantor saying he opposes amnesty is like Barack Obama saying he opposes Obamacare , ” thundered Dave Brat , an obscure college professor who challenged the powerful majority leader . Beating Cantor , Brat claimed , “ is the last chance ” to prevent undocumented immigrants from pouring into the country .
“ We were so close , ” Diaz-Balart says now . “ We were closer than the House has ever been . ”
Obama was back at square one . He had no bill to sign . And he was coming under pressure from his liberal allies . Hispanic advocates remained furious with him for waiting so long to do something— anything . Frustrated Senate Democratic leaders prodded him to take unilateral action by the end of the summer — just before the midterm elections — a timeline that White House officials tried unsuccessfully to get the senators to reconsider .
Then , in a face-to-face meeting outside the Oval Office in late June , House Speaker John Boehner informed Obama that not only would his Republican members decline to address immigration , they planned to sue the president , as well , for exceeding his authority in a variety of administrative actions taken in the absence of congressional approval .
A week later , Obama had settled on his course : He would go it alone , and take much broader executive action than the rest of Washington expected . And he would act soon , setting an end-of-summer deadline . Speaking in the White House Rose Garden , the president turned combative as he repeatedly veered from his prepared remarks .
“ The failure of House Republicans to pass a darn bill is bad for our security , bad for our economy , and it ’ s bad for our future , ” he thundered . “ Drop the excuses . ”
A shocking influx of tens of thousands of unaccompanied children , sent by their parents from violence-torn villages in Central America , were crossing the southwestern border of the United States , where overwhelmed federal border guards struggled to find ways to handle them . Some news reports mistakenly suggested that the parents were responding to Obama ’ s promises of leniency ; and as the numbers of children grew , even some previously supportive Democrats began getting cold feet about Obama ’ s plans to loosen immigration rules at a time when they feared it could send still more migrants flooding to the border . The first signs of the impending border crisis had been visible when Obama made his June announcement , but Democrats did not anticipate how it would alter the political landscape .
National Republicans soon launched a campaign to make the border influx a defining issue in the midterm elections . But Obama , at first , was unmoved .
In July , one White House aide dismissed the notion that Obama would pay much heed to the potential damage to Democratic candidates in conservative areas of the country . “ My guess is it is pretty minimal , ” the official said when asked what effect the fate of his party in the midterms would have on Obama ’ s decision . “ We are going to do what we think is the right thing to do . ”
As the politics got worse for endangered Democrats , outraged liberal activists were besieging the White House with demands for what should go into his executive orders .
Senior White House officials including counsel Neil Eggleston and domestic policy adviser Cecilia Munoz hosted more than 20 sessions in July and August with business , labor , Hispanic activists and lawyers . There was no shortage of special pleadings .
The Congressional Hispanic Caucus wanted Obama to protect all 8 million undocumented immigrants who would have been eligible for legal status under the Senate bill . Oracle , Cisco , Microsoft and other high-tech players pressed officials to include some of their longstanding requests , such as recapturing unused green cards to bring in more skilled workers from abroad . So-called “ dreamers , ” the young undocumented immigrants for whom Obama extended administrative relief in 2012 , pleaded for similar leniency for their parents . Undocumented farm workers sought a special carve out , too .
That only added to the pressure on Johnson and his small working group back at the Department of Homeland Security , who were struggling to come up with a plan that was legally defensible and yet sufficient to address the political demand . Some advocates , including California ’ s liberal Rep. Zoe Lofgren , an immigration attorney , drafted extensive memos for the administration laying out their own legal rationales for expanded executive action .
At DHS , however , Johnson and his team were hungry for information to back up their decisions . As time went on , they leaned more heavily on the work of the Migration Policy Institute , a nonpartisan Washington think tank that churned out data that caught the department ’ s attention . One report offered detailed projections of how each of the different categories of undocumented populations might benefit from executive action — possibilities based mostly on educated guesses from the Institute ’ s experts .
DHS aides were impressed enough to seek two personal briefings for Johnson from the Institute ’ s staff .
On Labor Day , Obama was traveling to Milwaukee , a battleground in recent years with Republicans as they ’ ve sought to curb union benefits . The president invited a small group of top labor leaders to fly with him to the event . The conversation aboard Air Force One turned to a heated political debate : whether Obama should take executive action on immigration before the November election .
Mary Kay Henry , president of the Service Employees International Union , urged the president to stick with his plans to act by the official end of summer , less than three weeks away . But Leo Gerard , president of the United Steelworkers , argued that Obama should delay the announcement until after the election , out of concern for Democratic Senate candidates who might be caught in the backlash . The conflicting advice , some advocates contend , undermined the unified front that activists were desperate to maintain , particularly as Senate Democrats grew nervous . ( Gerard and Henry declined to comment . )
Over the next few days , more and more Democrats began siding with Gerard .
What really worried the White House was that opposition wasn ’ t limited to vulnerable moderates up for reelection in Republican-leaning states . Sen. Al Franken , a liberal from Minnesota , expressed concerns . Sen. Bill Nelson ( D-Fla. ) , who wasn ’ t on the ballot , pointedly asked Obama to wait until after the election . And Sen. Angus King ( I-Maine ) , who caucuses with Democrats , declared openly that it would be a “ mistake ” for the president to do anything alone , ever .
When King personally delivered that message to White House chief of staff Denis McDonough , the Obama team knew it had a problem . If an independent from Maine , a state Obama won by 15 points , couldn ’ t support the president ’ s actions on immigration , they really were in trouble . David Simas , the White House political director , asked Guy Cecil , the executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee , for polling on the immigration issue . Cecil gave him polls commissioned by the Iowa and Arkansas Senate campaigns , showing vast numbers of voters who didn ’ t want Obama to ease pressure on undocumented immigrants without the agreement of Congress .
The White House realized it couldn ’ t put out an executive order that would get attacked by candidates of the president ’ s own party . By that Friday night , as Obama flew home from a NATO Summit in Wales , he began calling allies to inform them of his decision to delay action — dealing yet another setback to the immigration reform advocates and the president ’ s relationship with Hispanic voters .
The anger was palpable as the Congressional Hispanic Caucus squared off with top White House officials in a meeting room steps away from the House floor in September , days after the announcement . The lawmakers viewed the president ’ s decision to delay action as the latest in a long line of broken promises .
As they sat around a long table in a meeting room of House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ’ s office , more than a half-dozen lawmakers spoke as the caucusgrew impatient with McDonough , Munoz , and other Obama aides .
Democratic Reps. Tony Cardenas and Rep. Lucille Roybal-Allard spoke about the pressures they were under from impatient and disappointed constituents in Los Angeles . Cardenas , in particular , pressed the White House to maximize the number of undocumented immigrants who could be protected under the president ’ s authority — telling officials that if the number of immigrants covered under Obama ’ s order turned out to be smaller than expected — say , 3.5 million — he would feel that Obama hadn ’ t gone far enough .
Rep. Luis Gutierrez ( D-Ill. ) , for his part , was adamant that the Obama administration follow through on executive action by Thanksgiving .
Roybal-Allard wanted to know : Would the formal recommendations from the caucus , which lawmakers had sent months earlier , be included ?
The lawmakers , White House aides promised reassuringly , would be pleasantly surprised by the outcome .
The drafting process going on in the bowels of the DHS headquarters was a mystery to those on the outside . And that ’ s the way Johnson — and the White House — wanted it .
Disciplined and direct , Johnson approached his work for the White House like an attorney going to the mat for his clients . Unlike some political figures , he wasn ’ t interested in buffing up his own image . As an early supporter of Obama ’ s 2008 campaign , Johnson had credibility in the president ’ s insular world . No matter what , he wasn ’ t going to leak details of the president ’ s plan .
Despite his scant knowledge of the complex web of immigration laws when Obama first handed him the assignment , he took personal ownership of preparing the president ’ s policy . He held dozens of meetings with outside legal experts , lawmakers and interest groups , including NumbersUSA and Center for Immigration Studies , fierce opponents of legalizing undocumented immigrants .
But rarely did they walk away with any sense of Johnson ’ s thinking .
“ He ’ d be a terrible person to play poker [ with ] . He could have a cheap-ass hand and you ’ d think he ’ d have four aces , ” Gutierrez said . “ He almost stops breathing when you ask him a question . I feel he gets like , catatonic , like ‘ I ain ’ t telling you nothing . I ’ m not going to give you any verbal , non-verbal indications of affirmation . I ’ m not going to let you read me . ’ ”
Johnson ’ s circle of aides included Capitol Hill veterans like Esther Olavarria , who worked for the late Sen. Ted Kennedy ( D-Mass . ) , a leading champion on immigration reform for decades ; David Shahoulian , a former Lofgren aide ; and Serena Hoy , who worked on immigration issues for Sen. Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) . Their former colleagues on the Hill struggled to get anything out of them , too .
“ These are people that are not going to overstep , ” said a prominent immigration attorney who has known the key players for years .
By one count , Barack Obama , Jeh Johnson and their staff produced more than 60 iterations of the executive order proposal . | Photo by Pete Souza
Obama and Johnson , as well as their staffs , traded draft memos and ideas for months . By one count , they produced more than 60 iterations of the proposals . Johnson ’ s aides would draft something , then shoot it over to Eggleston and Munoz to examine and return with revisions .
The deliberations had gone on for almost eight months without any major leaks on the policy proposals — a feat that impressed White House aides .
But once Johnson ’ s tight circle expanded last week , the broad outlines of the plan began to seep out , starting the clock on the White House ’ s rush to unveil the most sweeping executive action on immigration in history .
“ He ran an airtight process , ” a senior White House official said of Johnson . “ It was an impressive thing . ”
As soon as Republicans realized the president was preparing to act , in the days after the GOP ’ s big victory in the midterm elections , they took to the airwaves to decry his abuse of authority . He was a king , an emperor , a heavy-handed executive abusing his power . Democrats , for their part , didn ’ t know enough about the president ’ s plans to offer any defense .
By this week , a belated White House response team kicked into high gear . Munoz and senior adviser Valerie Jarrett , the president ’ s closest aide and confidante , quickly ramped up their outreach . They put out calls to high-tech companies , detailing several changes that would make it easier for them to retain foreign workers . They summoned civil rights leaders in an effort to get buy in and work the grassroots . They dropped hints to Hispanic activists that they would be happy with the result .
But even in the lead-up to Thursday ’ s prime-time address , not all the president ’ s allies were happy .
The AFL-CIO , for one , was continuing to voice its displeasure over what it was hearing , including a sweetener for the tech industry that was reportedly included . Top union officials reached out to the Congressional Black Caucus to press their case that a provision to allow tech companies to recapture unused visas would harm American workers .
The White House realized it couldn ’ t put out an executive order that would get attacked by candidates of the president ’ s own party . | AP Photo
By Wednesday night , the months of political acrimony , second guessing , and behind-the-scenes furor appeared to subside as Obama sat down for dinner with 18 congressional Democrats . Placed next to the menu of crisp fennel cucumber and tomatoes salad , thyme-roasted rib eye and artichoke puree , was a card with talking points on immigration .
If critics raise the amnesty charge , the response should be : “ Taxes and background checks aren ’ t amnesty . That ’ s accountability . Doing nothing — that ’ s amnesty . ”
If the president ’ s legal authority is questioned , say : “ Every president for 70 years , both Democrats and Republicans , has taken executive action on immigration . ”
When Republicans argue for a government shutdown over it , supporters should respond : “ Republicans are blocking funding to conduct millions of background checks . ”
As the group sipped on a Cabernet Sauvignon from Washington state and a California Chardonnay in a White House dining room , Obama gave his pitch . His legal rationale was sound , his politics solid . House Republicans had plenty of time to take up immigration reform . More than 500 days had passed since the Senate approved its own comprehensive reform bill , Obama noted .
“ This is bold , ” Gutierrez told the president . “ This is courageous , and generous . ”