President Barack Obama praised the Senate 's bipartisan immigration bill and said he 's confident that the House of Representatives can also pass a plan that includes a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants .
Univision 's Maria Elena Salinas interviewed Obama during a two-day trip to Mexico , which he used to highlight the importance of immigration reform . Millions of Mexicans living in the U.S. could benefit from the proposal .
Obama said Friday he believes Congress will put a bill on his desk this year . But others have been more cautious . For example , Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) , who helped craft the Senate bill , believes the bill needs stronger border security measures or it could fail in the House .
The one area where Obama said he would not compromise , however , is the path to citizenship . Asked during the interview whether he would sign a bill without it , Obama flatly replied `` no . ''
Speaking this week with conservative talk-show host Sean Hannity , Rubio said that the bill 's border-security provisions would need to be beefed up in order to get it through the Republican-controlled House .
Some conservative lawmakers have raised concerns with the strength of the so-called security `` triggers '' in the bill , which make a path to citizenship contingent on attaining certain benchmarks in monitoring the border and apprehending illegal crossers .
`` Clearly what we have in there now is not good enough for too many people and so we 've got to make it better . And that 's what I 'm asking for and that 's what we 're working on , '' Rubio said . `` This bill will not pass the House and , quite frankly , I think , may struggle to pass the Senate if it does n't deal with that issue , so we 've got some work to do on that front . ''
Obama said he is open to changes through the amendment process , but not ones that would significantly alter core elements of the plan : border security , cracking down on employers who knowingly hire undocumented immigrants , streamlining the legal immigration system , and a tough , but achievable , path to citizenship .
Democratic lawmakers and immigration advocates have worried that making the triggers too strict would impede millions of legalized immigrants from eventually seeking citizenship , leaving them in a state of legal limbo .
Obama called the Senate bill a `` good '' product that was the result of compromise in both parties .
`` There were details in it that I did n't like , there were details in it that I liked , '' he said . `` I know that 's true for Sen. Rubio , and for Sen. [ Chuck ] Schumer , Sen. [ John ] McCain and everybody who was involved . That 's why it was a tough negotiation . ''
The president said he 's confident that the House will be able to stomach a path to citizenship , even though many conservative lawmakers have decried the provision as `` amnesty . ''
`` If those components are there , then I would expect that not only will I be supportive , but also I think we can get it through the House . It 's the right thing to do . It 's the smart thing to do . ''
Watch the full interview on this Sunday at 10 AM ET on Univision'sAl Punto .