Republicans tried to build support Wednesday for their compromise immigration plan , saying they ’ ve come up with something that can unite the GOP and get President Trump ’ s signature .
Preparing for the first major House immigration floor debate in eight years , Speaker Paul D. Ryan was hashing out final details on the compromise , which he will put up for votes next week .
“ This has a chance of going into law , ” Mr. Ryan said after a party caucus meeting Wednesday .
According to a draft outline , the plan the GOP is working on would allow “ Dreamers , ” those who illegally crossed into the U.S. as children , to get in line for citizenship .
The plan would also authorize and fund Mr. Trump ’ s border wall , raise the burden of proof on asylum claims , allow faster deportation of some illegal immigrants including children , limit the chain of family migration and eliminate the diversity visa lottery that doles out 55,000 immigration passes each year .
And the bill would explicitly prevent separation of children from their parents at the border , according to the draft .
Still to be decided is the size and details of the pathway to citizenship . One option would only cover Dreamers , while another option would cover children whose parents came on temporary legal visas .
The White House signaled its support for the plan , though many rank-and-file Republicans were waiting to see the final bill .
Rep. Mark Meadows , the head of the conservative Freedom Caucus , said the president could sway members .
“ Could he move 100 people because he says he likes it ? The answer is ‘ No , ’ ” Mr. Meadows said . “ Can he move a dozen or so ? The answer is ‘ Yes. ’ “
GOP leaders dodged a bullet this week after a renegade group of moderate Republicans failed to muster enough support for a petition drive that would have forced voted on a series of bills , including a Democrat-backed option with a more generous amnesty and far less enforcement .
Instead , the GOP will allow two votes : one on the compromise still being worked out , and the other on an enforcement-heavy bill authored by House Judiciary Chairman Bob Goodlatte .
Mr. Goodlatte ’ s bill would write President Obama ’ s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program into law , granting Dreamers a firmer legal footing but without the new pathway to citizenship that many have demanded .
Instead , the attention is on the compromise , which Mr. Ryan says matches the four pillars of reform Mr. Trump laid out earlier this year .
“ We ’ ve been working hand-in-glove with the administration on this , to make sure that we ’ re bringing a bill that represents the president ’ s four pillars so that we can come together , have the votes that everybody ’ s looking for , ” he said .
Mr. Trump ’ s “ four pillars ” blueprint called for a pathway to citizenship for up to 1.8 million illegal immigrants , combined with his border wall , elimination of the visa lottery and limits to the number of family members a legal immigrant could sponsor .
Rep. Scott Perry , Pennsylvania Republican and member of the Freedom Caucus , said the “ devil is in the details ” of the compromise — in particular when it comes to security . “ We all just need to take a breath and see what we ’ ve got before we get too excited about it one way or the other , ” Mr. Perry said .