The fact that David Brat and Eric Cantor , though both anti-immigration hardliners , spent so much time attacking each other as soft on immigration has led to a lot of immigration-related morning-after spin . Is Brat 's victory a thundering defeat for the forces of reform ? Or should we pay more attention to things like Eric Cantor 's penchant for big-spending on Beltway fundraising or his disagreement with Brat about the NSA ?
The problem with immigration reform is pretty simple — House Republicans think it 's a bad idea
Asking pundits who did n't predict Cantor 's loss to explain why it happened seems like a fool 's errand . But as far as immigration reform 's legislative prospects , I think everything you need to know is summed-up by the Iron Islanders from Game of Thrones — what is dead may never die .
The problem with immigration reform , after all , is pretty simple — most House Republicans think it 's a bad idea .
Most members of the House of Representatives are Republicans . Thus by the rules governing the House , the GOP leadership gets to decide which bills come up for a vote . The leadership can bring up bills that most GOP members intend to vote `` no '' on , but if most GOP members do n't want there to be a vote the leadership ca n't hold a vote . And immigration reform is a really big deal that most Republicans very genuinely think is a very bad idea . They think people who migrated to the United States without permission are criminals whose interests should n't factor into public policy analysis , and that the best thing for the country would be for them all to leave .
Eric Cantor losing does n't change this calculus , and Eric Cantor winning would n't have changed it either .
Persuasive substantive arguments from folks like Paul Ryan and Lindsey Graham who think immigration reform would be good for America . Overwhelming political pressure such that House Republicans fear non-passage of reform will jeopardize their majority .
Even the most diehard reform advocates I know do n't really try to argue ( 2 ) with a straight face , so you 're left with ( 1 ) . And it 's pretty clear that pro-reform conservatives are losing the argument and have been losing the argument steadily for years .
The question now facing immigrants is how far they can persuade the White House to go with the unilateral powers at Obama 's disposal . And people who have problems with the immigration status quo that can only be addressed through legislative reform — including Americans across the country whose labor market prospects would benefit from an influx of new skilled workers — can do nothing but wait for another couple of election cycles to pass .