When President Obama announces his executive order giving legal status to as many as 5 million undocumented immigrants , he will do it over the objections of nearly every Republican in Congress . And that ’ s just fine with Democrats .
“ We have waited long enough for House Republicans , ” Harry Reid said Wednesday . “ Since they won ’ t act , the president should , and he will . ”
Likewise , Josh Earnest , the White House press secretary , who often has to contort his answers from the podium to cover every base and offend no audience , was notably at ease as he discussed the president ’ s immigration plans during his press briefing later in the day . “ The president often says only the tough issues reach his desk , ” Earnest said with half a smile . “ This might be the one exception . ”
After a humiliating defeat on Election Day , when Latino voters stayed home in droves and Democrats lost every race they expected and many they didn ’ t , the president ’ s party now sees an early opportunity to turn the tide back against Republicans . By moving unilaterally , the thinking goes in Washington , Democrats will get credit from Latinos for securing legal status for millions , all while goading the GOP into a potentially fatal reaction on the issue that has danced on racial , class , and political divides for decades .
“ I ’ d say ‘ advantage Obama ’ on the politics of this , ” said Frank Sharry , executive director of America ’ s Voice , a pro-reform group . “ He ’ s going to recover lost ground in the Latino community for himself and for Democrats . This is a big , bold move that ’ s going to protect millions of people . ”
While Democrats get the credit , Sharry predicted , the danger for Republicans comes if the opposition of the party ’ s most strident members , like Sens . Ted Cruz and Jeff Sessions , define the GOP as a whole . The danger of a potential Republican overreach or overreaction was clearly on the minds of people in both parties Wednesday .
“ If the fight over the next six weeks , six months , two years is , ‘ Republicans want to kill this thing in the crib , Democrats fight to defend it , ’ think of the bright line that draws , ” Sharry said . “ One party is fighting for immigrants ; the other party is fighting against them . That distinction , which was a big factor in 2012 , will be turbo-charged in 2016 . ”
But as certain as Democrats are that the politics of another immigration fight will help them , conservatives are equally convinced of the rightness of their argument .
“ It is a huge issue , and I don ’ t think you could overstate how important it is , ” said Dan Holler , communications director for Heritage Action .
“ What we said in 2013 was that if you were a politician and the American people saw you fighting with every tool you have to stop Obamacare , you ’ d be rewarded , ” he said . “ I think that played out . Similarly , if a politician used every tool available to stop executive amnesty and handing out 5 million work permits , those politicians are going to be rewarded . I think it ’ s a no-brainer . ”
As news broke that the president would make his announcement from the White House before the end of the week , Democrats quietly hoped that the GOP would quickly find the self-destruct button . Even before the details of the president ’ s plans were made public , Republicans lambasted the president as “ Emperor Obama ” ( House Speaker John Boehner ) , “ abusing his power ” ( Sen. John Cornyn ) , using “ diktats ” and “ the tactics of a monarch ” ( Cruz ) , and risking “ anarchy ” and riots in the streets ( Sen. Tom Coburn ) .
While the language may have been heated , Republican leaders were quietly sorting through “ a very narrow path of acceptable options , ” as one GOP staffer described it . Included on the list were suing the president in federal court , passing legislation to reverse the executive order , which the president would veto , and the riskiest—passing appropriations bills to fund the entire government but stripping out money for the president to enact the executive order , a path that could lead swiftly to threats of a government shutdown .
The first test will come almost immediately , in the first week of December , as Congress debates a bill to fund the government past December 11 , when the current spending bill lapses .
Conservatives have made clear they want Republican leaders to use the December deadline to confront the president on immigration .
“ We expect [ the new GOP majority ] to use the power of the purse to defund amnesty , especially those—and there were many—who ran against it , ” said Kevin Broughton , national spokesman for the Tea Party Patriots . “ This is a constitutional republic , not a banana republic . Let ’ s see if the GOP can act like it . ”
Holler said he also thought the defund strategy is the one conservatives will push for , even though incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has promised to keep the government operating at all costs and several senior Republican senators have indicated that a government shutdown strategy should be off the table .
“ The incoming Republican majority in the Senate was built on opposition to executive amnesty , ” said Holler . “ It ’ s what a lot of these folks ran on—and ran successfully on . There ’ s going to be a tremendous amount of pressure to use the appropriations process to try to block the executive action , regardless of what one or two senators might say . ”
While the announcement will force Republicans to deal with a split in their caucus on the issue , Democrats have their own longstanding internal battles over immigration that the president ’ s announcement won ’ t solve . The executive action Obama is expected to take likely will not include relief for farm workers , high-tech workers , or those with extenuating humanitarian circumstances , three categories Democrats had pushed hard for .
Even the guest list for a White House dinner with Hill leaders to unveil the details of his plans raised eyebrows in Obama ’ s own party . On the list : Democratic leaders , the incoming head of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , and the leading Hispanic , Asian , and black members of the Democratic caucus . Not on the list : many of the senior Democrats who worked for years to write the House ’ s immigration-reform legislation and learned of plans for the executive order from media reports .
“ What a bunch of motherf * * kers , ” said a top Democratic aide of the White House ’ s outreach to Democrats . “ They can ’ t even do the easy things right . ”
One Democrat who should have no complaints is Harry Reid . On Friday the president will go to Del Sol High School in Reid ’ s hometown of Las Vegas , where Obama spoke first during the 2008 presidential campaign and returned in 2012 to promise Latinos in the audience that “ the time is now ” on immigration reform .
It turns out that the time wasn ’ t then . But two years and two elections later , it looks like the time has come for the president to deliver on his long-delayed promise to the Latino and immigrant communities , which make up 27.5 percent of the population in Nevada . Standing next to Obama will be Reid , who is up for reelection in 2016 and could face Brian Sandoval , Nevada ’ s popular GOP governor , who just pulled in 47 percent of the Latino vote in his reelection bid this month .
Frank Sharry says Friday ’ s event could make all the difference for Reid in 2016 . “ If Harry Reid on Friday stands next to the president and says , ‘ The biggest victory in 25 years is thanks so me , ’ that ’ s a pretty big calling card , ” Sharry said .