A U.S. Border Patrol agent at the U.S.-Mexican border near Calexico , Calif. , in 2017 . ( Mike Blake/Reuters )
There is some middle ground — but also areas where one side or the other must win .
Two Bills — Galston , of the Brookings Institution ; and Kristol , of The Weekly Standard — have teamed up to create the New Center , a think tank in the mold of the Bipartisan Policy Center or No Labels . ( Indeed , it began as an offshoot of the latter . ) And the center ’ s debut report suggests yet another bill : It ’ s a proposal for comprehensive immigration reform , and a good opportunity to review the state of play on this issue .
Bluntly put , unless some last-minute murmurs from the Trump administration come to fruition , immigration skeptics just missed a key window during which Republicans controlled the House , the Senate , and the White House . Once the new Congress arrives in January , any plan will have to win a majority in a Democratic House , beyond the current obstacle of hitting 60 votes in the Senate to avoid a filibuster . Assuming the president doesn ’ t soften his tone , making a more left-leaning deal possible , we ’ re not going to see much action until at least 2021 . Not to mention that big-picture immigration “ compromises ” have failed repeatedly in recent years , whatever the balance of power in D.C .
And that brings us to the substance of the new report : Is there anything here that breaks the logjam , whether under Trump or the next president ? Like many similar proposals , it puts forth a defensible and often laudable arrangement — but also highlights the inherent difficulty here .
Let ’ s start with a high point . The changes to the legal-immigration system are beautiful , matching almost precisely suggestions I ’ ve made myself in the past . In line with public opinion , the overall level of legal immigration is left alone . But whereas the current system lets in 68 percent of our immigrants on the basis of family ties , the plan would move toward a merit-based system that takes factors such as education , work experience , job offers , and English skills into account .
It ’ s the approach to illegal immigration that hits roadblocks . The mix of policies is actually fine . But the order in which those policies take effect is always the fault line between left and right .
Specifically , the proposal is vulnerable to one of the biggest conservative critiques of previous efforts : It trades amnesty for enforcement to address the problem of illegal immigration , but it doesn ’ t ensure the enforcement comes first . This creates the risk that the amnesty will happen but the enforcement won ’ t , as was the case after the immigration bill that Ronald Reagan signed in 1986 .
The plan would offer legal status , and permanent residency after ten years , to those who have resided here continuously since the end of 2011 , have paid application fees and back taxes , and have clean criminal records . “ Dreamers ” who arrived as minors and had not committed felonies would get green cards right away . The plan would also step up border security with a mix of fencing and more advanced technologies , and implement a new system for tracking people on temporary visas . ( About 42 percent of illegal immigrants overstayed their visas rather than sneaking over the border . ) Further , it would mandate the use of E-Verify , a currently voluntary system with which employers may check whether job applicants are in the country legally .
That ’ s all great , but again , timing is key . Conservatives have long insisted on “ enforcement first ” : Once you ’ ve shown us that you can control the border , catch and deport those who overstay their visas , and punish employers who hire illegal immigrants — and once worksite enforcement has brought down the numbers a bit , through the famed process of “ self deportation ” — then we can legalize the remaining illegal population . But there is no hint of delaying amnesty in the New Center plan , and it specifically says that E-Verify must not be implemented until everyone has had a chance to apply for legal status . Once amnesty is granted , of course , conservatives lose all leverage to insist on the vigorous implementation of the enforcement measures they were promised .
To be fair , if the plan had gone the other way , you ’ d be reading the mirror image of my complaints in some liberal rag . They ’ d say that putting enforcement first would unfairly drive illegal immigrants out of the country before they could be amnestied . Unfortunately this key issue can ’ t really be compromised on : You can shift around which parts of the law go into effect at what time — say , border enforcement and visa tracking go first , then amnesty , and finally E-Verify — but if any part of the enforcement package comes after amnesty , conservatives will be left taking it on faith that it will happen at all .
If a plan like this one becomes law , I ’ m afraid it will be over the objections of the other side , not part of a centrist kumbaya moment . And the same thing is probably true for the kind of plan I ’ d prefer . Sometimes one side just has to win , and the other has to lose .