Judges upheld order issued last week to prevent 90-day travel ban from seven Muslim-majority countries and 120-day freeze on US admission of any refugees
Donald Trump ’ s controversial travel ban suffered a major setback on Thursday after a panel of three judges upheld an injunction against the president ’ s order banning arrivals from seven Muslim-majority countries .
In its unanimous ruling , the three judges on the ninth circuit court of appeals upheld the temporary restraining order , which was issued by Judge James Robart , a federal district court judge in Washington state , and has blocked the enforcement of many key parts of the executive order .
The court found that “ the government has not shown a stay is necessary to avoid irreparable injury. ” In particular , its ruling noted “ the government has pointed to no evidence that any alien from any of the countries named in the order has perpetrated a terrorist attack in the United States . Rather than present evidence to explain the need for the executive order , the government has taken the position that we must not review its decision at all . ”
Almost immediately , Trump tweeted his response : “ SEE YOU IN COURT , THE SECURITY OF OUR NATION IS AT STAKE ! ”
Speaking to reporters in the West Wing shortly after that the ruling , he characterized it as “ a political decision ” and said that “ the safety of the nation is at stake ” . Trump added that he “ looks forward to seeing them in court ” .
Thursday ’ s ruling does not end all litigation over the executive order , which sparked international outcry when it was first issued . Instead , it simply means that its provisions – which include a 90-day travel ban from seven Muslim-majority countries , a 120-day freeze on admission of any refugees into the United States , as well as indefinite halt to admitting any refugees from Syria – can not be enforced again as the legal battle moves forward . There are roughly 20 lawsuits against the travel ban currently making their way through courts in various states .
US travel ban - a brief guide The executive order signed by Donald Trump suspends the entire US refugee admissions system , already one of the most rigorous in the world , for 120 days . It also suspends the Syrian refugee program indefinitely , and bans entry to the US to people from seven majority-Muslim countries – Iran , Iraq , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen – for 90 days . The order has prompted a series of legal challenges , while thousands of Americans have protested outside airports and courthouses in solidarity with Muslims and migrants .
On Robart ’ s injunction , the federal government can now ask the supreme court to review the ninth circuit ’ s ruling . But the unanimous ruling suggests that the Trump administration will face an uphill battle .
The supreme court could also sidestep controversy and defer an appeal , leaving the ruling in place as the case works its way through other courts .
The appeals court decision follows a hearing on Tuesday night , at which lawyers for the state of Washington , which was challenging the ban , argued with attorneys for the justice department .
August Flentje , the lawyer for the federal government , argued that the ban was “ plainly constitutional ” , noting that Congress has granted the president the authority to suspend certain classes of immigrants . However , he additionally argued that the decision should not be subject to judicial review , noting that “ judicial second-guessing of the president ’ s national security determination in itself imposes substantial harm on the federal government and the nation at large ” .
The court rejected much of this argument in its ruling . The panel wrote “ although courts owe considerable deference to the president ’ s policy determinations with respect to immigration and national security , it is beyond question that the federal judiciary retains the authority to adjudicate constitutional challenges to executive action ” .
Ruling from the US ninth circuit court of appeals on the travel ban .
In contrast , Noah Purcell , the solicitor general of Washington state who was arguing to keep the injunction , cited Trump ’ s campaign trail promise to impose “ a total and complete shutdown on Muslims entering the United States ” and raised the specter of religious discrimination .
The court , though , did not base its decision on this argument , although it noted “ we reserve consideration of these claims until the merits of this appeal have been fully briefed ” .
Instead , it found that the government had not shown it was sufficiently likely to succeed in a court hearing on the question of whether the executive order restricted without due process an affected individual ’ s ability to travel .
The judges ’ ruling was also scathing in parts , essentially calling into question the government ’ s credibility .
Travel ban ruling suggests supreme court would be tough to convince Read more
On the confusion over the rights of lawful permanent residents caught up in the travel ban , the ruling notes : “ At this point , however , we can not rely upon the government ’ s contention that the executive order no longer applies to lawful permanent residents . ”
Then later continues : “ Moreover , in light of the government ’ s shifting interpretations of the executive order , we can not say that the current interpretation by White House counsel , even if authoritative and binding , will persist past the immediate stage of these proceedings . ”
Also in the opinion , the judges wrote that “ it is well established that evidence of purpose ” from a case ’ s context can be used in court – meaning that the states can cite Trump ’ s claims and tweets , for instance about his preference for Christians and call for a “ complete and total shutdown of Muslims ” , as admissible evidence .
Trump ’ s long history of controversial statements , the court suggested , can therefore be used as legal weapons against him .
The decision immediately set off a political firestorm on both sides of the aisle . Donna Brazile , the chair of the Democratic National Committee , celebrated the decision in a statement . “ This is a massive blow to the White House . The court upheld that we do not discriminate based on religion . That is what terrorists do , and what terrorists want us to do . ”
The Washington state attorney general , Bob Ferguson , agreed : “ The bottom line this is a complete victory for the state of Washington . ”
“ We are a nation of laws as I have said … from day one , those laws apply to everyone in our country and that includes the president of the United States . ”
Trump tries to salvage travel ban amid numerous legal briefs to block it Read more
In contrast , Senator Tom Cotton , a Republican from Arkansas , railed against the ruling . “ No foreigner has a constitutional right to enter the United States and courts ought not second-guess sensitive national-security decisions of the president . This misguided ruling is from the ninth circuit , the most notoriously left-wing court in America and the most reversed court at the supreme court , ” said Cotton in a statement .
Senior White House aide Kellyanne Conway , speaking on Fox News , expressed confidence that the ruling simply represented a bump in the road . “ It is an interim ruling and we are fully confident that when we get our day in court and argue it on the merits we will prevail . ”
Purcell said on Thursday : “ The judges did their jobs carefully and well and we appreciate their work . ”
He added : “ We are not usually in the limelight light like this , and we ’ re not used to it . ”
Oliver Laughland , Claire Phipps , Julia Carrie Wong and Alan Yuhas contributed reporting .