The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of ███.com .
In 2016 , London ’ s mayor said Islamic terror attacks are just part of living in a big city .
The biggest city in the world hasn ’ t even had a single terrorist attack from a radical Muslim .
Tokyo , Japan boasts the largest population of any city , and they ’ ve got their problems , including a declining population , but Islamic terrorism isn ’ t one — not a single one .
Japan has a long history and tradition of extremely strict immigration policies , making it one of the highest homogeneous countries in the world , next to Korea . Japanese make up 98.5 % with the next highest ethnic group as Koreans at 0.5 % , then Chinese with 0.4 % , and other at a whopping 0.6 % .
In the West , diversity is seen as a moral superiority and objective , but wide open doors to Islamic extremists only invites terrorism .
From 9/11 to the Boston Marathon bombing to San Bernardino to the Pulse nightclub massacre — America has seen brutal terror attacks done in the name of radical Islam .
President Donald Trump was elected in large part because of his promise to secure the Southern border , get “ tough ” on illegal immigration , and “ defeat ” radical Islamic terrorism .
Each attempt Trump does to make America safer and more secure , he is met with protests from the mainstream media , Hollywood elites , and liberals across the coasts .
In stark contrast , London Mayor Sadiq Khan ran on diversity , and in September of last year , said the threat of terror attacks are “ part and parcel of living in a big city . ”
How did the West come to expect terror attacks in bigger cities ? According to Tucker Carlson , “ It wasn ’ t always this way . We made it this way . ”
Carlson points out we brought this upon ourselves , or rather “ the people in charge ” through “ reckless immigration policies…that none of us were asked to endorse , much less vote on . ”
“ Some of us didn ’ t even know they were happening , ” he added , and I couldn ’ t agree more .
“ Western cities got dangerous when they imported radical religious ideologies from other countries , ” he said , and I ’ ll add the nuance , those are from the Islamic faith — not the Buddhists , Pentecostals , Baptists , Lutherans , or Catholics .
“ Nobody from government wants to admit that , because it reflects poorly on them , but it ’ s true , and increasingly voters know it ’ s true , despite the official ban on saying it ’ s true . ”
“ In heavily Islamic areas terror is depressingly common . Elsewhere it is vanishably rare . ”
I couldn ’ t agree more with Tucker , and the facts back us up as well .
Interestingly , President Trump ’ s first meeting with a foreign leader was UK Prime Minister Theresa May , who had to be rushed to safety Wednesday when Parliament came under threat of a terror attack .
May described the attack as “ sick and depraved , ” but sadly it has become accepted as a norm for many in the West .
Getting back to Tokyo , though . The United States could learn a vital lesson from our friends in Japan .
President Trump met with Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe as president-elect and just a couple weeks after hosting May at the White House .
Trump reaffirmed his promise to Abe that he has spoken to the public many times : “ America First . ”
Although Trump was mostly referring to trade , this could be broadened to include national security .
You know , Japan doesn ’ t have to worry about homegrown terrorism .
If America doesn ’ t want to become another London , we have to pause , and ask ourselves if we really want to tolerate any more terror — haven ’ t enough American lives been taken at the hands of jihadists ?
This doesn ’ t have to be our reality . We can change it . Let ’ s take a lesson from Japan .
Please carry through on your promise , Mr. President . Let ’ s Make America Safe Again .