The 9th Circuit Court of Appeals on Monday ruled against President Trump 's so-called travel ban , delivering another blow to the administration as it waits for the Supreme Court to decide whether to intervene .
The California-based court affirmed in large part the Hawaii District Court ruling blocking parts of the order , which temporarily banned nationals from six Muslim-majority countries from entering the U.S. , suspended the entry of all refugees and reduced the cap on the admission of refugees from 110,000 to 50,000 for the 2017 fiscal year .
In a unanimous ruling Monday , a three-judge panel on the court said Trump 's revised order does not offer a sufficient justification to suspend the entry of more than 180 million people on the basis of nationality .
Though the Immigration and Nationality Act gives the president broad powers to control the entry of foreigners , the judges said the president ’ s authority is subject to certain statutory and constitutional restraints .
Trump stoked controversy last week by again labeling his order a “ travel ban ” on Twitter . White House officials had rejected that phrase , saying the administration action is not a ban , but is rather setting up a system of extreme vetting .
The judges on Monday cited Trump 's tweets in defending their finding that the order does not provide a reason why permitting entry of nationals from the six designated countries under current protocols would be detrimental to the interests of the United States
“ Indeed , the President recently confirmed his assessment that it is the ‘ countries ’ that are inherently dangerous , rather than the 180 million individual nationals of those countries who are barred from entry under the President ’ s ‘ travel ban , ’ ” they wrote in a footnote , citing Trump ’ s June 5th tweet .
`` That ’ s right , we need a TRAVEL BAN for certain DANGEROUS countries , not some politically correct term that won ’ t help us protect our people ! ” Trump had tweeted .
But the judges said the Hawaii District Court erred by blocking the government ’ s ability to conduct interagency reviews of its vetting procedures .
In their opinion , Judges Michael Daly Hawkins , Ronald Gould and Richard Paez — all Clinton-era appointees — vacated that part of the lower court ruling and ordered the court to issue a new order that blocks the temporary ban but allows the government to proceed with its review .
The court also called the government ’ s argument that the District Court erred in issuing an injunction that runs against the president himself “ well taken . ”
“ Generally , we lack jurisdiction of a bill to enjoin the President in the performance of his official duties , ” the judges said .
They vacated that part of the District Court ’ s injunction to the extent the order runs against the president , but said it still applies to the remaining defendants and all their respective officers , agents , servants , employees and attorneys , and people in active concert or participation with them .
The decision marks the second time the 9th Circuit has ruled against Trump . In February , the court refused to reinstate Trump ’ s first travel ban after a federal District Court judge in Washington state blocked it .
Trump revised that order — removing Iraq from the list of banned countries , eliminating the indefinite ban on Syrian refugees and deleting language that gave preference to religious minorities when the refugee program resumed — to address the court ’ s concerns .
The administration has already asked the Supreme Court to step in .
The Department of Justice filed two emergency applications on June 1 asking the Supreme Court to block the 4th Circuit and Hawaii District Court rulings blocking the ban and to review its case .
The Supreme Court had asked the groups fighting the ban to respond to the department 's requests by 3 p.m. on Monday .
The 9th Circuit is now the second federal appeals court to rule against Trump 's revised travel ban .
A full panel of 13 judges on the Richmond , Va.-based 4th Circuit Court of Appeals also refused to reinstate it , but focused on the statements Trump made while on the campaign trail and in office in finding the order discriminatory .
The judges said in their 10-3 ruling that the revised order “ speaks with vague words of national security , but in context drips with religious intolerance , animus and discrimination . ''