WASHINGTON—President Trump said he wants to sign an executive order that ends the automatic right to citizenship for anyone born in the U.S. , ratcheting up his election-season remarks on immigration with a proposal many legal scholars said is unconstitutional .
In an interview published Tuesday morning , just ahead of next week ’ s midterms , Mr. Trump said he planned an executive order to end what is known as birthright citizenship , bypassing Congress and waving off the belief of many legal scholars that such a move would require a change to the Constitution .
“ It was always told to me that you needed a constitutional amendment . Guess what ? You don ’ t , ” he told Axios . “ It ’ s in the process . It ’ ll happen , with an executive order . ”
Constitutional scholars dismissed the idea , saying a president has no legal standing to end birthright citizenship with an executive order . “ It ’ s basically saying the president is above the Constitution , ” said Laura K. Donohue , a senior scholar at the Georgetown Center for the Constitution .
The White House didn ’ t further explain Mr. Trump ’ s assertion that he alone could make the move , and it didn ’ t provide further details about the scope of the proposed executive order or the timing .
“ We will let you know when we have an announcement , ” White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said .
Birthright citizenship is a pillar of U.S. immigration law and is protected by the Constitution ’ s 14th Amendment , which , among other goals , was designed to grant full citizenship to former slaves . But some conservatives who favor more restrictive immigration laws have opposed the policy , saying it improperly rewards the children of people in the country who lack proper documentation .
Mr. Trump ’ s proposal is the latest in a string of pronouncements as he seeks to invigorate GOP voters ahead of the midterms . He recently suggested a middle-income tax cut that appeared to surprise both his staff and lawmakers . Last week , he said he would seek to cut prices that Medicare pays for some prescription drugs , but that wouldn ’ t go into effect until late 2019 or 2020 .
On immigration , Mr. Trump has seized on a slow-moving migrant caravan headed toward the U.S.-Mexico border , part of his push to toughen rules on people seeking asylum in the U.S. Mr. Trump has previously said he opposed birthright citizenship , but he hadn ’ t floated an executive order nor included it in his list of requests during the latest round of congressional negotiations .
The Justice Department ’ s official position from 1995 , posted on its website , is that only a constitutional amendment can alter the citizenship provision ; a bill or executive order doing so would be “ unconstitutional on its face , ” the department ’ s Office of Legal Counsel concluded . A spokeswoman didn ’ t respond when asked if that opinion would now be reconsidered .
The 14th Amendment , ratified in 1868 , states , “ All persons born or naturalized in the United States , and subject to the jurisdiction thereof , are citizens of the United States. ” Some opponents of birthright citizenship have argued the “ subject to the jurisdiction thereof ” clause could be read to exclude babies born to people who were in the U.S. illegally .
That interpretation , however , runs contrary to the Constitution Annotated , published by the Library of Congress , which says the “ jurisdiction ” exclusion applies to “ children born of diplomatic representatives of a foreign state , children born of alien enemies in hostile occupation , or children of members of Indian tribes subject to tribal laws . ”
The Supreme Court has routinely applied the amendment broadly when it has been tested .
Critics of birthright citizenship also have taken aim at what some call “ birth tourism , ” in which pregnant women travel to the U.S. in order to have children who receive the benefit of citizenship . Companies in China have attracted attention in recent years for advertising such services .
Amending the Constitution is exceedingly difficult , requiring supermajority support from Congress and assent from 38 state legislatures , or a constitutional convention , the last of which was held in 1787 . As a workaround , Republican lawmakers have periodically introduced legislation to change the historic understanding of the 14th Amendment , without success . Rep. Steve King ( R. , Iowa ) has repeatedly done so , and Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R. , S.C. ) said Tuesday morning that he would push for another legislative effort .
“ I plan to introduce legislation along the same lines as the proposed executive order , ” Mr. Graham wrote on Twitter while praising Mr. Trump . “ Finally , a president willing to take on this absurd policy of birthright citizenship . ”
Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R. , Iowa ) , chairman of the Judiciary Committee , said he would “ closely review ” any order from Mr. Trump , but he indicated any policy changes on immigration should be left to Congress .
Others openly disagreed with Mr. Trump . House Speaker Paul Ryan ( R. , Wis. ) , who is leaving office after this year , dismissed the idea of an executive order in an interview with a Kentucky radio station . Tweeted Rep. Justin Amash ( R. , Mich ) about Mr. Trump ’ s comments : “ A president can not amend [ the ] Constitution or laws via executive order . ”
Kristen Clarke , president and executive director of the Lawyers ’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law , called Mr. Trump ’ s plans ill-timed and misguided . “ Aside from being unconstitutional , such an executive order would exacerbate racial tensions , exploit fears and drive further polarization across the country at a moment that calls for unity and inclusion , ” Ms. Clarke said .
In 2014 , about 275,000 babies were born to unauthorized-immigrant parents , about 7 % of the four million births that year , according to a Pew Research Center report on government data .
Mr. Trump , in his Axios interview , incorrectly said the U.S. is “ the only country in the world where a person comes in and has a baby , and the baby is essentially a citizen. ” Dozens of countries in the Americas , including the U.S. , Canada , Mexico , Brazil and Argentina , have birthright citizenship , according to the CIA World Factbook . Most countries in Europe , Asia and Africa don ’ t , and they require that at least one parent be a citizen for their child to get automatic citizenship .
People in the U.S. support birthright citizenship by about a 2-to-1 ratio , a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll from September 2017 found . In the survey , more Republicans called for ending birthright citizenship than continuing it , by 52 % to 42 % . Independents and Democrats supported birthright citizenship by large margins .
“ We all think this is a base election . But today ’ s announcement , and everything Trump ’ s done in the immigration space , is having a large impact on the independent and moderate voters , ” said Ali Noorani , executive director of the National Immigration Forum , which advocates for comprehensive changes to immigration law . “ Those are the voters who will determine which way these races go and they don ’ t like the idea of changing our constitution or separating families ” apprehended at the border .