Several environmental groups say their new stance emerged after talks with labor groups . | REUTERS Greens move to heal immigration rift
Environmentalists are getting off the sidelines and backing immigration reform — but it wasn ’ t easy .
During the Senate ’ s last go round on the issue in 2007 , greens stayed silent to avoid airing their dirty laundry — an internal dispute that some in the movement feared would be seen as racist .
Their family feud was so rough that it twice nearly ruptured the Sierra Club when a vocal faction — including some of the movement ’ s leading luminaries — argued too many new immigrants living the American dream could spell doom for the planet .
Fast forward to 2013 , and the Sierra Club , BlueGreen Alliance and Greenpeace are among those out publicly in support of the kinds of comprehensive immigration reform measures pursued by President Barack Obama and the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight .
Atop their list of reasons why : the prospect of 11 million new green-minded voters .
Just like Republicans who see political gain in courting a new generation of Latino voters , greens count Hispanics , Asians and other potential new Americans as friendly to their causes , even more so in some instances than whites .
“ The Sierra Club has thrived because of the ability for our members to engage with the full tools of democracy , ” Michael Brune , the group ’ s executive director , told ███ .
“ Right now , there are 11 million people who don ’ t have the tools , who can ’ t act without fear . They can ’ t vote . They can ’ t engage in the public process . They can ’ t advocate for clean energy without the threat of deportation , ” Brune added . “ Nobody should live under those circumstances . ”
And if Congress paves the way for undocumented workers to become new citizens with full voting rights , they reason that it ’ d also be good news for their cause in electing lawmakers who will speak up for the EPA , clean energy and aggressive climate change policies .
Senate Environment and Public Works Committee Chairwoman Barbara Boxer welcomed the greens ’ entry to the debate , noting that illegal immigrants often live and work in places that are more vulnerable than the general population to higher levels of air , water and soil pollution . But they can ’ t speak up now for fear of deportation .
“ Where somebody is going to put the most polluting industry in a very poor neighborhood , if people are afraid to come forward because they ’ re not even documented , their voice isn ’ t heard , ” the California Democrat said in an interview .
It could also be good news for the bill itself .
Sen. Marco Rubio told ███ that the Gang of Eight think so . “ Obviously , I can ’ t recall the last time I ’ ve been aligned with ” the Sierra Club or other green groups , the Florida Republican said . “ But on this issue , I think by and large there ’ s a growing consensus across the country that we need to deal with immigration reform once and for all . ”
Environmentalists say their work on the immigration issue also gives them solid ground to stand on as they engage on issues intertwined in this legislative fight .
Several progressive and green groups pulled their ads off of Facebook in early May to protest pro-oil , anti-Obamacare ads sponsored by a subsidiary of Mark Zuckerberg ’ s immigration reform campaign .
Greens also claimed a minor victory last month when Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy added an amendment to the Gang of Eight bill watering down language that would have allowed the Homeland Security Department to bypass all environmental laws before doing major infrastructure and security work at the borders . The waiver remains , though it does sunset once the border is deemed “ secure ” and federal land managers now would get more say in what types of projects get built .
Several environmental group leaders advocating for immigration reform said they didn ’ t hear from the White House before registering support . But they said their new stance emerged after talks with the Service Employees International Union and other labor groups , civil rights activists and other like-minded liberal causes who they ’ ve partnered with on other issues .
While environmentalists have fought together for decades against industry on pollution issues , they ’ ve also sparred among themselves over immigration – and whether the U.S. could ever end up with too many people for its own good .