Thousands of supporters will descend on the U.S. Capitol on Wednesday to call for legislation that creates a path to citizenship for immigrants in the country illegally .
But this time , unlike in 2007 and 2010 when immigration legislation died in Congress after similar demonstrations , proponents of an overhaul say politics has swung inexorably toward their side .
`` I 've been working on this issue for more than a decade , and it feels unstoppable now , '' says Ana Avendano , director of immigration and community action at the AFL-CIO .
Momentum , however , has met Congress , where bipartisan `` gangs '' in the Senate and the House have been wrestling with writing comprehensive overhaul legislation — with some success , and a few setbacks .
The long-awaited bill from the Senate 's Gang of Eight , which includes Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio , is now expected to be released next week at the earliest .
Senators and lobbyists continue to haggle over two of the stickiest remaining issues : rules governing visas for foreign agricultural workers ; and border security thresholds Republicans like Rubio want met before citizenship paths are opened .
Rubio spokesman Alex Conant says that the senator , seen as key to a legislative deal , is not commenting on the thresholds or `` triggers , '' or any other part of the bill while senators are negotiating .
Republican opponents of citizenship options are wary of the implications of getting behind anything that smacks of amnesty , and the border controls are seen as one element of mitigating political fallout .
But it appears that a consensus has developed among advocates for a comprehensive overhaul that a path to citizenship should trump every other legislative consideration .
Says Gustavo Torres , a Maryland-based activist and one of the rally organizers : `` What we really want is legislation now . We want a path to citizenship . ''
The Senate gang has been considering a 13-year path to citizenship , and perhaps considerably shorter for farm workers here illegally , as well as a system that could levy fines and assess back taxes on those seeking permanent status .
`` The path to citizenship is the prime directive of the civil rights community , '' Wade Henderson of the Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights said this week .
The AFL-CIO and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce have worked out a deal on one potentially polarizing element of the effort .
A new program will allow , over five years , up to 200,000 low-skilled foreign workers to receive visas to work at jobs gone unfilled by Americans .
In its first year , the deal would allow about 20,000 workers in any industry to receive visas , says Avendano of the AFL-CIO . There would be a limit on the number allotted to construction companies .
`` The agreement with the chamber is solid , '' she says . `` It has broad support across the country . ''
In a statement , Chamber of Commerce CEO Thomas Donohue called the worker program `` just one important component of comprehensive immigration reform , '' and said border security , a pathway to citizenship `` under tight criteria '' and an employment verification system also needed to be part of a solution .
What remains unresolved is how a new temporary , seasonal guest worker visa program would play out in the agricultural industry .
There , negotiators representing the growers and the laborers remain at loggerheads over the number of visas and minimum wage requirements under any new program .
Diana Tellefson Torres , executive director at the United Farm Workers Foundation , declined to disclose specifics of confidential negotiations underway .
But she characterized current industry proposals as potentially harmful to the wages and working conditions of agricultural workers here legally .
`` We want to make sure that those who are already here are not affected adversely , '' Tellefson Torres says .
Legal farmworkers earn an average hourly wage of $ 10.80 , Tellefson Torres says , and of the 1.6 million farm workers in the U.S. , an estimated 1 million are here illegally .
Those familiar with the negotiations say that agribusiness has advocated a program that would begin with the authorization of 200,000 guest worker visas , know as H-2A visas , and raise or eliminate the cap going forward .
The current H-2A program since 2005 has set a cap of 85,000 visas for seasonal farm workers .
But the debate over agricultural guest worker visas may remain unresolved as the legislation moves forward , first to the Senate Judiciary Committee where Chairman Patrick Leahy , D-Vt. , has promised a full airing .
`` A specific agricultural program would be good , but it 's not essential , '' Tellefson Torres says . `` Our first priority is to ensure that farmworkers that are here are able to get on the path to citizenship . ''
Immigration overhaul advocates have worked to expand their reach and diversify the face of immigrants to beyond the Hispanic community .
In a conference by rally organizers this week , Gustavo Torres of Casa de Maryland , a Latino and immigrant advocacy organization , was joined not only by union officials , but also by representatives of the LGBT community and those advocating for Filipino immigrants .
The Migration Policy Institute in a 2009 study estimated that the number of unauthorized immigrants from the Philippines had increased about 33 percent since 2000 . Filipinos , however , make up just 2 percent of immigrants here illegally .
Gay and lesbian activists like Rachel Tiven have characterized the immigration issue as a `` shared struggle among the overlapping LGBT and immigrant communities . ''
Tiven , executive director of Immigration Equality , which provides legal services to those in the LGBT community affected by U.S. immigration law , says that the gay community 's recent civil rights successes should be seen as a model .
`` We play to win , '' Tiven said this week . `` We want the right to get in line , and when we get in , we want to make sure it 's a line that 's going to move . ''