I am the proud son of immigrants from Bangladesh . I was raised in New York City , which has benefited enormously from the energy and ambition of the millions of people born abroad who ’ ve chosen to make it their home . But I also believe that America ’ s immigration system needs to work for America , and right now , that is simply not the case .
We need a new immigration system . So what should it be ? We ’ re often presented with two stark choices : Severe restrictions or open borders . I think there ’ s a better way .
But before I offer a solution , let ’ s look at the usual suspects . The case for open borders is , on the surface , pretty attractive . Tens of millions of people around the world would be grateful to come to America for the chance to live in peace and earn a decent living . The vast majority of them mean us no harm . Why not give them a chance to share in the blessings of liberty ?
The simple answer is that our country is more than just a marketplace . We ’ re a democracy based on a social contract . Americans pay taxes so that , among other things , the poorest , most unlucky among us can still lead decent and dignified lives .
If you can ’ t work , you might be eligible for unemployment benefits or disability . If you do work but your paycheck doesn ’ t go far enough for you to afford medical care or food for your kids , we have a safety net designed to help you stay afloat .
Liberals and conservatives disagree on how extensive this safety net ought to be , but they all agree it needs to be there . The question is , how we far are willing to stretch it ?
A century ago , immigrants who found they couldn ’ t make it in America had little choice but to go back home . That is no longer the case . These days , immigrants who can ’ t earn enough to support their families have access to many government benefits . That doesn ’ t make them bad people . In an age of offshoring and automation , wages for menial jobs don ’ t go very far . If we only admitted a modest number of low-skill immigrants—say , as political refugees—we could easily handle it . But over the past forty years , we have allowed millions of low-skill immigrants into the country , both legally and illegally . While highly-educated immigrants pay far more in taxes than they consume in benefits , the opposite is true of immigrants with less than a high school diploma
Immigrant engineers working for Google , Amazon and Apple do just fine without government help . The immigrant janitors and busboys who serve them struggle to afford housing and to give their kids a decent start in life . Without government aid , many would go hungry . If we were to open our borders , the number of low-skilled immigrants would skyrocket , and so too would the cost of meeting their needs . Ironically , this would only exacerbate the wealth disparity that so animates the open borders crowd .
Maybe the rich could wall themselves off in gated communities . But the growing ranks of the poor and even the middle class would have to deal with ever more strained social services . That could provoke resentment strong enough to set off real class warfare .
If open borders are a bad idea , so too is severely restricting immigration . For one , immigration has always been part of the American story . And it continues to be an essential source of talent , from Silicon Valley to medicine to pro sports . Why shut ourselves off from the dynamism and energy that immigrants can bring ?
We can modernize the system to give priority to those who have strong skills and job offers— people , in other words , who will pay more in taxes than they need in benefits .
Today , we admit about two-thirds of immigrants on the basis of family ties and only 15 percent on the basis of skills . We need a course correction . We should limit family immigration to immediate family members—such as spouses and minor children—while greatly expanding the number of skills-based visas .
A skills-based points system would be a huge boon for people around the world looking to live the American Dream . It would give them a predictable , step-by-step guide for how to better their chances at a green card . Just as importantly , by prioritizing immigrants with strong skills , we ’ d make the safety net much easier to sustain for those with low skills—whom we ’ d still admit , albeit at a more modest level .
Let ’ s announce to the world that if you ’ re ambitious , if you have skills we prize , the golden door is open . If you can support yourself and your family , and add to our economy , we want you . If we aspire to an immigration system that works , this the most realistic—and idealistic—choice .
I ’ m Reihan Salam , Executive editor of National Review , for ███ .