Immigrant rights groups and some top Hispanic Republicans argue that the GOP ’ s only hope of winning over Hispanic voters is to legalize illegal immigrants — but an academic report being released Wednesday that studied the 2006 election suggests that Hispanics don ’ t reward pro-immigration Republicans .
George Hawley , who teaches political science at the University of Houston , crunched the numbers and found that Republicans who backed immigration reform in that election didn ’ t fare better with Hispanic voters , and in fact probably suffered overall thanks to a drop in support from white voters .
“ While Republican incumbents may have any number of justifications for supporting immigration reforms that provide a pathway to citizenship , they should not expect such policies to be an electoral panacea , ” Mr. Hawley wrote in a report for the Center for Immigration Studies , summarizing an academic paper he is publishing in Social Science Quarterly .
The question of political peril and reward from immigration has been front-and-center after the November elections , when President Obama won an overwhelming share of the Hispanic vote en route to a fairly easy re-election victory .
Immigrant rights advocates and many members of the GOP leadership concluded that Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney alienated Hispanic voters by running the most hard-line immigration campaign of any major-party nominee in modern history .
Now , those same forces argue that Republicans can recapture some Hispanic voters if they join efforts to pass a broad immigration bill that would grant illegal immigrants a path to citizenship along with stricter enforcement and a rewrite of the legal immigration system .
SEE ALSO : Illegal immigrants set free from detention centers as sequester approaches
Indeed , some immigrant rights groups warn that focusing on enforcement will only doom the Republican Party .
He looked at incumbent Republicans running for re-election to Congress that year and their grades on immigration as determined by NumbersUSA , an organization that supports a crackdown . He then looked at exit-poll data for 1,550 Hispanic voters and 14,378 non-Hispanic whites in those members ’ districts .
“ Whether a Republican member of Congress was a strong liberal or a strong conservative on immigration , most Latinos living in Republican districts did not vote for the incumbent in 2006 , ” he concluded . “ Thus , Republicans who take a more liberal stance on immigration should not expect to see a corresponding increase in their share of the Latino vote . ”
All told , the Republicans congressional candidates averaged less than 30 percent support of Hispanic voters in their districts , his study found .
Immigrant rights advocates said the political situation has changed dramatically since 2006 and that the study has been overtaken by events .
“ Right now , we have a majority of Americans supporting immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship , a consensus in Washington from both parties — how often can you say that about an issue — that there is an imperative to do something about this issue , and a fair , bipartisan framework that and process that by all accounts is make serious progress towards a legislative debate in the spring , ” said Angela Marie Kelley , vice president for immigration at the Center for American Progress .
The latest polling does suggest a shift among voters , including Republicans , who say they are increasingly likely to embrace a path to citizenship for some of the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants now in the U.S .
Frank Sharry , executive director of America ’ s Voice , said his group arranged a study of 2008 congressional campaigns looking at 22 competitive races featuring a pro-immigration reform candidate running against a candidate calling for a crackdown . He said that in 20 of those races , the pro-immigration reform candidate won .
He questioned the wisdom of studying 2006 , when he said immigration wasn ’ t as big a mobilizing issue for Hispanics as it has become . He also warned Republicans against taking advice from crackdown groups .
“ These are the guys who told Mitt Romney to embrace self-deportation . Now they ’ re telling Republicans immigration doesn ’ t matter with Latino voters . Anyone who follows their advice is a fool , ” Mr. Sharry said .
Those on both sides grapple with a number of questions about Hispanic voters .
Mr. Hawley , the study ’ s author , argued that Hispanics aren ’ t single-issue voters and that in general they tend to resemble Democratic voters on other issues . He said trying to win their support could end up costing Republicans among their base voters .
Some key Hispanic Republicans , though , argue that Hispanics share the stances on social issues to which most Republicans ascribe , which should make them a natural fit for the party .
Immigrant rights advocates argue that while Hispanics may not be single-issue voters , immigration has become a “ threshold issue ” and they tune out candidates they see as anti-immigrant .