John Boehner called the immigration debate 'important ' Wednesday . GOP reaches out on immigration
The House Republican leadership is reaching out to top House Democrats to assess their support for a piecemeal approach to immigration reform , according to sources involved in the discussions .
The House ’ s immigration gameplan is to pass individual bills rather than take the comprehensive approach advocated by the Senate . Speaker John Boehner ’ s ( R-Ohio ) team isn ’ t trying to cut a deal with Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) , these aides caution . But deeply-divided Republicans want to get a read on what members of the minority party would back when immigration reform comes to the floor .
The legislation under discussion between Republicans and Democrats includes bills reworking the employment verification system and legislation to toughen border security , according to sources both involved in and familiar with the talks . In strategy sessions and planning meetings , Republicans have said that support for immigration reform is soft among GOP lawmakers — and leadership is skeptical that there is backing for anything more drastic than border security and E-verify .
Moving legislation before the August recess is now almost completely out of the question — lawmakers are going to have to spend the month at home , with immigration lingering .
These contacts are in the early stages , but the discussions are aimed at running up big bipartisan majorities for a series of GOP-authored bills , that could counter the bipartisan Senate bill . In short , Democrats would smooth the prospects for passage .
Those talks with Democrats weren ’ t the focus of a closed-door GOP immigration strategy meeting , which took place Wednesday in the Capitol basement . In that meeting , leadership and bold-faced Republican lawmakers tried to explain that something needs to happen — and soon .
Boehner called the immigration debate “ important , ” and said Republicans need a plan . Majority Leader Eric Cantor ( R-Va. ) said Republicans should present an alternative to the Senate ’ s plan — just like the party did during the economic stimulus debate in 2009 .
More than Cantor and perhaps even Boehner , Rep. Paul Ryan ( R-Wis. ) is someone who is catching Republicans ’ eyes . The 2012 vice presidential nominee and House Budget Committee chair , who has been quietly meeting for months on immigration reform , took to the microphone at Wednesday ’ s meeting , saying that the GOP needs to tackle immigration — and now . Immigrants , he said , are important to the country ’ s economic vitality .
The issue might be urgent , but it won ’ t be smooth . House Republicans face logistical peril by entering into negotiations armed with small bills after Democrats passed a big , aggressive reform package .
The debate will also get lumped in with a busy fall , at a time when Congress will be jousting over government funding and the debt limit .
So , if immigration reform actually happens — far from a certainty — it seems increasingly likely to be tossed into a year-end rush , in a way mirroring the 2012 fiscal cliff panic , the 2010 extension of Bush tax rates and other panicked legislating that Washington has become so accustomed to . But immigration reform will be more challenging : there is no deadline .
Logistics and timing are only two of the reasons this policy debate is challenging . The party is split in multiple directions .