( CNN ) – In yet another sign that Congress will leave town next week without addressing the influx of young migrants at the southern border , a senior White House official acknowledged there are major doubts that lawmakers will approve President Barack Obama 's request for emergency funding to deal with the crisis .
`` Alarming if Congress leaves for the August recess without acting , '' the official told reporters ahead of the visit of three Central American presidents to the White House on Friday .
The official , who spoke only on condition of anonymity , conceded that demands , mainly from Republicans , to change immigration policy enacted in a 2008 law could scuttle efforts to pass Obama ’ s $ 3.7 billion funding bill by the end of next week , when members of Congress leave Washington until after Labor Day .
The Bush-era law entices unaccompanied minors from Central America by granting special legal status in U.S. immigration courts .
`` If it is an impediment to getting resources , then that is a problem , '' the official said of calls to change the 2008 law .
Obama supports making alterations to the law to give the Department of Homeland Security more leeway in removing migrant children who do not qualify for asylum status .
House Speaker John Boehner called on Obama to get more engaged .
“ This is a problem of the President 's own making . And then he tries to – says he wants to solve the problem so that we can stop this influx , but then he changes his mind , ” he said Thursday . “ We 've got a President that 's AWOL . And the President ought to get engaged in this if he actually wants something to happen . ”
The 2008 law was an effort to combat human trafficking . A leading bipartisan proposal to change it , advanced by Texas Republican Sen. John Cornyn and Texas Democratic Rep. Henry Cuellar , is not supported by the administration , a senior White House official said .
Making things more complicated is resistance by congressional Democrats to changing the law .
Sen. Dianne Feinstein , who authored it , said she ’ s received draft language from the administration with suggested changes . She said she ’ s looking at them but doubts there ’ s any way they can happen before the recess .
“ This bill is very complicated and we have to know what we ’ re doing and I think the important thing is to get the supplemental , ” the California Democrat told CNN .
As for House Republicans who signal they won ’ t pass any bill until the law is changed , Feinstein cautioned , “ I think that ’ s a big mistake , ” noting there is also money in the bill to battle wildfires in the West .
Sen. Richard Durbin , one of many powerful Democratic opponents of changing the law , told CNN that the Senate Democratic caucus was at first split on the issue but now the “ overwhelming majority ” thinks it would be a mistake to make changes .
Asked if the administration is pushing aggressively – if at all anymore – to make the changes that they say they want , Dubin pointed to the draft changes that Feinstein received .
“ Many of us are very wary of that , ” he said . “ First we think the President has all the authority he needs , number one , and number two , when the door is cracked open we think Cornyn and Cuellar and ( Ted ) Cruz and the whole gang of anti-immigrant opponents are going to walk through it . ”
Other senior White House officials said Obama will encourage the Central American leaders from Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador to do more to disrupt human smuggling networks in their countries .
The presidents of those countries are seeking financial assistance in return . But that money could also be in jeopardy as officials at the briefing noted the supplemental bill offers $ 295 million to Central America to deal with the crisis .