Three times a day , a Chevy van full of Milwaukeeans pulls out of a church parking lot and makes an hour-long drive to Sheboygan County , Wis. , where they go to work . In Milwaukee , one says , he ’ d be washing dishes for $ 8 an hour , maybe $ 9 , and the hours would be sparse . In Sheboygan , he ’ s making $ 15 an hour at an auto parts factory . When he works overtime , which is often , he makes $ 22 an hour .
That van represents the difference between poverty and opportunity . It ’ s part of the Joseph Project . The name is from the title of a book , “ The Triumphs of Joseph , ” by Bob Woodson , a man who has inspired both of us to rethink how America can address poverty .
The Joseph Project is an effort of churches and businesses to connect people who need good jobs with businesses that need good employees . The churches host week-long classes that teach “ soft skills , ” like how to interview or dress for the office . They organize a carpool to bring them to employers . Since it started last year , with classes taught by the staff of Sen. Johnson , the project has been thriving . It has placed scores of people , 70 % of whom are still at their jobs . Last month , the Sheboygan County Economic Development Corporation paid to add two more vans .
This is how you fight poverty : person to person . The Joseph Project is an example of what community leaders are doing across Wisconsin and America . They are developing homegrown solutions based on their neighbors ’ unique needs — in this case , after noticing a shortage of workers in one place , a shortage of work in another . But to expand opportunity , the federal government needs to stop competing with these social entrepreneurs .
Washington treats these entrepreneurs as it treats almost any successful enterprise — as a threat . Each year , it spends nearly $ 800 billion on more than 90 different programs to fight poverty , with almost no coordination or any consideration of an individual ’ s needs . It should be no surprise that upward mobility is no better now than when we started the War on Poverty in 1964 . But it should be a scandal that today , if you were raised poor , you ’ re just as likely to stay poor as you were 50 years ago .
A one-size-fits-all approach doesn ’ t work . What the federal government should do is direct resources to communities , let them try different ideas , then hold people accountable for results . This more organic approach will empower people , giving them dignity rather than dependence .
First , make sure it always pays to work . When it makes more sense to stay on aid instead of taking that job , it undercuts community leaders and demoralizes people trying to support themselves . It ’ s striking how Joseph Project participants tell us they desperately want to work but feel trapped by the system . It ’ s moving how they respond to opportunity : “ This program is like a second birth , ” one said . We must ensure our safety net never stops people from achieving the dignity of work .
Second , harness the talents of community leaders . Allow states to combine federal programs and customize benefits . This would allow them to coordinate with initiatives like the Joseph Project . Make housing benefits portable , so you can move to neighborhoods with more jobs .
Third , demand results . Washington measures success by how much money it spends . Instead , we should measure it by how many people the programs help . In exchange for giving states flexibility , we should also collect more data on their efforts to see what works .
Forty-six million Americans are in poverty today . Yet at our country ’ s heart is the idea that earning one ’ s success is crucial to human happiness . If the American idea is not true for everybody , then it is not true at all . That ’ s why we believe Republicans should take this issue head-on . We need the federal government to ditch the top-down solutions and take a bottom-up approach . Would it save money ? Sure . But ultimately , this isn ’ t about saving money . It ’ s about saving lives .
Rep. ███ , R-Wis. , is Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives , and Sen. Ron Johnson , R-Wis. , is the a U.S. senator .