The United States implemented a modified version of Donald Trump ’ s travel ban Thursday evening on some people from six Muslim-majority countries and certain refugees , citing security concerns that federal courts have declared to be unfounded .
Travel through major US airports appeared to be proceeding as usual , with border officials under orders to respect previously issued visas for citizens from the countries in question : Sudan , Somalia , Iran , Yemen , Syria and Libya .
Trump travel ban : new visa criteria set to come into effect Read more
The airport scenes contrasted sharply with the protests and security chaos that greeted the Donald Trump administration ’ s first travel ban in January , which drew impassioned demonstrators and led to the sudden detention and expulsion of travelers with valid visas .
Just before the latest travel ban took effect , at 8pm ET , it came under court challenge , with the state of Hawaii questioning the Trump administration ’ s interpretation of a standard for granting visas described by the supreme court in a ruling Monday partially allowing the ban .
Travelers with a “ credible claim of a bona fide relationship with a person or entity in the United States ” could be exempt from the ban , the high court ruled .
The Trump administration interpreted “ bona fide relationship ” to include parents , children , in-laws and step-relations but to exclude grandparents , nephews , nieces , cousins and others .
There appeared to be some indecision within the Trump administration about what the phrase signified . Fiances were originally placed in the excluded group , only to be declared by the state department late Thursday to qualify as partaking in a bona fide relationship .
David Miliband , president of the International Rescue Committee , called the situation “ alarming , ” “ confusing ” and “ inhumane ” .
“ The banning of grandmothers – of unaccompanied children – from America ’ s shores is a disgrace , ” Miliband said . “ Doubly so when America is a breaking a promise we have made to safeguard them . ”
State department employees were to practice discretion in assessing whether family bonds described by visa applicants were “ bona fide ” , according to a senior state department official in a conference call with reporters . Homeland security officials would practice another layer of discretion at points of entry .
“ Persons who have visas and show up at the ports of entry on a flight , on a ship , or another method will be allowed to enter the United States unless there ’ s another reason for not being allowed in , ” a senior administration official told reporters . “ So someone who has a visa will be allowed to be admitted . If , for some reason , there is another basis , they will not . ”
At John F Kennedy airport in New York City , the site of some of the largest protests when the Trump ’ s first order was chaotically rolled out in January , the scene was calm as the partial ban rolled in at 8pm .
A small group of volunteers clustered at a cafe in the arrivals hall of terminal four , awaiting passengers from four flights , one from Istanbul and three from London , to see if any travelers were in need of legal assistance or had seen others on their flights stopped by Customs and Border Protection officers .
The group carried signs in English , Arabic and Farsi and said they would also target a number of other flights from Egypt , Qatar and Dubai on Friday .
One US Muslim family , who did not want to give their names , was awaiting the arrival of three relatives visiting from Pakistan on a flight that arrived from Kuwait .
Even though Pakistan is not one of countries targeted by the ban , the family said the fact Trump ’ s order had taken effect on the day of their relatives ’ travel brought additional worries , despite all three traveling on valid visitor visas .
One member of the visiting group had been held by customs officers for nearly three hours without explanation . It was almost certain the man , who was a first time visitor to the US , was not being held in relation to the order .
“ But this is normal for us , ” said one relative , pointing to what he indicated was frequent profiling at the border .
“ There ’ s no comparison to last time , ” said Camille Mackler , director of legal initiatives at the New York Immigration Coalition , who was present at JFK in January . “ I think this time we ’ re not really expecting anything to happen here at the airport , we ’ re really waiting for this to play out at the consulates abroad . ”
The group encouraged any passengers traveling to the US who had concerns about entry to ring a hotline offering legal advice .
The Hawaii suit seemed to fulfill a prophecy made by Justice Clarence Thomas in a partial dissent from Monday ’ s ruling , in which Thomas called the “ bona fide relationship ” standard “ unworkable ” .
“ The compromise also will invite a flood of litigation until this case is finally resolved on the merits , as parties and courts struggle to determine what exactly constitutes a ‘ bona fide relationship ’ . ”
Trump declared the measure a victory for American security . “ Great day for America ’ s future Security and Safety , ” he tweeted at the time of the supreme court decision . “ We must keep America SAFE ! ”
A Cato Institute study of terrorist attacks in the United States over the 40 years from 1975–2015 concluded that nationals from the six countries in question – Somalia , Yemen , Libya , Syria , Iran and Sudan – were responsible for zero fatal attacks on US soil in that time period . Refugees from Syria and elsewhere likewise are not a threat at all , empirically speaking .
“ This attempt at implementing the president ’ s Muslim ban is just as illogical , discriminatory and un-American as the first two attempts , ” said Tammy Duckworth , a Democratic senator from Illinois , in a statement . “ How can President Trump credibly say that some relatives are ‘ bona fide ’ relationships while grandparents and grandchildren are not ? This disgrace will not make our country safer . It betrays the American values those of us who served in uniform fought to defend . ”