The US Navy is reportedly planning to build sprawling immigrant detention centres on military bases , amid a Trump crackdown at the US-Mexico border .
A draft memo obtained by Time magazine outlines plans to build `` austere '' tent camps to house 25,000 migrants .
The memo says the camps would be built on abandoned airfields in California , Alabama , and Arizona .
Another camp near San Francisco is being designed for as many as 47,000 people , the memo says .
A Pentagon spokesman said the military had not been asked by the Department for Homeland Security ( DHS ) to draw up the specific plans , but was engaging in `` prudent planning ... should the DHS ask for assistance in housing adult illegal immigrants '' .
The US military said on Thursday it had been asked by the government to get ready to house up to 20,000 immigrant children .
The Navy memo estimates the force would spend $ 233 million ( £175m ) to run a facility for 25,000 people for six-months .
The memo gives a sense of the knock-on effect of a `` zero tolerance '' immigration policy being pursued by the Trump administration , in an effort to deter migrants from Central and South America from attempting to cross into the US .
A decision by the administration to criminally prosecute every migrant crossing the US-Mexico border led to some 2,300 children being separated from their parents in May and June , and sparked a global wave of outrage .
President Donald Trump eventually backed down in the face of overwhelming public pressure and signed an order to halt the family separations , but he insisted he remained committed to his `` zero tolerance '' policy .
`` We must maintain a Strong Southern Border . We can not allow our Country to be overrun by illegal immigrants as the Democrats tell their phony stories of sadness and grief , hoping it will help them in the elections , '' he tweeted .
The sudden surge in immigrant detentions created by Mr Trump 's policy has strained various government departments , including Justice , Homeland Security , Defence and Health and Human Services .
Migrant children taken from their parents are being held in facilities run by the Department of Health and Human Services . Images from one facility in a converted Walmart sparked outrage earlier this week , when they showed children held in wire mesh cages , sleeping on mats with foil blankets .
A DHS official said on Thursday that about 500 children had been reunited with their families since separations began in May , but rights groups remain concern that there is not adequate information to return many young children to their parents .
On Friday Mr Trump brought the parents of victims of murders by undocumented immigrants to the White House , where he signed photographs of their late children and invited them to tell their stories .