President Trump on Friday threatened to close the Southern Border next week if Mexico does not “ immediately stop ” the record-breaking surge of illegal immigrants flooding into the United States .
Trump 's warning comes as Customs and Border Protection officials say March is on pace to exceed 100,000 border apprehensions -- the highest monthly total in a decade . According to CBP , this week alone , agents have more than 12,000 migrants in custody. ,
“ The DEMOCRATS have given us the weakest immigration laws anywhere in the World . Mexico has the strongest , & they make more than $ 100 Billion a year on the U.S. , ” Trump tweeted . “ Therefore , CONGRESS MUST CHANGE OUR WEAK IMMIGRATION LAWS NOW , & Mexico must stop illegals from entering the U.S. through their country and our Southern Border . ”
“ Mexico for many years made a fortune off of the U.S. , far greater than Border Costs . If Mexico doesn ’ t immediately stop ALL illegal immigration coming into the United States through [ sic ] our Southern Border , I will be CLOSING the Border , or large sections of the Border , next week . ”
He continued : “ This would be so easy for Mexico to do , but they just take our money and ‘ talk. ’ Besides , we lose so much money with them , especially when you add in drug trafficking etc . ) , that the Border closing would be a good thing ! ”
The president ’ s tweet comes after similar threats earlier in the week to close the Southern Border , with Trump accusing Mexico and Central American nations of doing “ nothing ” as illegal immigration surges .
Trump ’ s initial warning came following comments made by U.S. Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAlleenan , who said this week that the border was at its “ breaking point , ” noting that there are not enough agents to respond to the flow of illegal immigrants crossing the U.S.-Mexico border .
“ That breaking point has arrived this week at our border , ” McAleenan said during a visit to the border in El Paso , Texas . “ CBP is facing an unprecedented humanitarian and border security crisis all along our Southwest border . ”
His agency also tweeted that they saw the highest number of `` apprehensions and encounters '' in over a decade this week -- over 4,000 in one day : `` # CBP saw the highest total of apprehensions and encounters in over a decade on Monday , with 4,000 migrants either apprehended or encountered at ports of entry in a single day . Yesterday , that record was broken again—4,117 in a single day . ''
Last month , more than 76,000 migrants were detained , marking the highest number of apprehensions in 12 years . That figure includes more than 7,000 unaccompanied children . More than 36,000 migrant families have arrived in the El Paso region in fiscal 2019 with about 2,000 at the same time last year , according to CBP data . The influx has prompted new challenges for Border Patrol agents .
And according to new data , the number of adults crossing the border illegally with children has surged . During the first four months of the year , CBP apprehended more than 136,000 migrants made up of adults and children who crossed illegally , marking a new record .
Meanwhile , the president , whose paramount 2016 campaign promise was to build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border , declared a national emergency in a bid to free up funding for the barrier along the border . This month , the president issued his first veto on a Democrat-backed measure to cancel the emergency .
When asked about his comments , the president said he was serious .
`` Mexcio can stop them , but chose not to , '' he told reporters Friday . `` So they 're going to stop them , and if they do n't , we 'll close the border , and we 'll keep it closed for a long time . ''
On Tuesday , House Democrats failed to override Trump ’ s veto , allowing Trump to move forward with the issue .
Trump had declared the border emergency under a law that lets him shift budget funds to address dire situations . His plan is to shift an additional $ 3.6 billion from military construction projects to work on border barriers . Congress voted this year to limit spending on such barriers to less than $ 1.4 billion , and Democrats accused Trump of ignoring lawmakers ' constitutional control over spending .