This past Friday , the deputy director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement came to Chicago to announce a major problem : Chicago-area ICE arrests fell dramatically in 2019 .
Since becoming mayor , one of the things I ’ m most proud of is our unequivocal support of Chicago ’ s immigrant and refugee communities . It ’ s a position directly drawn from our belief that our nation ’ s strength lies in our diversity , and that the values which have made us a beacon of hope are sacred and need to be protected .
It ’ s for that reason that at Wednesday ’ s City Council meeting we passed the Accountability on Communication and Transparency Ordinance , which is designed to bolster our Welcoming City Ordinance — a policy first established by Mayor Harold Washington in 1985 and enhanced by my predecessors ever since .
In it , we are enshrining in the municipal code mandates from my previous executive actions . Namely , we will prohibit ICE from accessing Chicago Police Department databases . Additionally , we will make clear that ICE can not turn to CPD for assistance with immigration enforcement operations . And if ICE does request assistance for any purposes , a CPD supervisor must first confirm that ICE is being truthful and the request will not support immigration enforcement .
We also will establish reporting requirements to both my office and the Inspector General regarding the police department ’ s compliance with the Welcoming City Ordinance , and provide legal guidance to public facilities on how to protect immigrant patrons in the event they are targeted for ICE raids .
The ordinance will in no way inhibit our law enforcement agencies ’ ability to go after individuals suspected of committing serious or violent crimes . Nor does it conflict with our agreement with federal authorities that — in special and rare occasions — allows appointed officers to assist in investigating criminal enterprises , such as counter-terrorism , human trafficking and money laundering , with full knowledge that their assistance will be terminated if any action undertaken is inconsistent with city policies .
If this sounds familiar , it ’ s because it is . This past summer , when President Donald Trump was doing everything he could to scare undocumented families into the shadows , we undertook these measures in the form of executive actions . The difference now is that we ’ re codifying them into law , making for one of the largest expansions of immigrant protections in Chicago since the Welcoming City Ordinance first was adopted over 30 years ago .
All of which brings us to Friday ’ s ICE press conference . As the ICE deputy director noted , it ’ s because of our lack of cooperation that ICE was unable to reach its arrest goal .
Credit for that is shared among city and state leaders , as well as with countless local advocates — whether through the TRUST Act passed in Springfield , the vital services provided by Chicago ’ s immigration attorneys , or the hundreds of Community Navigators supported by our Legal Protection Fund who have been doing the Lord ’ s work of going into communities to educate and empower our undocumented immigrant families about their rights .
Yet , as proud as we are , it shouldn ’ t have to be this way . Cities like Chicago shouldn ’ t have to butt heads with federal agencies to keep their families safe and communities whole .
The reason we ’ ve had to work so diligently to educate residents about their rights is because the current administration has politized ICE into a cynical campaign against immigrants and refugees . Our protection actions also ensure we have the vital community trust needed for the effectiveness of our local police .
Make no mistake , immigration policy is complicated . There are no easy answers . But the national debate — if you can call it that — hasn ’ t been about immigration policy so much as about immigrants themselves . And for all the policy complexities , what isn ’ t complicated is the principle that no one should be demonized for who they are .
Chicago ’ s immigrants come from every corner of the globe — always have . As they have since our earliest days , they help build our city , drive our economy , and create the talent pool that gives us our competitive edge .
We as a nation should be crafting immigration policy based on welcoming our newest residents with clear pathways to citizenship , not fear of arrests . The fact that children right here in Chicago are afraid of coming home from school and finding their parents missing is an indictment of where we are as a country today .
As we move forward , we will continue to protect our communities , strengthen our status as a Welcoming City , and fight for the best of who we are . For unity and inclusion , equity and opportunity . For standing up for our neighbors and calling out division and demonization for what they are .
It ’ s those values that have endowed our heritage for generations , served as the foundation for our incredible success , and will ensure Chicago remains the best city in the world to call home .