Moving to try to steal the immigration spotlight from Democrats , top Senate Republicans on Tuesday introduced their own version of the Dream Act to grant young illegal immigrants legal rights — though it wouldn ’ t give them a special path to citizenship .
Sens . Jon Kyl , John McCain and Kay Bailey Hutchison , all senior Republicans , introduced the bill as a way to restart the immigration debate and to carve out a middle ground between sending illegal immigrants home or granting them green cards , which is the intermediate step to citizenship .
“ We have got to get this ball rolling , ” Mr. Kyl said . “ We have to have a discussion that is sensible , that is calm . ”
Their bill would give young illegal immigrants a chance at legal status as long as they are earning a college degree , serving in the military or , having completed those steps , are holding down a job .
But reaction from those on both sides was swift and negative .
Immigrant rights advocates said the senators ’ legislation , without a pathway to citizenship , would create a group of second-class Americans . Those who favor a crackdown on illegal immigration said any legal status would reward lawbreaking and that it is essentially an amnesty .
Even if its chances are iffy , the legislation is symbolically significant on several fronts .
It marks the return of Mr. McCain to the immigration debate after a four-year hiatus ; it was written with the input of Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida , who Republicans hope will spearhead outreach to Hispanics ; and it underscores the GOP plan to tackle immigration piece by piece .
Immigrant rights advocates said all illegal immigrants deserve a full solution that includes a real pathway to citizenship , rather than a piecemeal bill that stops short of citizenship rights .
“ It ’ s a little bit just stunning how tone-deaf they are to the lessons of the election just three weeks ago , ” said Angela Maria Kelley , vice president for immigration policy at the Center for American Progress , a liberal think tank . “ This bill is frankly disrespectful to the notion that we want to have people become citizens , and become full members of the American family . They ’ re creating a second tier for them to belong in , indefinitely . ”
Indeed , Democrats who two years ago pushed for the Dream Act as a stand-alone bill now say all parts of immigration reform should be tied together .
“ Here is the problem : We can pick off elements of immigration reform that are popular with business groups and others , but if we are going to have true immigration reform we need to keep the package together , and that includes the Dream Act . You know how I feel about that , ” Sen. Richard J. Durbin , Illinois Democrat , told reporters .
That runs up against House Republicans , whose leader , Speaker John A. Boehner , has signaled that he wants to tackle the issue in chunks . The House begins that effort this week with a vote on a bill to end the diversity visa lottery and grant the 55,000 annual green cards to foreign students who get high-tech doctoral degrees from universities in the U.S .
Illegal immigrant youths who were brought to the U.S. by their parents are among the most difficult cases . President Obama announced this year that he would stop deporting such immigrants and instead would grant them work permits — though they wouldn ’ t have permanent legal status .
He has called for lawmakers to follow up on his policy by passing the Dream Act , which would grant them full citizenship rights .
The Senate Republicans ’ bill is an alternative that would apply to those brought to the U.S. before age 14 and would allow applications for those 28 and younger . Their requirements are stricter than those under Democrats ’ Dream Act .
The Republican bill would create a three-tier visa system that would depend on an applicant ’ s length of education or military service . Those who earn visas would not be eligible for welfare or federal education benefits , nor could they gain federal health care benefits under the Affordable Care Act .
Cesar Vargas , who runs the Dream Action Coalition , a network of youths and young adults seeking legal status , said the Republican bill amounts to a permanent probation status , which he said isn ’ t much of an answer to his situation .
“ I think what they ’ re doing now is less of a solution and less of a legislative accomplishment and more trying to achieve a legacy that they ’ re doing something , ” he said of Mr. Kyl and Mrs. Hutchison , both of whom are retiring from Congress at the end of the year .
Mr. Vargas said the Dream Act , with a full pathway to citizenship , is a bipartisan proposal and there is no need to water it down to attract more support .
From the other side , the Federation for American Immigration Reform said the legislation amounts to amnesty for lawbreakers .
“ We hoped we ’ d find an ally in the GOP . Instead , we see many are willing to sell out the principles of true immigration reformers , ” federation President Dan Stein said in a fundraising letter to supporters Tuesday .
Mr. Kyl said the Republican senators are leaving the prospects for citizenship vague in the hopes that they can win middle-ground support .
But he said he expects most of those who would earn visas under his program to end up with citizenship — chiefly by living and working in the U.S. , where they are likely to marry citizens .
The senators said they worked on the legislation with Mr. Rubio . He is not a co-sponsor , though his spokesman Alex Conant said he approves of it even as he works on his own bill .
“ I think we ’ re supportive of their efforts , but we ’ ll have our legislation in the new year , ” Mr. Conant said .