WASHINGTON—Top congressional Republicans signaled Thursday that they wouldn ’ t be pressured into enacting an immigration framework reached between President Donald Trump and top Democrats , as conservatives reacted with alarm to news of a fledgling deal to protect young people brought to the U.S. illegally as children .
Mr. Trump , who ran for president on a hard-line immigration platform , jolted many of his own supporters by agreeing with Democrats to pair legal status for the group often called “ Dreamers ” with enhanced border security measures . The president agreed that the package would omit funding for his promised border wall , and said nothing about including other enforcement measures aimed at finding and deporting people living illegally in the U.S .
It was the second time in a week that Mr. Trump bypassed his party and dealt directly with Democrats . That left GOP congressional leaders excluded , but also relieved them of some of the political burden of delivering on immigration , which has long divided their party , GOP aides said .
The new framework was crafted at a White House dinner Wednesday with Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D. , N.Y. ) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D. , Calif. ) . No GOP lawmakers were invited .
“ We ’ re working on a plan , subject to getting massive border controls , ” the president said Thursday at the White House . “ The wall will come later. ” He said he was “ fairly close ” to reaching an agreement with the Democrats .
Mr. Trump said House Speaker Paul Ryan ( R. , Wis. ) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R. , Ky. ) were “ on board ” with his approach . The GOP leaders responded that Congress would craft any legislative package , and said negotiations would take on a broad set of immigration issues , including enforcement measures beyond border security .
“ The president wasn ’ t negotiating a deal last night . The president was talking with Democratic leaders to get their perspectives , ” Mr. Ryan ( R. , Wis. ) told reporters . “ The president understands he ’ s going to have to work with the congressional majority to get any kind of legislative solution . ”
Mr. McConnell said the fate of the young immigrants should be part of a larger immigration debate , including interior enforcement . “ We look forward to receiving the Trump administration ’ s legislative proposal as we continue our work on these issues , ” he said in a statement .
The leaders weren ’ t specific , but interior enforcement measures favored by conservatives include mandating that businesses use the E-Verify system to check whether applicants can work legally and punishing “ sanctuary cities ” that don ’ t cooperate with federal immigration enforcement .
In the coming weeks , Mr. Ryan and other GOP leaders will need to decide how large a role to play in a policy fight that has long divided their party , according to lawmakers and aides .
House GOP leaders are starting an immigration working group with Republicans from the Homeland Security , Judiciary and Appropriations committees , including a mix of conservative and more centrist Republicans , an aide said .
Mr. Trump ’ s decision to work with Democrats leaves him owning the issue , giving congressional leaders some political breathing room to pass legislation , GOP aides said . But Republican leaders are already under pressure from conservatives to push back against the president and drive a tougher bargain than he did .
Last week , the president overrode objections from GOP congressional leaders and sided with Democrats on a proposal to attach storm aid to measures to keep the government funded and its borrowing limit suspended until mid-December . Some Republicans fear their own internal divisions and trouble passing health care and other legislation are making Democrats a more appealing negotiating partner for Mr. Trump . Republicans are a group full of “ independent-minded folks that have no problem going in a different direction , ” who still “ need to demonstrate that we can govern , ” said Rep. Bill Huizenga ( R. , Mich. ) “ Maybe this is a wake-up call from the White House . ”
“ The word ‘ agreement ’ is a good thing around here , and we ’ re not very used to that , ” said Rep. Jeff Fortenberry ( R. , Neb. ) . “ The country is exhausted politically and sentiments about possibly getting things done are good . ”
A hard line on immigration was one of the central components of Mr. Trump ’ s presidential campaign , and his administration has ramped up arrests of suspected undocumented immigrants , sought to restrict travel from several countries and slashed admission of refugees . Last week , he followed through on a promise to end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which now gives about 690,000 young illegal migrants work authorization and protection from deportation . At the same time , though , he urged Congress to find a solution for those affected before the protections expire in six months .
“ Does anybody really want to throw out good , educated and accomplished young people who have jobs , some serving in the military ? Really ! ” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter Thursday .
That attitude stands in contrast to that of his attorney general , Jeff Sessions , a longtime backer of immigration curbs , who announced the decision to end DACA . He described the program as not just an overreach of executive authority on the part of former President Barack Obama , who created it , but as a wrongheaded move that had encouraged illegal immigration and taken jobs from Americans “ by allowing those same illegal aliens to take those jobs . ”
Democrats saw their power on the rise in a Congress in which they control neither chamber , and the party ’ s leaders appeared to be enjoying the moment . Still , some reacted with skepticism . “ There ’ s not a deal until we see it in writing and there ’ s a vote on it , ” said Rep. Filemon Vela ( D. , Texas ) . “ This is all pretty loosey-goosey . ”
Even if the parties agree on a framework , many details have yet to be settled . Among them is whether the young people being protected would get the chance for citizenship or a legal status short of that . The details of border security would also need to be settled . Mrs. Pelosi and Mr. Schumer said Thursday that the border-security measures could include new technology , drones , air support , sensor equipment and rebuilt roads along the border . Mr. Trump said he wants “ extreme security , not only surveillance but everything that goes with surveillance . ”
Mr. Trump said on a visit to Florida Thursday that “ we ’ re not looking at citizenship , ” but Mrs. Pelosi said their discussion with Mr. Trump involved movement on the proposed Dream Act , legislation that would provide a path to citizenship for some of the childhood arrivals .
Rep. Mark Meadows ( R. , N.C. ) , chairman of the House Freedom Caucus , a group of conservative lawmakers , suggested the most problematic part of a deal could be providing the young immigrants a path to citizenship . “ It ’ s a problem for the majority of the Republican conference on citizenship , ” he said Thursday .
More generally , the deal faces sharp opposition from conservatives who helped power Mr. Trump to office and felt betrayed by the move . The right-wing website Breitbart , run by former Trump adviser Steve Bannon , called the emerging agreement a “ full-fledged cave. ” Conservative writer Ann Coulter asked on Twitter , “ At this point , who DOESN ’ T want Trump impeached ? ” Opponents immediately labeled the deal “ amnesty . ”
“ There ’ s only one thing that cracks President Trump ’ s base and that ’ s if he cracks on immigration , ” said Rep. Steve King ( R. , Iowa ) , a leading immigration foe . “ He hasn ’ t heard enough voices reminding him of his campaign promises and I want to remind him of his campaign promises . ”
Brian Pannebecker , a Trump supporter from Harrison Township , Mich. , said any deal regarding DACA must include substantial funding for the border wall . “ At the rallies we chanted , ‘ Build the wall , build the wall. ’ That ’ s what we want , ” he said .