As anger over policy grows , it emerges children are being sent to ‘ tender age ’ shelters
Donald Trump has told Republicans he is “ 1,000 % ” behind their immigration reform effort , but did not offer a clear path forward as his administration faced bipartisan condemnation over separating children and their parents at the border .
Donald Trump ’ s child cruelty shocks us , but it shouldn ’ t surprise us | Hadley Freeman Read more
Meanwhile , it emerged that Trump administration officials have been sending babies and young children forcibly taken from their parents at the US-Mexico border to at least three “ tender age ” shelters in south Texas .
Lawyers and medical providers who have visited the Rio Grande valley shelters described playrooms full of crying preschool children .
Kay Bellor , the vice-president for programs at the Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service , said : “ The thought that they are going to be putting such little kids in an institutional setting ? I mean , it is hard for me to even wrap my mind around it . Toddlers are being detained . ”
Steven Wagner , an official with the Department of Health and Human Services , said : “ We have specialised facilities that are devoted to providing care to children with special needs , and tender age children , as we define as under 13 , would fall into that category .
“ They ’ re not government facilities per se , and they have very well-trained clinicians , and those facilities meet state licensing standards for child welfare agencies , and they ’ re staffed by people who know how to deal with the needs particularly of the younger children . ”
At a closed-door meeting with House Republicans on Capitol Hill , members said Trump expressed concern for the families being separated by the “ zero-tolerance ” policy , but he did not take responsibility for the practice . Instead , the president urged the Republicans in the room to pass legislation that keeps families together .
After the meeting , the Florida Republican congressman Carlos Curbelo said : “ The president does want this to end . ”
Curbelo , who has led the charge for immigration reform , said Trump told members that Ivanka Trump had appealed to him to stop separating families . However , the president gave no indication that he was willing to reverse the policy and did not acknowledge that he could stop the separations without legislation , he added . Instead , Trump insisted Congress deliver a legislative solution .
Unbowed by mounting public anger , Trump and leading administration officials have fiercely defended the policy , which has led to the separation of more than 2,300 children from their parents in five weeks .
Before the meeting on Tuesday evening , as the president walked through the Capitol , a protester yelled : “ Mr President , fuck you . ”
As Trump left the session , he faced a rare demonstration by members of Congress . House Democrats shouted at the president to abandon his immigration policy while waving signs that read : “ Families belong together . ”
The California congressman Juan Vargas shouted : “ Mr President , don ’ t you have kids ? Don ’ t you have kids , Mr President ? How would you like it if they separated your kids ? ”
Speaking to reporters , Trump said : “ We had a great meeting . These are laws that have been broken for many years , decades . But we had a great meeting . ”
Quick guide Why are families being separated at US border ? Show Hide Why are children being separated from their families ? In April 2018 , the US attorney general , Jeff Sessions , announced a “ zero tolerance ” policy under which anyone who crossed the border without legal status would be prosecuted by the justice department . This includes some , but not all , asylum seekers . Because children can ’ t be held in adult detention facilities , they are being separated from their parents . Immigrant advocacy groups , however , say hundreds of families have been separated since at least July 2017 . More than 200 child welfare groups , including the American Academy of Pediatrics and the United Nations , said they opposed the practice . What happens to the children ? They are supposed to enter the system for processing “ unaccompanied alien children ” , which exists primarily to serve children who voluntarily arrive at the border on their own . Unaccompanied alien children are placed in health department custody within 72 hours of being apprehended by border agents . They then wait in shelters for weeks or months at a time as the government searches for parents , relatives or family friends to place them with in the US . This already overstretched system has been thrown into chaos by the new influx of children . Can these children be reunited with their parents ? Immigration advocacy groups and attorneys have warned that there is not a clear system in place to reunite families . In one case , attorneys in Texas said they had been given a phone number to help parents locate their children , but it ended up being the number for an immigration enforcement tip line . Advocates for children have said they do not know how to find parents , who are more likely to have important information about why the family is fleeing its home country . And if , for instance , a parent is deported , there is no clear way for them to ensure their child is deported with them . What happened to families before ? When an influx of families and unaccompanied children fleeing Central America arrived at the border in 2014 , Barack Obama ’ s administration detained families . This was harshly criticized and a federal court in 2015 stopped the government from holding families for months without explanation . Instead , they were released while they waited for their immigration cases to be heard in court . Not everyone shows up for those court dates , leading the Trump administration to condemn what it calls a “ catch and release ” program . By Amanda Holpuch Read more
House Republicans , barrelling towards a vote on a pair of immigration bills , were hoping the president would rally skeptical members of the caucus around a proposal that sought common ground between moderates and conservatives on an issue that has fiercely divided the party .
Instead , Trump said he would sign either proposal that came to his desk , members said .
The Kansas Republican congressman Kevin Yoder said : “ He said we need to pass one of the two bills. ” He added that the president was “ agnostic ” about which of the two measures they should pass .
The Florida Republican congressman Mario Díaz-Balart said : “ Here ’ s what I ’ m absolutely – 1,000 % – sure of . “ Without his [ Trump ’ s ] support , without his approvals , there ’ s no shot of it passing the House , there ’ s no shot of it going anywhere . ”
During his remarks , which were expected to focus on immigration , Trump spoke about his recent visit to North Korea and his trade policy , members said . He also openly mocked the Republican congressman Mark Sanford , a conservative critic of the president who lost a primary this month after Trump endorsed his opponent , they said .
Image of sobbing toddler at US border : ‘ It was hard for me to photograph ’ Read more
The meeting came at a delicate moment for Republicans , as several lawmakers in both chambers rushed to defuse the spiralling political crisis caused by the immigration crackdown .
Mitch McConnell , the Senate majority leader , said “ all of the members of the Republican conference support a plan that keeps families together ” and endorsed a narrow plan that would allow law enforcement to detain parents and children together while their immigration case is adjudicated in court . McConnell said he hoped to pass a bill as early as this week .
Play Video 1:11 'These children are not animals ' : US house decries separation policy – video
Any such legislation would require some support from Democrats , who immediately rebuffed the plan , arguing that Trump could unilaterally end the practice .
The Senate minority leader , Chuck Schumer , said : “ There is no need for legislation . There ’ s no need for anything else . You [ Trump ] started it , you can stop it – plain and simple . ”
Under the policy , all adults are arrested for crossing the border illegally . As children can not be kept in an adult prison , they are held separately .
In the House , Republicans have included a provision to end family separations in their compromise immigration proposal , which would also provide $ 25bn ( £19bn ) for Trump ’ s border wall and his other hardline security demands . The bill would offer a pathway to citizenship for young undocumented immigrants , known as Dreamers . A rival bill , supported by a conservative bloc of Republicans , would not guarantee them a path to citizenship .
Trump did not discuss whether he would back a standalone measure should support for the immigration proposals flounder . The president has called on Democrats to negotiate an end to the separations , inviting criticism that he is leveraging the crisis at the border to win support for his hardline immigration framework .
The House is expected to vote on the immigration measures this week and their fates are far from certain .