Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) , 04/05/2013 : `` The climate is always changing , that ’ s not the question . The question is if manmade activity is what ’ s contributing the most to it . I know people said there ’ s a significant scientific consensus on that issue , but I ’ ve actually seen reasonable debate on that principle . '' Marco Rubio stumbles
Todd Harris , the usually gregarious consultant to Sen. Marco Rubio , uncharacteristically resisted eight days of calls and emails seeking his thoughts for this column . When he finally did reply , the answer was : “ to be honest , another story about Marco and immigration is not high on Christmas list ! ! ”
No wonder . The very issue Rubio ( and Harris ) thought would be a game-changing , legacy-builder looks like a big liability for the Florida senator , at least right now . In the process , the self-confident presidential hopeful suddenly looks wobbly , even a little weak , as he searches for what ’ s next .
Rubio spent six months working over Senate Republicans only to get stiffed by 70 percent of them . He has gone underground on the issue ever since , ducking reporters on Capitol Hill .
His poll numbers in Iowa and nationally are falling among conservatives . And he clearly feels intense pressure to start acting more conservative — and quick .
One of his new , non-immigration pushes : Warning he won ’ t vote to fund the government unless Obamacare is thrown out . His latest speeches have made fiscal responsibility his new signature issue , including opposition to raising the debt limit unless Congress can pass a budget that balances within 10 years . And he plans to join other Republican senators in a push on abortion restrictions that will please the base , but has no chance of becoming law .
Some top conservatives are questioning Rubio ’ s judgment on immigration , arguing that he was “ played ” by Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) and other Democrats in the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight immigration working group .
Rubio refused to be interviewed for this column . But ███ ’ s Senate specialist , Manu Raju , cornered him in the Capitol on Wednesday to get his take .
“ The Senate bill has passed the Senate , ” he said . “ What ’ s there to advocate for ? ” Rubio , a leader of the Gang of Eight , refused to join the rest of that gang in a meeting Tuesday with technology industry leaders to discuss putting pressure on the House . “ I don ’ t think the best way to get a result for immigration reform in this country is to somehow try to muscle the House , ” he said . The House , Rubio said , deserves “ the time and space…to come up with their ideas about how to reform immigration – and I hope they will – but that ’ s up to them . ”
Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) , a member of the Gang of Eight , said Rubio ’ s silent treatment is understandable - but not the best way to pass a bill . “ I have been there [ in the House ] : When a bunch of senators came over , it wasn ’ t a good news day , ” Graham said . But he added : “ If he ’ s got some influence in the House , now is a good time to use it . ”
In background conversations , Rubio allies spin elaborate theories about how he might be threading the perfect political needle , getting credit for winning Senate passage without owning the responsibility for the complexities of implementation – and certain rage from some parts of the right — if it actually became law .
“ The Senate passed a bill that he was essential to , and his colleagues now see him as a guy who got something important done , ” said a Rubio ally who would be a key part of any presidential campaign . “ The business , financial , tech and evangelical groups were for the bill – that ’ s all pretty good stuff . He showed political strength by not kowtowing to the ... right . And if the bill fails , the only way Republicans could win the Hispanic vote in a national election would be with him on the ticket . ”
But let ’ s rewind the camera to understand why this isn ’ t where Rubio wanted to be . He got into the immigration fight because he authentically believes the law needs to change – and because he knows that if he ever wants to run for the White House , he can not look like a policy chump . So he plunged all-in . He worked the conservative media masterfully , winning the support of important talkers like Bill O ’ Reilly on Fox , and neutralizing many talk-radio hosts , who seemed to give Rubio the benefit of the doubt personally , even if they didn ’ t love the proposed law . He quietly cultivated House allies like House Budget Chairman Paul Ryan . His clear aim was to get a bill signed into law .