The House GOP heads for its annual policy retreat Thursday in a very different place on immigration than just a year ago , when House Speaker John A. Boehner had hoped to use the gathering as a springboard to push his troops to approve a broad bill legalizing illegal immigrants .
Now , as congressional Republicans prepare to gather for another retreat , the conversation has completely shifted .
Mr. Boehner is leading a party that on Wednesday , a day ahead of the retreat , will pass a bill through the House canceling President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty and boosting pro-enforcement policies . Senate Republicans , who will join the House GOP for a joint retreat this year , will look for ways to push that legislation through their chamber too .
“ Our goal here is to fund the Department of Homeland Security . Our second goal is to stop the president ’ s executive overreach , ” Mr. Boehner said Tuesday as he outlined the immigration fight . “ This is not the way our government was intended to work . The president said 22 times that he didn ’ t have the authority to do what he eventually did . He knows the truth here , and so do the American people . ”
The GOP predicted near unity in Wednesday ’ s House votes , signaling just how much the politics of the issue have changed over the last 12 months .
“ They ’ ve just come off an election . That makes a big difference , ” said Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen , a Florida Republican from an immigrant-heavy district who has supported Mr. Boehner ’ s previous efforts to pass immigration legislation , though she also said her colleagues are reacting to a strong political message from their voters back home .
“ Right after an election you are very much in touch with the people , and the folks from their districts are expressing their concern about what they see as immigration run amok and the border crisis , when the president was saying , ‘ Hey , the border is secure , ’ But we see border kids coming through , and that caused a real shift in the people ’ s mood , ” she said .
The votes Wednesday will come as part of the debate over funding the Department of Homeland Security through September , which is the end of the fiscal year .
Republicans have scheduled votes on one amendment to cancel Mr. Obama ’ s new amnesty , announced in November , which would apply to more than 4 million illegal immigrants , and on another amendment to cancel the president ’ s previous 2012 amnesty that applied to so-called Dreamers , or young adult illegal immigrants .
Democrats called those proposals poison pills and pointed to Mr. Obama ’ s promise to veto any legislation that tries to stop his amnesties . They said Republicans were holding homeland security money hostage to their own immigration demands .
“ This is frivolous , ” said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat . “ Why don ’ t we live up to our responsibilities in a bipartisan way here to protect and defend the American people , to live up to the character of our country , which is a nation of immigrants ? ”
The White House has defended Mr. Obama ’ s actions as lawful and constitutional , saying that previous presidents have also granted “ deferred action ” — a suspension of deportations , along with work permits to allow illegal immigrants to compete legally for jobs .
In addition to Congress , Mr. Obama ’ s policy is also being challenged in the courts , where 25 GOP-leaning states have sued to stop him — a unity that couldn ’ t have been found among Republicans until recently .
Lawmakers and analysts said the 2014 House GOP retreat , held in Cambridge , Maryland , was decisive in the shift .
Mr. Boehner and his top lieutenants went into the closed-door retreat promising a set of principles for reform , which they said would guide the House ’ s action as it tried to match the Senate ’ s broad legalization bill , passed to tremendous fanfare a year earlier .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , Alabama Republican , had armed House Republicans with a report on the costs of legalization , and the Eagle Forum produced a report arguing that the GOP had little chance of gaining politically from legalization .
Meanwhile Rep. Steve King , Iowa Republican , had organized several dozen Republicans to stand up at the meeting and speak out against legalization , arguing Mr. Obama couldn ’ t be trusted to carry out any laws the GOP passed given his past behavior .
GOP pollsters who addressed the meeting also told lawmakers that voters weren ’ t fired up over the issue , countering what many Republicans had feared after seeing Hispanic turnout hurt them in the 2012 elections .
“ There was an accumulation of knowledge , ” Mr. King said in an interview Tuesday .
Within a week Mr. Boehner and his fellow GOP leaders had changed their tone , saying that while they wanted to move forward , they didn ’ t have a president they could work with .
The GOP leaders suffered one more embarrassment last summer , on a bill designed to combat the surge of tens of thousands of illegal immigrant families and unaccompanied children who stormed the border trying to gain entry .
A conservative rebellion forced the Republican leaders to pull their plans , which they ’ d hoped to pass with the help of Democrats , and instead negotiate with the conservatives , approving a bill that gave Mr. Obama less than a quarter of the money he wanted . At the urging of conservatives , the House also approved a bill that would have limited Mr. Obama ’ s amnesty for Dreamers .
This week ’ s votes will go further , canceling the amnesty program altogether .
Immigrant rights advocates , who had long counted on at least some Republican support for legalization , said the GOP ’ s new unity was lamentable .
“ There ’ s no daylight anymore between House Republicans on immigration reform , ” said Frank Sharry , executive director of America ’ s Voice , an advocacy group . “ So much for a ‘ Republican divide ’ on immigration , so much for the Republican attempt to expand its base , and so much for responsible governance . ”