The episode is perhaps most embarrassing for new GOP Whip Steve Scalise . Border fight delays recess
House Republicans are poised to delay their August recess by one day , as they frantically scramble to pass a border security bill .
After a chaotic afternoon , which saw the GOP leadership suddenly pull their legislation from the House floor because of flagging support , lawmakers planned a Friday morning meeting at 9 a.m. to try to plot a path forward . Plans are in flux , and subject to change at any minute , aides and lawmakers warned .
In a Thursday afternoon meeting , Speaker John Boehner , Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) and Majority Whip Steve Scalise ( R-La . ) heard from a number of Republicans who did not want to leave Washington until a package passed the House — a sentiment reflected by nearly every lawmaker who emerged after the meeting ended .
“ I ’ m willing to stay here ‘ til the cows come home , ” said Rep. Matt Salmon ( R-Ariz. ) . “ Use your metaphor — hell freezes over , cows come home . ”
But all day Thursday , the votes in support of the original $ 659 million border bill faded away , and it ’ s unclear if Scalise will be able to recapture votes in support of the package . Thursday was his first day as whip .
Lawmakers were supposed to be heading home Thursday to begin a five-week recess . But the House schedule was in such flux that members walked off the floor canceling and rebooking flights to go home .
After the bill was pulled , Boehner ( R-Ohio ) was surrounded on the House floor by a dozen colleagues while incoming McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) was also talking to fellow lawmakers .
Democrats in the Senate , who are struggling to pass their own border bill , took the opportunity to poke the Republican House . When asked whether he was surprised Boehner didn ’ t seem to have the votes for the GOP bill , Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid quipped : “ No . Not the first time . ”
The GOP legislation , which was rewritten twice to attract support , had trouble getting off the ground , and if the House doesn ’ t vote , lawmakers will head back to their districts to hear from voters with a crisis raging at the border .
The turmoil is stunning considering how far to the right the GOP leadership pulled this bill . Boehner , McCarthy and Scalise , the new GOP whip , crafted a process that would have given the House a vote on legislation to stop the Obama administration from expanding its deferred deportation program . But even that wasn ’ t enough .
The episode is most embarrassing for Scalise , whose allies crowed this week about running a more effective whip organization than McCarthy , the longtime Republican vote counter who will now be the majority leader .
The political impact of this decision is not clear , but if the House doesn ’ t vote , Democrats will be able to say that the GOP left Washington for an entire month without passing legislation to address the influx of migrants across the U.S.-Mexico border .
The challenges facing the House bill were evident earlier Thursday , when hard-right conservatives indicated that they still weren ’ t appeased by the last-minute offer of a vote on the immigration deferral program — known as DACA — in exchange for moving forward on the border funding bill .
This bloc demanded tougher border-security and immigration provisions in the supplemental package while also pressing for the language rolling back DACA to be included in the funding bill .
“ I don ’ t like it , ” Rep. Paul Broun ( R-Ga. ) said of the two-step strategy Thursday morning . “ We need to get rid of DACA , and the bill itself is bad . ”
Rep. Paul Gosar ( R-Ariz. ) , another conservative , had already started to circulate a Dear Colleague letter warning Republicans against the stand-alone vote on DACA .
More than 57,000 unaccompanied children , mostly from El Salvador , Guatemala and Honduras , have been apprehended at the southern border since October — exhausting government resources and leading federal agencies to warn that they will begin running out of money in August to deal with the crisis .
Beyond providing funds for the border , the House bill would have revised a 2008 anti-trafficking law that has , in practice , made it more difficult to deport children from countries other than Mexico or Canada . The legislation also called for bolstering National Guard presence on the border .
The White House blasted the House ’ s plan on Thursday after leaders tacked on the DACA vote . The deferral program was announced by President Barack Obama in June 2012 in the middle of his reelection bid . More than 550,000 young undocumented immigrants who grew up in the United States have been protected from deportation and gotten work permits under the program .
But Republicans have blamed DACA for contributing to the current crisis on the border , arguing that it sends a message to children from abroad that they , too , could be allowed to stay here lawfully .
“ It is extraordinary that the House of Representatives , after failing for more than a year to reform our broken immigration reform system , would vote to restrict a law enforcement tool that the Department of Homeland Security uses to focus resources on key enforcement priorities like public safety and border security , and provide temporary relief from deportation for people who are low priorities for removal , ” White House press secretary Josh Earnest said .
House Democratic leadership pressured its rank and file throughout the week to reject the border spending bill , denying the GOP of votes to offset defections in their own part . Most Democrats raised humanitarian objections to changing the 2008 trafficking law .
“ Clearly , many factors led these desperate parents to hand off their children to complete strangers with the hope they make their way to safety here , ” Rep. Nita Lowey ( D-N.Y. ) said . “ We ought to consider the complicated policy questions and provide a carefully considered solution . Yet these policy changes reveal a knee-jerk response coupled with another bill to deport children who are already in the U.S . ”
CORRECTION : Due to an editing error , an earlier version of this piece misstated the cost of the border bill .
CORRECTION : Due to an editing error , an earlier version of this piece misstated the cost of the border bill .