Much of Thursday ’ s news cycle was spent focusing on Donald Trump ’ s rather visceral attack on MSNBC host Mika Brzezinski and the ensuing social-media back-and-forth throughout the rest of the day . But outside the spectacle of bloodsport ( literally ) , a more insidious set of bills found their way out of the Republican-controlled house , both targeting the immigrants that Trump turned into scapegoats during his 2017 campaign .
Perhaps bolstered by a recent Supreme Court decision that reinstated parts of Trump ’ s controversial travel ban pending judicial review , the House passed two bills targeting criminal behavior committed by illegal immigrants , as well as the self-described “ sanctuary cities ” that declared they would not help federal authorities deport these immigrants . According to the The Washington Post , the first one , Kate ’ s Law , increases prison sentences for illegal immigrants convicted of crimes and deported , who then re-enter the country afterwards . The second , the No Sanctuary for Criminals Act , would cut off federal aid and grants for sanctuary cities , while leaving them responsible for lawsuits involving crime committed by illegal immigrants .
The two bills , along with the Supreme Court ’ s temporary upholding of his travel ban , gave Trump a couple of victories in his mostly winless administration , and he happily tweeted the news , while adding that he hoped that the “ Senate will follow. ” .
The bills had been heavily promoted by Homeland Secretary John Kelly , who , prior to his appointment , had advocated for a multi-pronged approach to help stem the flow of illegal immigrants , such as building relationships with leaders in Central America and encouraging economic stability in the region to deter immigrants from traveling to America . But during a press conference on Thursday , Kelly , echoing the president , took a harder line . “ President Trump has been clear that our borders are not open to illegal immigration , that we are a nation of laws , and we will no longer look the other way , ” he said . “ Well , we will no longer look the other way in the interior , either . ”
The bill targeting sanctuary cities alarmed police chiefs across the country , many of them arguing that the threat of deportation would scare illegal immigrants from reporting crimes for fear of deportation . In March , Los Angeles Police Chief Charlie Beck noted with alarm that reports of sexual assault had dropped 25 percent among Latinos—and that it was unlikely that sexual assaults had fallen that much . ” Imagine , a young woman , imagine your daughter , your sister , your mother . . . not reporting a sexual assault , because they are afraid that their family will be torn apart , “ said Beck .