Tense negotiations , months of deliberation , hundreds of amendments , and hours of speeches on the Senate floor culminated in passage of a bipartisan immigration reform bill on Thursday .
With Vice President Joe Biden presiding over the chamber , 68 senators – 54 Democrats joined by 14 Republicans – rose from their chairs to vote for the most sweeping immigration reform overhaul to pass the chamber since 2006 .
“ This , ” says Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R ) of South Carolina , a member of the “ Gang of Eight ” that crafted this year ’ s bill , “ is as good as it gets in the Senate . ”
But one question hung over the heady proceedings : Would it all be in vain ?
Without a single House Republican leader signaling an interest in taking up the Senate ’ s legislation , immigration reform ’ s road from broadly popular idea to legislation on President Obama ’ s desk is still as murky as ever .
“ To our friends in the House , we ask for your consideration , ” said Sen. John McCain ( R ) of Arizona , plaintively , at a news conference after the vote . “ We stand ready to sit down and negotiate with you . ”
The Senate bill ’ s limited appeal to the House isn ’ t for lack of trying to sweeten the deal for conservatives . The legislation carries an amendment struck by Republican Sens . Bob Corker of Tennessee and John Hoeven of North Dakota that , at an eye-popping cost of more than $ 40 billion , would nearly double the number of agents stationed along the US-Mexico border and authorize more than 700 miles of border fencing , among other requirements .
“ This border-security measure blows my mind , ” Senator Graham says . “ We ’ ve practically militarized the border . ”
In addition , the Senate bill blocks the undocumented from receiving subsidies under Mr. Obama ’ s signature health-care law . Those in the United States illegally but seeking to become US citizens must wait 13 years and pay thousands of dollars in fines while being barred from receiving federal benefits .
In another nod to conservatives , none of the 11 million illegal immigrants in the country today would be allowed to become permanent residents until each of five “ triggers ” are hit :
Establishing a nationwide E-Verify system for validating a person ’ s work authorization .
Making operational more than $ 4 billion in advanced border-security technology .
Bringing on line an advanced system of tracking entry and exit from the nation ’ s airports and seaports .
The bill likewise achieves two goals of the typically conservative-leaning corporate community : vastly expanding efforts to attract and retain high-skilled workers and opening up an entirely new class of visas for low-skilled foreign workers , including those in agricultural industries , to come to the US on a temporary basis .
But what rankles some conservatives is the central concession won by Democrats : The undocumented would be allowed to legalize , if provisionally , before all the bill ’ s many security measures are in place .
“ I can tell you it ’ s going to make history because it ’ s going to make the same mistakes that we made in 1986 when we thought we were securing the border and we obviously didn ’ t , ” says Sen. Charles Grassley ( R ) of Iowa , speaking of the 1986 immigration reform bill that legalized 3 million illegal immigrants but failed to secure the nation ’ s borders .
“ You find out [ if ] you reward illegality , and you get more of it by four times , ” says Senator Grassley , who voted for the 1986 bill signed by President Reagan . “ I don ’ t want to make that mistake again . ”
There ’ s hope among the GOP that the House will achieve conservative goals that couldn ’ t get enough support in the Senate .
“ Remember , this is the beginning of the process , not the end , ” Senator Hoeven says . “ In other words , the House has to do something . ”
But “ something ” is almost certainly not inclusive of the Senate ’ s legislation . House leaders – including those supportive of the immigration reform effort like House Speaker John Boehner ( R ) of Ohio , Rep. Paul Ryan ( R ) of Wisconsin , and Rep. Raúl Labrador ( R ) of Idaho – have said the Senate bill won ’ t get a hearing in the House .
What exactly the House will do is still an open question . House Judiciary chairman Robert Goodlatte ( R ) of Virginia is moving a passel of bills that address parts of the immigration system , including interior enforcement of immigration laws and nationwide implementation of E-Verify . A bipartisan group of House members has cooked up a single , comprehensive bill on which a final accord has proved elusive for weeks .
But those options and others won ’ t be formed into a legislative plan no earlier than a GOP conference meeting devoted to immigration on July 10 .
And with many conservative House Republicans balking at a Democratic red line of potential citizenship for the undocumented under any circumstances , it 's anyone 's guess whether lawmakers can reconcile the Senate bill with whatever legislation the House approves .
The perhaps grim fate of the Senate bill in an unrepentantly conservative House was clear on Thursday , even as senators were slapping one another on the back and paying tribute to Ted Kennedy , the late Massachusetts senator whose immigration reform efforts in 2006 and 2007 were indefatigable if , eventually , futile .
As the Gang of Eight assembled to face reporters after the vote , only six senators approached the podium .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Sen. Jeff Flake ( R ) of Arizona , who ascended to the Senate from the ranks of the House ’ s most fiscally conservative hawks earlier this year , was absent . So was Sen. Marco Rubio ( R ) of Florida , the man with presidential aspirations in 2016 who , like many new members of the House , was swept to office on the tea party wave of 2010 .
The absence of the two Gang of Eight senators with the most cachet among House Republicans spoke volumes : For now , keeping immigration reform rolling may very well mean steering clear of the bill that the Senate fought so hard to pass .