Subscribe to the whole series via our free weekly Politics newsletter and follow us on Twitter @ CSM_politics . Review the previous six installments , from guns to climate change , here .
It is about a quarter-mile hike to reach the top of a ridge west of the fence . There , among the cactuses and the mesquite , lie several small clearings where it appears people have been sleeping . Discarded food cans litter the area , and a tangle of wire runs through the middle of it .
Welcome to the other US-Mexican border – the one without a barrier .
The border here looks easy enough for anyone to cross . Donald Trump wants to change that . To address the problem , the Republican presidential candidate makes a bold pledge . “ We will build a great wall along the southern border , ” he says . “ And Mexico will pay for the wall . ”
As if on cue , the crowds at his rallies respond with a now familiar mantra : “ Build that wall .... Build that wall .... Build that wall .... ”
In a presidential election campaign unlike any in US history , Trump ’ s Wall looms large . At this point it is merely a proposal , yet the very idea of it has split the American public , offended Mexico , alienated American Latinos , and drawn a razor-sharp contrast between Mr. Trump and Democratic rival Hillary Clinton on the thorny issue of illegal immigration .
In a larger sense , Trump ’ s Wall is an ultimatum for the hemisphere and perhaps for the world – that it is time for the most powerful and richest country on earth to turn its generosity inward .
“ There is only one core issue in the immigration debate , and that issue is the well-being of the American people , ” Trump says .
But beneath all the rhetoric on both sides of the issue , practical questions loom : Could a wall actually be built ? How much would it cost ? And , most important , would it really keep people out ?
Sources : the Jill Stein campaign , the Gary Johnson campaign , the Hillary Clinton campaign website , the New York Times , CNN , Politifact , the Donald Trump campaign website , Donald Trump ’ s Twitter account , the Los Angeles Times , C-Span
Ann Hermes/The ███ Federal district Judge Robert C. Brack stands outside the United States Federal Courthouse on July 17 , 2014 in Las Cruces , New Mexico . The number of defendants Judge Brack sentences is among the highest in the nation due to the volume of cases he oversees dealing with illegal immigrants reentering the United States .
LAS CRUCES , N.M. — Less than an hour into one of his regular morning dockets , federal district Judge Robert Brack has already sentenced 14 felons , or roughly one-sixth the number of people the average federal judge sentences in an entire year . The 15th defendant of the morning , Jamie Peña-Flores , stands before the judge shackled at the ankles , wrists , and waist .
“ This is a tragic case , ” says the man ’ s lawyer . Mr. Peña-Flores , a Mexican national , has spent most of his life in the United States working as a certified diesel mechanic and welder . He was most recently living in Wyoming , where he was making $ 28 per hour . His three children are American citizens and his wife has been diagnosed with cancer . Until this moment in court , the defendant had a clean criminal record , except for one incident of driving under the influence , for which he ’ d already served jail time .
Peña-Flores , however , entered the country illegally . For at least the second time in his life , authorities caught him trying to cross from Mexico , where he had recently returned for a visit , into the US , an infraction that can be prosecuted as a felony and is part of a burgeoning American strategy to reduce illegal immigration .
In order to become a US citizen , immigrants must pass the Naturalization Test . American citizenship bestows the right to vote , improves the likelihood of family members living in other countries to come and live in the US , gives eligibility for federal jobs , and can be a way to demonstrate loyalty to the US . Applicants must get 6 answers out of 10 in an oral exam to pass the test . According to US Citizenship and Immigration services , 92 percent of applicants pass this test .
2 . How American are you ? Take the alternative citizenship quiz .
To become a US citizen , immigrants must past a test that includes questions on government , history , and geography . But what really makes someone `` American ? '' Here are 23 questions on everything from movies and music to fiction and food , with a little US history thrown in too .
3 . How much do you know about literature by immigrants ? Take our quiz .
How much do you know about literature by and about immigrants , old and new ? Test your melting pot , tossed salad , multi-culti , all-American literary knowledge here … from A to Z .
1 . `` A Little Reality on Immigration , '' by David Brooks , The New York Times
Donald Trump brings Republican crowds to their feet by bashing the supposed criminal hordes sneaking up from Mexico . The problem with this new orthodoxy is that it is ... based on a view of immigration that may have reflected 1980s realities , but that has little to do with reality today . The number of illegal immigrants flowing into this country is dropping , not rising .... There are more Mexicans leaving the United States than coming in . According to the Pew Research Center , there was a net outflow of 140,000 from 2009 to 2014 . If Trump builds his wall , he ’ ll lock more Mexican immigrants in than he ’ ll keep out .
2 . “ Immigrant America : The High Cost of Deporting Parents , ” a VICE video
Here we are , they deport him , and we ’ re having to support his family that he was supporting . I don ’ t understand why they don ’ t check a little more what ’ s going on… . Because he was supporting his family , he had a good job , had a business , and there ’ s people here just living off us .
– Jeff Kesler , conservative and longtime friend of Ray Jesus , on the cost of his deportation to US taxpayers ( estimated by VICE to be $ 102,710 )
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
3 . “ US stuck with ex-cons it fails to deport , ” Boston Globe interactive graphic ( 2012 ) , with context from a related series
Immigration and Customs Enforcement , or ICE , routinely releases dangerous detainees to the streets of America without warning the public . Over the past four years , immigration officials have largely without notice freed more than 8,500 detainees convicted of murder , rape , and other crimes , according to ICE ’ s own statistics , mainly because their home countries would not take them back . ( This graphic provides data sortable by city and type of crime . )
4 . “ The Economic Case for Welcoming Immigrant Entrepreneurs , ” Kauffman Foundation ( 2015 )
There ’ s something inherently entrepreneurial about leaving your home to start a new life in another country . Perhaps that is why immigrants tend to start businesses at a disproportionately higher rate than native-born Americans . From Alexander Graham Bell to Sergey Brin , immigrants have created some of America 's most iconic companies . In fact , more than 40 percent of the Fortune 500 companies in 2010 were founded by an immigrant or the child of an immigrant . Yet , despite their vast economic contributions , US law provides no dedicated means for immigrant entrepreneurs to launch innovative companies in the United States .
5 . “ The New Case Against Immigration , Both Legal and Illegal , ” book by Mark Krikorian ( 2012 )