President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE in fact supports both of the House GOP immigration bills expected to receive votes next week and misspoke earlier Friday when he said that he would oppose a compromise measure between centrists and conservatives , a White House official told ███ .
`` Yes , we fully support both the Goodlatte bill and the Leadership bill . The President misunderstood the question this morning on Fox News , '' the source said in an email . `` He was commenting on the discharge petition/dreamers bill — not the new package . He would 100 percent sign either Goodlatte or the other bill . ''
Centrists had tried to use a discharge petition to force leadership to move on four different immigration proposals , including one backed by Democrats that protects so-called Dreamers , beneficiaries of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program .
Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanDemocrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Three-way clash set to dominate Democratic debate Krystal Ball touts Sanders odds in Texas MORE ( R-Wis. ) and the rest of House leadership managed to block that attempt earlier this week , and will instead bring forth a pair of immigration bills , including a more hard-line measure from Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte Robert ( Bob ) William GoodlatteUSCIS chief Cuccinelli blames Paul Ryan for immigration inaction Immigrant advocacy groups should n't be opposing Trump 's raids Top Republican releases full transcript of Bruce Ohr interview MORE ( R-Va. ) .
Other White House officials who spoke to Breitbart News attempted to deny that Trump misspoke and claimed he does not actually back the compromise proposal .
“ President Trump made his views on the Ryan amnesty bill very clear today , ” one official told Breitbart . “ Unless he says something different publicly , it should be presumed that he knows exactly what he was talking about and what he was saying and why . ”
The White House later released an on-the-record statement from spokesman Raj Shah reiterating that the president misunderstood the question on Fox News .
“ The president fully supports both the Goodlatte bill and the House leadership bill . In this morning 's interview , he was commenting on the discharge petition in the House , and not the new package . He would sign either the Goodlatte or the leadership bills , ” Shah said .
The president said Friday morning during an appearance on “ Fox and Friends ” that he was looking at both pieces of legislation , but `` certainly would n't sign the more moderate one . ''
His comments resulted in chaos on Capitol Hill , with House Republicans scrapping their plans to whip the legislation — released Thursday evening — crafted following meetings between leadership , centrists and top members of the conservative House Freedom Caucus .
`` We want to get clarity on the president ’ s position on this bill , ” chief Deputy Whip Patrick McHenry Patrick Timothy McHenryHouse passes bill to protect cannabis industry access to banks , credit unions Manufacturing group leads coalition to urge Congress to reauthorize Ex-Im Bank Hasan Minhaj tells Congress : Student loan debt is 'sidelining millions of Americans ' MORE ( R-N.C. ) told reporters . “ Republicans are not going to take on immigration without the support and endorsement of President Trump . ”
Both moderates leading the discharge petition efforts , which would circumvent leadership and force votes on four separate proposals , and conservatives noted the bill was still a work in progress .
Despite the compromise bill coming together following meetings between negotiations from all factions of the GOP , conservatives have expressed concern that it lacks provisions to address e-verify , the guest worker program and `` sanctuary cities . ''
The president took to Twitter Friday afternoon to express his support for House Republicans ' efforts to come to an agreement on immigration that meets his four pillars : a pathway to citizenship for DACA recipients , an end to `` chain migration , '' the elimination of the diversity visa lottery system and strengthening border security .
The Democrats are forcing the breakup of families at the Border with their horrible and cruel legislative agenda . Any Immigration Bill MUST HAVE full funding for the Wall , end Catch & Release , Visa Lottery and Chain , and go to Merit Based Immigration . Go for it ! WIN ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 15 , 2018
The measure also ends the separation of immigrant children and parents at the border , closes “ catch and release ” immigration loopholes and contains a trigger mechanism to halt the new visas for Dreamers if Congress denies funding for the wall .
— Scott Wong and Jordan Fabian contributed to this report , which was updated at 5:46 p.m .