The Senate ’ s Gang of Eight remains in negotiations on the broader immigration bill . Labor-business immigration deal
Senate negotiators cleared the last major hurdle to reaching a bipartisan immigration reform deal Saturday as labor and business groups signed off on a visa program for future low-skilled workers , according to sources familiar with the talks .
The agreement marks a major breakthrough and significantly improves the odds of passing a larger immigration bill because it brings two powerful Washington interests on board on an issue that contributed to the defeat of past reform efforts .
The visa program , which allows businesses to bring in up to 200,000 low-skilled workers annually depending on economic conditions , would be among the most controversial elements of the overhaul package . But the AFL-CIO and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce are expected to play a key role in helping blunt attacks by conservatives activists and liberals .
“ This issue has always been the dealbreaker on immigration reform , but not this time , ” Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , a leader of the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight , said in a statement Saturday night .
The Gang of Eight remains in negotiations on the broader bill . The senators have reached tentative agreement on many of the major issues , including the path to citizenship and border security , but they have yet to review the legislative language and caution that they don ’ t have a deal until they agree on everything .
The reform bill is so complex that none of the senators is willing to say they have an agreement until they can look at it on paper . The group is preparing to spend the next week finalizing the legislation , with an announcement likely to come when they return from the Easter recess on April 8 — although it will mark the start of a long and difficult road to passage .
There has been a remarkable level of cooperation between Democrats and Republicans in the Gang of Eight , but their alliance will be tested once the details of their agreement become known . The bill is expected to include a 10-year path to legal permanent status for the country ’ s 11 million undocumented immigrants , billions of dollars for new border security measures , and reforms to the legal immigration program .
Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) , a member of the Gang of Eight , sent a letter Saturday to Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy ( D-Vt. ) urging against “ excessive haste ” when considering the expected bill . Rubio asked that Leahy hold “ meaningful hearings , ” with a particular focus on border security and the benchmarks that must be met before undocumented immigrants can obtain legal permanent residence status .
“ My strong belief that the success of any major legislation depends on the acceptance and support of the American people , ” Rubio wrote in the letter . “ That support can only be earned through full and careful consideration of legislative language and an open process of amendments . ”
The deal between the AFL-CIO and the Chamber , two fierce rivals , is yet another sign of how dramatically the politics of immigration reform have shifted since the 2012 election — and the last major attempt to pass a bill in 2007 .
Schumer convened a call Friday night with AFL-CIO president Richard Trumka and Chamber president Tom Donohue so they could hear from all the parties involved that they have an agreement , according to one source familiar with the talks said .
Describing it as a “ very good call , ” the source said they agreed they should go out to dinner at some point and celebrate .
Schumer spoke Saturday with White House chief of staff Denis McDonough to tell him that the visa program “ was no longer a problem , ” the source said .
“ The president continues to be encouraged by progress being made by the bipartisan group of senators , ” White House spokesman Clark Stevens said in a statement Saturday . “ We look forward to seeing language once it is introduced , and expect legislation to move forward as soon as possible . ”
The Chamber and the AFL-CIO have been the lead negotiators for labor and business , but there could be fissures among different industry groups and unions .
Trumka issued a statement Saturday night hailing the proposed program as “ a new model , a modern visa system . ”