WASHINGTON—Republicans in Congress are preparing a variety of bills that would make substantial changes to the immigration system , suggesting that the embers of interest in addressing immigration law , once thought to be extinguished , remain alive .
GOP leaders in both the House and Senate had said President Barack Obama had “ poisoned the well ’ ’ when he acted without congressional approval last month to shelter some four million illegal immigrants from deportation .
While many Republicans say the top priority must be to undo Mr. Obama ’ s unilateral action , the new efforts to write and pass immigration legislation , coming as Republicans prepare to take full control of Congress , show that some lawmakers are eager to navigate their own proposals into law , as well .
The Republican efforts begin with measures tightening security on the Southwest border—a top concern of GOP lawmakers—but go beyond that to include legislation favored by high-tech , agricultural and other business interests that would make more workers available to those sectors .
Republican leaders in the House and Senate have said they want to use their strengthened hand in the next Congress to notch legislative achievements , but it is unclear whether they would back any of the emerging immigration bills . Another question is whether the party would insist that any bill include a reversal of Mr. Obama ’ s action protecting illegal immigrants . The White House has promised to veto any legislation that scales back his policy . Mr. Obama might also object to the bills on their face .
Among the signs of legislative activity : A House committee is preparing border-security legislation for action early in 2015 . Veteran GOP lawmakers have drafted bills offering additional visas both for low-skilled and high-tech workers . Bipartisan discussions are under way in the Senate on legislation to revamp the visa program for farm workers .
Democrats , even those who oppose the Obama executive action , say the best course remains for Congress to pass a comprehensive bill that fixes a range of immigration problems , including help for undocumented residents .
“ We need a practical plan that strengthens our borders , addresses the systemic problems with our legal immigration policies and provides a tough , fair process for those who want to earn the opportunity for citizenship , ” said a recent letter to congressional leaders from Democratic Sens . Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota .
In the House , the chairman of the Homeland Security Committee is preparing a border-security bill aimed at better measuring illegal crossings , with targeted improvements in equipment and technology along the Southwest border . On the Senate side , the incoming chairman of the Homeland Security Committee said in an interview that he hopes to have a framework for a border-security bill ready by late January .
“ We want to set our own agenda on this , ” said Rep. Michael McCaul ( R. , Texas ) , chairman of the House committee . House leaders have asked him to have a border bill ready for action by late January or February , committee aides said .
Mr. McCaul and some other Republicans say action on a border bill could open political space for legislation on other aspects of the immigration system . “ My bill passing , hopefully in the early part of next year , can lay the groundwork for other measures , ” Mr. McCaul said .
Sen. Ron Johnson ( R. , Wis. ) , the incoming chairman of the Senate committee , said he anticipated advancing border legislation that would provide additional surveillance , fencing , a better visa-tracking system and possibly stronger workplace enforcement through mandatory use of E-Verify , an electronic system for employers to check the legal status of potential employees .
“ Once we pass a strong border security enforcement bill , we ’ ll turn our attention to the other things , as well ” to adjust immigration policy , Mr. Johnson said .
An official close to House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy , who sets the House agenda , said border security would be a priority for the incoming House . It remains unclear whether a bill acceptable to Republicans would also pass muster with Mr. Obama and other Democrats , who have long insisted that legalization for those in the U.S. illegally be included along with any increase in enforcement . Moreover , House Republicans have often suggested they want to move immigration bills without ever doing so .
A GOP committee aide said that a rollback of the executive action might initially be attached to the border bill but would have to eventually be stripped .
“ If the intent is to pass a bill I ’ d want this decoupled . Otherwise , it will be vetoed , ” he said .
Other Republicans are preparing legislation to address additional aspects of the immigration system . Rep. Raúl Labrador ( R. , Idaho ) , a onetime immigration attorney , plans two bills , an aide said .
One would create a temporary worker program that would allow as many as 350,000 foreigners to enter the country each year for construction , restaurant and other low-skilled jobs . These workers would have most of the labor rights afforded in a broad immigration bill that passed the Senate last year , such as the right to change jobs .
Labor unions and some conservatives are sure to argue that Mr. Labrador ’ s annual cap on foreign workers , at 350,000 , is too high . Last year ’ s Senate bill , the product of negotiations between labor and business leaders , included a complicated formula for determining the visa cap , but it set the maximum at about 200,000 a year .
Mr. Labrador ’ s second bill would aid some illegal immigrants by repealing rules known as the “ three- and 10-year bars , ” which effectively prevent undocumented immigrants from winning legal status through normal channels , such as an employment visa or marrying an American citizen . The existing rules require those who have been in the country illegally for longer than a year to return to their home country for 10 years before becoming eligible for legal status here . Those in the U.S. illegally for more than six months , but less than a year , must return home for three years .
Meanwhile , Sen. Orrin Hatch ( R. , Utah ) plans to introduce legislation making more visas available for high-tech workers , a spokesman said .
Sen. Dianne Feinstein ( D. , Calif. ) is working on a bill revamping the agricultural visa program , based on provisions in last year ’ s Senate bill . Her staff is in talks on the measure with Republicans including Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida , who helped work out a compromise on this issue in 2013 .
Both measures are priorities for industry—high-tech companies want access to more foreign programmers and engineers , while agriculture companies want changes to the farm worker program .
It isn ’ t clear whether these stand-alone measures could win sufficient support to pass on their own , or whether Mr. Obama would sign them even if his executive action was left intact . In the past , the president has emphasized the need for legislation that addresses all elements of the immigration system , including a legalization program for the undocumented .
The most immediate immigration issue in early 2015 will be whether the GOP attempts to use the appropriations process to try and unravel Mr. Obama ’ s executive action .
The Department of Homeland Security ’ s funding will run out at the end of February , an arrangement aimed at giving the GOP leverage over the president . But GOP leaders have also said they would work to ensure the agency ’ s funding doesn ’ t expire , so it is unclear whether or how they can use the appropriations bill to force Mr. Obama ’ s hand .
Frank Sharry , who heads the immigration advocacy group America ’ s Voice , said he would urge Democrats to oppose any enforcement bill that isn ’ t balanced with some sort of legalization program .
Mr. Johnson , the Wisconsin GOP senator , said that Democrats have already gotten their half of the bargain through Mr. Obama ’ s unilateral action . Between the recent executive action and one in 2012 that aided young people , some five million illegal immigrants are now eligible for a temporary reprieve from deportation and work permits .
“ By and large , the Democrats got what they have been looking for on their part of the bargain . Now it is time to give the American people what they ’ ve wanted , ” he said .