Sen. Marco Rubio on Thursday disputed the recently released study from the conservative Heritage Foundation that warned comprehensive immigration reform would cost taxpayers $ 6.3 trillion , saying the findings in the report are “ deeply flawed . ”
Mr. Rubio , a member of the bipartisan group of eight lawmakers that is ushering an immigration bill through the Senate , said that the study “ is not a legitimate study ” because , among other things , it is based over 50 years and overestimates the number of people who will be included in the system .
“ The bottom line is , I think as everyone has pointed out , is the study is deeply flawed , ” Mr. Rubio said during an appearance on “ CBS This Morning . ”
The remarks put Mr. Rubio , a likely 2016 presidential contender , at odds with one of the nation ’ s most well-known conservative think tanks , which is now headed by former Sen. Jim DeMint , who is credited with helping Mr. Rubio get elected to office in the 2010 election .
The Senate judiciary committee on Thursday is scheduled to hold another hearing on the 844-page bill that the “ Gang of Eight ” introduced last month .
Mr. Rubio said the biggest obstacle now standing in front of comprehensive immigration reform is convincing the American public that the border will be secured as part of a comprehensive bill that stops another wave of illegal immigrants from coming into the country after a proposal is enacted .
Mr. Rubio said that two dozen conservative groups have signed a letter in support of a comprehensive immigration fix and want to see something done akin to the bill now making its way through the Senate .
The ███ reported Monday that Heritage Foundation report said that the costs of the immigration reform are driven by demographics : Illegal immigrants are more likely to lack a high school education , and more than a third of households headed by illegal immigrants live below the poverty line , meaning those households consume more in services than they pay in taxes .
Heritage said legalizing them improves the situation in the short run but leaves a big hole over the longer term , when they access public health programs and , eventually , Social Security and Medicare benefits . Over the course of a lifetime , that works out to each illegal immigrant-led household taking $ 592,000 more in government benefits than would be paid in taxes , said Robert Rector , the report ’ s chief author .