STERLING , Va./ WHITE SULPHUR SPRINGS , W. Va. ( ███ ) - The U.S. Congress made no notable progress this week toward a deal on the status of 700,000 “ Dreamer ” immigrants , with President Donald Trump saying on Friday that one “ could very well not happen ” by a deadline next month .
Whether the lack of progress signaled the possibility of another federal government shutdown next week was unclear , but it worried the Dreamers , young people who were brought illegally into the United States as children .
Trump said last year that he would end by March 5 a program that was set up by former President Barack Obama to protect the Dreamers from deportation , and he urged Congress to act before that date . No action has resulted .
“ We want to make a deal , ” Trump said at an event in Virginia with U.S. Customs and Border Protection officials . And he blamed Democratic lawmakers for the impasse .
“ I think they want to use it for political purposes for elections . I really am not happy with the way it ’ s going from the standpoint of the Democrats , ” he said .
Democrats have said repeatedly that they want protections written into law for the Dreamers , who were given temporary legal status by Obama ’ s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , which lets them study and work in the United States without fear of deportation .
Republicans , who control Congress , are undecided on what to do about DACA and the Dreamers . They ended a three-day retreat at a mountain resort in West Virginia on Friday not much nearer to consensus than they were a week ago .
The partisan standoff caused a partial shutdown of the federal government for three days last month after Congress failed to pass a stopgap spending measure needed to keep the lights on at federal facilities across the country .
The House of Representatives plans to vote on Tuesday on legislation to keep federal agencies operating beyond Feb. 8 , when existing funds expire , a senior House Republican aide said .
The aide did not provide details , however , on the duration of this latest-in-a-series of temporary funding measures .
Democrats have leverage on the immigration issue because their votes are needed to pass spending measures in the Senate .
The next spending deadline looms on Thursday , with Democrats defiant in their demands and Republicans remaining divided .
Trump has offered the Dreamers a path to citizenship , but only on the condition he also gets funding for a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border , as well as other immigration-related measures that Democrats oppose .
Last month , he proposed letting 1.8 million Dreamers stay in the country and become citizens in exchange for $ 25 billion for the wall , curbs on family-sponsored immigration , and an end to a visa lottery program .
Some lawmakers want Trump ’ s four-part immigration framework pared back , while others want it approved or made even more strict on future immigration .
“ If we can solve DACA and border security that may be the best I can hope for , ” Senator John Thune , a member of the Republican leadership , told reporters at the retreat .
Senator James Lankford was among Republicans who said this week that Trump could give Congress more time to reach a deal by extending the Dreamers ’ deadline beyond March 5 .
Trump reiterated on Thursday at the retreat that all four components of his framework must be included in a deal , a stance viewed as unworkable by many lawmakers in both parties .
Some Republicans say the March 5 deadline lost its power last month when a federal court blocked the rescinding of DACA . That meant the law would remain in effect until the Supreme Court resolves the case , which is unlikely by March 5 .
U.S. President Donald Trump waves as he walks on South Lawn of the White House in Washington , U.S. , before his departure to the Customs and Border Protection National Targeting Center , February 2 , 2018 . ███/Yuri Gripas
In a research note , financial firm Height Analytics set the odds of another shutdown next week at 65 percent .
Republicans are trying to call Democrats ’ bluff on DACA , but the Democrats look even more willing to allow a shutdown than they were last month , the analysts said . “ What this has become is a very absurd game of chicken , ” they said in the note .