Collapse Surviving ISIS : Young Yazidi conscripts begin long path to healing
Confronted with a nephew who curls up into a ball and cries non-stop , Jihad does what many parents would do : loads him in the car , sits him on his lap , and allows him to “ drive ” down the roads of a dusty camp in northern Iraq in the pursuit of a fleeting moment of joy .
The internally displaced persons ( IDP ) camp became home to Jihad and his relatives after Islamic State militants attacked the Yazidi religious minority in the Sinjar mountain range in August 2014 – in what the embattled community remembers as its 74th genocide .
The boy crying unconsolably is Dilber . He reached what is left of his family in mid-March after fleeing Al-Baghouz , a speck of land on the banks of the Euphrates in Syria where ISIS suffered defeat at the hands of a U.S.-backed coalition of Kurdish and Arab forces .
“ When he is in a good mood , he is a fun boy , you ’ d never believe he was held by ISIS , ” explains Jihad , a day laborer who was away from Sinjar when ISIS attacked .
ISIS ’ s so-called caliphate may have come to an end , but the terror these jihadists inflicted on the Yazidi community is forever seared into the minds of boys like 10-year-old Dilber and his older brother Dildar , 15 . The siblings each look a good three years younger than their age , except for their eyes .
They form part of a generation of Yazidis whose fathers were executed , mothers and sisters enslaved , and who themselves were so relentlessly indoctrinated and beaten that some ended their lives , taking part in suicide attacks . The journey of healing promises to be long , and help is scant .
Dilber and Dildar spent the final days of the caliphate in March sleeping in ditches , drinking leftover wash-water , and begging civilian families for one daily portion of rank soup . Both struggle to speak Kurdish after years of being commanded in Arabic .
“ It took us just two days to learn how to use a rifle , but the Quran took forever , ” says Dildar . “ They beat us if we didn ’ t learn the religion quickly enough . I have memorized about a quarter of the Quran . The ones who failed to memorize the Quran would be beaten with sticks and water hoses . ”
His cousin , Hani , is in better shape physically but is likewise familiar with the toll that life under ISIS can take psychologically . Hani spent more than a year in captivity before being rescued through smugglers along with his mother .
“ It takes a long time to learn your language and get rid of their ideology , ” says Hani . “ Sometimes ISIS ideas pop into your head : Memorize the Quran ! Forget your infidel family ! ”
Dominique Soguel Dildar ( l ) , a former Yazidi conscript into ISIS , and his cousin Hani , who spent less time in ISIS captivity before being rescued , at an IDP camp in northern Iraq in March . “ They beat us if we didn ’ t learn the religion quickly enough , ” says Dildar , 15 , who spent his final days in the caliphate sleeping in ditches . “ I have memorized about a quarter of the Quran . ”
As the cousins – dressed in matching Juventus outfits – compare notes , a steady stream of well-wishers pour into the white small caravan where they live to celebrate their arrival . Others inquire about still-missing relatives .
Ziad Avdalo is a member of a team that has been rescuing Yazidi boys from ISIS for over three years . On the outskirts of Amuda in northern Syria , he runs the Yazidi House , which shelters survivors until they can cross back to Iraq .
The trauma and indoctrination of these boys , he says , renders caring for them a delicate task . “ We have boys who have arrived here more fundamentalist than ISIS , ” says Mr. Avdalo . “ Those who are very dogmatic we deal with very lightly and simply ; until their memories come back . ”
Some survivors are housed among Yazidi villagers in Syria until they can make the journey home . For many it was tough to establish where that is .
“ One six-year-old boy didn ’ t even know his own name , so we nicknamed him Judi , ” says Mr. Avdalo . “ Another didn ’ t know the name of his father . ”
Mr. Avdalo , himself a Yazidi , slams the international community for failing to support the survivors , but firmly believes that Yazidi families – or what is left of them in Iraq – are the best-equipped to nurse them back to health . “ If anyone cared about the Yazidi community this never would have happened , ” he says flatly .
The Autonomous Administration , a proto-government operating in northeast Syria , grants the Yazidi House about $ 1,000 per month , but that barely covers costs . The Kurdish Red Crescent helps by providing basic medical treatment .
But with Syria already confronting waves of displacement since 2011 , there was no targeted response focused on the Yazidis freed by the fall of Baghouz , humanitarian workers in northeast Syria say .
In northern Iraq , home to dozens of camps for displaced people , resources are limited . Dohuk has only a handful of psychologists who initially focused on helping Yazidi women but now provide help to boys as well . Their interventions are irregular , complicated by the fact that victims are widely scattered .
Many Yazidis have left Iraq , finding asylum in Australia , the United States , and Germany , among other nations . It is an exodus opposed by many community leaders .
“ Once they are gone , they are [ spiritually ] annihilated , ” says Mr. Avdalo . “ It is better they stay in their land , among their people . We have a lot of experience now when it comes to healing . ”
At the IDP camp in Iraq , photographs of the missing – especially women and children who had a better shot at survival – adorn the walls of every caravan . The camp is home to several natives of Kocho , one of the Yazidi villages ISIS attacked in the Sinjar mountains .
Kocho , a disputed territory claimed both by the Kurdish Regional Government and authorities in Baghdad , had a population of nearly 2,000 people before the rise of ISIS . Its exact size today is unknown .
A series of massacres unfolded there Aug. 15 , 2014 , after village leader Ahmed Jasso refused to succumb to the jihadists ’ pressure to convert to Islam en masse . He was the first to be shot behind a school where ISIS had rounded up the Yazidis .
Hundreds of men were executed in quick succession – just one reason why so many of the boys who survived five years under ISIS are coming back to highly traumatized and broken homes , where women significantly outnumber the men .
Among them is 15-year-old Bassim , who found shelter in the Yazidi House before rejoining relatives in Iraq last month . Like other boys who underwent military and religious training under ISIS , he recalled being beaten with sticks and berated on a daily basis .
“ We didn ’ t say a word about it , but through it all we thought of our families , ” he says . “ There are some who fought and some who blew themselves up . I always had hope I would get out . And every defeat that ISIS suffered raised these hopes higher . ”
Bassim ’ s father , Qassim , is likewise a survivor . He survived the Kocho massacre – only one of 19 men to do so when ISIS took Sinjar . The fate of Bassim ’ s mother and older brother remains unknown – although there are reasons to be hopeful because Bassim spotted him in Baghouz .
“ Many Yazidi children are mixed in with foreign ISIS families or even Syrian and Iraqi families , but nobody cares to check where they are , ” says Qassim . “ They ’ re scattered in IDP camps in Turkey , Syria , and Iraq . Some may have even ended up in the Gulf . ”
It 's a plausible scenario , says Mr. Avdalo . “ The number of missing is in the thousands , ” he estimates .
Dominique Soguel Saadu , a native of Sinjar City who is staying now with relatives in Dohuk , Iraq , was only 10 when ISIS captured him and his mother . Her fate remains unknown . “ It was non-stop training , ” he says of life under the jihadists . “ Weapons training and Sharia . They called us infidels but we told ourselves that they were the infidels . We had never heard of someone being beheaded for his beliefs . ”
At the Iraqi camp and Yazidi House in Syria , Yazidi teenage boys recount being forced to renounce their religion and assume a new identity as “ Cubs of the Caliphate. ” The staccato testimonies , glazed eyes , and malnourished bodies of those who left Baghouz in recent weeks hint at the depth of their trauma .
The massacres in Sinjar were followed by years of abuse and indoctrination . The pain of separation from their families was compounded by the hardships of war – many survived the sieges of ISIS strongholds Raqqa in Syria and Mosul in Iraq .
A lean boy with spiky black hair , Saadu , recalls fighting in 2017 on the front lines of Raqqa , the caliphate ’ s capital . Two of his peers – siblings from Tel Kasab – carried out suicide attacks defending Mosul that very same year . They were hailed as heroes in ISIS propaganda material .
“ They showed us these videos and told us , ‘ These are real Muslims , they are going to heaven , ’ ” recalls Saadu , who lost a thumb to shrapnel . A more painful example of the group ’ s successful indoctrination hit closer to home : his sister . She snitched on him when he wanted to escape . He spent 10 days detained in a cell so small he could not lie down .
“ Her ideology shifted , ” explains Saadu , who channels part of his anger into online war games and believes ISIS is anything but over . “ They have lost control of the ground , but they and their convictions remain . ”
Saadu has the fortune of being with relatives in a comfortable apartment in Dohuk . Most of the returnees are living in basic caravans and tents in Iraq with impoverished families that struggle to cope .
Mazen looks no more than 10 , but has already turned 15 . With melancholy eyes and a soft voice he describes how hunger has been a constant companion – the heavy physical routine of military training under ISIS was coupled with the most spartan and sporadic of meals .
In Baghouz , he slept in a ditch under a thin tent along with another Yazidi boy in the hope of dodging air strikes . “ I wish it had been a tent like this , ” he says , sitting next to heater in a wet wool tent , unable to shake off the cold . “ The rain poured in and you could not see anything . ”
The boy has no knowledge of what became of his father – although other relatives presume him to be dead . “ All I know is that Sinjar was attacked by ISIS and is now uninhabitable , ” he says . “ What happened to the Yazidis , I want to happen to them . I don ’ t want trials for them . When they slaughtered Yazidis , they did not offer them a trial . An eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth . ”