Trump Blames Democrats For Deaths Of Migrant Kids As DHS Secretary Visits Border
Secretary of Homeland Security Kirstjen Nielsen traveled to Texas and Arizona on Friday and Saturday , citing an `` unprecedented '' increase in the apprehensions of families and unaccompanied children at the U.S.-Mexico border .
`` The system is clearly overwhelmed , '' Nielsen said in a statement . Nearly 50,000 family units were caught by the U.S. Border Patrol in October and November , according to Department of Homeland Security data , a fourfold increase over the same period last year .
The secretary 's visit comes as her department is under scrutiny for the recent deaths of two Guatemalan migrant children in U.S. custody . On Monday , 8-year old Felipe Gomez-Alonza died after coming down with the flu , and 7-year-old Jakelin Caal Maquin died earlier this month of shock and dehydration . Nielsen 's trip began in El Paso , Texas where Gomez-Alonza was apprehended , and where Maquin died .
Earlier this week , Nielsen called the 8-year old 's death `` deeply concerning and heartbreaking '' and announced new medical screening procedures for all child migrants – both those travelling with family members and those who arrive unaccompanied . In El Paso , they are being examined at a network of hospitals and pop-up clinics staffed by volunteers . As of Friday , nearly 150 children had been screened under the new procedures and at least four had been admitted to an area hospital , according to the Border Regional Advisory Council , a non-profit that is helping coordinate the check-ups .
On Saturday , President Trump blamed Democrats for the two children 's deaths .
Trump has repeatedly made unsupported claims about the dangers posed by incoming migrants ; his controversial campaign-promise of a new border wall is at the center of congressional gridlock that has temporarily shuttered the federal government .
Without citing specific numbers , Nielsen said this week that there has been an increase in sick children crossing America 's southern border . Alan Shapiro , a pediatrician who treats and advocates for immigrant children told Yahoo News that the claim is `` disingenuous '' adding that `` there 's an uptick everywhere in the country of viral illnesses in winter . That 's not specific to migrants . ''
As NPR 's Joel Rose has reported , bleak living conditions and a lack of sanitation inside government detention facilities can also make migrant children sick . A group of Democratic lawmakers say that when Congress returns to Washington , D.C. , next week they will `` hold hearings and conduct oversight of the two deaths that occurred earlier this month , as well as the conditions under which thousands of children are being held in DHS custody . ''
In El Paso on Friday , Nielsen met with the sector chief and staff at two border patrol stations , as well as Immigration and Customs Enforcement leadership , and U.S. Coast Guard medical personnel who are advising the Border Patrol on new screening protocols .
Nielsen also had a conversation with the city 's Republican mayor , Dee Margo , who welcomed her visit .
Margo told NPR that among the topics they discussed was the release of 400 migrants in downtown El Paso earlier this week by ICE officers . The move caught city officials and local aid agencies off-guard , as the migrants were left without food , shelter or a place to go . Margo dismissed the unexpected drop-off as a `` glitch . ''
On Saturday morning , Nielsen continued her tour in Yuma , Ariz . Details of that visit were not immediately available .
Last week , Nielsen announced a new policy that will require asylum seekers at the southern border to wait in Mexico while their claims are processed . If it is implemented , more children will likely be housed in already-strained Mexican shelters , in areas where gangs routinely target migrants .