Senate Republicans have dodged being easily tarred for blocking immigration reform , as more than half their caucus helped Democrats Tuesday overcome a pair of procedural hurdles to amending and debating the comprehensive immigration bill .
Yet whether the GOP decides the bipartisan Senate immigration fix is ultimately better than the current broken system remains an open question .
Many Republicans who voted in the affirmative Tuesday also said the bill needed significant changes to gain their final approval . Several cited an amendment from Sen. John Cornyn ( R ) of Texas that aims to amp up border security as a key requirement .
“ I think the status quo is completely unacceptable , ” Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell ( R ) of Kentucky told reporters after voting for the measure . “ The legal immigration improvements in the bill are really quite good things that we should have done years ago . The contentious parts of it obviously are in the categories of benefits [ for those in the country illegally ] and border [ security ] . ”
The Senate moved ahead on the immigration reform bill Tuesday with two heavily bipartisan votes . The second , which passed on an 84-15 vote , saw 30 Republicans join all 54 Democrats in support . ( Sen. John McCain ( R ) of Arizona , one of the bill ’ s sponsors , is a surefire “ yes , ” but missed both votes . )
The broad GOP support was a strongly positive sign for conservative immigration reformers .
“ You saw a majority of the caucus wanted to proceed to the bill – that doesn ’ t mean they ’ re going to vote for it , but it does mean they are in play , ” says Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R ) of South Carolina , one of the bipartisan “ Gang of 8 ” who authored the Senate bill . “ And one or two people who voted against cloture may come into play later on if we can improve the bill . ”
The 15 ‘ no ’ votes highlighted those Republicans , led by long-time critics like Sen. Jeff Sessions ( R ) of Alabama and Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R ) of Iowa , who are all but dead-set against the reform measure .
But despite a core of stalwart opponents , Republicans including Senators McConnell and Cornyn , the top two GOP Senate leaders , lent their assent to the bill , which majority leader Harry Reid ( D ) of Nevada plans to see safely out of the chamber by month ’ s end . House Speaker John Boehner ( R ) of Ohio recently said he expected the House to be ready to begin it ’ s own immigration debate in July .
The bill ’ s authors have long said they are attempting to get a vast bipartisan vote in the Senate , perhaps as high as 70 votes , in order to show momentum for the reform movement . Currently , five Republicans and all but a handful of the Senate ’ s 54 Democrats are committed to the bill .
The vote Tuesday was proof , according to supporters of immigration reform , that the majority of Republicans believe it would be politically toxic to be labeled obstructionists .
“ From a Republican Party point of view , you don ’ t have to vote for a bad bill , ” Senator Graham says . “ But to have seemed to have not been willing to work on a solution on immigration , and be practical on the 11 million [ undocumented immigrants ] , I think is a death blow to our party . ”
But Tuesday ’ s vote , procedural though it was , was not without more immediate risk for Republican senators . Several groups that oppose increasing immigration , including Heritage Action , the political arm of the conservative Heritage Foundation , and NumbersUSA , said they would use the votes on their annual congressional scorecards . Such vote ratings can prove to be powerful signals for some of the GOP ’ s most conservative voters .
Given the twin pressures , the question on the minds of Democrats and immigration advocates is whether Republicans are acting in good faith – or just acting .
Nowhere is this debate about Republican intentions more clear than on the issue of border security , the area that Republicans , including Gang of 8 member Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida , have targeted for hardening on the Senate floor .
Cornyn ’ s RESULTS Act , which he is currently drafting , would address a key GOP concern that the underlying bill lacks border security requirements that are both stiff and specific .
But Senator Reid called that amendment a “ poison pill ” aimed at short-circuiting the ability of the nation ’ s more than 10 million undocumented immigrants to become citizens .
Cornyn told reporters outside the Senate chamber that he ’ s willing to work with Democrats to try to figure out stronger border security measures .
“ I think that ’ s what the next three weeks are for , ” he said . “ It ’ s important to not only get this out of the Senate in a stronger state but also to prepare it for a conference committee with the House if we ’ re going to get anything important done . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
That sounds like the congressional equivalent of a Trojan horse to some liberals . Skeptics of the GOP see a maneuver aimed at making the bill repellant to liberals who believe that raising border security requirements to near-absolute levels will , given the bill ’ s linkage between border security and a path to citizenship , mean those here illegally may never be allowed to become permanent residents or citizens .
“ Those who hold out the Cornyn amendment as a condition for support are not looking to get to yes , ” said Frank Sharry , executive director of immigration reform advocates America ’ s Voice , in a statement after the vote , “ but they are looking for an excuse to get to no . ”