Both the White House and illegal immigrants said Tuesday that they would not be swayed by a federal judge ’ s decision in Texas halting President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty as overstepping the bounds of his powers .
Within hours of the decision , immigrants had said they would still prepare to apply for the program and the White House was vowing to appeal the ruling that accused Mr. Obama of granting “ benefits and privileges ” to people that the law says should be deported .
In a ruling late Monday , Judge Andrew S. Hanen said Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson was “ not just rewriting the laws ; he is creating them from scratch ” when he wrote the amnesty , which could have granted tentative legal status , work permits and Social Security numbers to more than 4 million illegal immigrants . Judge Hanen issued an injunction halting the program until he can hold a full trial .
The administration was poised to start accepting amnesty applications Wednesday , but it found itself scrambling to regroup while insisting it will eventually win the court fight .
On Capitol Hill , Republicans said now that a judge has ruled the president ’ s actions are likely illegal , Democrats should stop filibustering the Homeland Security spending bill , which they have been blocking as part of their defense of Mr. Obama ’ s immigration plans .
Judge Hanen ’ s 123-page ruling doesn ’ t mean any of the illegal immigrants who would have been approved for the amnesty will be deported . The judge said Mr. Obama does have the discretion to decide whom to deport given the resources he has , and the president has said he won ’ t deport longtime illegal immigrants without serious criminal records .
But the judge said the president and Mr. Johnson went beyond those powers when they created a program proactively allowing illegal immigrants to come forward and be granted driver ’ s licenses , work permits and potentially billions of dollars in tax credits .
“ Instead of merely refusing to enforce the [ Immigration and Naturalization Act ’ s ] removal laws against an individual , the DHS has enacted a wide-reaching program that awards legal presence , to individuals Congress has deemed deportable or removable , as well as the ability to obtain Social Security numbers , work authorization permits and the ability to travel . Absent [ the program ] , these individuals would not receive these benefits , ” Judge Hanen wrote .
Immigrant rights advocates , who predicted Judge Hanen ’ s ruling , spent weeks trying to undercut him by arguing that he was biased from the start .
One immigrant rights group called Judge Hanen ’ s decision “ judicial vigilantism. ” Another called it a “ minor legal bump ” and said it ’ s “ merely a matter of time ” before illegal immigrants win legal status .
Mr. Obama , speaking to reporters in the Oval Office , said he would respect the judge ’ s ruling but predicted an eventual court victory and said the Homeland Security Department will be ready once courts approve his actions .
“ The law is on our side , and history is on our side , ” Mr. Obama said .
Mr. Obama ’ s amnesty had two parts . The first was an expansion of a 2012 policy , Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , granting tentative legal status and work permits to so-called Dreamers , or illegal immigrants brought to the U.S. as children , who are viewed as the most sympathetic figures in the debate . The second part , known as Deferred Action for Parental Accountability , granted similar benefits to illegal immigrants whose children are American citizens or legal permanent residents .
Judge Hanen halted both parts of the amnesty , though he left in place the original 2012 policy for Dreamers .
The administration was prepared to start accepting applications for the expanded Dreamers program Wednesday and parental accountability applications in mid-May . Mr. Johnson announced Tuesday afternoon that he was putting both plans on hold in light of Judge Hanen ’ s ruling .
“ The Department of Justice will appeal that temporary injunction ; in the meantime , we recognize we must comply with it , ” Mr. Johnson said in a statement , adding that he still believes Mr. Obama acted within the law despite the court ruling .
Immigrant rights groups told illegal immigrants to continue preparing their applications . They predicted that an appeals court would step in and stay Judge Hanen ’ s ruling . Some activists continued with rallies scheduled to coincide with the beginning of the application period , saying they want immigrants to be ready to file immediately .
“ We may be delayed , but we will not be deterred , ” said Rep. Luis V. Gutierrez , Illinois Democrat . “ I am telling immigrant communities to keep preparing to sign up millions of families for protection from deportation . ”
In the near term , the ruling further roils the debate on Capitol Hill , where House Republicans have passed a bill to fund the Homeland Security Department while halting Mr. Obama ’ s amnesties — and Senate Democrats are blocking it through a filibuster .
Both sides are blaming each other for threatening funding for Mr. Johnson ’ s department that expires Feb. 27 . Most of the department ’ s employees are deemed essential and will remain on the job even with a shutdown , though pay would be delayed for many of them .
House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican , said Judge Hanen ’ s ruling should break the impasse and that Democrats are holding up Homeland Security funding in order to defend an illegal action by the president .
Democrats countered that they believe courts will uphold the president ’ s amnesty and they won ’ t accept any Homeland Security bill that questions Mr. Obama ’ s actions .
“ This procedural ruling , in our opinion , is very unlikely to be upheld , but regardless of the outcome , Democrats remain united in our believe that funding for the Department of Homeland Security should not be used as a ransom by Republicans , period , ” said Sen. Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat .