The left focused on the horrific conditions at the border detention facilities and remains very critical of the Trump administration ’ s immigration policies .
Many are pointing to the case of Francisco Erwin Galicia as evidence that the system is broken . “ A Dallas-born U.S. citizen , [ Galicia ] spent 23 days in the custody of U.S. Customs and Border Protection in conditions that made him so desperate he almost opted to self-deport . Galicia says he lost 26 pounds during that time in a South Texas immigrant detention center because officers didn ’ t provide him with enough food . He said he wasn ’ t allowed to shower and his skin was dry and dirty . He and 60 other men were crammed into an overcrowded holding area where they slept on the floor and were given only aluminum-foil blankets , he said . Some men had to sleep on the restroom area floor… ‘ It ’ s one thing to see these conditions on TV and in the news . It ’ s another to go through them , ’ he said . ”
“ His detention was hardly an isolated mistake — hundreds of American citizens have now been detained on suspicion that they are living illegally in the United States , including a man held in custody for 1,273 days… The entire system of checkpoints , detention centers and immigration agents hunting for Hispanics — along with all the horror of children penned in disgusting conditions and a cascade of immigration policies that violate fundamental rights — perverts American values and traditions…
“ It should be in the DNA of the American people , the overwhelming majority of whom are themselves descendants of immigrants who found refuge , opportunity and happiness in the United States , to approach this crisis with humanity . ”
“ At least seven children have died while in such circumstances and many more are suffering from lice , scabies , chicken pox , and other afflictions . Yet when doctors from the American Association of Pediatricians traveled to the camps to offer their help , their services were refused… It ’ s hard not to assume that , however overwhelmed Customs and Border Protection may be , at least some of this treatment is intentional…
“ Why else turn away doctors offering help or refuse supplies of donated aid sent by worried citizens ? Why arrest a humanitarian aid volunteer who gave food and water to two ill and desperate undocumented Central American migrants and tried to get them medical help ? The administration acknowledges that the overall situation is dire , but its officials on the spot have basically thrown up their hands , complaining that they have been overwhelmed by the situation they created… The rest of the administration refuses even to admit to the appalling conditions . ”
Regarding “ the Trump administration ’ s expansion of the use of fast-track deportations through ‘ expedited removal ’ … [ it ] will create a ‘ show me your papers ’ regime nationwide in which people — including citizens — may be forced to quickly prove they should not be deported . This policy allows Immigration and Customs Enforcement to quickly deport someone without going before an immigration judge , undermining American principles of fundamental fairness and putting United States citizens , permanent residents and asylum-seekers at risk of wrongful deportation… In expedited removal proceedings , immigration officers serve as both prosecutor and judge — charging someone as deportable and making a final decision to deport him , often all within a day…
“ Moreover , there is typically no judicial oversight , with relatively low-level government officers authorized to issue the deportation orders… Immigration officers applying expedited removal are obligated to inform individuals of their opportunity to seek asylum and refer a person who expresses a fear of returning to their home country for a ‘ credible fear interview. ’ Unfortunately , multiple investigations have revealed that officers at the border sometimes fail to fulfill these obligations . ”
“ In the final two years of the Obama Administration , ICE had a clear mandate : only convicted criminals and certain recent arrivals were priorities for arrest… The [ overall ] idea was to spare those who were law-abiding and had deep personal ties to the U.S. One of the first things Trump did after taking office was to rescind those priorities , making anyone unlawfully in the U.S. subject to deportation… ‘ [ Among Democrats ] no one is willing to say who they are willing to deport , ’ Cecilia Muñoz , who worked in the Obama White House , told me . ‘ It sounds harsh , but you need to be able to articulate that so you can be clear about who you want to protect . ’ ”
Regarding Guatemala , “ In pressuring [ the country ] to accept a deal to absorb vast numbers of asylum seekers , the Trump administration has embarked on a dramatic and risky strategy to slash the number of Central Americans flooding the U.S. border . The accord — which was negotiated in secret and signed at the White House on Friday — could plunge Guatemala ’ s young democracy into a constitutional crisis… the agreement is built on a fragile political and legal base…
“ The Guatemalan Constitutional Court ruled earlier this month that President Jimmy Morales needed approval from the Guatemalan Congress to sign the accord , something he has not received… On Saturday , hundreds of people demonstrated in front of the presidential palace in Guatemala City to protest the agreement . ”