The Trump administration introduced an “ interim final rule ” pertaining to the asylum cooperation agreements it ’ s reached with Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador .
The new rule , which will go into effect on Tuesday , will allow the U.S. government to begin sending a large number asylum seekers back to Central America .
Under the deals , the three governments must accept U.S.-bound migrants who pass through their borders , allowing them to first seek protected status in their countries .
The Trump administration will soon begin enforcing its asylum cooperation agreements with three Central American governments , allowing the U.S. to send back many aliens who appear at America ’ s southern border .
The Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) , in conjunction with the Justice Department , released an “ interim final rule ” that is set to go into effect on Tuesday . The rule will allow the Trump administration to implement the asylum cooperation agreements it reached with Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador—the countries of origin for many of the illegal migrants seeking protected status from the U.S. government .
Earlier this year , former acting Homeland Security Kevin McAleenan scored asylum deals , sometimes referred to as “ safe third country ” deals , with the countries that make up the region in Central America known as the Northern Triangle . Generally , the deals require Northern Triangle countries to hold onto U.S.-bound migrants who pass through their countries .
A Salvadoran migrant passing through Guatemala , for example , must first seek asylum in Guatemala before attempting to apply for protected status at the U.S border . If not done so , the Trump administration can send that individual back to Guatemala . The aim of the deals is to tighten the flow of migrants appearing before the southern border and immediately lodging asylum claims , which has bogged down the U.S. immigration system .
In return , the Trump administration has reinstated hundreds of millions of dollars in economic aid to the Northern Triangle , and pledging to help their cash-strapped governments manage their asylum capacity .
“ This rule will apply to all [ asylum cooperative agreements ] in force between the United States and countries other than Canada , including bilateral ACAs recently entered into with El Salvador , Guatemala , and Honduras in an effort to share the distribution of hundreds of thousands of asylum claims , ” read a portion of the interim rule . “ The rule will apply only prospectively to aliens who arrive at a U.S. port of entry , or enter or attempt to enter the United States between ports of entry , on or after the effective date of the rule . ”
Confusion over how the agreements will be implemented prompted the Trump administration to clarify what will happen to those required to turn back .
Guatemala ’ s Interior Minister Enrique Degenhart , who has been heavily involved in negotiations with his U.S. counterparts , told Reuters his government was considering the possibility of accepting migrants at remote areas far away from the country ’ s capital city , including the Peten jungle . The statement raised alarm by immigration advocates concerned about immigrants ’ safety .
A DHS spokesperson later said that “ the U.S. government has no plans to make returns to the airport in Peten at this time . ”
“ We have established procedures for returning Guatemalans to Guatemala , and for a variety of logistical reasons , it is most efficient to use those routes and procedures for this agreement , ” the spokesperson continued . ( RELATED : CBP Chief Says ‘ No Immigration System In The World ’ Can Handle What The US Experienced In 2019 )
Mark Morgan , the acting commissioner of Customs and Border Protection , announced in October that nearly one million “ enforcement actions ” took place during the 2019 fiscal year . In particular , the number of migrant family units in fiscal year 2019 more than tripled any previous year in history—a testament to the scale of the migration challenge facing the Trump administration .