More than 2 million illegal immigrants will be approved for President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty over the next few years , and they will be eligible to collect Social Security and Medicare benefits as well as claim a special tax break for low-income families , the Congressional Budget Office said in an analysis Thursday .
Mr. Obama predicted that up to 5 million illegal immigrants could be eligible for his amnesties , but the CBO numbers predict only 2.25 million will have signed up and been approved by 2017 .
The estimate was released as the administration defended the law in a federal court in Texas on Thursday , asking a judge to reject a request by Texas and two dozen other states to halt the program even before it gets started .
Judge Andrew S. Hanen , sitting in Brownsville , said he won ’ t rule before the end of the month . Applications for the first part of the amnesty are scheduled to begin in the middle of February .
“ There aren ’ t any bad guys in this , ” Judge Hanen told attorneys for both sides , according to The Brownsville Herald . He gave no indication of which way he is leaning in the thorny case , which is likely to determine Mr. Obama ’ s legacy on immigration .
Texas and its allies argue that Mr. Obama overstepped his legal bounds in November when he announced a program to halt deportations for illegal immigrant parents who have legal resident or U.S. citizen children , and to expand a 2012 amnesty for illegal immigrants who were brought to the U.S. as children .
To win , the states first must prove that they were injured by the amnesty , which would give them “ standing ” to sue . Then they must prove that Mr. Obama ’ s actions are either unconstitutional because they try to rewrite the laws , which is Congress ’ job , or else they are official policies that should have been submitted to the public for comment and revisions before they were enacted .
Administration attorneys told Judge Hanen that Mr. Obama isn ’ t rewriting law , but rather deciding whom to prosecute under it based on his powers of prosecutorial discretion . The attorneys say presidents going back to the 1950s have used similar powers to halt deportations , albeit on smaller scales .
The Obama administration said if it declares most illegal immigrants off limits for deportation , it will be easier to pursue the recent illegal immigrants and the serious felons who won ’ t qualify for the leniency .
Mexican officials , hoping to help their citizens stay in the U.S. , began issuing birth certificates at consulates Thursday .
Mexicans make up the majority of the illegal immigrant population in the U.S. , though Central Americans may be rivaling them among newcomers , according to statistics .
Although Judge Hanen didn ’ t tip his hand about his thinking , administration supporters fear the worst . They point to a striking order he issued in December 2013 , at the beginning of the surge of Central American children crossing the border , that accused the Homeland Security Department of being complicit in human trafficking .
Judge Hanen said because agents would take children caught at the border to their parents living illegally in the U.S. , without trying to deport either of them , the government was in effect doing the job of smugglers and encouraging others to make the same journey .
“ Clearly , the plaintiffs filed their suit in Brownsville for one reason — a friendly judge , ” said America ’ s Voice Education Fund , which lobbies for immigrants ’ rights .
Three self-identified illegal immigrants , who filed as “ Jane Doe ” litigants , asked Judge Hanen on Thursday to be allowed to join the lawsuit in defense of the president ’ s policies .
The Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund , which filed on their behalf , said they “ could face deportation and separation from their families and their communities ” if the president ’ s amnesty is struck down .
They are three of the millions who could qualify , but the CBO report suggested that many of those who are eligible for amnesty won ’ t apply .
All told , the budget analysts predicted that 1.5 million will have been approved under the amnesty for illegal immigrant parents by 2017 , while 750,000 illegal immigrants will have been approved under the modified 2012 amnesty for Dreamers , who are illegal immigrants brought to the U.S. as children .
The total illegal immigrant population in the U.S. is estimated to be 11 million to 12 million people . The number dropped at the beginning of the Obama administration but has been ticking up in recent years .
Most illegal immigrants who do not qualify for the amnesty are unlikely to be deported under the guidelines Mr. Obama issued in November , which call for only the most serious criminals to be deported .
On Wednesday , the House voted to insist that convicted sex criminals be included in that list of crimes serious enough to demand deportation .
Those who are granted amnesty are also entitled to work permits , allowing them to compete legally for jobs . Texas and its allied states argued that those who get the amnesty are also eligible for some state benefits and services , such as a driver ’ s license and , in some states , concealed weapons permits or health care .
The CBO also said those covered by the temporary amnesty , which the government refers to as “ deferred action , ” will be eligible for some federal benefits .
“ Because they are lawfully present during the period of their deferred status , they are eligible to receive Medicare and Social Security benefits if they meet the programs ’ requirements , ” the CBO said in its report . “ In addition , those individuals who are approved for deferred action and receive work authorization have Social Security numbers and therefore can claim the earned income tax credit if they qualify . They are ineligible for other federal benefit programs . ”