U.S. Customs and Border Protection announced Tuesday that they will be conducting medical checks on all children in their custody following the death of an eight-year-old Guatemalan boy late Monday evening . The agency also released a timeline of events leading up to the boy ’ s death at Gerald Champion Regional Medical Center in Alamogordo , New Mexico .
“ U.S . Border Patrol is conducting secondary medical checks upon all children in CBP care and custody , including children arriving as part of Family Units ( FMUA ) and Unaccompanied Children ( UACs ) , with a focus on children under 10 years old , ” the agency announced .
The statement said that CBP and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement are looking at “ options for transportation to Family Residential Centers and/or supervised release. ” CBP is also “ reviewing all available custody options to relieve capacity issues in Border Patrol stations and checkpoints in El Paso Sector . ”
CBP is additionally seeking the possibility of more medical assistance from interagency partners , including the U.S. Coast Guard , and “ potentially requesting further aid from the Department of Defense , Federal Emergency Management Agency , and Health and Human Services to assist the U.S. Border Patrol with supplemental medical capabilities . ”
The agency emphasized that it is “ reviewing its policies with particular focus upon care and custody of children under 10 both at intake and beyond 24 hours in custody . ”
The boy , identified by Guatemalan authorities as Felipe Gómez Alonzo , was in CBP custody with his father , Agustin Gomez , since December 18th .
According to the timeline , the boy and his father were taken to the hospital on Monday after the boy began exhibiting flu-like symptoms . At the hospital , the boy was initially diagnosed with a cold .
The boy was kept in the hospital for observation for 90 minutes after he was found to have a fever but then was released with prescriptions for antibiotics and pain relievers .
The child ’ s father declined further medical assistance later that evening when the boy began vomiting because the boy was reportedly feeling better .
However , later that night when the nausea continued he was taken back to the hospital . He vomited and lost consciousness on the way to the hospital where staff were ultimately unable to revive him .
CBP Commissioner Kevin K. McAleenan said in a statement that “ this is a tragic loss . On behalf of U.S. Customs and Border Protection , our deepest sympathies go out to the family . ''
The Associated Press reports that CBP has promised “ an independent and thorough review of the circumstances , ” and the Guatemalan foreign ministry called for an investigation “ in accordance with due process . ”
Felipe is the second child to die in CBP custody this month . A seven-year-old Guatemalan girl , Jakelin Caal Maquin , died after going without food and water for days prior to being apprehended at the border with her father . The father reportedly absolved CBP of blame in the incident .