Illegal immigrants… illegal aliens … undocumented workers… persons living in the United States without legal permission…Whatever you choose to call them , there are roughly 11 to12 million of them living in our country , and President Obama says he plans to do something about that very soon .
“ Soon ” as in “ before the end of the year , ” the president said in his press conference last Wednesday , the day after his Democratic Party lost control of the Senate .
Or maybe even sooner than that . “ Every day that I wait we ’ re misallocating resources , ” Obama said on Sunday .
But if his fix , as rumored , is to grant amnesty to an estimated 5 million illegals , he ’ ll be making a huge mistake , because we simply can ’ t afford it .
Amnesty will cost you , the American taxpayer , a fortune . And that ’ s why so many , including me , are strongly opposed to the idea .
We currently have a national debt of $ 18 trillion , on which we have to pay interest . We also spend , as a country , $ 600 billion more than we earn through tax revenue , which is the only way our country generates income .
According to a detailed analysis by the Heritage Foundation , each illegal immigrant costs our country $ 24,000 a year . But , on average , eachpays $ 10,000 in taxes , soit ’ s reasonable to say that each illegal really adds $ 14,000 a year to our country ’ s debt burden .
Now multiply that $ 14,000 by the 5 million illegal immigrants we might grant amnesty , and we ’ re out a mere $ 70 billion . That ’ s billion , with a B .
Moving along , let ’ s recall that the average full-time worker in this country earns about $ 50,000 a year and pays 25 percent— $ 12,500— in income taxes .
So how many new jobs do we need to create to offset the $ 70 billion we ’ ll have to pay if the president grants amnesty to 5 million illegal immigrants ?
Divide 70 billion by 12,500 and you get… 5.6 million new full-time jobs .
In the last 12 months of our “ wonderful ” economic recovery , we ’ ve created 2.6 million new jobs . That ’ s nice , but it ’ s less than half the jobs we ’ d need to offset this potential new debt burden . What ’ s worse , more than half those 2.6 million new jobs were part-time . We ’ re not even hitting the $ 50,000 average .
With all our nation ’ s needs and wants , is granting amnesty to 5 million illegal immigrants and increasing our financial burden the best way to spend our money ? Is it fiscally responsible ?
No matter how good you may feel about lifting our lamp beside the golden door , there ’ s only one answer :