Later that day , Judge William Alsup of Federal District Court in San Francisco handed down his ruling , writing that the administration must “ maintain the DACA program on a nationwide basis ” as the legal challenge to the president ’ s decision goes forward .
In his ruling , Judge Alsup laid out a road map for the government that officials appeared to follow . He said that previous beneficiaries of DACA , known as Dreamers , must be allowed to renew their status in the program , though the government would not be required to accept new applications from immigrants who had not previously submitted one .
On Sunday morning , Mr. Trump blamed Democrats for preventing progress on a legislative deal that would permanently legalize the young immigrants and give them an eventual path to citizenship in exchange for tougher border security and enforcement measures .
The president criticized Democratic lawmakers , some of whom have suggested that they will not support efforts to fund the government by a deadline later this week unless Congress passes the DACA legislation .
“ DACA is probably dead because the Democrats don ’ t really want it , they just want to talk and take desperately needed money away from our Military , ” Mr. Trump said on Twitter from his Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach , Fla .
In a second tweet , Mr. Trump said that immigration legislation should include an end to the diversity visa lottery system , in which the State Department encourages diversity in immigration by holding a lottery for those wanting to come to the United States .
The president has criticized the program as a threat to the country ’ s security even though people selected are screened in the same ways that other immigrants are . Mr. Trump has also said that the program undermines efforts by the administration to allow immigrants who have skills that will be beneficial to the United States .
“ I , as President , want people coming into our Country who are going to help us become strong and great again , people coming in through a system based on MERIT , ” he said . “ No more Lotteries ! # AMERICA FIRST . ”