WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. President Donald Trump openly fought with the top two Democratic lawmakers in the Oval Office on Tuesday about government funding , throwing into question whether a deal to avert a government shutdown was possible ahead of a deadline next week .
In a remarkable public argument , the likes of which is seldom seen before cameras , Trump brawled with U.S. Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer and House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi about paying for a wall on the U.S.-Mexico border that they see as ineffective and wasteful .
“ If we don ’ t get what we want , one way or the other - whether it ’ s through you , through a military , through anything you want to call - I will shut down the government , ” Trump said as the heated argument drew to a crescendo .
“ I am proud to shut down the government for border security , Chuck , because the people of this country don ’ t want criminals and people that have lots of problems and drugs pouring into our country , ” he said before reporters left their ringside seats .
Vice President Mike Pence sat beside Trump , silent and stone faced .
While Trump ’ s fellow Republicans control both the House and the Senate until next month , Democratic support is needed to pass any spending legislation .
If the impasse can not be resolved by Dec. 21 , about one-quarter of the federal government immediately would be left without funding . Money for the rest of the government already has been appropriated .
Trump has asked Congress for $ 5 billion for border security , while Schumer and Pelosi have offered to extend funding at current levels , around $ 1.3 billion . That is less than the $ 1.6 billion a bipartisan Senate committee approved .
While the battle over border security is contentious , the money being negotiated is a small portion of a $ 450 billion bill to keep agencies operating through next September .
In an interview with ███ later in the day , Trump did not rule out a compromise on the funding . “ We have to see what else is entailed , ” he said .
The meeting did not last long after reporters were ushered out of the Oval Office .
But the harsh words continued during a closed meeting of House Democrats . According to an aide in the room , Pelosi said Trump ’ s fixation with building a wall was “ like a manhood thing for him . As if manhood could ever be associated with him . ”
Pelosi told reporters she had asked Trump to pray about resolving the dispute , recounting the biblical story of King Solomon asking God for wisdom .
Pelosi told reporters that later in the day that she and Trump spoke by telephone , and the president said he was reviewing the offer made by Democrats during the White House meeting .
Despite the rancor , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , a Republican , told reporters , “ I ’ d still like to see a smooth ending here and I haven ’ t given up hope that ’ s what we ’ ll have . ”
U.S. President Donald Trump talks with Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D-NY ) as he meets with the Senate and House Democratic leadership at the White House in Washington , U.S. , December 11 , 2018 . ███/Kevin Lamarque
If there is no deal , Trump would be shuttering the very agency in charge of border security - the Department of Homeland Security . In past shutdown battles , workers deemed “ essential ” were instructed to work .
Other federal agencies that also would face closures include the departments of State , Commerce and Agriculture , and visitors would not be allowed into federal parks .
At the Pentagon , Lieutenant Colonel Jamie Davis said there were no plans now for the U.S. military to build sections of the border wall , though the Defense Department could under current law pay for some border barrier projects “ such as in support of counter-drug operations or national emergencies . ”
The rocky White House meeting was the first Trump held with Pelosi and Schumer since Democrats won control of the House in Nov. 6 elections , possibly foreshadowing battles to come next year .
Trump told ███ he thought it would be possible to work on legislation with Democrats - unless they launch a barrage of investigations into his administration and policies .
“ We ’ re either going to start the campaign and they ’ re going to do presidential harassment . Or we ’ re going to get tremendous amounts of legislation passed working together , ” he said .
Tuesday ’ s fight kicked off when Pelosi told Trump that Americans did not want to see a “ Trump shutdown , ” touching a nerve . Trump cut off Pelosi , arguing that he could not advance a funding bill without Democratic votes in the Senate .
“ If I needed the votes for the wall in the House , I would have them in one session . It would be done , ” Trump bragged .
“ Well then - go do it , go do it , ” Pelosi shot back .
Senior White House staff watched the melee from the edges of the room .
“ I don ’ t think we should have a debate in front of the press on this , ” Pelosi said , adding , “ Let ’ s call a halt to this . ”
“ It ’ s not bad , Nancy - it ’ s called transparency , ” Trump said .