CLOSE New York Candidate for Governor Cynthia Nixon has called ICE a ‘ terrorist ’ organization and she thinks it should be abolished ! Rob Smith has all the details . Buzz60
Two prominent New York Democrats joined recent calls from progressives to abolish the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement .
Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio both called for the dismantling of ICE this week amid backlash over President Donald Trump 's `` zero tolerance '' immigration policy .
`` I do n't think ICE today is working as intended , '' Gillibrand said on CNN Thursday evening . `` I believe that it has become a deportation force , and I think you should separate the criminal justice from the immigration issues . And I think you should reimagine ICE under a new agency with a very different mission and take those two missions out . ''
On Friday , Gillibrand echoed her sentiment on Facebook , writing `` We need to abolish ICE . ''
De Blasio said in a radio interview with WNYC Friday , `` ICE 's time has come and gone . ''
He added , `` We should abolish ICE . We should create something better , something different . ''
ICE spokeswoman Liz Johnson condemned calls to abolish the agency as `` dangerously misguided . ''
`` Instead of being insulted with politically-motivated attacks , the men and women of ICE should be praised for risking life and limb every day in the name of national security and public safety , '' Johnson said in a statement . She added that ICE arrested more than 5,000 immigrants who entered the country illegally in New York over the last year ,
Both Democrats ' comments came after Tuesday 's primary win by progressive , Democratic Socialist candidate Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez over Democratic incumbent Rep. Joe Crowley for New York 's 14th congressional district .
Ocasio-Cortez is one of many progressives who has called for ICE to be abolished .
On Monday , Rep. Mark Pocan , D-Wis. , said he would introduce legislation to eliminate the agency .
More : ICE on ice ? Move to abolish ICE , at center of storm in immigration battle , has a long way to go
More : 'We make kids disappear — I.C.E . : ' Billboard vandalized to criticize immigration policy
More : Federal police arrest at least 8 protesters at ICE facility in Portland
ICE has been in the center of the storm over family separations at the border . The Trump administration 's `` zero tolerance '' immigration edict had ICE arresting undocumented immigrant adults entering the country without using legal entry points . Children with those adults were then placed with the Department of Health and Human Services .
President Donald Trump ordered the separations halted , but the details on what is next are being worked out .
Stephen Yale-Loehr , a professor at Cornell University Law School who has written extensively on immigration law , told ███ earlier this week that ICE is n't going anywhere soon .
`` Even if the Democrats take control of Congress in November , the chances of abolishing ICE are slim to none , '' he said .