Americans are ready for just immigration reform that keeps our borders secure , respects the rule of law and creates a pathway to earned legal status for our hardworking neighbors who lack documentation . This earned legal status should include temporary worker visas and citizenship .
As an evangelical leader , I applaud leaders in Congress for recognizing that a better immigration process is urgent . Republicans in particular are showing leadership by prioritizing the debate .
As the House of Representatives holds a hearing Tuesday to take up the challenge of creating a better immigration process , evangelical Christians across the country are participating in their own challenge : to reflect on what the Bible has to say about how we treat our immigrant neighbors .
My own contemplation has led me to conclude that we must unite behind an immigration process that is fair , that respects every human being ’ s God-given dignity , that protects the unity of our families and that preserves our standing as the world ’ s standard-bearer for freedom .
As members of the Evangelical Immigration Table affirmed in June , just immigration reform will strengthen our economy and our communities . Policy that reflects our shared principles — accountability , fairness , dignity and hard work — will strengthen us .
The principles that a bipartisan group of Senate leaders announced last week represent a solid start . Now is the time for our legislators to move beyond partisan rancor and come to consensus that honors our heritage .
Immigrants always have contributed to our country . Both our history and our legacy call on us to enable American immigrants to come out of the shadows and participate fully as American taxpayers , voters , workers and leaders .
Establishing a challenging but achievable path to citizenship is key . There are only three options for addressing undocumented immigrants : deportation , amnesty and a middle , more reasonable alternative that provides an opportunity for earned legal status . Mass deportation would be impossible and morally wrong . Amnesty would flout the law . Let me be clear : I oppose amnesty . What I do support is providing an opportunity for earned legal status that allows people to come out of the shadows and participate in the American dream .
It should include appropriate penalties , waiting periods , background checks , evidence of moral character and a commitment to full participation in American society through learning English . Yet for our hardworking , undocumented neighbors who aspire to be fully American , it must end with citizenship — not a permanent second-class status .
Such a path also reconciles the rule of law in Matthew 25 , where the Bible teaches us that by welcoming a stranger , we may be welcoming Jesus : “ I was a stranger and you invited me in. ” Whatever we do for the least among us , he teaches , we do for him .
In hundreds of evangelical churches across more than 40 states , evangelicals are considering how these words apply to our relationship with our immigrant neighbors by participating in the “ I Was a Stranger ” challenge . Each day for 40 days , we are reading a different short passage of Scripture that speaks to God ’ s compassion toward immigrants , and we are praying for our immigrant neighbors .
The Bible presents a stark choice between two paths : welcoming the stranger leads to eternal bliss ; not welcoming the stranger leads to eternal punishment .
These teachings speak to us in our lives . They help us see that no matter how we got here , we are all created in God ’ s image and all worthy of God ’ s love and of one another ’ s respect .
As we take God ’ s Word to heart and honor it in our lives , we must acknowledge that as a beacon of freedom , the United States has attracted immigrants who move here to improve life for themselves and their families — today , as throughout our history . Nearly all of us have ancestors who came here from somewhere else to build a better life .
That is the promise of America , and that is our pride . We are a nation of hope for people of courage who leave behind lives they know because they believe in the opportunity for better lives on our shores .
We must continue to prove that the American dream we idealize is more than a mirage — that people from diverse backgrounds can come here , and that all of us can live in peace with our neighbors , pursue our dreams and succeed .
As Congress embarks on the difficult challenge of creating a just immigration process , we support their efforts to have a respectful debate , and we rededicate ourselves to a process that shines freedom ’ s light more brightly .
In so doing , we will honor God ’ s will and bring God ’ s blessing on our country and its inhabitants , each created in God ’ s image — no matter where we were born .
Mathew Staver is chairman of Liberty Counsel and chief counsel of the National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference .