Staring at a certain defeat , House Republicans canceled votes on their immigration compromise Thursday — an embarrassing setback for leaders who thought they had finally been able to wrangle some unanimity on an issue that has bedeviled them for years .
Lawmakers emerged from a closed-door evening meeting to say their new goal is a vote sometime next week , after they try to make tweaks to win over conservatives while keeping moderates on board .
The vote on the “ moderate ” compromise bill was postponed just hours after a more conservative bill failed in the House by a 231-193 vote . More than three dozen Republicans joined Democrats to kill the legislation .
Worried about a twin rejection on the same day , Republican leaders decided on a cooling-off period .
“ The worst thing for us to do would be to fail , ” said Rep. Tom Cole , Oklahoma Republican . “ I think people desperately want to get to ‘ yes . ’ ”
At stake is the fate of hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrant “ Dreamers , ” stiffer border security and President Trump ’ s goals of limiting the chain of family migration and ending the visa lottery .
Republican leaders thought they had an agreement between conservatives and moderates , but the conservatives balked , saying the bill had too many mistakes and didn ’ t do enough to pressure businesses against hiring illegal immigrants .
The conservatives wanted the bill to require the use of E-Verify , the government ’ s currently voluntary system for electronically checking a new hire ’ s work eligibility .
But if E-Verify is added , farm-region lawmakers said , they have to see a guest-worker program for agriculture so farms won ’ t lose their workforce , much of which is unauthorized .
“ While we ’ ve all been in negotiations for the last several weeks , we feel like we ’ ve continued these good discussions on , but two new issues came up , ” said Rep. Jeff Denham , a California Republican who had been leading negotiations for the moderates .
“ We ’ re going to spend the weekend , delay a vote [ until ] next week and see if we can come to a compromise on those two final issues , ” Mr. Denham said .
Some conservatives are opposed to anything that includes a pathway to citizenship and are unlikely to be won over . But other conservatives say their support is winnable so long as the bill makes major strides in border security , including firm funding for Mr. Trump ’ s border wall .
Mr. Trump called in to the Republican meeting , looking to urge the bill along .
Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen weighed in earlier this week , making the case for the more moderate legislation .
But with success looking elusive , Republicans across the spectrum have begun to pin blame for failure on Democrats .
“ Democrats have taken a walk on this thing , ” said House Speaker Paul D. Ryan , Wisconsin Republican .
Mr. Trump was more pointed : “ They don ’ t care about the children . They don ’ t care about the injury , they don ’ t care about the problems . ”
Yet it ’ s disunity within the Republican ranks that has sunk every effort to pass broad immigration legislation in the House for more than a decade , and those divisions were on display Thursday .
Conservatives griped that they felt abandoned by their leaders . They pointed to the more conservative bill that failed Thursday and said if Mr. Trump , the administration and Mr. Ryan had put more effort behind it , they may have been able to pass it .
“ They told us they were way short — what I saw today on the floor was 193 votes — that ’ s pretty darn close to what [ we ’ d ] need to pass that , ” said Rep. Jim Jordan , Ohio Republican .
Centrist Republicans accused conservatives of abandoning the core of an agreement they thought they had reached .
Republican leaders had planned votes on two bills , both of them sponsored by Rep. Bob Goodlatte , Virginia Republican and chairman of the Judiciary Committee . One bill , written months ago , would have codified the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program into law , curtailed family migration , ended the diversity lottery , authorized the wall , boosted criminal penalties for illegal immigration , surged more resources to border enforcement and punished sanctuary cities .
The legal status for DACA recipients was too much for some conservatives , while the lack of a full pathway to citizenship was too little for some moderates .
“ We ’ re not going to let hatred , bigotry and xenophobia prevail in this country , ” said Rep. Zoe Lofgren , a California Democrat who helped lead opposition to the bill .
But the vote on the conservative bill did serve Republican leaders ’ purposes by officially derailing the petition drive that moderates and Democrats launched to try to force debate on a Democrat-backed bill that would have combined a generous pathway to citizenship for perhaps 2 million illegal immigrants with promises of future border security .
That petition drive was tied to the conservative legislation , so by bringing the bill to the floor — even in defeat — the petition fell .
Some moderate Republicans said they could start another petition drive next month , though they would have an even bigger climb and only a couple of weeks to gather signatures before the next window for action closes .