In a border city with generations of connections to Mexico , and generations who came to the U.S. under much different circumstances , the situation is provoking mixed feelings .
What isn ’ t disputed is that the people handling the migrant flows in El Paso – including CBP agents , city government , and volunteer organizations – are exhausted . The 11-hour-plus work days , buzzing cell phones , and daily chaos is akin to responding to a natural disaster .
Immigrant advocacy groups dispute that , claiming that the situation has been worsened by policy decisions by the Trump administration .
With the southwest border experiencing a surge in migrants , primarily families from Central America seeking asylum , this West Texas city has become ground zero . The commissioner of Customs and Border Protection said the U.S. immigration system had reached a “ breaking point ” due to “ vulnerabilities in our legal framework . ”
“ My neighbor ’ s actually Border Patrol and he talks about it all the time . Like , ‘ Dude , I don ’ t even know what time I get home , ’ ” says Mr. Lopez .
Javier Lopez and Lalo Garcia are playing chess in San Jacinto Plaza . Both men are in their 20s , and both have lived in the city for the four big migrant influxes it has experienced . They have never seen anything like this one , they agree .
A friend from another church had called . Immigration agents would be releasing 152 migrants , their processing and background checks completed . Could he take them ?
Mr. Cabrera , an associate pastor at the Caminos de Vida church , said he needed time to think . We need an answer now , his friend replied .
That left 30 minutes to prepare , and all the church had was a 24-pack of bottled water . By the end of the day , members of the congregation and the community had brought beans , rice , clothes , and blankets . By the end of the week , Caminos de Vida had so many supplies they were helping other churches hosting migrants .
“ The amazing thing is , we just said ‘ yes. ’ That ’ s all we did , ” says Mr. Cabrera . “ This is what happens when a community gets together and does something and moves on their own . ”
Since the call , Caminos de Vida has been taking in 50 migrants every few days , feeding them , clothing them , and arranging transportation to family or friends in the United States . They are starting to feel the strain , he says while preparing to welcome another 50 migrants . The water bill jumped from $ 80 to $ 500 ; volunteers , many of them elderly , are burning out ; and some members of the congregation have left , uncomfortable with what the church is doing .
That tension permeates El Paso . With the entire southwest border experiencing a surge in migrants , primarily families and children from Central America seeking asylum , this West Texas city has become ground zero . Kevin McAleenan , commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) , came here last week and announced that the U.S. immigration system had reached a “ breaking point ” due to “ vulnerabilities in our legal framework . ”
Immigrant advocacy groups dispute that , claiming that the situation on the southwest border has been worsened by policy decisions by immigration agencies and the Trump administration .
What isn ’ t disputed is that the people handling the migrant flows in El Paso – including CBP agents , city government , and volunteer organizations – are exhausted . The 11-hour-plus work days , buzzing cell phones , and daily chaos is akin to responding to a natural disaster .
If you ’ re not a part of those groups , the surge in asylum seekers has remained mostly invisible on the ground . In a border city with generations of connections to Mexico , and generations who came to the U.S. under much different circumstances , the situation is provoking mixed feelings .
On a sunny Monday afternoon , Javier Lopez and Lalo Garcia are playing chess in San Jacinto Plaza . Both men are in their early 20s , and both have lived in the city for the four big migrant influxes it has experienced . They have never seen anything like this one , they agree .
“ My neighbor ’ s actually Border Patrol and he talks about it all the time . Like , ‘ Dude , I don ’ t even know what time I get home . It ’ s just crazy because we ’ re shorthanded , ’ ” says Mr. Lopez .
The volume of asylum requests bothers him though . “ I feel like this is a safe haven for everybody , and sooner or later it ’ s going to be crowded or some other problems are going to come up , ” he says .
Mr. Garcia jumps in . “ Put yourself in their shoes , ” he says . “ A lot of people come trying to survive . Not all of them , but most of them , ” he continues . “ Which is the controversy . We get hit by that , but they need it . So , honestly , it ’ s up to your morals whether you want to help or not . ”
Commissioner McAleenan has described how he thinks the immigration system needs to change .
Border Patrol is projecting that 100,000 migrants will have crossed the southwest border legally and illegally in March , the highest single month figure in a decade . The El Paso sector , which includes West Texas and New Mexico , has seen some of the sharpest increases in recent months . But those crossing are now mostly family units and unaccompanied children , and that change in demographics has forced the CBP in particular to do things it is not used to doing .
The agency has begun medical screening for every child 17 and under taken into custody , a policy Mr. McAleenan called “ unprecedented. ” And last week , for the first time in a decade , the CBP began releasing migrants directly after they have been processed due to overcrowding in Border Patrol stations and a lack of Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) bed space .
The agency has reassigned 750 agents from four other ports of entry to process asylum-seekers , and Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen sent a letter to Homeland Security employees last week asking for volunteers to help on the southwest border .
“ This humanitarian mission which we are committed to is undermining our border security efforts , ” said Mr. McAleenan last week . “ Changes in the law and closing the vulnerabilities in our legal framework is the only way that this flow is going to be reduced . ”
El Paso City Council meetings these days have come to include similar statements about the need for immigration reform .
Certain laws passed in recent years , Mayor Dee Margo said during a meeting this week , “ amounts to basically unfettered asylum-seeking . We ’ re a humanitarian nation . People are coming for their families , economic benefits , but it ’ s a challenge to us . ”
Last week , the city appropriated $ 20,000 to the United Way to fund a volunteer coordinator position , and they ’ re now helping Annunciation House – a nonprofit shelter that has been managing the network of more than two-dozen volunteer organizations – open a new 500-bed hospitality center for migrants .
If there is a face for the citizen response in El Paso , it is Ruben Garcia , the director of Annunciation House . He calls and texts with CBP and ICE every day , and calls and texts other churches and volunteer groups to see who could take the migrants in .
But he ’ s begun to notice what he calls a “ concerning ” trend . When ICE releases migrants , it contracts with private companies that can transport migrants up to eight hours away – so when bed-space is low in El Paso , migrants can be taken to shelters in Las Cruces and Albuquerque , New Mexico . The CBP doesn ’ t have that ability , but the volume of their releases has been increasing , according to Mr. Garcia , from 115 last Thursday to 240 this Monday .
Those releases are “ basically going to be restricted to El Paso , ” he said in a press conference .
“ I ’ m not sure exactly where Border Patrol is headed in terms of the releases , ” he added . “ I very much hope [ it ] does not have a political component to it . ”
CBP did not respond to specific questions about their migrant releases by deadline .
There have been other instances of political manipulation of the immigration bureaucracy , others believe .
Perhaps the most dramatic example was the housing of hundreds of migrants in an outdoor shelter under the Paso del Norte Bridge last week . CBP say they initially opened that camp to deal with the large increase in migrants . Another is “ metering , ” a policy that limits the flow of asylum claims processed at official ports of entry . Last summer , CBP officials expanded the practice to ports of entry in every border state , causing wait times to stretch for months and more migrants to cross illegally .
Xochitl Rodriguez , a community activist , says it sometimes “ feels like we are the target , like they ’ re trying to break … the community down . ”
She has been volunteering at migrant shelters , preparing food – usually pozole soup and peanut butter and jelly sandwiches . If she ’ s lucky she gets one day ’ s notice of how much to prepare .
“ I think we ’ ll never be so tired we can ’ t jump on it , ” she says .
For other El Pasoans , the situation illustrates how much the immigration system has changed since they had to navigate it themselves .
Darlene Villagrana ’ s father entered the U.S. without documents and worked for more than a decade before the rest of his family joined him after President Ronald Reagan ’ s 1986 “ amnesty ” bill . Ms. Villagrana recently got married and paid $ 3,000 to bring her husband to the U.S . Earlier this week she was taking her infant son for a stroll in El Paso ’ s Memorial Park .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ I know they have problems , but ... I don ’ t think it ’ s fair , ” she says . “ They just come and they cross ” immediately .
“ It ’ s something I ’ m really struggling with , ” she adds . “ They think they can just come here . But everyone deserves a better life . ”