House Republicans voted Thursday to block President Obama 's immigration executive actions , though it was unclear whether the largely symbolic step would be enough to prevent a risky budget stand-off next week .
The House voted 219-197 for the bill , by Rep. Ted Yoho , R-Fla. , that declares Obama 's actions `` null and void and without legal effect . ''
The legislation is part of a three-step plan by House GOP leaders to both address Obama 's immigration maneuvers and approve a new spending bill to avert a partial government shutdown . Next week , the chamber is set to vote on a bill funding most of the government through fiscal 2015 , and the Department of Homeland Security through early next year . That would tee up a new fight over funding for Obama 's immigration policies when Republicans control both chambers .
However , many conservative lawmakers want to wage that battle now , and use the looming Dec. 11 deadline -- when current government funding expires -- as leverage to defund the immigration plan .
They worry Yoho 's legislation is an ineffective tool for doing that , as the stand-alone bill approved Thursday stands little chance of passing the Senate . The White House also has issued a veto threat , calling the bill `` non-sensical . ''
`` I 'm not happy , '' Rep. Mick Mulvaney , R-S.C. , said . He said he 's concerned that if Republicans do n't fight the immigration policy now , it could send the wrong signal ahead of the new Congress .
Conservative sources indicate there are between 30 and 40 , or more , conservatives who would bolt on any spending bill next week .
`` There 's a higher risk of more [ members ] bolting , '' said one source . `` Let us sort of vent . I do n't think [ GOP leaders ] thought this was going to be as big an issue . ''
But despite that concern , one source said GOP leaders think would-be defectors will come back to favor the plan at the end .
Asked if he was concerned that opposition could torpedo the spending bill , House Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers , R-Ky. , said : `` I do n't think so . I 'm hearing good things about it . ''
Still , House Speaker John Boehner might need Democratic support to carry the spending package across the finish line next week .
House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi , who had been coy about whether she 'd help pass a spending plan , said Thursday she 's reached out to Boehner to extend a `` hand of friendship '' to keep the government open -- as long as Democrats see a bill they can support .
It 's unclear whether the legislation in the works meets that criteria . She indicated Thursday that Democrats might make demands if Boehner needs their help .
`` If he has 218 votes , there 's no conversation . If he does n't , we have leverage , '' Pelosi said .
At a press conference earlier Thursday , Boehner urged his rank-and-file to be patient , making the case for delaying the immigration fight until next year .
`` Come January , we 'll have a Republican House and Republican Senate , and we 'll be in a stronger position to take actions , '' he said .
Boehner said the current plan is `` the most practical way to fight the president 's action . ''
Obama 's executive actions would defer deportations and grant work permits to up to 5 million illegal immigrants .