The White House Thursday released an immigration plan that would offer a path to citizenship for approximately 1.8 million of the so-called `` Dreamers , '' along with a $ 25 billion investment in border security -- including for President Trump 's long-promised wall .
The White House was expected to provide more details of the president 's proposal early next week . But the proposal represents a reversal for Trump and could provoke resistance among his conservative allies .
In September , Trump ended the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , which currently covers roughly 690,000 immigrants who were brought to the U.S. illegally as children .
`` We 're not looking at citizenship , '' Trump told reporters at the time . `` We 're not looking at amnesty . We 're looking at allowing people to stay here . ''
On Wednesday , however , Trump said he was open to a pathway to citizenship for younger immigrants brought illegally to the U.S. as children .
`` We 're going to morph into it , '' Trump told reporters . `` It 's going to happen , at some point in the future , over a period of 10 to 12 years . ''
The nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute said it believes the largest share of the White House 's 1.8 million people who 'd be eligible for citizenship -- 1.3 million -- are people who currently meet all of DACA 's eligibility requirements . These include years in the U.S. , their ages now and when they entered this country , and whether they have a high school or equivalent education .
Another 400,000 are people who 'd be eligible for DACA protection but for their education . And 100,000 more are people who are under age 15 -- the minimum age allowed for most people requesting protection under the program .
Legal status for the recipients would be revocable for criminal behavior and national security threats , sources familiar with the plan told ███ , and eventual citizenship would require still-unspecified work and education requirements -- and a finding that the immigrants are of `` good moral character . ''
Trump 's plan would restrict new family-based immigration to spouses and minor children , doing away with provisions allowing parents , adult siblings and others to enter the country . The sources said it would only end new applications for visas , allowing those already in the pipeline to be processed .
It would also end the diversity visa lottery program , which drew Trump 's attention after the New York City truck attack last year , redirecting the allotment annually to bringing down the existing backlog in visa applications .
Trump had deferred to a bipartisan , bicameral group of lawmakers to craft an immigration proposal , saying he would sign whatever they passed . But as talks on Capitol Hill broke down -- in part because of controversy Trump ginned up using vulgar language to describe other countries -- the White House decided to offer its own framework .
The release follows on concerns raised by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , that the president had not sufficiently laid out his priorities . One official said the Thursday release represents a plan for the Senate , with the administration expecting a different bill to pass the House .
In a statement , McConnell said the White House plan `` indicates what is necessary for the president to sign a bill into law . ''
`` I am hopeful that as discussions continue in the Senate on the subject of immigration , Members on both sides of the aisle will look to this framework for guidance as they work towards an agreement , '' McConnell added .
Doug Andres , a spokesman for House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , echoed the sentiment saying : `` We 're grateful for the president showing leadership on this issue and believe his ideas will help us ultimately reach a balanced solution . ''
But a spokesman for House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , blasted the plan as part of a `` hateful anti-immigrant agenda . ''
Drew Hammill accused White House aide Stephen Miller , a staunch opponent of illegal immigration , of `` trying to ransom the lives of innocent DREAMers for a $ 25 billion anti-immigrant wish list . ''
`` The White House strategy of moving the goal posts every time the President is n't paying attention continues to complicate this process , '' he said in a statement .
The president 's most loyal media ally , Breitbart News , attacked Trump as `` Amnesty Don . '' The conservative group Heritage Action for America said the proposal `` should be a non-starter . ''
However , Sen. Tom Cotton , R-Ark. , who played a key role in immigration talks earlier this month , said Trump 's proposal was `` generous and humane , while also being responsible . ''
`` It protects those eligible for DACA , who are here through no fault of their own . But it also will prevent us from ending up back here in five years by securing the border and putting an end to extended-family chain migration . ''
Among other Republicans , Oklahoma Sen. James Lankford said he supports the citizenship pathway Trump described Wednesday . Sen. Mike Rounds , R-S.D. , called Trump 's words `` positive '' and said Trump 's description `` gives us a better sense '' of his views , but added , `` We have a long way to go yet . ''
Sen. David Perdue , R-Ga. , said the White House framework was `` something that both Republicans and Democrats in the House and Senate should be eager to support .
`` We all want a good deal , '' Perdue added , `` and here it is . ''
Some of Congress ' more conservative members seemed unwilling to open the citizenship door for the Dreamers .
`` DACA itself did n't have a pathway to citizenship , '' said Sen. Ted Cruz , R-Texas , who battled Trump in 2016 for the GOP presidential nomination . `` So I think it would be a profound mistake and not consistent with the promises we made to the voters , to enact a pathway to citizenship to DACA recipients or to others who are here illegally . ''
Rep. Jim Jordan , R-Ohio , said he supports a more conservative , more sweeping immigration bill proposed by House members , including House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte , R-Va. , which has won strong support from House conservatives . Ryan has promised to push for support for that measure .
Meanwhile , immigration activists blasted the plan . Lorella Praeli , with the American Civil Liberties Union , called it `` a hateful , xenophobic immigration proposal that would slash legal immigration to levels not seen since the racial quotas of the 1920s , eliminate legal immigration channels for African countries , and spend $ 25 billion for a harmful , wasteful border wall and an increase in Border Patrol and ICE agents. ``
`` The White House proposal is clearly an effort to sabotage bipartisan talks on the issue by continuing to put issues on the table that are non-starters , '' she said .
███ ' Mike Emanuel contributed to this report , along with the Associated Press .