President Donald Trump on Sunday defended his executive order restricting immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries as his plan to tighten national security spawned legal challenges , congressional criticism , widespread protests and confusion at airports across the country and around the world .
The order , issued Friday , fulfilled a campaign pledge by Mr. Trump to clamp down on immigration from countries affected by terrorism . He suspended the U.S. refugee program for four months and banned for 90 days entry into the U.S. of nationals from Iran , Iraq , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen .
What followed was immediate detention of many arrivals at America ’ s major international airports , and even some deportations back to nations of origin . Late Saturday , a federal judge in Brooklyn , N.Y. , issued a temporary injunction that blocked the deportation of those detained , but the judge stopped short of allowing them into the country and didn ’ t rule on the constitutionality of Mr. Trump ’ s measures .
Other judicial decisions called into question enforcement of other parts of the order , prompting what is likely to be a long legal review .
Meantime , clearing up one of the points of confusion , the new Department of Homeland Security chief said late Sunday that the order wouldn ’ t affect holders of so-called green cards , or legal permanent residents , after the agency had said it did .
The result was uneven enforcement . Scientists , athletes , airline crews and immigrants were detained for hours , denied lawyers and in some cases returned to the countries they had left . Across the country , the court order blocking removals hasn ’ t been honored in a consistent way , according to attorneys for the American Civil Liberties Union .
The orders prompted massive protests Saturday and Sunday at airports in New York , Dallas , Atlanta , San Francisco , Seattle , Chicago , Los Angeles and near Washington , D.C. , where some travelers remained in detention Sunday afternoon .
At Los Angeles International Airport , large crowds gathered to demand the release of travelers held there , including two grandmothers from Iraq and Iran who refused to board flights back to their home countries , according to immigrant-rights lawyers . Late Sunday afternoon , airport officials in Los Angeles closed the roads around the arrivals area because of the protests .
Attorneys seeking to help potential detainees at Dulles International Airport , near Washington , said it wasn ’ t clear whether federal customs officials were complying with court orders . They were refusing to give information about any potential passengers detained , the attorneys said . From conversations with families at the airport , the attorneys believed there were about 50 or 60 people potentially being detained under the executive order .
Justin Dillon , a Washington attorney working pro-bono at the airport to represent any potential detainees , said that Customs and Border Patrol officials were refusing to tell attorneys on the ground , as well as four congressmen , whether there were any lawful permanent residents being detained under the executive order .
Sirine Shebaya , another attorney who spent the weekend at Dulles , said that customs officials were in violation of a Virginia judge ’ s ruling because they were not giving lawful permanent residents access to attorneys .
The Trump executive order states that while the moratorium is in place , the U.S. can admit individuals on a case-by-case basis . It makes no mention of specific religions but says the government would continue to process requests from individuals claiming religious persecution , “ provided that the religion is a minority religion in the individual ’ s country. ” That suggests the U.S. would admit Christians from Muslim-majority countries .
Yet at least one Christian family from Syria with approval to immigrate was turned away in Philadelphia over the weekend , family members and local officials said . Ghassan Assali , a Syrian dentist in Allentown , Pa. , filed a petition 13 years ago to sponsor two brothers and their families who were living in Damascus . But en route to the airport , he received a call from a U.S. official informing him the family had been barred from entering the country and would be returning to Qatar , their point of departure . “ It ’ s a nightmare , ” Mr. Assali said .
While he was running for president late in 2015 , Mr. Trump had called for a “ total and complete shutdown ” of Muslims entering the U.S. , before later moving off that blanket promise .
At least a dozen GOP senators raised some measure of concern by Sunday . Sens . John McCain of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina said in a statement that Mr. Trump ’ s order “ may do more to help terrorist recruitment than improve our security ” by alienating U.S. allies in the Muslim world .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , meanwhile , tried to express support for Mr. Trump ’ s national-security goals while raising questions about his tactics .
“ We need to be careful ; we don ’ t have religious tests in this country , ” Mr. McConnell said on ABC . The top Senate Republican demurred when asked whether he supported Mr. Trump ’ s policy , saying that courts would decide “ whether or not this has gone too far . ”
Mr. Trump responded Sunday afternoon , writing on Twitter that Sens . McCain and Graham were “ sadly weak on immigration ” and “ should focus their energies on ISIS , illegal immigration and border security instead of always looking to start World War III . ”
In a statement on Facebook Sunday night , Mr. Trump said the “ seven countries named in the Executive Order are the same countries previously identified by the Obama administration as sources of terror . To be clear , this is not a Muslim ban , as the media is falsely reporting . This is not about religion—this is about terror and keeping our country safe . ”
Over the weekend , federal judges in three states issued separate rulings that blocked the deportation of those detained at airports . But the rulings differed . The Brooklyn judge issued a nationwide injunction on deportations but stopped short of allowing the travelers into the country and didn ’ t address the constitutionality of Mr. Trump ’ s measures . A Boston judge said officials at Logan International Airport could not detain those with valid visas . That prompted lawyers to advise green-card holders to reroute their trips so they enter the U.S. in Boston .
By Sunday night , after nearly two full days of implementation , the extent and limits of the policy—which continued to morph through legal challenges and White House statements—were still unclear .
A senior Homeland Security official said Saturday that in the first 23 hours the order was in effect , 375 people had been detained on arrival in the U.S. , prevented from boarding flights at their overseas point of departure or intercepted while en route to the U.S .
Critics , including David Leopold , past president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association , said the hasty rollout of the measures had prevented both U.S. authorities and U.S.-bound travelers from adequately preparing .
Beyond new immigrants and refugees , those detained over the weekend also included green-card holders , students and employees of many U.S. companies and universities .
Green-card holder Pouyan Mashayekh , a researcher at a financial firm in New York , landed at John F. Kennedy International Airport at 10 p.m. Friday after a weeklong business trip in London and was met at the gate by polite immigration officials .
He soon joined a group of several other detainees , including several Iraqis and a young Sudanese-American woman . All except him were handcuffed , he said . Lawyers for Mr. Mashayekh , who first came to the U.S. from Iran in 1994 to study for a doctorate in economics , arrived and secured his release at 3 a.m .
“ I was unhappy and very tired , ” he said . “ But you know , I was so numb , so I was very calm. ” Mr. Mashayekh eventually returned to his home in a Trump Plaza condominium apartment in Jersey City , N.J .
Immigration lawyers Sunday said border agents at a handful of airports around the country weren ’ t complying with the order , and that some refugees could still face deportation , including at Los Angeles International Airport and San Francisco International Airport .
Elnaz Ghotbi Ravandi , a doctoral student in biology at Southern Methodist University in Dallas , arrived at Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport early on Saturday morning to meet her parents and sister flying in from Iran for their first family reunion in more than two years .
Her relatives were detained for over 30 hours at the airport and barred from speaking with Ms. Ravandi . “ I was feeling very bad—I felt like I ’ m not welcome in this country , ” she said .
But Sunday afternoon , a security escort brought her to a building nearby the airport , where Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings awaited her with her family members , all holding white bouquets .
Timing was key as the doors to the U.S. shut , then were pried opened again : NBA Milwaukee Bucks forward Thon Maker , once a refugee from Sudan , scored a career high in a game against the Toronto Raptors Friday night in Canada—and made it back across the border into the U.S. without incident just hours after Mr. Trump signed the order .
But a 27-year-old Sudanese internal medical resident at the Cleveland Clinic , Suha Abushamma , was detained on arrival at Kennedy Airport Saturday morning , then put on a plane back to her point of origin in Saudi Arabia 20 minutes before the judge ’ s emergency ruling was issued , according to a colleague and friend .