WASHINGTON—Demand for low-skilled worker visas for the summer season starting Sunday is again far outstripping supply , with the Trump administration forced to choose between helping businesses seeking more visas or trying to save those jobs for American workers .
Some lawmakers tried and failed this month to secure an increase in the number of H-2B visas available for this summer as part of a large spending bill . One Senate proposal would have permanently raised the annual cap from 66,000 to 90,000 , with no limits for certain jobs in areas affected by disasters . A House version would have increased the annual cap to 132,000 .
The White House warned some lawmakers not to kick the decision to the Department of Homeland Security as they did in 2017 , congressional aides said . “ We did not want the discretion , ” an administration official said .
Nonetheless , DHS is now under pressure from the business community to provide more visas after the spending bill authorized the department ’ s Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen to offer tens of thousands of extra visas if she sees fit .
A DHS spokeswoman , Katie Waldman , said no decision has been made . “ We are currently looking at last year ’ s implementation of the H-2B plus-up to determine how best to proceed this fiscal year , ” she said .
The H-2B visas , issued for low-skilled , seasonal foreign workers , are typically employed by landscaping companies , Alaskan fisheries , ski resorts and vacation spots , including some of President Donald Trump ’ s properties .
Backers say the program provides needed foreign workers , often in remote locations where Americans are scarce . They say the problem is particularly acute given the current unemployment rate of 4.1 % , the lowest in a decade .
“ We rebranded 8,000 vehicles and put ‘ now hiring ’ on everything we own . We can not get enough workers , ” said Todd Chambers , chief marketing officer for BrightView Landscapes , LLC , a large landscaping company that has used H-2B workers for more than a decade .
Opponents say businesses should try harder and raise wages if needed . “ We should want the labor market to tighten and employers have to work overtime trying to entice American workers , especially those who ’ ve dropped out of the labor market , ” said Mark Krikorian of the conservative Center for Immigration Studies .
Ultimately , Democratic leaders killed the proposals to increase the visas , congressional aides in both parties said . Democratic aides said that was partly because they weren ’ t willing to import more foreign workers at a time when Congress was failing to protect hundreds of thousands of young undocumented immigrants brought to the U.S. as children , known as Dreamers .
By statute , a total of 66,000 H-2B visas are available each year , divided evenly between winter and summer seasons . In past years , Congress has effectively raised the cap by exempting workers who are returning to jobs they had in previous seasons , but didn ’ t do so last year nor this year .
For this summer season , businesses filed requests for more than 81,000 workers with the Labor Department on Jan. 1 , the first day possible , a record , and more since then . Many firms tried to file applications after midnight on New Year ’ s Eve to be near the front of the line .
This year , for the first time , DHS conducted a lottery among early applicants to pick winners , saying it was only fair given the crush of demand . Administration officials said that applications cleared by the Labor Department by mid-February were eligible . But several people who use the program said they were confused about why some petitions were included in the draw and others weren ’ t .
BrightView Landscapes filed 94 petitions requesting a total of 3,500 visas , but was awarded fewer than 500 , compared with 1,600 last year , said Sarah Powenski , vice president and associate general counsel at the company .
Company officials say they are frustrated that the program has been caught up in the larger immigration debate . “ This thing has become more of an immigration issue in people ’ s minds , ” said Mr . Chambers . “ It ’ s been attached to a third-rail issue . ”
Faced with the same situation last year , John Kelly , then DHS secretary and now White House chief of staff , fumed . He argued that if Congress wanted more visas , then lawmakers should have approved them .
Many lawmakers lobbied him to approve additional visas . His boss , President Donald Trump , ran for office promising to protect American workers against foreign competition , and White House officials pressured him against it , according to people familiar with the decision making .
Ultimately , Mr. Kelly allowed up to 15,000 additional visas for guest workers , though not until the summer was half over . He set a high bar for businesses that wanted to apply and described the approval as a “ one-time ” move .