President Trump vowed Saturday to “ immediately ” appeal a judge ’ s ruling blocking funding for his border wall , while reviving threats to proceed with stalled deportation raids as soon as a week from now .
The president discussed his immigration plans as part of a wide-ranging press conference following the G-20 summit in Osaka , Japan .
His administration , just after notching a win with the passage of a $ 4.6 billion bill to address the humanitarian crisis along the U.S.-Mexico border , was dealt a blow Friday when a California judge barred Trump from tapping $ 2.5 billion in military funding to build high-priority segments of the border wall in California , Arizona and New Mexico . Judge Haywood S. Gilliam , Jr. in Oakland acted in two lawsuits filed by California and by activists who contended the money transfer was unlawful and construction would pose environmental threats .
`` We 're immediately appealing it and we think we 'll win the appeal , '' Trump said at his press conference , calling the decision a disgrace . `` There was no reason that that should have happened . ”
Meanwhile , the president made clear that despite the passage of the aid package in Congress , he plans to move forward with controversial Immigration and Customs Enforcement raids absent a deal on reforming the asylum process , which he described as unlikely .
“ We will be removing large numbers of people … starting in a week after , you know , sometime after July 4th , ” Trump said .
Those planned raids have been the subject of intense debate and a source of immense turmoil inside the Department of Homeland Security . Before last weekend , The Washington Post reported on the closely held plan to target families in up to 10 cities across the U.S. for deportation raids . The plans prompted outrage from Democrats and , last Saturday , Trump said he would agree to their requests to delay the operation “ for two weeks ” to see if they can strike a deal on “ Asylum and Loophole problems at the Southern Border . ”
But the past week was consumed by negotiations over the humanitarian aid bill , which Congress passed right before the start of the holiday break .
While Trump expressed gratitude to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi for helping pass that package – she steamrolled the liberal wing of her party in order to move a bipartisan package that did not include restrictions on enforcement sought by that wing – the president suggested that bill does not make ICE raids less likely .
The raid plan , as well as national controversy over poor conditions at certain migrant detention centers , has been the backdrop to a major reshuffling at the top levels of the Department of Homeland Security . New leaders have been installed this past week at ICE and Customs and Border Protection -- as the DHS secretary himself faces questions about his future .
Acting Secretary Kevin McAleenan has been accused of leaking those planned raids . But during an appearance on ███ ’ “ The Ingraham Angle , ” he again denied it .
`` I would not , have not , ever leaked details of a sensitive law enforcement operation , '' he said .
One senior administration official told ███ on Thursday that after the alleged leak , `` He ’ s lost the confidence and trust of both the workforce and his superiors , with no viable path to proceed with any confidence and credibility . ''
The official lamented the state of morale at the department , saying : “ DHS has devolved into chaos and employee morale is abysmal . ”
NEW LEADERS INSTALLED AT DHS AMID QUESTIONS OVER SECRETARY 'S FUTURE
McAleenan , though , touted at a press conference on Friday that the flow at the border is reducing , saying he expects as much as a 25 percent reduction in border apprehensions in June – from soaring levels so far this year .
The California judge ’ s wall ruling on Friday created yet another front in the ever-expanding legal , political and physical battle over immigration .
`` All President Trump has succeeded in building is a constitutional crisis , threatening immediate harm to our state , '' said California Attorney General Xavier Becerra , who led a 20-state coalition of attorneys general in one lawsuit .
The U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals is expected to take up the same issue of using military money next week .
At issue is Trump 's February declaration of a national emergency so that he could divert $ 6.7 billion from military and other sources to begin construction of the wall , which could have begun as early as Monday .
Trump declared the emergency after losing a fight with the Democratic-led House that led to a 35-day government shutdown . The president identified $ 3.6 billion from military construction funds , $ 2.5 billion from Defense Department counterdrug activities and $ 600 million from the Treasury Department 's asset forfeiture fund .
The judge Friday did n't rule on funding from the military construction and Treasury budgets .
In the second suit , brought by the American Civil Liberties Union on behalf of Sierra Club and the Southern Border Communities Coalition , the judge determined that the use of the $ 2.5 billion for two sectors of the wall was unlawful , although he rejected environmental arguments that wall construction would threaten species such as bighorn sheep .