Their goal : prove that it ’ s not just insiders who want an immigration reform overhaul . Immigration groups to target GOP
Outside groups plan to target more than 100 House Republicans over the August recess with an aggressive ground game aimed at persuading lawmakers to embrace immigration reform .
Their goal : prove that it ’ s not just Washington insiders who want a comprehensive immigration overhaul , but that conservative voters in their districts support it as well .
The unusually coordinated effort to win the recess includes a major grass-tops initiative by pro-reform groups like American Action Network , the Partnership for a New American Economy , Republicans for Immigration Reform and others to connect local business leaders , mayors , pastors and activists with GOP lawmakers on their home turf .
“ Advocates of reform understand that for our conservative base , the month of August is very important to provide accurate information about the need for comprehensive reform , ” said Charlie Spies of Republicans for Immigration Reform . “ During the previous debate when President [ George W. ] Bush pushed for immigration reform , there was no grass-roots effort and a loud minority that opposes reform controlled the dialogue . This time , proponents of reform are not going to be caught off-guard . ”
Unions and other immigration activist groups like the SEIU , AFSCME , the National Council of La Raza and others are going to lay out their immigration reform summer plan Wednesday on Capitol Hill that includes holding hundreds of events in districts across the country in an effort to target key lawmakers while members are at home during August .
One notable missing component to the reformers ’ recess campaign : political television ads .
Several outside groups , including New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg-backed Partnership for a New American Economy and Republicans for Immigration Reform , told ███ they don ’ t have plans to blanket House districts with TV ads touting reform .
Political strategists said the reason for not running ads in August are numerous — they ’ re expensive , the timing isn ’ t ripe yet for ads since it ’ s unlikely the House will move quickly in September to pass a comprehensive package , and some argue there ’ s also a recognition that running ads could backfire and play into anti-reform groups ’ narrative that it ’ s only establishment insiders urging members to tackle reform .
Case in point : American Action Network , which ran a series of TV ads during the Senate immigration debate and also went up with an ad in early July , urging House Republicans to support the border surge in the Senate bill , doesn ’ t have plans to run ads in House districts next month .
AAN ’ s Dan Conston said the group isn ’ t doing ads because it recognizes the House and Senate approach needs to be different .
Instead , AAN plans to spend about $ 250,000 in August as it launches what it is calling the conservative support network that will work to push House Republicans to consider supporting immigration reform . The campaign will be in more than 20 districts and more than 10 states , including Pennsylvania , Ohio , Minnesota , California and Texas . It also includes mobilizing the group ’ s existing grass-roots network through digital outreach , release of district-by-district studies on the economic impact of immigration reform and could include additional polling and other pieces .
“ We recognize as events shift and opportunities or challenges arise , we need to be closely monitoring how else we can play a role , ” Conston said .
The push will focus on messaging that the current immigration system is broken , reform needs to happen , but that it won ’ t be through the Senate bill , according to sources familiar with the effort .
FWD.us , the well-funded , tech-backed group that supports immigration reform , is still determining whether it or its affiliated organizations like Americans for a Conservative Direction will wage an ad war in August . The group has not released its plans yet .
“ Stakeholders across the ideological spectrum know that we need to fix our broken immigration system to grow our economy and create jobs , ” the group ’ s Rob Jesmer said . “ We look forward to continuing to work alongside a broad variety of groups to mobilize the widespread , grass-roots support for reform . ”
Of course , the reform groups won ’ t have the battlefield to themselves .