President Donald Trump delivers a speech in the White House East Room in Washington , D.C. , June 29 , 2018 . ( Jonathan Ernst/Reuters )
According to Axios , President Trump is gearing up to sign an executive order that would , in their words , “ remove the right to citizenship for babies of non-citizens born on U.S. soil. ” There is some ambiguity in this formulation . Will the executive order in question limit birthright citizenship to the children of U.S. citizens , or will it extend citizenship to the children of lawful permanent residents , as in the case of most market democracies that have revised their birthright citizenship rules in recent decades ? It is not clear from the video clip provided by Axios on HBO .
In truth , Trump ’ s response to reporter Jonathan Swan ’ s question seems rather off the cuff . At first , the president explains that while he once thought bringing an end to automatic birthright citizenship — presumably for the children of any class of non-citizens born in the U.S. , whether legally present or otherwise — would require a constitutional amendment , he has since been persuaded that a statute would do , or even an executive order . Pressed by Swan as to whether such an executive order was in process of being drafted , Trump confidently replied that “ it ’ s in the process , it ’ ll happen. ” Will it happen , though ? I ’ m skeptical .
First , I should stipulate that I have in the past argued for an amnesty for the long-settled unauthorized-immigrant population that would be accompanied by a constitutional amendment that would do two things : ( a ) grant Congress the authority to revise the rules around automatic birthright citizenship and ( b ) allow naturalized U.S. citizens who are otherwise eligible to serve as president . I ’ ve since changed my mind .
Though an amendment along these lines would have a hard time clearing the high hurdles we rightly put in the way of new constitutional amendments , it struck me as a tough-minded but ultimately fair way to address a serious and legitimate concern often raised by critics of an expansive amnesty : that such an amnesty would encourage further unauthorized inflows , future unauthorized immigrants would form families in the U.S. ( including native-born citizen children ) , and these mixed-status households have long been among the most sympathetic cases , as most Americans are , for good reason , reluctant to divide families . If mixed-status households are a barrier to stringent enforcement , revising the rules around automatic birthright citizenship seemed like a legitimate solution — indeed , a solution that has in the past appealed to partisans of more open borders .
If you believe that opponents of an expansive amnesty ought to be anathematized , a sentiment often expressed by admissionists , addressing their concerns is an inciting thing to do in itself . I disagree . As the political scientists Matthew Wright , Morris Levy , and Jack Citrin have found , “ opponents of legalization . . . often cast the issue in strict moral terms , regarding unlawful presence in the country as a blanket disqualification . To give any illegal immigrant a path to citizenship constitutes ‘ amnesty , ’ an act that transgresses respect for the law , rewards violators , and unjustly pushes aside those who have ‘ played by the rules. ’ ” Wright et al . are favorably disposed to legalization , as they call it , but they acknowledge that much of the opposition to it is driven by categorical moral judgments that can ’ t be reduced to , say , ethnic or racial bias , which is often cited as a driving force . ( I discuss these and other related issues at greater length in Melting Pot or Civil War ? ) Revising automatic birthright citizenship so that it extends only to the children of citizens and lawful permanent residents is , in theory , a powerful signal that the next amnesty would be the last , not yet another amnesty in a long series of them that sap support for the rule of law .
Why have I changed my mind ? It ’ s not because I believe that ending automatic birthright citizenship for the children of the unauthorized is offensive on its face . ( As others have mentioned , many market democracies have revised their birthright-citizenship rules , and some of them have devised reasonable compromises , e.g. , Australia ’ s 2007 citizenship law , which Peter Schuck and Rogers Smith recently discussed in National Affairs . ) The short answer is that I am more confident we can make immigration enforcement much more effective via mandatory E-verify and focusing our efforts on recent violators , though it will require a political compromise , and I am more concerned about the issues raised by creating a large class of stateless persons . If we can greatly diminish future unauthorized flows , as I believe we can , we can shrink the number of mixed-status households . If we fail to do so , the countries of origin of unauthorized immigrants might refuse to grant citizenship to the offspring of their nationals , which would , I fear , precipitate a serious and lasting problem . It is never wise to give a foreign government that much power to sow chaos in our country . That is why getting enforcement right is so essential .
To return to President Trump ’ s remarks , I find it hard to believe the Trump White House would pursue an executive order ending automatic birthright citizenship for the children of the unauthorized . For one , the practical realities of implementing such a rule would be enormously complex , and it would face serious legal challenges right from the start . My impression is that this is yet another attempt by the president to telegraph that he takes controlling immigration seriously . The danger , however , is that Trump will further exacerbate the “ thermostatic ” reaction to his immigration rhetoric , i.e. , the fact that the more hawkish the president comes across on the issue , the more moderates and liberals seem to take a more dovish line .
Consider the following from political scientist Daniel Hopkins , a leading expert on public opinion on immigration : “ With Trump taking a more hard-line stance than Romney , we might have expected some Americans to likewise shift against a pathway to citizenship , but that ’ s not what happened , ” observed Hopkins . “ Instead , Republicans and Democrats alike became more pro-pathway between 2012 and 2016 , and much of that uptick occurred during the 2016 campaign . This is a common phenomenon : When a politician advocates for a policy proposal , American opinion sometimes moves in the opposite direction . ”
If Trump ’ s opposition to birthright citizenship becomes a salient issue , it is more likely to undermine the restrictionist cause than strengthen it .