The former US First Lady Laura Bush has condemned a controversial policy that splits up families who illegally enter the country at the Mexican border .
Writing in the Washington Post newspaper , she describes the separation of children from their parents as cruel , immoral and heart-breaking .
Her comments follow growing controversy over President Donald Trump 's `` zero-tolerance '' immigration policy .
Mrs Trump `` hates to see children separated from their families '' , her spokeswoman said .
She repeated her husband 's call for `` both sides '' to work on immigration reform as a solution . However , fact-checkers point out that the policy was introduced by Mr Trump 's attorney general and does not require congressional action to be stopped .
In a recent six-week period there were nearly 2,000 family separations following a crackdown on illegal border crossings .
Adults who try to cross the border outside of official entry points - many planning to seek asylum - are placed in custody and face criminal prosecution for illegal entry .
As a result , hundreds of children and babies are now being housed in detention centres , including warehouses and converted supermarkets , and kept away from their parents .
Laura Bush , wife of the former Republican President George W Bush and a Texas resident , launched an outspoken attack on the policy .
`` This zero-tolerance policy is cruel . It is immoral . And it breaks my heart , '' she wrote in the Washington Post .
`` Our government should not be in the business of warehousing children in converted box stores or making plans to place them in tent cities in the desert . ''
`` These images are eerily reminiscent of the Japanese American internment camps of World War Two , now considered to have been one of the most shameful episodes in US history , '' she added .
Earlier Mrs Trump said she `` hates to see children separated from their families and hopes both sides of the aisle [ Republicans and Democrats in Congress ] can finally come together to achieve successful immigration reform '' .
`` We need to be a country that follows all laws , but also a country that governs with heart , '' her statement added .
The first ladies ' comments come amid growing alarm over the impact of the policy .
On Monday , UN human rights chief Zeid Ra'ad al-Hussein called on the US to end what he called its `` unconscionable '' strategy of forced separations .
Earlier Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen defended her agency 's role at the border , saying : `` We do not have a policy of separating families at the border . Period . ''
But she said authorities would remove children if the parent they were travelling with had broken the law .
Mr Trump has said a law `` Democrats gave us '' is responsible for the policy , but it is unclear which law he is referring to .
In a tweet on Saturday he urged Democrats to work with Republicans to create new legislation .
However , critics have pointed out that detaining children separately from their parents is the consequence of a policy announced by Attorney General Jeff Sessions last month to deter new arrivals .
The significant change , analysts say , is the justice department 's decision to prosecute parents if they illegally cross the border , even if it is their first offence . The children are not charged with a crime , which means they can not be jailed together .
Until this policy was announced , such families were usually subject to civil deportation proceedings , which did not require separation .
The recent child detentions have resulted in some shelters and foster homes reporting that they are running out of space .
On Sunday , Democratic lawmakers visited shelters and processing facilities in New Jersey and Texas , demanding to see detainees .
`` They call it zero-tolerance , but a better name for it is zero-humanity . And there is zero logic to this , '' Sen Jeff Merkley of Oregon , who organised a visit to Casa Padre detention centre in Brownsville , Texas , told the BBC .
`` What we saw is this huge warehouse , it was a super centre for Walmart before , now it 's a super detention centre . It 's holding almost 1,500 kids inside there . ''
Vermont congressman Peter Welch said he saw children held `` in chain link cages '' in a processing facility and one shelter `` filled to capacity '' .
Meanwhile , officials announced plans to erect tent cities that will hold hundreds more children in the Texas desert where temperatures regularly reach 40C ( 105F ) .
Local lawmaker Jose Rodriguez described the plan as `` totally inhumane '' and `` outrageous '' , adding : `` It should be condemned by anyone who has a moral sense of responsibility . ''
Protesters marched to one such tent city in Tornillo , Texas , on Sunday where hundreds of children were being held separately from their parents .
They chanted `` Families united ! '' and `` Free our children now ! `` , reported NPR .
The policy faces legal challenges , including a federal case brought by the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) .
The number of families trying to enter the US overland without documentation is on the rise .
In the first two weeks of the new `` zero-tolerance '' approach , 658 minors - including many babies and toddlers - were separated from the adults that travelled with them , according to US border officials .
In many of the cases , the families have been reunited after the parent was released from detention . However , there are reports of people being kept apart for weeks and even months .
But it is not clear if this new tougher policy will stop the migrants from travelling .
This is because many are fleeing violence and poverty in countries such as Honduras and El Salvador , and staying put is often fraught with dangers .