President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE is gambling on his immigration policy . But it ’ s a risky bet .
The president is going full-steam ahead with the hard-line approach that his team believes fueled his election win last year . Whether he can bring the country with him is another matter .
On Tuesday , the administration announced a host of changes to immigration enforcement . The shift includes the hiring of thousands of new Border Patrol officers , a major expansion in the number of people subject to expedited deportation and the establishment of a new office focused on “ immigration crime . ”
The announcement came in two memos from the Department of Homeland Security . The documents reiterated Trump ’ s plan to press ahead with his famous promise to build a wall along the southern border with Mexico , and underlined his administration ’ s opposition to the policies of so-called sanctuary cities .
Meanwhile , a new , revised version of Trump ’ s earlier executive order suspending travel from seven majority-Muslim nations is expected soon — though that release has been delayed until next week .
Trump has asserted that he is a standard-bearer for the “ forgotten men and women ” of America who feel that their nation has changed for the worse .
“ We ’ ve defended other nations ’ borders while refusing to defend our own , ” Trump said in his inauguration address .
Earlier this month on Twitter , he wrote , “ The crackdown on illegal criminals is merely the keeping of my campaign promise . Gang members , drug dealers & others are being removed ! ”
Trump aides make no bones about their belief that his immigration stance was fully endorsed by the electorate last November .
White House spokesman Michael Short told ███ , “ He campaigned hard on this issue and won 306 electoral votes — the most for a Republican nominee since 1988 . ”
Short also noted a Harvard-Harris Poll survey , exclusively provided to ███ , which found that 80 percent of voters believe cities that arrest illegal immigrants for crimes should turn them over to the immigration authorities .
Trump himself tweeted about that poll on Tuesday afternoon — a sign that the president ’ s political antennae are closely tuned to public opinion on the issue .
Advocates for stricter immigration policies also believe Trump is on the right side of public opinion .
“ This is one of the reasons why he is president , ” said Ira Mehlman , the media director of the Federation for American Immigration Reform , a group that seeks to stop illegal immigration and reduce legal immigration .
“ Improbable as it was , he ended up winning the election based on addressing the real concerns that the American public has had over immigration , as well as some other things , ” Mehlman added .
The polling on the issues is not so clear-cut , however .
Trump ’ s election win could just as easily be seen as coming despite his immigration stance , rather than because of it .
Election Day exit polls showed that a clear majority of voters — 70 percent — believed illegal immigrants should be offered some form of legal status . Only 25 percent favored deportation .
Those same exit polls showed Trump ’ s proposed border wall with Mexico was supported by 41 percent of voters — but opposed by 54 percent .
Findings like that bolster liberal confidence that Trump is making a political misjudgment in pressing ahead .
People “ roundly reject the idea of mass deportation , ” said Tom Jawetz , the vice president of immigration policy at the Center for American Progress Action Fund , a liberal group . “ The American public does not support building his border wall . The American public does not support , and is increasingly opposed , to his Muslim ban . ”
Trump supporters would contest that view . Polling on the travel ban is inconclusive so far . The most recent major poll , from the Pew Research Center , showed a very clear majority against it : 59 percent to 38 percent . But three other surveys not long before , from Quinnipiac University , CBS News and CNN respectively , showed a closely divided public .
Debate will also rage for years about how big a part Trump ’ s immigration stance played in his election victory — especially when it comes to the key Rust Belt and Industrial Midwest states that sealed his win .
In Ohio , a full 36 percent of voters believed illegal immigrants should be deported , compared to just 25 percent nationwide . In neighboring Pennsylvania , the figure was 31 percent . But Trump also won Wisconsin and Michigan , where the pro-deportation vote was almost indistinguishable from the national norm , at 26 percent and 27 percent respectively .
Terry Madonna , a public affairs professor and polling expert at Pennsylvania ’ s Franklin and Marshall College , argued the importance of immigration as a primary factor in the election is overstated . He asserted that the economy , jobs and wage stagnation were more potent .
But he added that immigration played into a broader picture of cultural anxiety among Trump supporters .
“ For many , many voters in small-town and rural America , they wake up and think they are living in a strange land — a land of immigration , of gay marriage and of the people who want to take my guns away , ” he said . “ That side of it played a role too . ”
On Wednesday , Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanDemocrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Three-way clash set to dominate Democratic debate Krystal Ball touts Sanders odds in Texas MORE ( R-Wis. ) toured a section of the border with Mexico for the first time . In a statement , he promised that the Republican Congress would work with Trump in “ securing the border and enforcing our laws . ”
Whether that approach bears political dividends — or extracts a price — remains to be seen .
The Memo is a reported column by Niall Stanage , primarily focused on Donald Trump ’ s presidency .