Grass-roots activists were instrumental in derailing the previous attempt by Congress to overhaul immigration laws , in 2007 . This time , they have yet to ignite a similar fire .
Coordinated rallies last week to oppose the current bipartisan immigration legislation drew sparse crowds , with fewer than 10 people showing up for a protest in Dover , Del . The number of phone calls to lawmakers ' offices opposing the bill has been a fraction of what it was six years ago . As a discussion topic on conservative talk radio in recent weeks , immigration has ranked behind issues such as Syria-Israel tensions and President Barack Obama 's speech on counterterrorism .
`` This time I am getting this sense of resignation , '' said Rusty Childress , a veteran opponent of illegal immigration in Phoenix . `` We have to awaken the sleeping giant . ''
Immigration Law in America Review legislative milestones and key shifts in immigration policy .
The current immigration bill , introduced by a group of senators known as the `` Gang of Eight , '' would provide a pathway to citizenship to about 11 million people illegally in the U.S. and create new work visa programs . It would also require the Homeland Security Secretary to submit a border security plan before illegal immigrants gain provisional legal status , the first step in the legalization process . The plan does n't have to be implemented for the process to begin , and a system for employment verification would come later .
Opponents of the bill say that , like the 2007 effort , it amounts to amnesty for law breakers and does n't stanch the flow of illegal immigration . Adding legalized immigrants to the workforce would disadvantage jobless Americans , they say .
But this year 's bill has n't stirred as much opposition . It has more support from mainstream Republicans eager to improve the party 's standing with the fast-growing Hispanic population , and from many evangelical Christian leaders . Also , a steep drop in illegal immigration in recent years has meant fewer television images of migrants sneaking into the country .
Protesters at the Phoenix offices of Sens . John McCain and Jeff Flake spoke last week against the immigration bill that the lawmakers helped write . Linda Bentley
Even so , prospects for the bill 's passage appear mixed . The Senate legislation has n't yet been tested in that chamber , and efforts by a bipartisan House group to write a similarly broad bill have n't succeeded . The path-to-citizenship provision of the Senate bill could prove particularly troubling in the House .
Meantime , opponents promise to intensify their campaign . Mr. Childress leads `` Remember 1986 , '' a group named after the year of the last big immigration overhaul , signed by President Ronald Reagan . The group sponsored the coordinated rallies last week , many of which were dwarfed by larger protests the same day against the Internal Revenue Service over its scrutiny of conservative groups . Mr. Childress said his group would start targeting a tea-party base that he said is `` newly energized '' since the IRS news broke .
A fierce backlash against the bill six years ago ultimately spelled its demise because it prompted lawmakers such as Georgia Republican Sens . Johnny Isakson and Saxby Chambliss , who helped draft sections of the measure , to withdraw support . `` The backlash began as soon as an outline for a bill was announced , and it was relentless , '' said Joan Kirchner , a top aide to Mr. Isakson . Neither of the Georgia senators has taken a public position on this year 's bill .
In recent weeks , Mr. Isakson 's office has been receiving about 100 calls a day versus as many as 2,000 a day in 2007 . The volume is expected to rise if a bill reaches the floor , Ms. Kirchner said , `` but signs are it wo n't be as intense . '' Activists said they are planning a protest outside Mr. Isakson 's Atlanta office in early June .
Michael Harrison , publisher of Talkers , a talk-radio trade magazine , said many influential hosts have `` moved on '' to discuss gun control , health care and other `` hit topics '' because `` the public 's attitude is different on immigration . ''
Alan Ogushoff , who made protest calls to Mr. Chambliss 's office in 2007 , often several times a day , said he remains a foe of any legalization . But , the avid listener of conservative talk radio said , `` I 'm just going to let this happen and move on ; I 'm burned out fighting it . ''
Roy Beck , president of NumbersUSA , a group that channeled opposition to the 2007 bill into a barrage of calls and emails to lawmakers , agreed `` there may be some fatigue '' now . Still , the group over the weekend said it unveiled TV and radio ads in 18 states opposing the bill . One radio script warning of the dangers of adding more potential workers says : `` Jobs—20 million of our friends , family and neighbors still ca n't find one . ''
Groups pressing for an immigration overhaul , such as businesses and undocumented youngsters , also have been more vocal . The Evangelical Immigration Table , made up of leaders of Christian groups , this week will launch a new round of national radio ads to promote the bill .
`` This time , there is not as much emotion on our side , '' said Mr. Beck of NumbersUSA . But , `` I do n't know if that means there is less resolve . ''
An earlier version of this article incorrectly said an immigration-overhaul bill drafted by eight senators would require beefed-up border security and employment verification before steps to legalize illegal immigrants could kick in .