Winding its way through federal courts is a case that , although inconsequential on its face , is actually highly illustrative of the depths professional illegal-alien “ rights ” activists will go in their war against our sovereign borders .
The American Immigration Lawyers Association ( AILA ) , a 13,000-strong immigration attorneys lobby , along with the Ford-funded American Immigration Council and Ralph Nader ’ s Public Citizen , apparently have designs to defame the names of immigration judges they and other open-borders groups don ’ t like . Acting in the name of “ the public interest , ” AILA and company seek to “ out ” judges who have had complaints filed against them — complaints likely filed by the three groups themselves as well as other partner organizations . To current and future immigration judges the message is clear : follow the nation ’ s immigration laws too closely and expect a campaign of intimidation and harassment .
The contemporary left has used similar tactics in their war against traditional America for some time . Those who have signed pro-traditional marriage petitions in Maryland , Washington and California have had their names and personal details published online , setting them up for abuse from fanatical groups . Immigration patriots are routinely attacked , especially by organizations like the multimillion-dollar Southern Poverty Law Center , which publishes photos and personal details of persons on its “ Hate Watch ” blog , libeling them online for life .
As for federal immigration authorities , this isn ’ t the first time they have been threatened for doing their job . In 2011 Casa de Maryland , an illegal-alien “ rights ” group once led by President Obama ’ s labor secretary , Thomas Perez , sued in federal court to obtain the names of Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) agents who allegedly racially profiled Hispanic day laborers in Baltimore . The case went up to the 4th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals , where a three-judge panel decided in favor of the open-borders group . ICE agents no doubt got the hint : ease off on enforcement or get dragged through the mud .
In the current case , AILA ’ s initial attempt at publicizing the immigration judges ’ names was struck down by a lower court , which found that exposing their names would indeed “ unduly infringe their privacy interests. ” On appeal , it is hoped ICE attorneys warn that alien plaintiffs and their counsel could lodge complaints against members of the immigration court , and nothing can stop them from coordinating with other open-borders attorneys to gang up on judges they don ’ t like . These groups could simply fire off a series of targeted complaints ( charging a judge with “ implicit bias ” against non-citizens , for instance ) , then point to the pile of complaints as “ evidence ” that the offending judge must be exposed “ for the public interest . ”
The Washington Post led a similar attack in 2007 . After seeking background information on immigration judges appointed by the Bush administration , the paper “ exposed ” those who had “ Republican ties ” and who “ lacked experience ” in immigration law . These “ compromised ” judges posed a threat to the immigration judicial system , according to The Post .
The Immigration Reform Law Institute ( IRLI ) uncovered similar findings about the immigration judges appointed under Mr. Obama , although they are likely nothing The Post would want to publish . After receiving through a public records request the resumes of every immigration judge approved by the Justice Department since 2012 , around half were found to have past ties to open-borders groups . Fifteen of the 34 hires whose resumes IRLI received worked for either open-borders advocacy groups , such as the Soros-funded Catholic Legal Immigration Network , or had been in private immigration law practice , an industry whose remuneration is tied to open borders . Several of the appointed judges were affiliated with both groups , while others were actual AILA chapter board members .
A note on the particularly cynical field of immigration law : Although it is true that immigration attorneys understand immigration law and , therefore , may appear best suited for a role in the immigration courts , it ’ s not an exaggeration to say that their work hinges on impeding those very laws and pushing for ever more-porous borders . AILA , for instance , attacks states that try to pass their own immigration laws and it claims publicly that the president ’ s unilateral amnesty programs are , in fact , legal .
Ideological imbalance at the Department of Justice was once made the subject of an investigative series by PJ Media . Within the Office of Special Counsel , the section tasked with enforcing the anti-discrimination provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act , PJ Media found that most Obama hires in the department had a background involving open-borders fanaticism .
As for intimidation and harassment from open-borders pushers in general , the tactics currently employed by the American Immigration Lawyers Association and the Southern Poverty Law Center may just be the beginning . In Sweden , for instance , so-called “ antifa , ” or anti-fascist groups , hacked the comments section of several Swedish news sites and found the contact information of “ anti-immigrant ” commentators . In cooperation with one of Sweden ’ s leading newspapers , the group took a camera crew to the commentators ’ homes , filming and interrogating them as if their concerns about mass immigration were somehow unlawful or immoral . Again , the message to Swedish patriots was clear : stay passive and you ’ ll be unmolested .
Witch hunts , intimidation and slander will increase if immigration patriots fail to organize . A confident and supportive pro-sovereignty movement gives its advocates the confidence to not back down in the face of an attacker , disarming and neutralizing his attacks . Without organization , however , immigration patriots will continue to yield and the “ social justice ” surveillance state will only keep spreading .
• Ian M. Smith is an investigative associate at the Immigration Reform Law Institute .