A recent US Supreme Court decision has jeopardized the asylum claims of tens of thousands of Central American , Caribbean , African , and Asian migrants hoping to enter the United States at the southern border . The decision has brought new anguish and uncertainties to those already facing desperate conditions in Mexico . On September 11 , the court ruled 5–4 to allow the Trump administration ’ s new asylum restrictions to go into effect , pending ongoing litigation . With limited exceptions , the measure prohibits anyone from requesting asylum at the US–Mexico border who previously transited through another country , effectively banning all but Mexicans from seeking such protections . The asylum ban is the latest in an escalating effort to fence off the United States from the racialized global poor , while ICE purges the country from within . In the context of mounting economic and ecological crises , we are faced with an increasingly dire choice : surrendering to global apartheid , enforced by US imperial power , or a collective struggle , guided by solidarity .
Mexico Mexican president Andrés Manuel López Obrador ( AMLO ) campaigned on a promise to respect migrants ’ human rights , and in the first months of his term issued over 13,000 humanitarian visas to migrants transiting through the country to seek asylum at the US border . But the visa program was short-lived , and in June , after Trump threatened to impose tariffs on Mexican imports , AMLO ’ s administration committed to reducing US-bound migration , deploying the newly formed National Guard to its southern border and agreeing to host US asylum seekers under what ’ s known as the “ Remain in Mexico ” policy . Mexico ’ s top migration official resigned in protest . For Genoveva Roldán , economist and researcher at the National Autonomous University of Mexico , it ’ s a lose-lose situation . “ Mexico is a dependent country ; it doesn ’ t have the means , the economic autonomy [ to respond to Trump ’ s tariff threats ] like China did , to enter into a trade war with the United States , ” she says . “ Mexico is acting with a boot to its throat. ” The outcome of the negotiations , however , is disastrous . “ With this , Mexico has already tacitly become a Safe Third Country , ” says Roldán . Under international law , Safe Third Country agreements can oblige migrants to seek asylum in countries of transit that can provide them adequate protections . Mexico , plagued by organized crime , corruption , and impunity , can not guarantee migrants ’ safety , and the meager existing services and infrastructure for migrants are already overwhelmed . “ They ’ ve put Mexico into a position where it ’ s not going to be able to respond , ” she warns . Xenophobia is rising across Mexico , and a humanitarian crisis rages at both borders . Mexico has detained more than 108,000 migrants in 2019 , over 32,000 of them children . Tens of thousands more wait their turn to present claims at the US border through an unofficial and arbitrary metering process . US hearings are now conducted remotely in “ tent courts , ” further violating migrants ’ right to due process and diminishing their chances of securing protections . Since July , the Remain in Mexico program has forced more than 42,000 applicants back into Mexico to await their asylum proceedings , where they are vulnerable to kidnapping and extortion . At least fifteen children have died at the border this year . “ It ’ s an abomination , ” says a US immigration attorney who works with migrants in Mexico , speaking anonymously for fear of reprisals from Mexican and US authorities — we ’ ll call him Alex . “ People are being killed after asking for asylum . . . It ’ s going to be studied in the history books as a stain . It already is a huge stain on the US . ”
Central America All this comes as the United States is pressuring vulnerable Central American countries — themselves the principal source of the current exodus — to block migrants transiting toward the United States . Panama has resisted US overtures . Guatemala , however , appears poised to implement a Safe Third Country agreement signed by the outgoing president , despite misgivings from the president-elect . Under the deal , migrants who pass through Guatemalan territory will be required to seek asylum there ; those who fail to do so will be ineligible for US protections and could be deported back to Guatemala . One of the most unequal economies in Latin America , Guatemala ranks in the top three countries of origin for US asylum seekers . El Salvador ’ s new president , who recently unveiled a new , US-financed border patrol , just made a deal with DHS to become a Safe Third Country in all but name . Honduras , wracked with violence and protest since a US-backed 2009 coup d ’ état installed a corrupt authoritarian regime , may soon yield as well . President Juan Orlando Hernández , currently implicated in a major US narco-trafficking investigation , is in negotiations with DHS to harbor Nicaraguan and Cuban asylum seekers — and prevent them from continuing north . As Alex points out , “ these countries are in no condition to be able to house any significant number of refugees or asylees. ” Devastated by decades of US-backed genocidal anticommunist wars and neoliberal economic restructuring , Central America has expelled millions of its citizens to the United States , and indeed depends on those migrants ’ remittances for survival . The region boasts some of the highest homicide rates in the world , with social movement leaders particularly vulnerable to attacks . “ Safe Third Countries need to be safe , ” says Alex . “ There will be legal challenges to this in the US , and hopefully there will continue to be some sort of opposition in Guatemala and Honduras , because these are obviously farcical . ”
Life or Death The United States hopes to render Central America and Mexico into prisons , each border another brick in Trump ’ s wall . Authorities are slowing the process and erecting physical and legal barriers in the hopes of discouraging migrants through attrition , or forcibly sending them back . The result is further suffering and endangerment . Migrants seeking to evade the authorities risk being preyed upon by organized crime in Mexico , drowning in the Rio Grande , or being driven into deadly deserts in the US southwest . More than 7,000 Africans have been trapped for weeks in Tapachula , the site of Mexico ’ s principal migrant detention center on the southern border with Guatemala , as Mexican authorities refuse to provide them with safe passage north . Alex describes Tapachula as a “ carceral city ” : “ There have been raids in public spaces , there ’ ve been raids in the hotels , so migrants aren ’ t as publicly visible anymore , ” he says . “ They ’ re trying to frustrate people and keep people in Tapachula , to make people fearful of being out in public . There ’ s a huge increase in checkpoints on the roads. ” The poorest and most vulnerable migrants , especially those who can not afford to hire a smuggler , bear the brunt of the crackdown . Alex explains : “ It creates a situation where there ’ s an increase in corruption , because the officers are still very much amenable to bribes . It also increases the vulnerability of women and LGBT migrants of sexual assault . And the traffickers are still getting people by that are able to pay the fees . They just charge more money and pay off the officials to be able to get through. ” For Bryan , a Honduran who separated from a caravan in January to request asylum in Mexico , the implementation of Trump ’ s asylum ban “ will only create a darker , sadder panorama , with more deaths and many more problems for people who migrate . But in the end , they won ’ t stop the migration. ” Bryan volunteers at a Mexico City shelter , where he provides migrants with legal information . He stresses the urgent need for humanitarian relief , especially for the growing numbers of those returning to the country through the Remain in Mexico program . “ They come back here , and they don ’ t have any options . They seek out shelters , and the shelters are full of people heading north. ” In a recent visit to the shelter , officials from the International Organization for Migration told Bryan that migrants are adults and responsible for their own decisions . “ My response was , okay , but if you tell me I can die there or die here , what options do I have ? That ’ s not much of a decision . ”