The Obama administration told federal immigration lawyers to release illegal immigrants with “ old ” drunken-driving convictions and those found guilty of stealing other people ’ s identities , according to a lawsuit filed by one of the lawyers at the center of the operation .
Patricia M. Vroom , a top attorney for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement in Arizona , filed a 67-page discrimination complaint that details repeated battles with agency higher-ups who told her to close cases and not deport people whom President Obama deemed low-priority .
Federal officials were particularly dismissive of identity theft convictions from Arizona , arguing that the state ’ s laws were too strict and stealing an ID to get a job wasn ’ t a serious enough offense to get kicked out of the country .
“ This was a very significant development , as generally , criminal aliens , particularly convicted felons , are , under the [ prosecutorial discretion ] memos , ‘ priority ’ cases that should be aggressively pursued , ” Ms. Vroom said in her complaint .
But she said her superiors deemed the identity theft felons low-level offenders “ since the typical alien defendant convicted under these provisions of Arizona criminal law had simply been using a fake I.D . to get and keep employment . ”
Homeland Security officials said the department , of which ICE is a part , was looking over the lawsuit filed in U.S. District Court in Arizona .
“ We are reviewing the allegations in the complaint , which largely refer to events from 2012 and 2013 concerning workplace environment and various personnel decisions taken by key officials , some of whom have since left the department , ” spokeswoman Marsha Catron said .
“ The leadership of both [ the Department of Homeland Security ] and ICE take these allegations seriously and , when founded , will always take the appropriate disciplinary action , ” she said .
Ms. Vroom , who filed the complaint Nov. 6 , declined to comment through her attorney .
In her complaint , she detailed a September conversation in which top ICE lawyers told staff to ignore “ old ” DUI convictions if immigrants had enough “ equities , ” such as ties to the community or family responsibilities in the U.S. , that would outweigh their criminal behavior .
ICE officials and Mr. Obama have defended their prosecutorial discretion , saying they have enough resources to deport only about 400,000 immigrants a year , so it makes sense to go after the most serious criminals , recent border crossers and those who have violated immigration laws repeatedly .
“ We ’ re misallocating resources . We ’ re deporting people that shouldn ’ t be deported . We ’ re not deporting folks that are dangerous and need to be deported , ” Mr. Obama said Sunday on the CBS program “ Face the Nation . ”
Mr. Obama has promised to expand his nondeportation policies by the end of the year , potentially granting tentative legal status and work permits to millions of illegal immigrants .
Deportations , though , have dropped by about 20 percent over the past two years , suggesting the administration is having trouble finding enough cases that meet its definition of “ high priority . ”
Critics say the Obama administration has given up on enforcement in all but the most extreme of cases .
“ Criminals got released , ” said Jessica Vaughan , director of policy studies at the Center for Immigration Studies , which pushes for a crackdown on immigration .
One major area of contention was Arizona ’ s tough identity theft law , which makes it a felony to steal an identity for the purpose of getting a job . The law appeared designed to punish illegal immigrants who used bogus Social Security numbers to get jobs .
But ICE put pressure on its attorneys in Arizona to drop deportation cases against illegal immigrants convicted of felonies under that statute .
Ms. Vroom recounts that top Homeland Security attorneys held a conference call on Aug. 16 , 2013 , to talk about how to handle a “ dreamer , ” or illegal immigrant brought to the U.S. as a child , who had been convicted of ID theft under Arizona ’ s law . The local field office was pursuing the deportation case , but the top officials wanted it canceled .
Ms. Vroom said officials in Washington should be the ones to insist that the case be canceled because they had such an interest , but a top ICE official rejected that idea in an email to Ms. Vroom : “ No way . Keep it local Pat . Figure it out . ”
Annie Lai , an assistant clinical professor of law at the University of California at Irvine , is leading a case arguing that Congress , not Arizona , has the power to regulate identity theft involving immigrants seeking jobs .
“ A state can ’ t create regulations that are going to present an obstacle to accomplishing federal objectives , ” she said .
She said one example of a state law ’ s interference with federal goals is the case of Noemi Romero , a young Arizona woman who would appear to qualify for Mr. Obama ’ s deferred action policy for dreamers .
Ms. Romero , though , has not been approved for the policy . She told The Arizona Republic that she was convicted of criminal impersonation under Arizona law because she used her mother ’ s Social Security number to get a job . That felony conviction has prevented her from gaining deferred action , she said .
If she had earned deferred action , she would have tentative legal status , a work permit and the chance in many states to apply for a driver ’ s license and be eligible for in-state tuition . Instead , she remains in a legal limbo , with her deportation case put on hold , but without legal authorization to work in the U.S .
Ms. Lai said they have already had a court date to argue for a preliminary injunction against Arizona ’ s identity-theft laws , and they are awaiting a judge ’ s ruling on that .