A stubborn anti-reform 'Gang of Five ' has been the bill 's loudest opponents . | AP Photos 'Gang ' warfare over immigration
To a small band of Republican senators , the problems with the Senate ’ s immigration reform bill could fill an encyclopedia .
To them , the bill is too long , it hasn ’ t been read , it ’ s been negotiated in secret , it ’ s filled with loopholes , it doesn ’ t do what Gang of Eight talking points promised and Republicans haven ’ t been given the chance to substantively alter it . They ’ ve compared it to Obamacare , warning that a “ cornhusker kickback ” is buried somewhere deep inside the border security language .
Senate enemies of immigration reform are rapidly dwindling after Republican Sens . John Hoeven of North Dakota and Bob Corker of Tennessee struck a border security deal last week that may well push the overall bill over the finish line in the upper chamber . But they are still making a lot of noise , as well as coordinating with outside groups opposing the proposed reform to warn the American people that they are getting a bad deal .
A stubborn anti-reform “ Gang of Five ” has been the loudest opponents : Republican Sens . Mike Lee of Utah , Jeff Sessions of Alabama , David Vitter of Louisiana , Ted Cruz of Texas and Jim Inhofe of Oklahoma . These loud-and-proud foes are bucking much of the mainstream GOP establishment — including Fox News ’ s Bill O ’ Reilly — which is now rushing en masse to embrace the bill .
They are employing guerrilla tactics , trying to break up the bipartisan backslapping to speak on the Senate floor or staying until the wee hours of the night to rail against reform . It ’ s an aggressive campaign to kill one of the most significant pieces of Senate legislation in years , pummeling reform advocates on both the process ( not enough amendment votes on the Senate floor ) and the bill ’ s substance ( the bill doesn ’ t solve the problem of those who have overstayed their visas ) .
Despite their opposition , the Senate bill is expected to pass this week by a wide margin . But their complaints may well be picked up by their House compatriots , where reform faces a far tougher path .
They are warning their House colleagues that it may soon be their turn to fight . Cruz has already appeared with the House ’ s Tea Party Caucus at a rally to pronounce the Senate bill as “ utterly toothless . ”
Sessions , the most high-profile reform foe , suggested last week that the bill needs to be sent back to committee . Instead , the group fears Senate leadership and other Republicans are poised to jam a bill through , a note of alarm accentuated over the weekend as the Senate Conservatives Fund urged Minority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) to do everything he can to halt the bill .
“ I fear we ’ ll be told , ‘ We ’ ve got to pass this bill now ! It all has to be passed now , and we don ’ t have time for any more of these pesky amendments from these pesky senators from all over the great country of the United States of America . We have got to pass this now ! ’ ” Lee said in a prediction of what might happen this week .
Sessions has enumerated his quibbles with the bill in wide-ranging floor speeches even on Fridays , when the Senate is typically out of session .
“ We ’ ll just give amnesty to everybody here and we ’ ll pass a law and we promise it will fix things and we don ’ t really worry whether it does or not . And I can tell you it won ’ t . It won ’ t fix it , ” Sessions said Friday in one of dozens of appearances he has made on the Senate floor — and C-SPAN .
Vitter spent the weekend poring over hundreds of pages of text in the substitute bill written by the Gang of Eight , Corker and Hoeven , tweeting its flaws one by one .
“ Found 8 ‘ emergency spending ’ items so far to hide true costs . Fast-tracking amnesty is not an emergency ! ” Vitter said in one message .