( CNN ) Calls to eliminate the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency , for years relegated to the far-left corners of progressive activism , have been thrust this week into the mainstream of Democratic politics .
Cracks in the dam became visible 10 days ago , when a group of demonstrators confronted Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen at a Mexican restaurant in Washington . They called for an end to the Trump administration policy that resulted in separating migrant families at the border and , as the viral protest heated up , began to chant : `` Abolish ICE ! ''
Less than two weeks on , the demand -- a favored meme on the left -- has gone from a progressive fringe cause , mostly ignored even by some of the most liberal lawmakers , to a political message being embraced by a growing roster of influential national Democrats .
Fueling its sudden ascent have been a series of recent shocks to the system . On Tuesday , US House candidate Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez delivered a stunning Democratic primary upset in New York after campaigning on abolishing the agency , which was formed in 2003 as part of a post-9/11 federal overhaul that created the Department of Homeland Security .
Two days after Ocasio-Cortez 's primary , New York 's Kirsten Gillibrand became the first senator and potential 2020 candidate to announce her support for the agency 's elimination . Less than 12 hours later , on Friday morning , New York Mayor Bill de Blasio joined the chorus , telling WNYC 's Brian Lehrer , `` ICE 's time has come and gone . ''
`` I do n't think ICE today is working as intended , '' Gillibrand said Thursday night on CNN 's `` Cuomo PrimeTime . '' `` I believe that it has become a deportation force , and I think you should separate the criminal justice from the immigration issues . ''
Thank you , @ NYCMayor , for joining the call that seems the separation of children and violation of human rights as an inexcusable bright red line in the United States of America . https : //t.co/5Dwxq0XJ9T — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez ( @ Ocasio2018 ) June 29 , 2018
In a Facebook post on Saturday , Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren wrote , `` The President 's deeply immoral actions have made it obvious that we need to rebuild our immigration system from top to bottom , starting by replacing ICE with something that reflects our values , '' a line that mirrored her statements in a speech at a protest in Boston .
Progressive immigration rights activists -- during both Republican and Democratic administrations -- have come to view ICE as a rogue agency that terrorized immigrant communities . Calls for its dissolution , once rare , are spreading .
A group of 19 agents with its Homeland Security Investigations unit , which deals with complex investigations including transnational crime , recently wrote a letter to Nielsen asking her to break up the agency amid what they described as a debilitating conflation of their work with ICE 's deportation activities . Concerns over the public backlash to actions by the Enforcement and Removal Operations division were , they wrote , making HSI 's work impossible .
In their message -- first reported by The Texas Observer -- the agents reported that some jurisdictions had agreed only to `` partner with HSI as long the 'ICE ' name is excluded from any public-facing information . ''
On Capitol Hill , Rep. Mark Pocan of Wisconsin is now working with fellow Democratic Reps. Pramila Jayapal of Washington state and Adriano Espaillat of New York on legislation to eliminate the agency .
In an interview , Pocan said a recent series of aggressive actions by ICE had led him to conclude that it was effectively serving as President Donald Trump 's `` own political police force '' -- a tool for creating a sense of crisis to help build support for a border wall and other hardline immigration policies .
For Pocan , Trump 's call on Sunday to return immigrants who enter the country illegally without judicial proceedings was the last straw .
`` The culmination of all those things , going to the border and then when the President started talking about getting rid of due process , was it , '' he said . `` You 're just kind of like , all right , this has gone way astray , and we need to start over . ''
Leading progressives , like Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders and -- until Saturday -- Warren , have stopped short of calling for ICE to be terminated outright and the Congressional Hispanic Caucus has circulated talking points advising caution -- arguing in a memo obtained by CNN that `` abolishing ICE without changing President Trump 's disastrous immigration policy will not solve the problem . '' They 're not alone . Some progressives on the Hill worry that wielding the `` Abolish ICE '' banner would be a political gift to Trump and his allies , and that Democrats should consider a more nuanced approach .
Republicans are casting progressive calls to abolish the agency and the recent momentum in the Democratic Party as a move to the far left , evidence that Democrats are weak on border security and immigration enforcement .
`` Recent calls to abolish ICE are dangerously misguided , '' agency spokeswoman Jennifer D. Elzea said in an email . `` Instead of being insulted with politically-motivated attacks , the men and women of ICE should be praised for risking life and limb every day in the name of national security and public safety . ''
Activists and progressive leaders are pressing on , becoming more aggressive in their push to abolish the agency , an effort many in the movement view as both a way to open up the debate over decades of bipartisan US immigration policy and , crucially , win elections .
`` The Democratic Party had a reckoning about the crime bill , financial deregulation and about welfare reform , but it never really had a reckoning about their complicity in creating both the intellectual framework for this sort of policy , '' said Sean McElwee , a leading activist in the anti-ICE movement and early supporter of Ocasio-Cortez 's campaign . He cited the 28-year-old Democratic socialist 's unapologetic embrace of the issue as a key factor in her Tuesday triumph .
`` She had an actual campaign strategy that revolved around ICE , and it was very smart , because ( incumbent Rep. Joe ) Crowley was weak on immigration and she knew that he would never be able to get where he needed to be to win that primary , '' McElwee said . `` So she just hammered him on it . She did n't shy away from saying it . She put it in her ads . She ran on the issue . She challenged him in the debate . I think 'Abolish ICE ' is where it is today because of her leadership . ''
Efforts to further escalate the fight beyond the electoral realm are already in motion . The Democratic Socialists of America , which reported its largest spike in new , dues-paying members since Trump 's election on the day after Ocasio-Cortez 's win , are planning a national campaign to ramp up the pressure .
Love when someone comes to their very first DSA meeting and is willing to jump right in with their art talents 🎨 pic.twitter.com/KrLOaF75KT — Kristin P. 🌹⚑ ( @ donaisabelle ) June 29 , 2018
Maria Svart , the group 's national director , said the organization is ready to `` apply pressure wherever possible to lift up the narrative that ICE is horrific , has no place in our communities and needs to be abolished . ''
`` That looks different in different places , '' she said . `` We have chapters in every state in the country , and folks are doing everything from vigils to encampment to bird-dogging to really raise this issue in the public eye and say , 'We do not submit to this . ' ``
Protests have already begun to grow in size and frequency . By Friday afternoon , police in Philadelphia had made six arrests outside the city 's ICE office amid a heated demonstration , as crowds chanted , `` I 'd rather go to jail than go to a detention center . ''
Philadelphia City Council member Helen Gym recorded and tweeted out video of the scenes .
`` I 'd rather to go to jail than go to a detention center . '' @ NationalADAPT Tony 's emotional response before getting arrested becomes a group chant outside ICE . # AbolishICE pic.twitter.com/NwHXbBJ6cw — Helen Gym ( @ HelenGymAtLarge ) June 29 , 2018
Activists are also seeking to expand the moral dimension of the fight . Hartford City Councilwoman Wildaliz Bermudez , of the Working Families Party , said the visceral nature of reporting from the border during the height of the family separation crisis pushed the movement toward a tipping point .
She likened the situation to what followed the white supremacist rallies last summer in Charlottesville , Virginia .
`` It has to be a unified front ( in response to ICE ) , '' Bermudez said , `` because like when you have people chanting on the street , 'You will not replace us , ' they 're not just talking about Jews . They 're talking about everyone . ''