Everything about the Trump administration ’ s radical restrictions on asylum for people crossing from the US into Mexico without papers — banning people who cross between ports of entry ( official border crossings ) from entering the asylum process as of November 10 — has moved quickly .
The policy itself was developed in just a few weeks , as a slow-moving crisis of resources on the US-Mexico border turned into a hot political issue thanks to President Donald Trump ’ s obsession with the migrant “ caravan . ”
It became public on Thursday evening and Friday morning , before going into effect Friday at midnight . ( Even as of late Friday , some asylum officers hadn ’ t received guidance about how to implement the new policy . )
The policy has already been challenged in court by the ACLU and other immigration advocates , who hope that a federal judge in the Northern District of California will put the policy on hold as early as Tuesday .
It ’ s moved so quickly — during a time when there ’ s lots of other news dominating the headlines — that it hasn ’ t attracted the attention of other Trump signature policies on immigration . But it is every bit as significant .
Hundreds of people a day cross into the US between ports of entry and seek asylum . Any who arrive at the border while this policy is in effect — it ’ s scheduled to last 90 days but could be extended or renewed later — are being forced to choose between having to wait for weeks or longer at overloaded ports of entry and risking near-immediate deportation by crossing illegally and turning themselves in to Border Patrol . Illegal crossing between ports of entry could give them a chance at staying in the US , but that chance will be much more remote , and with many fewer privileges , than asylum seekers currently get .
It ’ s a continued escalation of the Trump administration ’ s months-long war against the asylum system on the southern border . But it ’ s far more legally dicey than anything the administration has done so far — even the travel ban .
No matter how long this policy stays in effect before being put on hold in court , the fight over it is going to continue . As long as people continue to seek asylum in the US in large numbers , the Trump administration will be trying to stop them — and as long as the administration tries to stop them , there will be human rights concerns about whether the US is upholding its obligations to protect fleeing people from harm .
Under US law , people who enter the US without papers are legally able to apply for asylum . If they show that they ’ re at risk of persecution in their home country ( due to their race , nationality , religion , political opinion or membership in a particular social group ) the US is supposed to give it to them .
Unless , that is , they are subject to specific restrictions . The Trump administration used a two-part strategy to carve out such a restriction .
On Thursday , the Trump administration posted the text of a regulation ( which was formally published in the Federal Register on Friday ) that added a restriction for people who were subject to a presidential entry ban , like the “ travel bans ” Trump signed in 2017 . It also set out a process for how the asylum process would change for someone subject to such a ban .
The regulation went into effect immediately , skipping the traditional months-long regulatory process . Then , on Friday morning , Trump signed an entry ban on people entering the US from Mexico between ports of entry .
The combined effect of the two parts is that someone who crosses the US-Mexico border between ports of entry — i.e. , who commits the misdemeanor of improper entry — between November 10 , 2019 and February 8 , 2019 , is ineligible for asylum . Instead , they ’ re subject to an alternative process set up by the regulation , modeled off the process for asylum-seekers who have been convicted of serious crimes in the US .
2 ) How did someone who enters the US without papers get asylum before this policy went into effect ?
Someone who enters the US without papers — either at a port of entry or otherwise — is subject to immediate deportation without a court hearing , unless she says she wants to claim asylum or that she fears persecution in her home country . In those cases , she ’ s entitled to an interview with an asylum officer .
Generally , if the asylum officer determines that she has a “ credible fear ” of persecution ( in other words , that there ’ s a significant possibility she ’ d be persecuted if deported based on her race , nationality , religion , political opinion , or membership in a particular social group ) , she is allowed to go before an immigration judge in the same court process that unauthorized immigrants arrested while living in the US are entitled to . There , she ’ s able to make her case for asylum . And in the meantime , since immigration court hearings take months or years , she ’ s legally able to work and live in the US .
Even if she is being persecuted , she might still be ineligible for asylum , if she has a certain criminal record in the US or her home country , for example . But the judge will wait until the end of the process to make that judgment . If she is ineligible for asylum but still has reason to fear persecution , she can receive a lesser form of protection — called withholding of removal — that allows her to stay in the US but gives her no path to permanent legal status .
3 ) How is the process working under the new Trump policy ?
Someone who enters the US from Mexico without papers between ports of entry is still entitled to an interview with an asylum officer . But the asylum officer is required to screen not for a credible fear of persecution , but a “ reasonable ” fear — a higher standard that requires not just a significant possibility of persecution but a determination that persecution is more likely than not .
The “ reasonable fear ” standard was used only in rare cases before the new Trump policy — for immigrants who ’ ve already been ordered deported and returned to the US , and immigrants who have committed serious crimes . But the difference in pass rates is striking . In credible fear interviews , about 75 percent of all asylum seekers pass . In reasonable fear interviews , a little more than 25 percent do .
Even assuming that many asylum seekers who used to be subject to the credible fear standard will also pass the more stringent one , that ’ s still thousands of immigrants a month who may end up failing their screening interviews and being summarily deported .
People who don ’ t pass the reasonable fear screening will be deported summarily ( unless they choose to have a judge review the finding ) . People who do pass the reasonable fear screening will be allowed to go before an immigration judge . Even then , though , they still won ’ t be eligible for asylum . Their only options are withholding of removal and protection under the Convention Against Torture .
That allows the US to fulfill its obligations under international law — which prevents countries from returning migrants to places where their lives are in danger — but doesn ’ t give people any access to permanent legal status .
And it doesn ’ t allow families to go through the system together ; while a mother can get asylum for her child when her own case gets approved , mother and child each individually have to prove they ’ re eligible for other protections . ( This ███ article offers more detail as to the difference between asylum and the lesser forms of protection . )
4 ) What ’ s the problem the Trump administration is trying to solve ?
Asylum seekers are making up an ever-larger share of people crossing into the US from Mexico . And the Trump administration is convinced that most of them are trying to game the system .
While way fewer people have been entering the US without papers over the past few years than have in the past , the people who are coming in now aren ’ t the same type of migrants the US saw in the decades of highest unauthorized migration . They ’ re more likely to be from Central America ( specifically , Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador ) than Mexico . They ’ re more likely to be families or children than single adults . And most importantly , they ’ re increasingly likely to say they fear deportation in their home country — and pass their credible-fear screenings .
But even though the number of people making it into the US ( at least temporarily ) by passing their credible fear screenings keeps rising , the number of people who ultimately get asylum in those cases hasn ’ t risen to meet it at all . Essentially , the trend of the past several years has been a growth in the number of people who start the asylum process but miss the cut , or simply disappear , along the way .
This drop-off happens at every stage of the process . Less than 40 percent of people who pass the initial screening interview for asylum submit a written asylum application , for example , which is a necessary step in the process even though they ’ ve passed the interview and gotten assigned a court hearing .
Families seeking asylum , in particular , appear to have trouble showing up to their court hearings , which means they get ordered deported in absentia . In fact , the biggest determinant of whether a family gets a deportation order appears to be whether they show up in court .
There are lots of reasons why families could be missing their court dates . A 2018 study by Catholic Legal Immigration Network and the Asylum Seekers Advocacy Project , for example , offered suggestive evidence that families were trying to keep track of their court dates , but bureaucratic and structural issues — from inattentive lawyers to trouble getting the hearing moved to the correct location — got in the way .
The Trump administration , however , sees the drop-off rate as proof that people are using the credible fear screening to sneak into the country on the basis of asylum claims that are either fraudulent or don ’ t show persecution that meets the legal standards for asylum .
The administration is convinced asylum seekers aren ’ t just getting lost in the system — they ’ re deliberately disappearing because they know that if they continued to pursue asylum , their claims wouldn ’ t get approved . Trump has accused smugglers of coaching asylum seekers to say the “ magic words ” that will allow them into the country . A senior administration official described the asylum system to press last month as “ the biggest loophole in the world , ” and said it was beset by “ systemic fraud ” — pointing to the low approval rate as evidence that most asylum claims weren ’ t just insufficient , but malicious .
It ’ s hard to imagine that this policy would have been pushed through if Trump and his administration hadn ’ t spent the few weeks before the midterm election freaking out about the caravan of several thousand asylum seekers moving slowly through Honduras , Guatemala , and southern Mexico .
To be fair , the administration has been worried about the rising number of border-crossers for over a year . It attempted to address this with a spring crackdown that culminated in widespread family separation of border crossers — but crossings didn ’ t drop while family separation was in effect , and they rose precipitously afterward . ( The Trump administration believes that ending the family separation policy encouraged families to come , though it ’ s hard to prove this . ) But the caravan caught Trump ’ s attention and sent the administration into crisis mode .
As the Trump administration unveiled the new policy , though , leaders of the caravan announced they were setting off from Mexico City for Tijuana — and from there , presenting themselves for asylum at the San Ysidro port of entry . In other words , unless some members peel off , the caravan won ’ t even be subject to the new policy because they won ’ t be crossing between ports of entry .
Instead , the Trump administration argues this policy is needed immediately because the US system is simply overwhelmed . And that ’ s clearly true . The disagreement is over whose fault it is .
The US has developed a border policy that ’ s designed to maximize the efficient apprehension and deportation of everyone trying to cross the border illegally and not get caught . It is not designed to facilitate the processing of people for asylum — especially families .
Ports of entry are already overwhelmed with asylum seekers ; at most ports , asylum seekers have to wait on the Mexican side of the border , sometimes for weeks , before Customs and Border Protection officials allow them to cross into the US and claim their right to asylum . Border Patrol facilities ( for people apprehended between ports of entry ) are also running out of capacity to take asylum-seekers in .
Much of the “ refugee corps ” — the US Citizenship and Immigration Services officers who are responsible for interviewing refugees around the world who are applying to resettle in the US — has been detailed to do asylum interviews of detained border-crossers . And Immigration and Customs Enforcement claims it ’ s so overwhelmed with families coming into the US that it has to simply release them at bus stations , instead of working with nonprofit organizations to help orient families and get them where they need to be to continue their asylum case .
Some administration officials blame asylum seekers for this , saying they ’ re deliberately trying to sabotage the system . Others blame Congress for not giving DHS the money it needs . Immigration advocates blame the administration — saying they ’ re either unwilling to devote the needed resources to process asylum-seekers faster , especially at ports of entry , or that they are actively trying to block people from their legal right to asylum .
It ’ s hard to answer this because it ’ s hard to say what , exactly , the Trump administration expects this plan to achieve .
The US wants to be able to refuse all asylum seekers who come through Mexico — but Mexico won ’ t agree within 90 days . The explicit goal of the 90-day ban — the thing that would cause Trump to lift it even before the 90 days were up — is getting Mexico to sign a safe-third-country agreement with the US . That would allow the US to turn back all asylum seekers who had traveled through Mexico . ( The US currently has such an agreement with Canada . )
A safe-third-country agreement would essentially make the current Central American migration , which has brought hundreds of thousands of people from Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador to the US and Mexico to seek asylum in the last several years , Mexico ’ s problem alone to solve . Mexico , whose new president will arrive in office on December 1 , has shown no interest so far in signing such an agreement .
The Trump administration says it ’ s trying to encourage people to go to ports of entry — but those are already backed up . One senior administration official told press Thursday that “ what we are trying to do is funnel asylum claims through the ports of entry , where we are better resourced , have better capabilities , and have better manpower and staffing . ”
That is really not true . Ports of entry have been overwhelmed with asylum-seekers even before Border Patrol units between ports of entry were . It ’ s hard to imagine how ports of entry can accommodate more asylum seekers if they can ’ t accommodate the ones coming now — and they ’ re not staffing up at ports of entry in anticipation of the new plan going into effect .
The Trump administration will probably be able to deport more people more quickly — but it ’ s really not clear how many more . In theory , raising a credible-fear standard 75 percent of asylum seekers pass to a reasonable-fear standard only 25 percent of asylum seekers pass would mean that thousands of people a month fail their screenings — and become eligible for summary deportation . But maybe the reasonable-fear passage rate is only low because the people who are subject to that standard now have less compelling cases than people fleeing gang violence and government indifference in Honduras .
How this shakes out depends a lot on how it ’ s being implemented , even down to the level of individual asylum officers . It ’ s possible that pretty much everyone who would have been allowed to stay in the US and seek asylum before this policy will still be able to stay in the US ( and seek lesser protections ) under it . It ’ s not likely , though . Some people will fall through the cracks between the old standard and the new one ; it ’ s just a question of how many .
There ’ s a reason that the first lawsuit against the policy was filed less than 6 hours after the proclamation was signed . Even for the Trump administration , this policy is a bold assertion of executive power to restrict immigration to the United States .
While the underpinnings of the right to asylum are a matter of international law , that isn ’ t the Trump administration ’ s biggest legal obstacle . By allowing people to stay in the US under withholding of removal or protections under the Convention Against Torture , the US covers its legal obligation not to return people to countries where their lives would be in danger .
The text of the Immigration and Nationality Act specifies that people may apply for asylum “ whether or not ” they enter the US at a port of entry . The Trump administration is setting up to render that “ or not ” basically dead letter — at least as long as the proclamation is in effect .
The administration justifies this by saying that the law also gives the attorney general broad power to set restrictions on asylum , and the president broad power to suspend entry ( an interpretation encouraged by the Supreme Court ’ s ruling in the travel ban case in June , which didn ’ t actually specify any limits on this power ) .
The ACLU , and the other legal advocates and immigration service providers who ’ ve sued over the policy , disagree . They argue that this isn ’ t just use of discretion to fill in a gap Congress didn ’ t address , but overriding a specific thing Congress wrote into the law — which the administration can ’ t do .
Furthermore , they argue that the way the policy was rolled out — by issuing a regulation that immediately went into effect — is a violation of the Administrative Procedure Act . There ’ s a high bar to skip the regulatory review process . The ACLU argues the administration didn ’ t clear it .
A federal judge is going to agree with the ACLU and rule against the administration — that is nearly certain . ( The ACLU filed in the Northern District of California , which isn ’ t friendly turf for Trump . ) The only question is how quickly this happens . The ACLU has requested a hearing on Tuesday , November 13 ; in theory , the judge could put the policy on hold during that hearing , or any time afterward .
Of course , the Trump administration will appeal any ruling against it . The case may end up at the Supreme Court within a matter of days , or it might take several months — or longer — but it ’ s almost certain to end up there , just like every other legal fight on immigration Trump has picked .
According to Julia Ainsley of NBC , the administration thinks it ’ s going to prevail with the newly ensconced conservative majority on the Supreme Court . It might be right ( though the administration might not be able to count on some of the court ’ s conservatives to back the executive branch over Congress ) .
Politically , a ruling against the administration could give both sides what they want — Trump and company could rail against liberal judges , and the ACLU could claim another victory against Trump .
But regardless of the outcome of the legal battle , it ’ s not going to soothe the Trump administration ’ s concerns with people coming into the US without papers . It ’ s not going to resolve the resource crisis at the border . To the extent that the Trump administration is committed to reducing the number of people claiming asylum in the US by any means necessary , this is just one front in a multi-front battle .