The election has strengthened President Obama ’ s hand on immigration , and Dream Act organizers said it likely means a flood of hundreds of thousands of new applications for his nondeportation policy — but it ’ s not clear that anything has changed in the decade-long stalemate in Congress on the issue .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , Nevada Democrat , said Wednesday that he will insist the upper chamber hold votes on immigration legislation .
He called the issue “ very , very high ” on his to-do list , after Hispanics voted overwhelmingly for Mr. Obama on Tuesday .
Exit polls showed the president winning 71 percent of Hispanics , which is up from the 67 percent he won in 2008 in the rapidly expanding voter bloc . Basking in those numbers , immigration rights advocates said they are eager to collect the rewards of their support .
“ It ’ s time for Latinos to cash their check for the Dream Act and for immigration reform , ” said Cesar Vargas , who has applied for Mr. Obama ’ s nondeportation policy .
But he said the president ’ s victory likely will mean a flood of applications from other young adults who had waited , fearful that they would be judged by a less-lenient Romney administration than by Mr. Obama ’ s .
For the past decade , immigration has been stymied in Congress , including failed attempts in 2006 and 2007 with President Bush . Mr. Obama promised to take action during his first term , but instead tackled health care , the economy , climate change and financial regulations .
Facing re-election without having acted , he took unilateral steps in June by announcing that he no longer would deport most illegal immigrants 30 and younger who had steered clear of major criminal problems . The policy , known as “ deferred action , ” energized Hispanic voters on behalf of Mr. Obama — all the more so since Republican nominee Mitt Romney opposed the move .
Looking at Tuesday ’ s election , Frank Sharry , head of advocacy group America ’ s Voice , said the conclusion is clear : Democrats , some of whom had been reluctant to touch immigration for fear of political consequences , saw it as a major winner .
“ Yesterday ’ s election basically said it ’ s a wedge issue for Democrats , ” Mr. Sharry said . “ Democrats are really starting to feel their oats on this issue : ‘ If we lean into it , it mobilizes Latinos , swing voters actually like the leadership , and Republicans — it makes them divided . ’ ”
All of that , plus Mr. Reid ’ s vow to hold votes with his expanded Democratic majority in the Senate , should mean major pressure for a Republican Party still trying to figure out how to rebuild a winning national majority in presidential elections .
But voters returned Republicans to a majority in the House , and there is little evidence that the chamber has moved closer to trying to pass the broad legalization bills that Democrats seek .
Kris W. Kobach , Kansas secretary of state and the co-architect of many state immigration-crackdown laws , said polling earlier this year shows independents liked Mr. Romney ’ s stand on immigration more than Mr. Obama ’ s .
He said he doesn ’ t see any way that House Republicans would accept an immigration bill that includes amnesty for illegal immigrants .
“ The Democrats and Obama have been unyielding on that point — that they insist upon an amnesty , and Republicans rightly said ‘ No , we ’ ll go along with a whole host of changes , but not ones that reward amnesty . ’ ”
Mr. Kobach , who is leading a lawsuit to try to halt Mr. Obama ’ s nondeportation policy , said the more likely avenue for action is in the states .
He said he expects more of them to adopt Arizona-style laws giving police powers to check the legal status of those with whom they come into contact . The Supreme Court earlier this year upheld that part of Arizona ’ s law , though it struck down other provisions .
But he also said he expects Mr. Obama to use his own executive powers more , in the face of continued congressional deadlock .
Indeed , immigrant rights advocates said that is exactly what they will ask him to do if Mr. Obama can not get a legalization bill through Congress .
In his first term , the president walked a tightrope , increasing deportations and instituting new agreements with state and local police and jails to try to identify deportable immigrants . But patience is running thin .
“ I think he ’ s under time pressure because 1 million people have been deported , and we can ’ t wait around for another year or two as another half-million or million get deported , ” said Douglas Rivlin , spokesman for Rep. Luis V. Gutierrez , the Illinois Democrat who has taken on leadership of the immigration issue in the House .
“ People ’ s lives are being ruined in the meantime because we have a mass-deportation policy . I know Congressman Gutierrez is going to be very interested in the president calling [ Republican Sens . ] Lindsey Graham or Marco Rubio or [ Mitch ] McConnell or whoever he needs to call in the Republican Party , get them to Camp David for the weekend , and see what we can do on immigration reform — sooner rather than later , ” Mr. Rivlin said .
Mr. Sharry agreed that Mr. Obama will face pressure to act , but said if president had the will , he could use the threat of unilateral action to force Republicans to the table .
“ If he wanted to , what he could do is say , ‘ All right , Republicans , work with me on this , or I ’ m going to use my executive authority to do more popular things that Latinos love , ’ ” he said .
In the meantime , Mr. Obama will still be able to grant tentative legal status to younger immigrants under his deportation policies — something Mr. Vargas has waited for years to earn .
A law school graduate , Mr. Vargas also hopes that the election could convince courts that the new deportation policy is here to stay — which he hopes means he will be able to join the bar and practice law .
“ It means a lot to me , ” he said Wednesday . “ It means I can try to be productive in terms of seeking out employment . It means that my younger brother can also get deferred action . ”