A federal judge Tuesday ordered the Trump administration to quicken its efforts to reunite migrant toddlers and infants with their parents , after the government said it wouldn ’ t meet an order that the judge called “ firm deadlines , not aspirational goals . ”
Federal agencies said that by Tuesday they would only be able to reunite adults with 38 out of the 102 children under age 5 in the government ’ s care . The administration separated the children , and has been holding some since the spring , from their parents after the families crossed the border to enter the U.S. , many illegally .
Department of Homeland Security officials said Tuesday that they would use monitoring tools including ankle bracelets to ensure that they maintained contact with the released parents of young children .
Judge Dana Sabraw said the government should have been able to reconnect 63 eligible young migrant children with their families by day ’ s end . He told the American Civil Liberties Union to keep tabs on the government ’ s efforts and suggest punishment if attorneys believe officials are out of compliance .
Under a June court order , the judge told the administration to reunite the 2,000 to 3,000 detained children with their families following weeks of separation , with an early July deadline specifically for the youngest children .
Some of the remaining reunions of young children couldn ’ t take place because the children ’ s parents have criminal records , communicable diseases or have been deemed otherwise unfit , the government said . The judge ordered regular progress reports from the government and set another hearing for Friday .
The Justice Department had argued that a federal law designed to avoid putting children in the custody of human traffickers had slowed the process of reunifying families . Judge Sabraw told the government to rely on a more streamlined method to reunite separated families than the labor-intensive and time-consuming process it had been following .
Advocates and agencies caring for the children described a last-ditch effort by the government to get the infants and toddlers reconnected with parents or adult sponsors . Travel arrangements presented hurdles . Information about where reunifications were happening was hard to come by .
The Tuesday deadline came after weeks of uncertainty over how the government would reunite the families . President Donald Trump signed an executive order in June stopping his own administration ’ s family separations under its “ zero-tolerance ” immigration policy .
On Monday , a judge in Los Angeles declined to consider changing a longstanding federal-court settlement that bars prolonged detention of immigrant children with their families . Scott Stewart , a Justice Department attorney , said he believed that court order , combined with the one ordering the children to be reunited by the end of the month , presented parents who illegally entered the country with a choice : Remain in custody after being reunited with their children or agree to release the kids to authorities to be placed with a sponsor .
Meanwhile , reunions were happening on Tuesday . Near downtown Grand Rapids , Mich. , a car pulled up to a half-open garage in the back of an Immigration and Customs Enforcement facility , and two 3-year-old boys and a 4-year-old girl were quickly ushered out of the car to be reunited with their fathers . The children stayed inside the facility with their parents for about two hours .
One of the fathers , Ever Reyes Mejia , was reunited with his 3-year-old son after three months of separation , said his attorney , Abril Valdes , an immigrant-rights lawyer for the ACLU in Michigan . Mr. Mejia claimed asylum after entering the U.S. through a legal point of entry in McAllen , Texas , his lawyer said . They were detained together at a facility until one night , when agents separated them , the lawyer said . Mr. Mejia declined to comment .
Ms. Valdes said the father was crying , hugging and holding his son , caressing his face and assuring him they would never be separated again . She added that Mr. Mejia ’ s son had been so traumatized by the separation that he had stopped speaking .
“ The boy is a shell of himself , ” Ms. Valdes said she was told , adding Mr. Mejia blames himself for his son ’ s pain .
Mr. Mejia , being tracked by an ankle bracelet , is staying in Michigan for now with his son and will face a hearing in Detroit later this month .
Elsewhere , an official from one children ’ s agency said only one of more than a dozen expected reunifications between migrant parents and young children in the agency ’ s care had taken place . Many others had been held up by delays in DNA testing .
Officials from the Department of Health and Human Services said Tuesday at least 26 children were ineligible for reunification because DNA testing had revealed that adults weren ’ t biologically related to them , or the adults had criminal backgrounds , communicable diseases or accusations of child abuse , or were in custody .
Silvia , a 25-year-old Guatemalan immigrant who illegally crossed the border , was hoping to reunite with her 3-year-old daughter on Tuesday , but confronted several obstacles . While the mother was staying with her sister in Chatsworth , Ga. , the girl was at a children ’ s facility in New York City .
On Tuesday afternoon , Silvia was trying to sort out whether someone would transport her daughter to Atlanta or whether she would need to travel to New York .
“ I ’ m very worried , ” said Silvia , who declined to provide her last name . “ I don ’ t know what way they ’ re going to return her to me . ”
—Louise Radnofsky , Ian Lovett and Gerald Porter Jr. contributed to this article .