( CNN ) - As House Republicans convene this week to discuss their next steps on immigration reform , former President George W. Bush underscored the importance of fixing a `` broken system . '' While noting the political controversy surrounding the bill , he said immigration reform `` has a chance to pass . ''
`` It 's a very difficult bill to pass because there are a lot of moving parts , and the legislative process can be ugly , but it looks like they are making some progress , '' Bush told ABC in an interview taped in Dar es Salaam , Tanzania . Bush has been in Zambia to help renovate a clinic that serves as a cervical cancer screening and treatment center .
Asked if it will hurt the GOP if Republicans fail to pass the bill , Bush said , `` The reason to pass immigration reform is not to bolster a Republican Party , it 's to fix a system that 's broken . ''
`` Good policy yields good politics as far as I 'm concerned . ''
The former Republican president tried but failed to pass immigration reform during his second term in the White House , thanks in part to opposition from members of Congress from his own party .
Bush will deliver a speech on immigration at his presidential library in Dallas at an event titled `` What Immigrants Contribute '' on Wednesday , the same day House Republicans will meet to discuss their next steps on the issue .
Bush was also asked whether his views have evolved on same-sex marriage in light of recent Supreme Court decisions , but insisted he 's `` not going to wade back into those kinds of issues . ''
`` I 'm out of politics . The only way I can really make news is either criticize the president , which I do n't want to do ; criticize my own party ; or wade in on a controversial issue , '' Bush said .
The former president met with President Barack Obama in Tanzania on Tuesday before the interview to talk about the Emergency Program for AIDS Relief , a program started by Bush during his first term . The two attended a wreath-laying ceremony commemorating the 1998 U.S. Embassy attack in Dar es Salaam , which killed 11 people , wounding hundreds . On the same day , a separate blast at the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi , Kenya , killed more than 200 people and wounded close to 5,000 .
Bush said when he spoke to Obama , he reminisced about similar , long trips during his own presidency .
`` I remember how tired I used to get , and I said , 'You 've got to be kind of worn out . ' He said , well , he 's had a great trip , looking forward to getting back home . ''
`` And I asked him about his little girls - were they having a good time ? He said , 'You bet , ' '' Bush said of Obama 's daughters , Sasha and Malia , who accompanied first lady Michelle Obama and the president on the trip .
`` I remember bringing our daughters on some of these trips , and how meaningful it was to be with them , '' Bush said , adding that there was no talk of policy .