An immigration overhaul that would legalize millions of undocumented immigrants while boosting border security passed a major test in the Senate on Monday , as lawmakers voted to advance a compromise measure despite resistance from some Republicans .
The Senate voted 67-27 to advance an amendment that was only submitted late last week . Critics complained that the Senate was voting on the 119-page proposal before having a chance to analyze it .
`` This is exactly what happened with ObamaCare , '' said Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Ala. , one of the most vocal critics of the bill . He warned the chamber was voting on a bill `` no one has read . ''
But the tally late Monday was a positive sign for supporters of the legislation . Fifteen Republicans voted in favor of it .
The vote -- which was technically a vote to shut down debate on the amendment -- needed 60 senators to proceed . That it attracted 67 senators effectively demonstrates the entire bill likely has more than enough votes to pass the chamber . Supporters hope it will also nudge the House to act , though that could be a tough sell .
`` The bill has been dramatically improved with this vote , '' Sen. Bob Corker , R-Tenn. , a co-sponsor of the amendment , said Monday .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid wants to tee up a vote on final passage before the Fourth of July recess .
Ahead of the vote , President Obama urged Congress to act .
`` Now is the time to get comprehensive immigration reform done , '' he said .
The measure voted on Monday includes changes to the original border security provisions in the bill that would double the size of the U.S. Border Patrol at a cost of around $ 30 billion and complete 700 miles of fencing . At the same time it sets out a pathway to citizenship for some 11 million immigrants living in the United States illegally , who would be permitted to get permanent resident green cards only once all the border changes had been put in place , about a decade after enactment of the legislation .
Sessions and other lawmakers , though , warned that the mass legalization could happen even if the border security measures were not fully implemented .
Despite Monday 's Senate vote , the bill still faces uncertain prospects in the House , where many conservatives oppose citizenship for people in this country illegally . The House Judiciary Committee has been passing narrowly focused , single-issue immigration bills -- in contrast to the Senate 's comprehensive approach -- and Speaker House Boehner , R-Ohio , has not indicated how he 'll proceed .
Negotiations between the two chambers are not expected until the fall at earliest , and opponents of the legislation are predicting it will be stopped in the House .
`` It 's dead on arrival in the House , '' Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , said on Sunday .
But the sponsors behind the border security amendment -- Sens . Corker and John Hoeven , R-N.D. -- staunchly defended their effort ahead of Monday 's vote .
`` I 've seen reports of a ' 1,200 page bill ' no one has read or had time to read , '' Corker said in a statement , presumably in response to Sessions . `` To be clear , the tough border and interior enforcement provisions that Sen. Hoeven and I offered on Friday make up 119 pages added to the 1,100 pages that have been public since May . ''
His office said the proposal would require an `` unprecedented surge of security '' on the border .
Some conservative groups were skeptical . The Heritage Foundation on Monday warned that the amendment would allow illegal immigrants to `` receive amnesty now , '' with the possibility of more border security `` somewhere down the road . ''