Republicans discussed immigration reform at their Thursday retreat . House leaders sell immigration plan
CAMBRIDGE , Md . — The House Republican leadership is trying to sell their colleagues on a series of broad immigration principles , including a path to legal status for those here illegally .
Speaker John Boehner ’ s leadership team introduced the principles at their annual policy retreat here . Top Republicans circulated a tightly held one-page memo titled “ standards for immigration reform ” toward the tail-end of a day that include strategy conversations about Obamacare , the economy and the national debt .
In the private meeting where the language was introduced , Boehner ( R-Ohio ) told Republicans that the standards are “ as far as we are willing to go . ”
“ Nancy Pelosi said yesterday that for her caucus , it is a special path to citizenship or nothing , ” Boehner said , according to a source in the room . “ If Democrats insist on that , then we are not going to get anywhere this year . ”
Boehner said the standards represent “ a fair , principled way for us to solve this issue . ”
The strategy marks a shift for House Republicans . In 2013 , Boehner ’ s chamber ignored the bipartisan immigration reform bill passed by the Senate . But toward the end of last year and early this year , Boehner , Majority Leader Eric Cantor ( R-Va. ) , Whip Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) and Rep. Paul Ryan ( R-Wis. ) began hashing out this approach to rally Republicans toward reform .
“ It ’ s important to act on immigration reform because we ’ re focused on jobs and economic growth , and this is about jobs and growth , ” Boehner said in his pitch in the closed meeting . “ Reform is also about our national security . The safety and security of our nation depends on our ability to secure our border , enforce our laws , improve channels for legal entry to the country , and identify who is here illegally . ”
Embracing legalization is a modest change for Republican leaders — some of them signaled openness to the idea last year . For a Republican Party that advocated “ self-deportation ” as recently as 2012 , it ’ s a massive shift .
Some Republicans fear of the political fallout from immigration reform , but the proposal suggests GOP leaders are taking the long view : Republicans need to woo the booming Hispanic population to stay relevant .
At the private meeting where the proposal was unveiled , lawmakers talked about their distrust that President Barack Obama will enforce the law , according to sources inside of the room . Ryan and Boehner spoke in favor of the effort , but high-profile conservatives like Rep. Tom Price ( R-Ga. ) and Rep. Jeb Hensarling ( R-Texas ) were more suspect of the reform push .
“ Nobody , even those who want to get this done , trusts the president , ” Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) said in a phone interview Thursday evening . “ And I understand it , because I don ’ t either . ”
But legislation on some of the key components of the principles , most notably the legalization part , have not been released and it remains to be seen how the full set of principles are received by rank-and-file House Republicans — many who have been skeptical of acting on immigration reform this year .
The principles stress that undocumented immigrants will have to go through the current immigration system and complete several prerequisites . Criminals will not be eligible for legalization .
“ These persons could live legally and without fear in the U.S. , but only if they were willing to admit their culpability , pass rigorous background checks , pay significant fines and back taxes , develop proficiency in English and American civics , and be able to support themselves and their families ( without access to public benefits ) , ” according to a draft of the document .
A broad swath of pro-reform groups — from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce to the liberal-leaning America ’ s Voice — welcomed the principles . But one concern already being raised by Democrats and immigration reform advocates off Capitol Hill is language in the principles that call for “ specific enforcement triggers ” to be in place before undocumented immigrants can get on the legalization track .
That section is meant to make sure that the Obama administration — and future presidents — enforce any immigration laws that Congress may pass . One of the most prominent immigration actions from Obama has been halting the deportations of young undocumented immigrants who qualify , known as Dreamers — a move that was done without the blessing of Congress .
But Democrats and advocates worry those “ triggers ” will be overly restrictive — preventing millions of undocumented immigrants from beginning the process to become legalized .
“ It leaves them vulnerable to deportation for God knows how long , ” Kevin Appleby , the director of migration policy for the pro-reform U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops , said in an e-mail .
Ana Avendaño , the director of immigration and community action for the AFL-CIO , also called the trigger issue a “ serious concern ” for the labor group . In a statement , the AFL-CIO called the principles “ flimsy . ”
The leadership ’ s principles do treat young undocumented immigrants differently , however . House Republican leaders declared that lawmakers should give a pathway to legal residence and citizenship for young immigrants who were brought to the United States illegally as children .
“ For those who meet certain eligiblity standards , and serve honorably in our military or attain a college degree , we will do just that , ” the document says .
The blueprint is also silent on whether the broader undocumented population will ever be able to apply for permanent residency — and eventually , citizenship — by using pathways that currently exist for all immigrants . The principles rule out a so-called “ special ” pathway to citizenship — meaning a separate track for undocumented immigrants that isn ’ t available to other immigrants .
The document — drafted by leadership with input from key GOP lawmakers who have been working on immigration — also makes clear that the House will not negotiate with the Senate on its comprehensive bill . In fact , GOP leadership has already begun laying out the differences between the House ’ s approach and the Senate ’ s bill .
“ The problems in our immigration system must be solved through a step-by-step , common-sense approach that starts with securing our country ’ s borders , enforcing our laws , and implementing robust enforcement measures , ” the document ’ s preamble reads .
The pathway outlined in the principles does not open up until the nation ’ s borders are secure . Securing America ’ s borders has long been a major issue for House Republicans — but how that can actually be accomplished was a major issue in passing the Senate measure .
The document lays out policies beyond legalization . Republicans want to implement a biometric system to track those in the nation on a visa . The GOP wants to implement a “ workable electronic employment verification system. ” And the principles also call for an overhaul to the legal immigration system that ’ s focused on economic needs , rather than family ties .
The one-page list of principles has been one of the most hotly anticipated documents in recent memory . Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , one of several key senators who led the immigration reform process in that chamber , said with the House GOP leadership ’ s overhaul blueprint , “ the door is open .
“ While these standards are certainly not everything we would agree with , they leave a real possibility that Democrats and Republicans , in both the House and Senate , can in some way come together and pass immigration reform that both sides can accept , ” Schumer said .
Sen. John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) , another member of the so-called Senate Gang of Eight , praised House Republicans on moving forward on immigration reform by releasing their principles .
“ And if [ Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) ] hadn ’ t gotten control of his conference , this wouldn ’ t have happened , ” McCain said . “ So maybe there is a silver lining in the shutdown … I ’ ve been digging for that pony for a long time . ”
Still , skeptics of a broad immigration reform push were already critical of the House Republican leadership ’ s principles .
“ In three fundamental respects , the House leaders ’ emerging immigration proposal appears to resemble the Senate plan , ” said Sen. Jeff Sessions ( R-Ala. ) , who has been talking with House Republicans on the immigration issue . “ It provides the initial grant of amnesty before enforcement ; it would surge the already unprecedented level of legal lesser-skilled immigration to the U.S. that is reducing wages and increasing unemployment ; and it would offer eventual citizenship to a large number of illegal immigrants and visa overstays . ”
Manu Raju contributed to this report . Seung Min Kim reported from Washington .