WASHINGTON/SAN FRANCISCO ( ███ ) - The U.S. Justice Department sued the state of California over so-called “ sanctuary ” policies that try to protect illegal immigrants against deportation , ramping up a confrontation over whether local police should enforce federal law .
The lawsuit , filed late Tuesday in federal court in Sacramento , the California state capital , takes aim at three state laws passed last year that the Justice Department contends violate the U.S. Constitution .
The issue of illegal immigrants has become increasingly heated since Donald Trump became president last year and signaled that he planned to target a wider swath of people for deportation .
Trump ’ s attorney general , Jeff Sessions , has made combating illegal immigration one of his top priorities since taking over the helm of the Justice Department in February 2017 . A key part of that effort involves a crackdown on primarily Democrat-governed cities and states that Sessions claims are “ sanctuaries ” that protect illegal immigrants from deportation .
Sessions is expected to discuss the lawsuit during a speech on Wednesday morning in Sacramento . The Justice Department lawsuit cites a provision of the U.S. Constitution known as the “ Supremacy Clause , ” under which federal laws trump state laws .
California Attorney General Xavier Becerra on Tuesday said law enforcement in the state is focused on public safety , not deportation . The Trump administration ’ s legal arguments are similar to those it has made in other cases , he said , and his office is prepared to address them .
“ We ’ ve seen this ‘ B ’ rated movie before , ” Becerra said on a call with reporters .
Brown in October signed into law a bill that prevents police from inquiring about immigration status and curtails law enforcement cooperation with immigration officers .
U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions at the White House in Washington , U.S. , March 1 , 2018 . ███/Kevin Lamarque
“ The Department of Justice and the Trump administration are going to fight these unjust , unfair and unconstitutional policies that have been imposed on you , ” Sessions plans to tell a group of law enforcement officers on Wednesday , according to prepared remarks seen by ███ .
Early into his tenure , Trump signed an executive order that sought to block municipalities that failed to cooperate with U.S. immigration authorities from receiving federal grant funding .
However , the Justice Department ’ s attempts to implement the order to date have been stymied by lawsuits in the federal courts in Chicago , San Francisco and Philadelphia .
At issue is whether sanctuary cities are violating a federal law that requires them to share information about people they arrest with the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency .
One case is now on appeal , after a federal judge in San Francisco blocked Trump ’ s executive order to block funding to sanctuary cities .
Similar kinds of cases are under way in other parts of the country , including a case on appeal in Chicago after a federal judge issued a nationwide injunction barring the government from blocking grant money typically used to help local police combat violent crime and help victims .
The Justice Department ’ s lawsuit on Tuesday against California targets three state laws . One of them , known as Assembly Bill 450 , prohibits private employers in California from voluntarily cooperating with federal immigration officials .
A second law , Senate Bill 54 , prevents state and local law enforcement from giving federal immigration officials information about when they intend to release an illegal immigrant from their custody .
California Governor Jerry Brown delivers his final state of the state address in Sacramento , California , U.S. , January 25 , 2018 . ███/Fred Greaves
The third law empowers the state to inspect federal immigration detention centers .
The Justice Department filing says all three laws improperly attempt to regulate federal immigration at the state level . The department also plans to seek a court order from a judge to temporarily block the state from enforcing the laws .