When attorneys for the Trump administration defended the president ’ s executive order targeting sanctuary cities this month , they urged a federal judge not to take its wide-ranging threats too seriously .
The order was merely an example of the president ’ s use of the “ bully pulpit , serving the purpose of highlighting President Trump ’ s focus on immigration enforcement , ” the administration ’ s council told US District Judge William Orrick in San Francisco .
That argument failed to persuade . On Tuesday , Judge Orrick put a temporary halt to Mr. Trump ’ s executive order threatening to withhold federal funds from jurisdictions that limit local cooperation with immigration officials . It was the third time since Trump took office that a federal court put a halt to one of his executive orders – and the third time a court cited the president ’ s free-flowing bully pulpit to rule that an order likely overstepped the bounds of the Constitution .
As a first-time politician , Trump reveled in flouting establishment niceties and saying things few others would dare . From the start , the New York billionaire has employed a style of shoot-from-the-hip hyperbole that can be considered more rhetorical art than precise public policy .
It ’ s a style suited for bursts of provocative Tweets or stream-of-consciousness speeches . In the courtroom , where judges value verbal precision , the president ’ s hyperbole , which often runs roughshod over factual details , has often worked against him .
“ In some respects , what we ’ re seeing is new , because courts have not used that kind of information before , ” says Nancy Kassop , professor of political science at the State University of New York at New Paltz . “ But they haven ’ t had any reason to until now . They ’ re beginning to create a precedent that what a president says , even if it ’ s off-the-cuff , if it has policy consequence to it or policy significance to it , it can ’ t be ignored . ”
In March , federal judges in Hawaii and Maryland halted the president ’ s executive order suspending immigration from “ countries of concern , ” citing administration officials ’ many statements broadly condemning Islam , as well as candidate Trump ’ s statements calling for “ a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States ” – a statement still posted on the campaign site .
“ Donald Trump appears to use rhetoric and words in a far different way from his predecessors , ” says Mark Jones , a fellow at Rice University ’ s Baker Institute of Public Policy in Houston . “ He ’ s far more prone to exaggeration and the use of language that is more of a metaphor for broader action rather than a concrete policy proposal . ”
“ However , our legal system , our judges , our public are used to past presidents ’ presidential behavior , where what a president says is indicative of their intent , and that ’ s where President Trump ’ s actions on the campaign trail have got him into trouble in his first 100 days , ” Mr. Jones continues .
In his battle against “ sanctuary cities , ” Trump , as well as surrogates such as White House press secretary Sean Spicer and Attorney General Jeff Sessions , have said his administration would wield federal funding as “ a weapon ” against states like California , where many jurisdictions limit cooperation with immigration officials .
The problem is that the president can not simply wield funding as a kind of stick to prod states to get in line . Many Supreme Court precedents already limit the president ’ s ability to cut funding already allocated by Congress , legal experts say .
The president ’ s lawyers seemed to know this , arguing that the executive order should be interpreted more narrowly than the president ’ s public statements – or even the words of the order ’ s text itself . They told the judge to ignore the administration ’ s broad language , saying the president only had the power to withhold , at most , three small grants administered by the Departments of Justice and Homeland Security .
Trump ’ s lawyers also argued that the plaintiffs in the case , Santa Clara and San Francisco , should not have standing to sue , because the administration has not yet taken any action , or even defined what a sanctuary city is , exactly .
It was a curious concession that rendered the executive order “ toothless , ” Orrick wrote . The order , “ by its plain language , attempts to reach all federal grants , not merely the three mentioned at the hearing . ”
And given all the administration ’ s saber rattling about holding sanctuary cities to account , Orrick described the Trump administration ’ s arguments in court as “ schizophrenic . ”
“ There is no doubt a culture clash going on between judges who use language precisely and a populist president who freewheels with language and often shoots from the hip , ” says James Goodnow , an attorney with Fennemore Craig , headquartered in Phoenix , and a frequent legal commentator . “ Judges are in the business of ascertaining intent .... Courts then have to do their best to figure out intent from the papers in front of them or witness testimony . ”
“ But Trump makes it easy , ” he continues . “ He live tweets his every thought to the entire world . In the case of the travel ban and his sanctuary city executive order , he indicated his apparent intent behind the laws time and again . In the sanctuary city case , justice department lawyers essentially argued that Trump was simply engaging in hyperbole … and he didn ’ t mean his comments to be taken literally . ”
“ But when it comes to matters of national security or people ’ s livelihoods , judges are trained that words matter , ” Mr. Goodnow says .
The White House , in a statement , said Orrick ’ s ruling was “ yet one more example of egregious overreach by a single , unelected district judge ” who “ unilaterally rewrote immigration policy for our nation . ”
The president lashed out against the ruling on Twitter . `` First the Ninth Circuit rules against the ban & now it hits again on sanctuary cities – both ridiculous rulings . See you in the Supreme Court ! ” Orrick is a district judge in San Francisco , not a member of the US Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit .
Even without the rhetoric , the executive order may have faced profound constitutional hurdles , many legal scholars say .
A number of conservative Supreme Court decisions have emphasized the concept of federalism . A concept dear to many conservatives , federalist principles may prevent the Trump administration from using funding as a weapon , scholars say .
Local governments can not be compelled to enforce federal law , the high court has ruled . The Trump administration can not coerce or “ commandeer ” state or local agencies to enforce any federal law , including immigration law . It can and does , however , enter into agreements – not requirements , legal scholars note – that deputize local officials as proxies to enforce federal immigration law .
Many “ sanctuary ” jurisdictions require a warrant from a judge before handing over a person to federal immigration officials . They argue that public safety is better ensured when immigrants are not afraid to cooperate with law enforcement . Besides , many say , they do not have the manpower or budget to take on the federal government 's duties .
The Trump administration has also said that local jurisdictions must certify their compliance with a section of federal immigration law in order to receive certain federal grants . Section 1373 of the federal statute requires localities to share any information they have about an individual ’ s immigration status . But as legal scholars note , this section of the law does not , and can not , require local entities to collect this information in the first place .
In addition , the Supreme Court has long ruled that any conditions attached to federal grants must be “ unambiguously ” stated in the text of the law “ so that the States can knowingly decide whether or not to accept those funds . ”
“ The right way to do it is to get Congress to do it with future grants , and do it clearly and unambiguously and in a way that doesn ’ t , in the language of the court , doesn ’ t coerce state and local governments , but rather gives them choice to either take grants with conditions or decline grants entirely , ” says Steven Schwinn , professor at the John Marshall School of Law in Chicago .
Courts , as well as foreign governments , have struggled with how seriously they should take Trump ’ s hyperbolic political style .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ There has to be adjustment on both sides , ” says Jones . “ President Trump needs to be more cognizant of the impact that his words , statements , and tweets have on how judges , foreign leaders and the American public views his policy proposals . ”
“ Both are trying to read [ intent ] , but judges have to err on the side of caution . Foreign leaders are doing what ’ s in the best interests of their country , but judges have to err on side of caution . ”