Among the plan ’ s new proposals is the creation of a commission of governors , law enforcement officials and community leaders from border states that would assess when border security measures had been completed . A proposal would also require that an exit system be in place for tracking departures of foreigners who entered the country through airports or seaports , before any illegal immigrants could start on a path to citizenship .
The lawmakers intend for their proposals to frame the debate in the Senate , which is expected to take up immigration this spring , ahead of the House of Representatives . Compared with an immigration blueprint from 2011 that White House officials have said is the basis for the president ’ s position , the senators ’ proposals appear to include tougher enforcement and a less direct path for illegal immigrants than Mr. Obama is considering .
In a parallel effort , a separate group of four senators will introduce a bill this week dealing with another thorny issue that is likely to be addressed in a comprehensive measure : visas for legal immigrants with advanced skills in technology and science . The bill , written primarily by Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah , a Republican , and Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota , a Democrat , would nearly double the number of temporary visas , known as an H-1B , available each year to highly skilled immigrants . It would also free up more permanent resident visas , known as green cards , so those immigrants could eventually settle in the United States and go on to become citizens .
In a sign of the rapidly changing mood in Washington on immigration , the two groups of senators and the White House have been vying in recent days to see who would unveil their proposals first .
Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey , a Democrat who was one of those negotiating the comprehensive principles , said the senators finally agreed that any legislation should include a pathway to citizenship .
“ First of all , Americans support it , in poll after poll , ” said Mr. Menendez , who was interviewed along with Mr. McCain by Martha Raddatz on Sunday . “ Secondly , Latino voters expect it . Thirdly , Democrats want it . And fourth , Republicans need it . ”