Wisconsin Gov . Scott Walker has run into a little bit of trouble on immigration again , this time forcing a communications aide off his staff after Democrats pushed out old tweets from the aide disparaging Rep. Steve King ( R-IA ) , a well-known opponent of amnesty .
`` In other news , I see Iowa is once again embarrassing itself , and the GOP , this morning . Thanks , guys , '' the aide , Liz Mair tweeted , referring to King 's January 24th Iowa Freedom Summit where Walker , Sen. Ted Cruz ( R-TX ) , Carly Fiorina , and other possible Republican presidential candidates spoke .
Walker 's troubles with immigration began in January when opponents began circulating prior statements of his showing that Walker has endorsed both a `` path to citizenship '' generally and the Senate 's Gang of 8 bill specifically .
Walker has since tried to walk those positions back , telling Fox News Sunday 's Chris Wallace on March 1st , `` My view has changed , I ’ m flat-out saying it . Candidates can say that , sometimes they don ’ t . ''
And Walker 's view on immigration has changed . Here he is on immigration in July of 2013 : `` You hear some people talk about border security and a wall and all that . To me , I do n't know that you need any of that if you had a better , saner way to let people into the country in the first place . ''
And here is Walker in March 2015 : `` I 've talked to people all across America . And the concerns I have is that we need to secure the border . We ultimately need to put in place a system that works . A legal immigration system that works . And part of doing this is put the onus on employers , getting them E-Verify and tools to do that . ''
So Walker has shifted from believing a secure border was n't really necessary to now believing that it is .
But what about those illegal immigrants already here ? What is Walker 's position on that ? Again , from March 1st :
WALLACE : The question was , can you envision a world where if these people paid a penalty , that they would have a path to citizenship ? And you said , sure , that makes sense . WALKER : I believe there 's a way that you can do that . First and foremost , you 've got to secure that border or none of these plans make any sense .
( emphasis added ) Notice the present tense . Walker still believes that illegal immigrants currently in the United States should be given a path to citizenship , but only if you secure the border first , which is a not uncommon Republican position on immigration .
But how is it any different than Jeb Bush 's position ?
It ’ s easy to say , ‘ Well , anything you propose is amnesty , ’ but that ’ s not a plan . That ’ s a sentiment , that ’ s not a plan . I think the best plan , the most realistic plan , the grown up plan , if you will , is once you control the border and you ’ re confident it ’ s not going to be another magnet , is to say , ‘ Let ’ s let these folks achieve earned legal status where they work , where they come out of the shadows . ’ ”
So both Walker and Bush believe we should `` secure '' / '' control '' the border first ( whatever that means ) , and then , only after that is accomplished , can we give legal status/citizenship to illegal immigrants currently in the United States .
If there is any difference between Walker and Bush on immigration , I do not see it .