President Trump on Tuesday said that the U.S. will secure the southern border with the military until a wall can be built , calling the move a “ big step . ”
Trump made the remarks during a meeting with Baltic leaders , where he said he had discussed the matter with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis . A White House official revealed later Tuesday to ███ that the plan considered by Trump would be a “ substantial ” mobilization of the National Guard .
“ Until we can have a wall and proper security , we ’ re going to be guarding our border with the military , ” he said . “ That 's a big step , we really haven ’ t done that before , or certainly not very much before . ”
At a news conference later , he confirmed the plan , saying the border is unprotected by “ our horrible , horrible and very unsafe laws . ”
“ We do n't have laws , we have catch-and-release , ” he said . “ You catch and then you immediately release and people come back years later for a court case , except they virtually never come back . ”
Trump did not offer specifics , but the move appears to be at least partly motivated by a caravan of over 1,000 Central American migrants heading toward the U.S. border . Buzzfeed , which first reported on the caravan , said that Mexican officials had not yet attempted to stop the flow .
In Tuesday 's discussion , Trump and senior officials “ also agreed on the need to pressure Congress to urgently pass legislation to close legal loopholes exploited by criminal trafficking , narco-terrorist and smuggling organizations , ” White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said . She added that Mattis , Homeland Security Secretary Kirsten Nielsen , Attorney General Jeff Sessions , Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Joseph Dunford and Chief of Staff John Kelly were among the other officials present .
Reports of the caravan angered Trump , who has sent out a number of tweets threatening to end the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) and to cut foreign aid to countries such as Honduras , from where many of the migrants originate .
“ The big Caravan of People from Honduras , now coming across Mexico and heading to our “ Weak Laws ” Border , had better be stopped before it gets there , ” he tweeted Tuesday . “ Cash cow NAFTA is in play , as is foreign aid to Honduras and the countries that allow this to happen . Congress MUST ACT NOW ! ”
At the press conference he said that NAFTA was an “ embarrasing ” deal and that he had told Mexican officials on Monday : “ I hope you 're going to tell that caravan not to get up to the border. ” He added that he thinks the caravan was being broken up as a result .
The Pentagon was scrambling to come up with a response to Trump 's statement on the military guarding the border . But according to a memo obtained by ███ and discussions with officials , one area where the Pentagon could contribute immediately is the Air Force ’ s Barry Goldwater live-fire range , which shares a 35-mile border with Mexico in southern Arizona .
The Defense Department is already offering some support to the border , including U.S. Navy ships patrolling waters to seize drugs as well as missions involving over 100 personnel from U.S. military ’ s northern command -- including eight planes and a drone -- to help border patrol .
In 2010 , President Obama authorized 1,200 National Guard troops to increase security at the border , although Republican lawmakers questioned their role and whether they would in fact be “ boots on the ground . ''
Trump has struggled to secure funding for his central campaign promise of a wall , which the administration and border officials say will cost approximately $ 20-25 billion . In the omnibus bill signed by Trump last month , $ 1.6 billion was included for technology and some replacement of existing border fencing -- although it excluded the prototypes Trump recently viewed in California .
Trump briefly considered vetoing the legislation both over its lack of funding for the wall and also the failure to include a fix for the expiring Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program that granted protection for illegal immigrants brought to the country as children . He has since floated the idea of getting the Pentagon to fund the wall .
Brandon Judd , President of the National Border Patrol Council , said on ███ Radio ’ s “ The Todd Starnes Show ” that it gives Border Patrol “ certainty of apprehension . ”
“ The criminal smugglers , this is a multibillion dollar industry . They smuggle humans , they smuggle drugs , ” he said . “ This criminal enterprise , if we arrest the majority of people that cross the border illegally , we put a dent into their criminal enterprise , and if you put a dent into their criminal enterprise , then you can possibly stop them . ”