Washington ( CNN ) - House Speaker John Boehner insisted Thursday that immigration reform was `` absolutely not '' dead – just a little over a week after declaring he had `` no intention '' of negotiating with the Democratic led Senate over its comprehensive immigration proposal .
Boehner told reporters at his weekly press conference he was `` encouraged '' by President Barack Obama 's comments earlier this week saying he was open to the House GOP 's plans to address immigration reforms in a series of smaller bills .
The President , speaking to a group of CEOs on Tuesday , said of House Republicans , `` They 're suspicious of comprehensive bills , but if they want to chop that thing up into five pieces , as long as all five pieces get done , I do n't care what it looks like as long as it 's actually delivering on those core values that we talk about . ''
But Boehner declined to answer a question on when the House would vote on any of the piecemeal GOP immigration measures . A Boehner aide told CNN , `` he did n't make any specific announcement on timing . ''
The House of Representatives is scheduled to be in session just eight more days before the end of the year , and aides from both parties do not expect the House to hold any votes until next year .
Even before the President stated he could accept moving reform in pieces , House Democratic leaders said as long as the Republican controlled House moved some type of immigration bill they believed larger negotiations could start . But Boehner 's spokesman said the Speaker 's opposition to discussing the Senate passed bill still stands .
That Senate measure , passed in June with some GOP support , includes an eventual pathway to citizenship for most of the nation 's 11 million undocumented immigrants .
A group of immigration reform supporters is staging a fast on the National Mall not far from the Capitol that has lasted over a week to urge Congress to pass comprehensive immigration reform now . House Democratic leaders invited five of those protesting to address some of their members Thursday morning , before the House leaves for another extended recess for the Thanksgiving holiday .
`` We believe our Republican colleagues should hear the message 'let 's act now . ' It is good for the economy , '' House Democratic Caucus Chairman Xavier Becerra said .