A federal judge temporarily blocked the Trump administration from ending the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program on Tuesday , declaring that the Department of Homeland Security ’ s “ decision to rescind DACA was based on a flawed legal premise . ''
U.S. District Judge William Alsup ruled the Obama-era program must remain in place while litigation plays out .
Alsup , an appointee of former President Bill Clinton , also said the program should continue , allowing those already approved for the program to renew their DACA protections and work permits .
New applications will not be allowed to be submitted under the ruling , however .
`` Dreamers ' lives were thrown into chaos when the Trump Administration tried to terminate the DACA program without obeying the law , '' said California Attorney General Xavier Becerra . `` Today 's ruling is a huge step in the right direction . ''
`` America is and has been home to Dreamers who courageously came forward , applied for DACA and did everything the federal government asked of them , '' he added . `` They followed DACA 's rules , they succeeded in school , at work and in business , and they have contributed in building a better America . We will fight at every turn for their rights and opportunities so they may continue to contribute to America . ''
But the Department of Justice said the ruling doesn ’ t change the facts about the program .
`` DACA was implemented unilaterally after Congress declined to extend these benefits to this same group of illegal aliens . As such , it was an unlawful circumvention of Congress , and was susceptible to the same legal challenges that effectively ended DAPA , '' the DOJ said in a statement .
During Tuesday ’ s bipartisan immigration meeting , President Trump said he would support a plan those in the room came up with , adding that he 'd be open to taking on his political base in order to support a bipartisan agreement .
“ I ’ ll take the heat off both the Democrats and the Republicans , ” he said .
UPDATE : The White House and President Trump blasted the judge 's ruling .
`` We find this decision to be outrageous , especially in light of the President 's successful bipartisan meeting with House and Senate members at the White House on the same day , '' White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said in a statement .
`` An issue of this magnitude must go through the normal legislative process , '' she added . `` President Trump is committed to the rule of law , and will work with members of both parties to reach a permanent solution that corrects the unconstitutional actions taken by the last administration . ''
`` It just shows everyone how broken and unfair our Court System is when the opposing side in a case ( such as DACA ) always runs to the 9th Circuit and almost always wins before being reversed by higher courts , '' he said on Twitter .