The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com .
Last Monday , Trump announced , via Twitter , of course , a bold , direct , and , most importantly , necessary move in the war on illegal immigration . ‘ The Donald ’ informed the country that ICE would be deployed to various American sanctuary cities in order to detain and deport “ millions ” of illegal aliens . Predictably , this set off a firestorm of hysterics from the left , illegal alien rights groups , and , alas , the media . Yet Trump ’ s proclamation was right , necessary , and long overdue .
Illegal immigration is a detriment to our national sovereignty , national economy , and , by extension , our national security . Current estimates put the total number of illegal aliens in our country at over 12 million . Exact numbers are difficult to come by for reasons such as citizenship questions on the national census ( let ’ s see if the Supreme Court recognizes that this term ) .
The Federation for American Immigration Reform ( FAIR ) conducted a comprehensive study regarding the financial impact of illegal immigration . Services provided to these some 12 million illegals and their families are just over $ 135,000,000,000 , don ’ t count the zeroes , that ’ s BILLIONS . Remember during the 2014 Ebola outbreak when NIH and CDC didn ’ t have enough money to properly address the problem ? Where could the government have found that money ? When funding for the Veterans ’ Administration was in question , what other purse could have been raided ? Of course , federal funding and appropriation laws don ’ t exactly work that way , but the underlying principle should resonate with anyone who owns a calculator .
Remember the recent government shutdown ? $ 5.7 billion was too much for a wall , but somehow $ 135 billion in services to illegal aliens is just the cost of government doing business . These are the same arguments , from the same people , who want to mandate what taxes , living wages , and Congressional pay raises should be . Not a comforting realization .
America , with or without illegal aliens , has crime , as does any nation . But is that any justification to import more ? From Kate Steinle ’ s 2015 murder by an illegal to Mollie Tibbett ’ s 2018 brutal killing , along with the federal government ’ s report of 2,028 murders by illegals arrested in 2018 , an important question arises : Why , through inaction , allow such crimes to persist ?
Simply because America already has crime is no justification . If your son or daughter was in the emergency room for a stab wound would you tell the doctor , “ Don ’ t bother stitching him up . He already has pneumonia ? '' Of course not . If we can ’ t get rid of our own crime problem , we certainly should not invite more that we can get rid of .
We have serious problems that we must deal with , and deal with effectively .
Sanctuary cities that flout our laws only serve to aggravate an already overwhelming set of problems . Los Angeles and San Francisco , both sanctuary cities , are both crumbling under crises of homelessness and crime . A new app in San Francisco allows people to track human feces in the street . Back in L.A. , even Cher , a liberal stalwart , recently felt compelled to tweet about the homeless problem in the City of Angels and the insanity of inviting more .
Sanctuary cities not only serve to exacerbate the tribulations we see every day , they invite them . They are beacons to every illegal border crosser , “ Come here , we don ’ t care about the law or big picture ! ”
Of course , the Left has attempted to frame the issue of illegal immigration into the only argument they ever make : one of race . Not surprising for a party whose primary tenet is identity politics . If the Left can only see race or gender or sexual orientation , then they can only believe others ’ opinions are based on the same . Therein lies their argument . “ You don ’ t want unfettered illegal immigration because of race , not for the actual reasons . Therefore , your opinions are invalid because I believe your basis is in racism. ” A complete lie that the media and 2020 candidates tout more often than Joe Biden makes a gaffe .
They conveniently ignore the logical fallacy of their primary economic beliefs , that a welfare state can support everyone that wants in . Free college , free health care , guaranteed free income , free to everyone who wants , yet , free of any rational way to support such a utopia . Free thinkers indeed .
Now the Left has turned its ire on ICE . These federal law enforcement officers are evil , equated to Nazis they shout in almost every sentence . Democratic members of Congress screaming “ Concentration camps ! ” ( PLEASE read a history book on the Holocaust ! ) . They may as well work for the Department of Redundancy .
ICE is not evil . ICE is not the problem . Illegal immigration is the problem . Sanctuary cities are a symptom of that problem . ICE is simply doing what is necessary .
As of today , Trump has placed a two-week hold on his plan to detain and deport , hoping Democrats in Congress can do their job and fix the problem . Failing that , people should remember , Illegal immigration is the cancer , sanctuary cities are the tumors , and ICE is the chemotherapy .