President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE on Friday said he could quickly shutter the U.S. southern border , one day after saying he would give Mexico a “ one-year warning ” before taking drastic measures to stop illegal immigration .
While visiting a Border Patrol station in Southern California , Trump praised Mexico ’ s efforts to apprehend migrants from Central America but said he would not be afraid to close down the border if necessary .
“ It won ’ t take a year , it ’ ll take a day , ” Trump said , accusing media outlets of writing “ a lot of fake news ” about how long it would take for him to make the move .
On Thursday , the president said “ we 're going to give them a one-year warning ” before slapping tariffs on autos made in Mexico or shutting down the border if Mexico 's government does not do more to stem the flow of drugs and migrants .
Trump in those remarks backed off his previous threat to close the border this week , a move lawmakers and business groups warned could inflict significant harm on the U.S. economy .
Yet Trump earlier Friday denied changing his mind about shuttering the border and said he could do so at a later date .
“ I never changed my mind at all , ” he told reporters as he left the White House . “ So Mexico , I have to say , has been very , very good . ''
Though Trump has sent a series of mixed signals in recent days , he used his visit to California to promote his administration ’ s efforts to crack down on illegal immigration , an issue he has put at the center of his 2020 reelection campaign .
He met with Border Patrol and military leaders before touring a section of rebuilt fencing he says is part of his long-promised border wall , even though the project was authorized years ago .
A Border Patrol agent gifted Trump a plaque mounted on a portion of the first 30 feet of wall along the southern border . The agent who presented it , Gloria Chavez , said it was for “ number 45 ” for “ proudly defending the American border ” and showing “ unwavering support for the men and women ” on the front line .
“ We built a lot of it . It ’ s better and much more effective than the previous wall , ” Trump said later while visiting the new section of border fencing .
The president touted the wall as the answer to stopping illegal border crossings , pledging he would have roughly 400 miles built in the next two years . It is an ambitious goal , given that the 654 miles of existing barriers took years to build while having congressional approval .
Trump is seeking to jump-start construction of his wall by declaring a national emergency to circumvent Congress , a move that is being challenged by House Democrats , state attorney generals , including California 's , and immigrant-rights groups in federal court .
Nonetheless , the president said the wall and other measures were meant to send a stern message to people hoping to cross into the country illegally .
“ They system is full , can ’ t take you any more , ” Trump said , adding that whether it is “ illegal immigration ” or “ asylum ” seekers , the answer is “ I ’ m sorry , we ’ re full . ”
The Trump administration has described the situation on the border as a crisis caused by thousands of migrant families and unaccompanied minors showing up each day , overwhelming detention facilities and exacerbating backlogs in immigration courts and asylum proceedings .
“ It ’ s a colossal surge and it ’ s overwhelming our immigration system , and we can ’ t let that happen , ” Trump said .
During his West Coast swing , Trump is also scheduled to attend a political fundraiser in Beverly Hills , Calif. , on Friday night and speak on Saturday to the Republican Jewish Committee in Las Vegas .
The Washington Post reported Trump will have dinner with his son , Eric , and other supporters at his privately owned golf club in Rancho Palos Verdes , Calif .