U.S. District Court Judge Arthur Schwab has issued an opinion classifying President Obama 's executive action on illegal immigration as unconstitutional based on a list of violations , including the separation of powers .
The opinion was issued in United States vs Juarez-Escobar , a case in which an illegal immigrant was sentenced for deportation after being arrested for driving under the influence in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania .
The immigrant did not ask for relief through Obama 's amnesty program since illegal immigrants with drunk driving convictions were not eligible for Obama 's first amnesty , the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , and are not eligible for Obama 's most recent amnesty either .
Schwab , not the defendant , sought guidance from the federal government to see if Juarez-Escobar qualified for Obama 's latest amnesty . The government said no .
Schwab then opined on Obama 's latest amnesty anyway , writing , `` On November 20 , 2014 , President Obama announced an Executive Action on immigration , which will affect approximately four million undocumented immigrants who are unlawfully present in the United States of America . This Executive Action raises concerns about the separation of powers between the legislative and executive branches of government . This core constitutional issue necessitates judicial review to ensure that executive power is governed by and answerable to the law such that “ the sword that executeth the law is in it , and not above it , '' Schwab wrote .
`` President Obama contended that although legislation is the most appropriate course of action to solve the immigration debate , his Executive Action was necessary because of Congress ’ s failure to pass legislation , acceptable to him , in this regard , '' Schwab continued . `` This proposition is arbitrary and does not negate the requirement that the November 20 , 2014 Executive Action be lawfully within the President ’ s executive authority . It is not . ''
`` This Executive Action “ cross [ es ] the line , ” constitutes “ legislation , ” and effectively changes the United States ’ immigration policy . The President may only “ take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed . . . ” ; he may not take any Executive Action that creates laws , '' he continued . `` President Obama ’ s unilateral legislative action violates the separation of powers provided for in the United States Constitution as well as the Take Care Clause , and therefore , is
Since the government never claimed the defendant qualified for Obama 's amnesty , Schwab 's opinion is not binding on the government in anyway .
Separately , twenty-four states have filed lawsuits against President Obama 's executive action and a variety of polls show the majority of Americans are against the move .