Democrats and immigrant-rights groups demanded answers Tuesday after a news report that the first “ Dreamer ” has been deported by President Trump .
USA Today said Juan Manuel Montes , a 23-year-old Mexican who ’ d been brought to the U.S. at age nine and who had twice been approved under President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty , was deported in February after a run-in with a Customs and Border Protection agent in California .
Mr. Montes told the paper that after he was deported he tried to sneak back into the U.S. , climbing over the border fence on a rope . He said agents quickly captured and deported him again .
Speaking to USA Today from Mexico , where he was living with an aunt and uncle , Mr. Montes said he was deported Feb. 17 after his encounter with the CBP agent . The agent wouldn ’ t let him get his wallet , where Mr. Montes said he had proof of his status under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , the official name for Mr. Obama ’ s deportation amnesty .
The paper reported that Mr. Montes was approved for DACA , and has also won a renewal , which was supposed to have protected him from deportation through 2018 .
But CBP ’ s version of events contradicted Mr. Montes in most respects .
The agency , in a statement Tuesday night , did not mention any initial deportation but did confirm Mr. Montes was nabbed while trying to climb over the border fence in downtown Calexico , California .
“ He was arrested by [ Border Patrol ] just minutes after he made his illegal entry and admitted under oath during the arrest interview that he had entered illegally , ” the agency said .
Officials also said he fell out of DACA status in August 2015 and was notified . The agency did not mention any renewal .
CBP also said Mr. Montes had been convicted of theft and had been granted probation for the offense . USA Today reported that he also had three convictions of driving without a license , including one three months ago .
DACA recipients are generally eligible to obtain licenses , so it ’ s unclear why he was without one .
USA Today asserted that those convictions shouldn ’ t have been serious enough to cause him to be excluded from the DACA program .
Mr. Montes quickly became a cause for immigrant-rights groups , who said his deportation was proof that President Trump was acting harshly toward illegal immigrants .
“ Juan Montes was the target of abusive law enforcement officers , ” said Greisa Martinez , advocacy director at United We Dream , a group that represents the Dreamers who took advantage of Mr. Obama ’ s amnesty .
They began a # JusticeForJuan campaign designed to bring attention to the case .
Sen. Richard J. Durbin , an Illinois Democrat who ’ s long been an advocate for Dreamers , demanded Homeland Security explain why Mr. Montes was kicked out of the U.S .
As a whole , Dreamers are the most sympathetic cases in the immigration debate . They were usually brought to the U.S. as children and often don ’ t know their home countries . Many boast of outstanding academic achievements .
That wasn ’ t the case for Mr. Montes , who had his share of run-ins with the law .
Still , Mr. Trump has struggled to figure out a policy toward Dreamers . During the presidential campaign he called Mr. Obama ’ s amnesty policy illegal and vowed to repeal it , but now in office Mr. Trump has reversed course , saying that he would treat Dreamers with heart .
Democrats and advocacy groups had been awaiting the first Dreamer to be deported , and quickly seized on Mr. Montes ‘ story as proof that Mr. Trump had broken his updated stance .
“ The Trump Administration is terrorizing patriotic young people who want nothing more than to live , work and contribute to the country they love – the only home they ’ ve ever known , ” said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat .