Erwin Ardon , the first Honduran migrant sent back home under new restrictions , meets a relative as he arrives to his home , in Honduras November 23,2019 . ( Jorge Cabrera/Reuters )
The first Central American migrant offered asylum in Guatemala , under an arrangement between that country and the U.S. , has decided to return to his home in Honduras , according to the Associated Press .
Erwin José Ardón Montoya , 23 , travelled to the U.S. in September in a bid to see his newborn daughter . The daughter ’ s mother had chosen to migrate to the U.S. while still pregnant .
“ I wanted to see my daughter , to help her , ” Ardón Montoya told his parents through tears as he arrived at his family ’ s home in Trujillo , Honduras .
Ardón Montoya was caught by federal agents in El Paso , Texas . He was offered a job and a place to live in Guatemala , but chose to return to his family .
The 23-year-old told the Associated Press he might try to enter the U.S. again after Christmas .
The Trump administration has enacted a host of policies meant to curb illegal immigration to the U.S. , including placing restrictions on asylum seekers who enter the U.S. illegally . U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services has announced a policy change preventing illegal asylum seekers from obtaining work permits until their applications have been approved .
The Department of Homeland Security has also instituted the so-called “ remain in Mexico ” policy , whereby asylum seekers who enter the U.S. illegally are required to wait in Mexico while their applications are processed .
While some of the Trump administration ’ s immigration policies have been challenged in court , a senior Border Patrol official warned in October that striking down those policies could bring the flow of illegal immigration to “ crisis level . ”
“ We will go back , mark the words , we will go back to the crisis level that we had before , ” said the Border Patrol ’ s chief of law enforcement operations Brian Hastings . “ It is kind of a new norm . We ’ re at risk at any time . ”