Less than 24 hours after senators powered their immigration bill through committee , the legislation came under fire in the House , where the former head of immigration enforcement testified that it has too many loopholes that could delay enforcement , let dangerous people in , and hamstring agents from fighting illegal immigration in the future .
Key House Republican lawmakers , meanwhile , signaled their worries over the Senate bill , saying they worried it repeated some of the mistakes of the last amnesty in 1986 , which auditors said was rife with fraud and failed to follow through on promises of better enforcement .
“ I can not find any deadline by which the border is to be secured , ” said Rep. Lamar Smith , Texas Republican , at a hearing called to poke holes in the Senate bill .
The three witnesses who testified included a supporter of the Senate bill , an ardent opponent , and Julie Myers Wood , the former chief of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement in the administration of President George W. Bush , who wants to see legalization but had concerns about the Senate bill .
All three agreed with Mr. Smith that there is no absolute requirement in the legislation that the borders be secured before illegal immigrants get legal status .
“ Not within the bill , not right now , ” said David V. Aguilar , former deputy commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection .
SEE ALSO : Immigration reform bill clears committee hurdles , heads to full Senate
The witnesses were testifying before the House Judiciary Committee the day after an 867-page immigration bill cleared the Senate Judiciary Committee on a 13-5 vote .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , Nevada Democrat , said he ’ ll bring the bill to the floor in June , and key Senate Republicans have already signaled they won ’ t filibuster to block the bill from reaching the floor .
That sets up what ’ s likely to be a bruising , in-depth debate covering dozens of amendments .
“ Although neither Republicans nor Democrats will support each and every aspect of this legislation , it is gratifying to see the momentum behind reforms that will make our country safer and help 11 million undocumented immigrants get right with the law , ” Mr. Reid said , adding that the lawmakers who wrote the immigration bill showed “ real bravery ” in the face of harsh attacks , particularly from conservatives .
The crux of the Senate deal , negotiated by four Democrats and four Republicans , offers a quick legal status to illegal immigrants , but withholds a full path to citizenship until the Homeland Security Department spends more money on border security , creates a national electronic system for businesses to check their workers ’ legal status , and requires a photo-based entry-exit system to check visitors ’ identity .
Backers said legalizing illegal immigrants must be part of a deal , and said they don ’ t want to delay that legalization too long or else it will prevent people from coming forward . They argue that bringing the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants into the open will enhance security .
But Ms. Wood , who was in the administration when Mr. Bush pushed for legalization in 2007 , listed a series of places where she said the current bill fails .
She said it should require in-person interviews of those applying for legalization , it should invest more in interior enforcement , and it should place stiffer requirements on the Homeland Security secretary to follow through on stiffer security .
Ms. Wood also said the bill shifts the burden for proving an illegal immigrant should be detained onto the federal government , rather than current law which presumes illegal immigrants should be detained unless there ’ s a good reason not to . And she said the bill creates too many chances for illegal immigrants to gum up deportations with court appeals .
One critical change Ms. Wood suggested was to get the electronic verification system for employers to check workers up and running faster than the five-year deadline in the bill , and to have businesses check not only new employees but their existing workforce .
“ Five to seven years is too long for all employees to have to go through the system , and the inability to verify the existing workforce is going to create an unclear workforce , ” she said . She said that will lead to exploitation of those workers .