House Republican leaders are trying anew to round up an elusive majority for a bill addressing the border crisis , after a chaotic day where they initially abandoned the legislation and began sending lawmakers home for the summer recess -- only to reverse course moments later .
The dramatic scene unfolded at a rapid clip Thursday afternoon . Earlier , House leaders abruptly canceled a planned vote on a package meant to address the surge of illegal immigrant minors crossing the U.S.-Mexico border , with a combination of funding and policy changes , after failing to gather enough votes for it .
Lawmakers began heading out for the five-week summer recess . But incoming House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy , R-Calif. , then took to the floor to say `` additional votes are possible , '' indicating lawmakers should stay . Boos could be heard in the House chamber as he made the announcement .
But House Republicans later huddled on Capitol Hill before the House adjourned for the day . It was scheduled to meet again Friday morning .
Meanwhile , a different piece of border legislation died Thursday night in the Senate on a procedural vote . So even if the House did succeed in passing a bill Friday , there was no prospect for reaching a deal to send a bill to Obama 's desk .
The second thoughts in the House reflected deep concerns in the GOP caucus about the prospect of leaving for the August recess without addressing the border bill , amid criticism from both sides of the aisle .
It remains unclear whether there 's any chance enough votes can be rounded up to pass the measure . Senior Republican leaders were adamant , though , that something must be done , regardless of the looming recess .
`` We 'll stay until we vote , '' House oversight committee Chairman Darrell Issa , R-Calif. , said .
Asked if the House can find a solution , House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton , R-Mich. , said : `` We 'd better . ''
If lawmakers do end up breaking for recess without a bill , House leaders left open the possibility of recalling members if need be when they feel they have a majority of 218 votes . Earlier , sources said GOP leaders were `` way short '' of the votes they needed , with conservative lawmakers joining Democrats in refusing to back the package .
Asked Thursday afternoon if the bill still has a chance , House Appropriations Committee Chairman Hal Rogers , R-Ky. , said : `` We 'll see . '' He told ███ that he was at the airport when his secretary told him to return to Capitol Hill .
A joint statement from House Republican leaders said the `` situation shows the intense concern within our conference -- and among the American people -- about the need to ensure the security of our borders and the president 's refusal to faithfully execute our laws . ''
In the absence of legislation , Republicans urged President Obama to act on his own to secure the borders and safely deport illegal immigrant children .
`` We will continue to work on solutions to the border crisis and other challenges facing our country , '' they said .
But Senate Democrats blasted their House colleagues for dropping the legislation . `` Shame on the House of Representatives , '' Sen. Chris Murphy , D-Conn. , said .
Texas Gov . Rick Perry also slammed his fellow Republicans , saying `` it 's beyond belief that Congress is abandoning its post while our border crisis continues to create humanitarian suffering . ''
The legislation 's prospects changed quickly over the course of the day . Initially , House leaders thought they had a plan to win enough support , by scheduling a separate vote on legislation to prohibit Obama from expanding a policy that lets some illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. as children stay . Amid reports that the administration is considering such an expansion , the bill by Rep. Marsha Blackburn , R-Tenn. , would specifically bar the president from broadening the 2012 policy .
Republicans say another illegal immigrant reprieve by the president would only exacerbate the surge of illegal immigrant children trekking to the U.S.-Mexico border from Central America .
`` Such action would create an even greater incentive for more illegal crossings and make the crisis on our border even worse , and that would be a grave mistake , '' House Speaker John Boehner said Thursday .
The vote had been scheduled by Republican leaders as part of the effort to win conservative support for the separate , scaled-down package giving the Department of Homeland Security an immediate $ 659 million to address the border crisis and making other policy changes .
But Sen. Ted Cruz , R-Texas , nevertheless raised concerns with House members about their version of the border legislation , and lawmakers and aides said Thursday that it had an impact . They also pointed to opposition from Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Ala .
Sessions voiced concerns about both the House and Senate proposals , arguing that the Senate would never take up the executive action bill being considered in the House . Sessions wants any bill addressing the president 's funding request to also address the executive action issue .
`` We as policy makers must face the reality that the president is openly planning to use executive actions to provide amnesty and work permits to millions without any lawful authority , '' he said in a statement .
White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said earlier in the day : `` It is extraordinary that the House of Representatives , after failing for more than a year to reform our broken immigration reform system , would vote to restrict a law enforcement tool that the Department of Homeland Security uses to focus resources on key enforcement priorities like public safety and border security , and provide temporary relief from deportation for people who are low priorities for removal . ''