Just as people often define themselves by the company they keep , a nation creates an identity by the immigrants it lets in . For that reason alone , it is instructive to look over the 844-page bill on immigration reform released Tuesday by a “ gang ” of eight senators .
The bipartisan bill , which the Senate will debate in coming weeks , seems more like tactical truces between the two parties than a vision on how to define American society through its immigrant flows . It contains difficult compromises designed to split political differences , all in hopes of pleasing – or at least not offending – the various constituencies of Democratic and Republican lawmakers .
The bill ’ s title – the “ Border Security , Economic Opportunity , and Immigration Modernization Act ” – illustrates a general lack of grand ideals . Yes , better security and individual prosperity do matter . Yes , the United States needs both low- and high-skilled workers from abroad . And surely , the mass lawbreaking of undocumented workers needs a rectifying and humane resolution .
But shouldn ’ t a major move to legalize 11 million immigrants and open the doors to millions more at least offer a transcending mission that unifies the nation around its civic character ?
At best , the document calls for a “ just system for integrating those who seek to join American society. ” But join for what ?
In a 2011 speech , President Obama warned of the need to lift the immigration debate to a higher narrative :
“ The truth is , we ’ ve often wrestled with the politics of who is and who isn ’ t allowed to enter this country , ” he said . “ These issues touch on deeply held convictions – about who we are as a people , about what it means to be an American . ”
Past immigration laws were designed to help break down the potentially divisive identities of class , sect , and ethnicity and create a unifying theme . The theme was often based on ideals spelled out in the Declaration of Independence and other founding documents . But after many waves of immigrants , the US is seen less as a “ melting pot ” or even a “ salad. ” Some might describe it as a table of distinct tapas dishes .
If the bill passes , will American society become a “ pudding without a theme , ” to use a Churchill phrase ? Modern countries that allow new immigrants need an identity centered on ideals – “ bonds of affection , ” as Lincoln put it – that are worthy of self-sacrifice . And certainly worth more than an economic imperative , a security patch , or a wider tolerance for diversity .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
The nation ’ s motto , E pluribus unum ( out of many , one ) , constantly needs to define that “ one. ” That happens in many ways – through elections , court decisions , and cultural trends . A new immigration law should be able to strike broadly at reshaping a national identity .
In designing the Great Seal of the United States , Founding Father Charles Thomson chose the words Novus ordo seclorum , or new order of the ages . But he insisted that it should really signify the “ beginning of the new American Era. ” Surely a new and hefty immigration bill can signify a new era for America that defines what sort of new company it wants to keep .