The calls started coming from Republican Party honchos and prominent GOP senators right after Election 2012 : The party had to start competing better for the Latino vote , and immigration reform was the place to start .
As a pair of deal-making Republicans deeply disliked by elements of the GOP base — Sens . John McCain and Lindsey Graham — were working with senators from both parties to draft an immigration bill , top Rubio hands flatly warned the Florida freshman not to go there . The advisers feared nothing would be worse for his chances in a potential presidential campaign than being associated with “ amnesty ” for the 11 million immigrants in the country illegally .
Rubio didn ’ t take the advice . And two years later , immigration remains the freshman senator ’ s No . 1 liability in his bid for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination — though not necessarily the deal breaker it appeared to be after the reform effort Rubio helped shepherd to passage in the Senate hit a brick wall in the House .
“ Everybody likes Marco Rubio , ” said Iowa conservative radio host Steve Deace , a nationally syndicated commentator . But “ I still don ’ t hear his name from conservatives at all , and I think the Gang of Eight ” — the bipartisan group of senators that pushed the most sweeping immigration overhaul in a generation — “ has a lot to do with that . ”
Even so , the political damage to Rubio has clearly subsided over time , in no small part due to Rubio ’ s repeated disavowal of the entire reform exercise . In the days ahead of his presidential campaign launch in Miami Monday evening , some critics on the tea party right concede he has resuscitated himself politically , though the true effect may not be apparent until much deeper into the 2016 primary season .
“ What I think everyone over here underestimated is how difficult it is to pass massive pieces of legislation on any subject — not just immigration — given the rightful distrust the people have about the federal government , ” Rubio said in a recent interview in the Capitol .
Said Jenny Beth Martin , the president and co-founder of the Tea Party Patriots : “ I think that Sen. Rubio has done something that most politicians don ’ t do : He evaluated what went wrong … [ and ] is working to make sure he doesn ’ t make the same mistakes again . I think that neutralizes his mistakes . ”
Still , even if immigration won ’ t be a central message of his presidential campaign , it will be an inescapable part of his record and his own personal narrative . The son of Cuban immigrants , Rubio announced his presidential run at the Freedom Tower in Miami — an Ellis Island of the South that served as a welcoming point for Cuban exiles into America .
The issue is also bound to be re-litigated by his opponents and voters , as it has during early appearances this year at a New Hampshire town hall and Iowa book signing . When pressed on the matter on the campaign trail , Rubio plans to tell voters that the comprehensive bill he co-authored will never pass Congress .
In his latest book , “ American Dreams , ” Rubio argues that the approach he took in 2013 on immigration — one single bill to reform the entire system — was “ simply not realistic. ” He can assert that , Rubio says , because he knows of the experience firsthand .
“ Every massive piece of legislation that has passed over the last 20 years has by and large been disastrous , ” Rubio said in the interview .
Instead , Rubio is renewing an argument he made originally that Congress should take up immigration reform in pieces , starting with proposals that Republicans largely support such as enforcement at the southern border , a mandatory electronic system to verify the legal status of employees and a new method to track people who overstay their visas . He ’ ll argue that deporting all 11 million immigrants here illegally is improbable , and call for an onerous series of steps to allow some to stay in the country . And a President Rubio would only entertain that possibility of citizenship after a enforcement-minded immigration laws are enacted first .
Such talk — and his decision to back away away from his own bill — seem to have alleviated some concern on the right that Rubio is not another McCain or Graham .
Yet it ’ s also opened him to charges that the GOP lawmaker flip-flopped on the issue when the political temperature got too hot – simply to pander to the base of the party , and potentially leaving himself vulnerable to Latino voters in a general election .
In June 2013 , the same month that his immigration bill passed the Senate , a Washington Post-ABC News poll showed that his “ strongly favorable ” ratings among Republicans had tumbled by 11 points since the previous August .
Rubio began to make amends with conservatives . Immediately after the bill passed the chamber , he shifted his attention to a range of economic reforms and other matters . He refused to call on the GOP-led House to pass the Senate bill , even as the other seven co-authors planned an aggressive public pressure campaign on House Republicans .
Rubio blamed President Barack Obama for scuttling the bill ’ s chances , saying no conservative trusts the White House to implement the border control provisions . Republicans in the House agreed .
His shift to the right didn ’ t stop there . At the height of last summer ’ s border crisis , Rubio called for the 2012 Obama administration program that halts deportations of young undocumented immigrants — an initiative highly popular with Latinos — to eventually end .
Critics say his handling of immigration feeds the perception that Rubio lacks any significant legislative accomplishments in his short time in the Senate . And immigration activists who were once impressed with Rubio for taking on the politically fraught task of writing a reform bill now see him as a sell-out .
“ Every time he gets on his knees and begs for forgiveness from the nativist right in the GOP , I cringe , ” said Frank Sharry , a veteran immigration advocate who leads America ’ s Voice , a left-leaning , pro-reform group . “ He will always be known as the guy who stood up for something he seemed to believe in and backed down when it was politically convenient to do so . ”
It ’ s unclear how Rubio would fare among Latino voters if he were to win the GOP nomination . The polling firm Latino Decisions found in a November survey of Latino voters that Rubio is viewed favorably by 31 percent of Latinos vs. 36 percent who saw him unfavorably . About one-third of those voters had not heard of Rubio , or had any opinion on the senator .
Despite concerns for some on the right , public polls show the senator still has a serious chance to win a wide-open race . A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll from March showed that 56 percent of Republican primary voters said they could see themselves supporting Rubio — a higher figure than received by any other of the 13 GOP contenders listed by the poll .
Perhaps that ’ s because Rubio has moved to ensure he ’ s not identified strictly with the immigration issue . He ’ s been laying out economic reform ideas , from making higher education more affordable to helping narrow the income gap . At the same time , he has maintained his staunchly conservative views on social issues and foreign policy .
“ I ’ m struck by how much he has recovered , ” said Weekly Standard editor William Kristol , who two years ago advised Rubio to “ walk away ” from the Gang of Eight .
“ It ’ s hard to put your finger on it , but there do seem to be some politicians whom lots of voters want to like and are eager to forgive for their mistakes , ” Kristol said , citing Ronald Reagan as an example . “ Others who are less likable get held to a stricter standard . So Rubio ’ s apparent comeback over the last couple of years may indicate a kind of underlying strength there that one might not have expected . ”
Yet , Rubio is still likely to be the left of the likes of Ted Cruz when it comes to immigration reform .
In “ American Dreams , ” Rubio said he would address immigrants already here illegally once Congress has passed enforcement proposals and turned the current legal immigration system into one based on merit and economic considerations , not family ties .
At that point , he said he would institute a system to register those here illegally , deporting ones who have committed serious crimes or who have not been in the United States long enough . Undocumented immigrants who pay a fine , learn English and undergo background checks could then obtain a temporary legal status , something they would have to hold for at least 10 years before applying for permanent residence .
Rubio said he would not create a so-called special pathway , meaning a way to obtain citizenship that isn ’ t afforded to other immigrants . That highly contentious provision — to provide a pathway to citizenship — was included in the Gang of Eight proposal .
“ He not going to run away from it , he ’ s going to talk about it , ” said Alfonso Aguilar , executive director of the American Principles Project ’ s Latino Partnership , a group that advocates for conservative causes among Latinos . “ He ’ s going to continue to say that it ’ s important to deal with the issue . ”
Aguilar , who has lobbied GOP lawmakers on immigration reform , said Rubio should have tried harder to recruit other conservative Republicans to the Gang of Eight so he wasn ’ t the sole emissary charged with selling the bill to the right . One target might have been Sen. Mike Lee ( R-Utah ) , who was considered part of the group in its early stages .
But still , many Republicans said Rubio should get political credit for at least trying to solve a tough issue .
“ What can not be denied is that while many of his colleagues will be critical , they have yet to propose any viable solution to a problem that everybody in the United States understands is there , ” said Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) , who is backing Jeb Bush but says he ’ s a “ huge admirer ” of his home-state senator . “ Rubio had the courage to take on a very , very controversial issue . ”