The Senate on Thursday approved a sweeping immigration overhaul that would extend legal status to millions of undocumented immigrants while increasing border security , sending the bill to the House side where it faces a chilly reception .
The vote caps weeks of bipartisan negotiations and hands President Obama , who has made immigration legislation the cornerstone of his second-term agenda , a partial victory .
The Senate voted 68-32 to approve the bill , following a series of test votes that already demonstrated the legislation had enough support to pass .
`` The United States Senate delivered for the American people , bringing us a critical step closer to fixing our broken immigration system once and for all , '' President Obama said in a statement . He added : `` Today , the Senate did its job . It 's now up to the House to do the same . ''
The question is whether the Senate vote can compel the Republican-led House to follow suit . Though 68 votes is a strong majority , backers fell short of the 70 votes they were hoping to secure , a number they felt would help persuade House leaders to move forward . Some Republicans have already declared the Senate bill `` dead on arrival '' in the House , but House lawmakers are nevertheless working on their own piecemeal version of immigration legislation .
House Speaker John Boehner , who says both chambers should act on immigration , declined to say Thursday how his caucus would proceed .
`` We 're going to go home for the recess next week and listen to our constituents , '' he said . `` And when we get back , we 're going to ... have a discussion about the way forward . ''
Despite the strong majority in favor of the bill on Thursday , Congress remains divided over the issue .
Republican opponents of the bill voiced frustration as the Senate scrambled to finalize its work ahead of the looming recess . Sen. Charles Grassley , R-Iowa , on Wednesday said he felt `` used and abused , '' as he tried to slow down the process and call for more amendments to be considered .
All Democrats , in addition to 14 Republicans , voted for the legislation on Thursday . All `` no '' votes came from the Republican side of the aisle .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Ala. , an ardent critic of the legislation , said the failure to reach 70 votes `` ensures the House has plenty of space to chart an opposite course and reject this fatally flawed proposal . ''
Sessions complains that , among other issues , the bill would lead to a `` surge '' in legal immigration that would `` reduce wages and increase unemployment . ''
The legislation would be the most sweeping overhaul of America 's immigration system since the 1980s . It would legalize millions of presently illegal immigrants , while expanding legal immigration and increasing border security .
`` The vast majority of members in this body realize that the immigration system is broken and needs fixing , '' Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , said on the Senate floor Wednesday .
But many in the GOP-controlled House oppose the pathway to citizenship at the center of the Senate bill . And many prefer a piecemeal approach rather than a sweeping bill like the one the Senate is producing .
Republicans in both chambers have complained that a late-developing compromise measure that increased spending on border security still puts `` amnesty '' ahead of security .
At its core , the legislation in the Senate includes numerous steps to prevent future illegal immigration , while at the same time it offers a chance at citizenship to the 11 million immigrants now living in the country unlawfully .
It provides for 20,000 new Border Patrol agents , requires the completion of 700 miles of fencing and requires an array of high-tech devices to be deployed to secure the border with Mexico .
Businesses would be required to check on the legal status of prospective employees . Other provisions would expand the number of visas for highly skilled workers relied upon by the technology industry . A separate program would be established for lower-skilled workers , and farm workers would be admitted under a temporary program .
The basic legislation was drafted by four Democrats and four Republicans who met privately for months to produce a rare bipartisan compromise in a polarized Senate . They fended off unwanted changes in the Senate Judiciary Committee and then were involved in negotiations with Republican Sens . John Hoeven of North Dakota and Bob Corker of Tennessee on a package of tougher border security provisions that swelled support among Republicans .
Outnumbered critics insist the bill falls short of the promises made for it .
Sen. Richard Shelby , R-Ala. , called it `` the mother of all amnesties . ''
The House Judiciary Committee is in the midst of a piece-by-piece effort , signing off Wednesday on legislation to establish a system requiring all employers within two years to check their workers ' legal status .
The Judiciary Committee was turning its attention Thursday to a bill on high-skilled workers . Last week it approved two more measures , one on agriculture workers and a second to make illegal presence in the country a federal crime , instead of a civil offense as it is now .