Unless Congress moves to limit current legal immigration rates , the U.S. will add at least 10 million more legal immigrants over the next decade — more than the combined populations of seven major cities , according to GOP staffers on the Senate ’ s Immigration subcommittee .
A chart the committee released Monday reveals that the populations of Atlanta , Los Angeles , Chicago , Boston , Denver , St. Louis , and Dallas together would not equal the number of new immigrants set to be admitted over the coming ten years .
The chairman of the subcommittee , Sen. Jeff Sessions ( R-AL ) , has been arguing for a curb to current immigration levels .
“ What we need now is immigration moderation : slowing the pace of new arrivals so that wages can rise , welfare rolls can shrink and the forces of assimilation can knit us all more closely together , ” Sessions wrote in an op-ed Thursday ( emphasis his ) .
In conjunction with the release of the chart , the subcommittee issued an analysis of the expected flow over the coming ten years , noting that under current policy the U.S. issues “ green cards ” to about a million new Legal Permanent Residents annually .
“ New lifetime immigrants admitted with green cards gain guaranteed legal access to federal benefits , as well as guaranteed work authorization , ” the analysis reads . “ LPRs can also petition to bring their relatives to the United States , and both the petitioner and the relatives can become naturalized citizens . ”
The more than 10 million immigrants expected over the coming decade — as the chart shows — is more than the total populations of Atlanta ( 447,000 ) , Los Angeles ( 3.88 million ) , Chicago ( 2.7 million ) , Boston ( 645,000 ) , Denver ( 650,000 ) , St. Louis ( 318,000 ) , and Dallas ( 1.25 million ) .
The analysis notes that in the 1950s and 1960s only about 285,000 new permanent residents were admitted annually — or less than 3 million in a decade — and over all the foreign-born population actually declined from the 1950s-1970s .
“ During this economic period , compensation for American workers nearly doubled , ” the analysis reads . “ These lower midcentury immigration levels were the product of a federal policy change—after the last period of large-scale immigration that had begun in roughly 1880 , President Coolidge argued that a slowing of immigration would benefit both U.S.-born and immigrant-workers . ”
Since the 1970s , however , the report notes that the foreign-born population in the U.S. has quadrupled to 41.3 million in 2013 as the share of working age men ( 25-54 years old ) has tripled since the 1960s . It notes that the 2013 Senate Gang of Eight immigration bill , S.744 , would have continued the trend of increased immigration by tripling the number of green cards available over the next decade .
“ Finally , it is worth observing that the 10 million grants of new permanent residency under current law is not an estimate of total immigration , ” the analysis adds . “ In fact , increased flows of legal immigration actually tend to correlate with increased flows of illegal immigration : the former helps provide networks and pull factors for the latter . Most of the top-sending countries for legal immigration are also the top-sending countries for illegal immigration . ”
The analysis further noted that visa overstays make up a significant part of illegal immigration and that the Census Bureau is projecting that net immigration will be 14 million by 2025 .
“ Not only is the population of foreign-born at a record level , but Census projects that , in just eight years , the percentage of the country that is foreign-born will reach the highest level ever recorded in U.S. history , with more than 1 in 7 residents being foreign-born and , unlike the prior wave , surge towards 1 in 6 and continually upward , setting new records each and every year . In 1970 , less than 1 in 21 residents were foreign-born , ” the report reads , noting that this is occurring as Gallup has shown that a majority of Americans want to see a decrease in immigration rather than an increase .