At long last , we have movement to end the government shutdown .
Per a deal reached between Senate leaders Mitch McConnell and Chuck Schumer , the Senate will vote on two bills to fund the government on Thursday . One will be the immigration proposal the president unveiled Saturday . It ’ s a complete non-starter for Democrats , especially now that its many poison pills have been revealed . The other , though , would be a clean continuing resolution reopening the government until Feb. 8 that the House had already passed . That one would very much be a starter for Democrats , and it would ensure that federal workers wouldn ’ t miss another payday . It would need 60 votes to advance .
This is either the breakthrough that ends the shutdown—at least for a couple of weeks—or this week ’ s iteration of What ’ s New in Shutdown Messaging .
If enough Republicans join Democrats to pass the short-term bill , President Donald Trump would find on his desk a bill to fund the government without any wall money . That would be a defeat for him , and it would be a sign that Senate Republicans had finally decided their position was untenable . It would be a cave .
If the president comes out against the proposal , though , and scares off Senate Republicans from voting for it , it would allow Senate Republican leaders to argue that it ’ s futile passing legislation that doesn ’ t address the border . And the shutdown would continue .
In either case , we are starting to see this week what we hadn ’ t seen in the past month of the shutdown : movement . It was McConnell who asked the president to develop “ compromise ” legislation in the first place , because he needed something to put on the floor . And centrist Democrats in the House , many of them representing red or purple districts , drafted a letter on Tuesday to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi urging her at least to promise the president a vote on his homeland security request , including border wall funding , after the government reopened .
The Senate might not be able to end the shutdown on Thursday . But the machinery that will end the shutdown eventually—pressure from anxious Senate Republicans and anxious House Democrats—is starting to operate .