The Trump administration told a federal judge late Friday that it won ’ t defend the legality of the Obama-era DACA amnesty — but said the court should be wary of cutting it off entirely , as states such as Texas have requested .
“ Federal defendants agree — DACA is unlawful , ” the Justice Department said in a brief filed with Judge Andrew S. Hanen in Texas , agreeing with the reasoning of Judge Hanen and a higher-up appeals court from several years ago that the Obama administration overstepped its powers by granting a categorical amnesty to potentially millions of immigrants who crossed the border illegally .
But the Justice Department said it didn ’ t want to see the judge issue a nationwide injunction that would stop the program in its tracks , saying the current legal situation is too messy already .
The move leaves it to immigrant-rights advocates and , perhaps , Democratic states , to defend the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program in what ’ s likely to be the final legal showdown for the embattled program .
DACA , announced by the Obama administration in 2012 , is currently protecting some 700,000 “ Dreamers ” from deportation , and offers them work permits and Social Security numbers . They are eligible for some taxpayer benefits .
But the program has been controversial and legally suspect from the start — President Obama repeatedly said he lacked the power to create such a program , before reversing himself and claiming such powers .
The Trump administration last year concluded the program was , in fact , illegal , and moved to phase it out .
While a judge in Maryland agreed with the move , judges in California , New York and Washington , D.C. , said the Trump administration cut too many corners and the phaseout was illegal . They ordered the president to restart the program , at least in terms of renewing two-year amnesties for people who have been previously approved for DACA .
Texas , meanwhile , which won a battle in 2015 to stop a broader deportation amnesty attempt by the Obama administration , is now demanding Judge Hanen step in and stop the program by ruling it illegal .
The administration ’ s new brief cuts a middle ground between Texas and the pro-DACA courts .
The Justice Department says it agrees with Texas that the program is illegal , but doesn ’ t want the court to issue an injunction , saying that would create even more of a legal mess .
“ If this court issues an injunction ordering federal defendants to end the DACA policy , federal defendants will face simultaneous conflicting court orders — which highlights the impropriety of issuing nationwide injunctions as a general matter , ” government lawyers said .
They said if Judge Hanen does issue an injunction , they hoped he would at least grant a two-week grace period so the government could rush to the Supreme Court and try to get the conflicts sorted out .
A similar request made to the justices was rejected earlier this year .