WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. President Donald Trump urged lawmakers on Tuesday to work toward bipartisan compromises , but pushed a hard line on immigration , insisting on a border wall and other concessions from Democrats as part of any deal to protect the children of illegal immigrants .
Trump , in his first State of the Union speech , gave no ground on the contentious issue of whether to shield young immigrants known as “ Dreamers ” from deportation .
Aiming to keep conservative supporters happy as he looks to November congressional elections , Trump stood by a set of principles opposed by Democrats , including the border wall with Mexico and new restrictions on how many family members that legal immigrants can bring into the United States .
“ Tonight , I call upon all of us to set aside our differences , to seek out common ground , and to summon the unity we need to deliver for the people we were elected to serve , ” Trump said in his address .
Trump used the hour-and-20-minute speech , given annually by presidents to Congress , to try to overcome doubts about his presidency at a time when he is battling a probe into his campaign ’ s alleged ties with Russia and suffering low job approval ratings .
Trump made no mention of the federal probe into whether his campaign colluded with Russia in the 2016 presidential election , a controversy that is dogging his presidency . Trump has denied collusion and has called the probe a “ witch hunt . ”
The speech was short on details about Trump ’ s policy proposals .
But his sober , measured approach was welcomed by the public . A CNN/SSRS snap poll said 48 percent of those surveyed had a “ very positive ” response to the speech and 22 percent “ somewhat positive . ”
There was little sign of unity inside the House of Representatives chamber where Trump spoke . Republican lawmakers cheered wildly at the president ’ s applause lines . Democrats often sat in their seats silently and many booed when he laid out his immigration proposals .
Turning to foreign policy late in the speech , Trump denounced the “ depraved character ” of North Korea ’ s leadership and said Pyongyang ’ s “ reckless pursuit of nuclear missiles could very soon threaten our homeland . ”
“ We are waging a campaign of maximum pressure to prevent that from happening , ” he said . In a surprise moment , he singled out a North Korea defector in the crowd , Ji Seong-ho , as an example of what he called the reclusive country ’ s brutal nature .
Trump also said he had signed an order to keep open the U.S. military prison at Guantanamo Bay , Cuba , for foreign terrorism suspects . Former Democratic President Barack Obama had vowed to close the prison , which has been condemned by human rights groups , but was unable to shut it down completely .
Whether Trump would follow through on his appeal for bipartisan harmony was far from clear . Trump ’ s past attempts at a unifying message have been undermined by his later rancorous tweets and divisive statements that angered Democrats and frequently annoyed lawmakers in his own Republican Party .
The unity plea will first be put to the test in his drive for a compromise on protecting 1.8 million Dreamers - people brought illegally to the country as children - who face a March 5 deadline on whether they can begin to be deported .
Republicans welcomed Trump ’ s immigration proposals , with U.S . Senator James Lankford of Oklahoma saying Trump tried to strike a middle ground .
“ My Democratic colleagues can say he didn ’ t move enough , but you can ’ t deny he moved a lot . There are people in his core base who think he has moved way too far . ”
But Senator Patrick Leahy , a Vermont Democrat and the longest-serving senator , said Trump ’ s words about unity , after a year of “ divisive actions , petty insults and disgraceful race-baiting ... ring hollow . ”
U.S. President Donald Trump delivers his State of the Union address to a joint session of the U.S. Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington , U.S. January 30 , 2018 . ███/Joshua Roberts
Trump said he was “ extending an open hand ” for an immigration deal and that he would provide Dreamers a pathway to citizenship over 10 to 12 years in exchange for funding the border wall , which he promised during his campaign , and restrictions on legal immigration .
He called his plan a “ down-the-middle compromise , ” but some Democrats hissed when he said he wanted to rein in “ chain migration , ” the ability of legal immigrants to bring a wide-ranging number of family members into the country .
“ Let ’ s come together , set politics aside and finally get the job done , ” Trump said .
Trump took credit for U.S. economic gains including a soaring stock market and a low jobless rate . He boasted about the economic growth he believes will result from tax cuts Republicans pushed through Congress late last year .
“ This is our new American moment . There has never been a better time to start living the American Dream , ” he said .
Trump said he would like a compromise over a plan to rebuild aging roads , bridges and other infrastructure . He said he wanted legislation to generate at least $ 1.5 trillion through a combination of federal , state and local spending as well as private-sector contributions .
Market reaction was muted , with S & P 500 futures drifting higher , but investors saying there was little new for Wall Street in the speech .
“ Futures lifted a bit because it was not a negative speech . He was calm . He celebrated America . He avoided his own failures , ” said Tim Ghriskey , chief investment officer at Cresset Wealth Advisors in Chicago .
While Trump spoke of compromise , his speech provided some reminders of partisan battles over the past year .
He singled out a speech guest , 12-year-old Preston Sharp , for leading an effort to put American flags on the graves of 40,000 veterans , saying the initiative was “ why we proudly stand for the national anthem . ”
His criticism of National Football League players who refused to stand for the anthem in protest against police shootings of minorities and racial disparities in the justice system , dominated headlines last autumn .