President Obama vowed Sunday to move forward with an executive order to ease immigration laws before the end of the year , ignoring dire warnings from Republican leaders that the move will poison his relationship with the next Congress .
The president said he would not wait any longer to address the country ’ s immigration problems and would grant legal status to most of the estimated 11 million undocumented residents living in the U.S .
“ I ’ d prefer , and still prefer , to see it done through Congress . But every day that I wait , we ’ re misallocating resources , we ’ re deporting people that shouldn ’ t be deported , we ’ re not deporting folks that are dangerous and need to be deported , ” Mr. Obama said in an interview aired Sunday on the CBS program “ Face the Nation . ”
Mr. Obama has been warned against acting unilaterally on immigration by House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican , and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky , who is likely to become majority leader when Republicans take over the upper chamber in January .
Sen. John Barrasso , Wyoming Republican , said the president ’ s executive action on immigration would be like tossing a “ hand grenade ” into his negotiations with the Republican-run Congress .
“ It would be like the president pulling the pin out of a hand grenade and throwing it in as we are trying to actually work together . I am hoping that cooler heads at the White House can prevail , ” he said on “ Fox News Sunday . ”
The fight over immigration reform adds to the drama when Congress resumes this week after a wave of Republican victories over Democrats in midterm elections . Lawmakers will wrestle with the budget , tax measures and whether to take up Mr. Obama ’ s nomination of New York federal prosecutor Loretta Lynch to be the next attorney general .
Mr. Obama said he took responsibility for Democrats ’ widespread losses in the elections , which Republicans succeeded in making a referendum on the president ’ s job performance .
“ We got beat , ” said Mr. Obama . “ The buck stops right here , at my desk . And so whenever , as the head of the party , it doesn ’ t do well , I ’ ve got to take responsibility for it . ”
Despite a slow but steady economic recovery , Mr. Obama said , many Americans are still struggling and are angry about partisan paralysis in Washington .
“ We ’ re making progress , but people still feel like their wages haven ’ t gone up , their incomes haven ’ t gone up , it ’ s still hard to save for retirement , still hard to send a kid to college . And then they see Washington gridlocked , and they ’ re frustrated , ” he said . “ They know one person in Washington , and that ’ s the president of the United States . So I ’ ve got to make this city work better for them . ”
In the lame-duck session , lawmakers also will consider Mr. Obama ’ s request of $ 5.6 billion to fight the Islamic State terrorist army , including $ 1.6 billion associated with a U.S. military buildup to train and equip Iraqi forces .
He wouldn ’ t rule out sending even more troops to Iraq after ordering the deployment of another 1,500 last week to bring the number of U.S. military advisers to about 3,100 .
Mr. Obama stressed that U.S. troops would be training and supporting Iraqi and Sunni tribal forces , but would not be engaging in combat operations . He said a well-trained Iraqi force is the key to defeating the terrorists .
“ What we learned from the previous engagement in Iraq is that our military ’ s always the best . We can always knock out — knock back any threat . But then when we leave , that threat comes back , ” Mr. Obama said .
Critics blame the president ’ s 2011 withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq for creating a power vacuum that has been filled by Sunni extremists .
As he risked a brawl with Republican leaders over immigration , the president said that offering legal status and a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants was the only option because “ we don ’ t have the capacity to deport 11 million people . ”
Mr. Obama insisted that his executive order did not have to be the last word on immigration reform . He said Congress still will have an opportunity to pass legislation that could replace whatever executive action he takes .
“ What I ’ m saying to them [ is ] actually their time hasn ’ t run out , ” said Mr. Obama . “ I ’ m going to do what I can do through executive action . It ’ s not going to be everything that needs to get done and it will take time to put it in place . In the interim , the minute they pass a bill that address the problems with immigration reform , I will sign it and it supersedes whatever actions I ’ ve taken . ”
“ I ’ m encouraging them to do so , ” said Mr. Obama . “ They have the ability , the authority , the control to supersede anything I do through my executive authority by simply carrying out their functions over there . And if in fact it ’ s true that they want to pass a bill — they ’ ve got good ideas — nobody ’ s stopping them and the minute they do it and the minute I sign that bill , then what I ’ ve done goes away . ”
However , the president would be able to measure any legislation against his executive orders when deciding whether to sign a bill or exercise his veto power .
In defending his decision to use an executive order , Mr. Obama also cited the need to secure the border , which has been the focus of Republicans in the immigration debate .
Republican lawmakers balked at the Senate-passed immigration bill because they were skeptical of Mr. Obama ’ s commitment to border security to stop the flood of illegal immigrants if the U.S. opens a path to citizenship .