Washington , D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser ordered the removal of fake U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement fliers that were posted around the city Thursday , which the mayor said was an effort to divide residents in the nation 's capital .
Clearly the flyer is meant to scare and divide our residents .
We wo n't stand for it . # DCValues https : //t.co/aCf9ewJ8Ir — MurielBowser ( @ MurielBowser ) June 1 , 2017
Bowser confirmed via Twitter that she is working with the city 's police and public works departments to remove the official-looking fliers , which show a U.S. Department of Homeland Security logo beside the words `` U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement '' written in large block letters .
The flier reads , `` Sanctuary City Neighborhood Public Notice , '' and goes into claims about possible penalties for supporting illegal immigration .
Balkans Bohemia , who posted an original image of the flier that the mayor retweeted , told ███ that he first spotted the fliers a little after 9.a.m Thursday local time on his walk to the train .
`` I saw about six posters within a block and a half , '' Bohemia said . `` Some were put up with tape and others with glue . Some of the ones hung with glue are still up because they are proving difficult to get off the pole . ''
Bohemia said he knew the posters were fake when he spotted a Washington , D.C. , government logo at the bottom corner . `` Anyone who knows D.C. government knows they are a pro-sanctuary city , '' Bohemia said .
Federal immigration authorities responded to the fake fliers on Twitter .
“ The immigration enforcement notices appearing across Washington , D.C. , were not issued or sanctioned by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) , '' spokesperson Carissa Cutrell told ███ .
`` Just like false reports of immigration checkpoints or random sweeps , notices like these are dangerous and irresponsible . Any person who actively incites panic or fear of law enforcement is doing a disservice to the community , endangering public safety and the very people they claim to support and represent , ” Cutrell added .
Washington 's Metropolitan Police Department tweeted that it has a longstanding policy prohibiting officers from asking individuals about citizenship or residency status and stated `` our immigrant community is a vital part of the fabric of our city . ''
There is no word yet on who is responsible for posting the fliers or exactly how many have been found in the city .
Mayor Bowser tweeted about the incident using the hashtag # DCValues , offering `` a reminder that we respect all DC residents no matter their immigration status . ''