The amendment , from Sens . Corker and Hoeven cleared a procedural vote in the Senate . Senate backs 'border surge ' in test
The support of 67 senators on a test vote for a so-called “ border surge ” deal on Monday strongly signaled that a sweeping overhaul of the nation ’ s immigration laws will clear the Senate later this week .
The amendment , from Republican Sens . Bob Corker of Tennessee and John Hoeven of North Dakota , cleared a procedural vote in the Senate 67-27 . Fifteen Republicans voted in favor of cloture , and zero Democrats broke from their party to oppose the measure .
The overwhelming vote Monday accelerates the Senate momentum for immigration reform as its supporters race toward a self-imposed July 4 deadline to pass the bill . The Gang of Eight authors have inched closer to a supermajority of votes that could be as high as 70 after the group struck a deal with Corker and Hoeven that bolsters security resources for the U.S.-Mexico boundary .
But frustration from some Senate Republicans over what they see as a plodding floor process boiled over Monday , as 14 GOP senators vented in a letter to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) that their amendments weren ’ t getting heard . They are angry that there haven ’ t been enough votes on the Senate floor and many of the changes to the bill are being incorporated in a single Corker-Hoeven amendment .
The broad Corker-Hoeven compromise is likely the last major change to the immigration bill . Reid filed cloture on the overall Gang of Eight bill Monday afternoon , which sets up another procedural vote for Wednesday .
Though some senators are demanding more time and opportunities to offer amendments , an agreement to vote on them would require unanimous consent , which appears unlikely .
“ We could have had three genuine weeks on this bill , processing amendments and having votes , ” Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley , the top Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee , said during a floor speech Monday . “ Yet , we ’ re forced to vote on packages that were concocted behind closed doors . ”
A spokesman for Reid rebuffed the complaints from Republican senators , saying the same senators had blocked agreement on amendment votes throughout the month .
Added Corker : “ The very people who are calling for more amendments are those who have objected to amendments being voted on . I think it ’ s ironic . ”
But one by one on Monday , some undeclared Republicans announced that they won ’ t be backing the Corker-Hoeven compromise . That decision signals they will oppose the underlying legislation when it comes up for a final vote later this week .
Sen. John Cornyn ( R-Texas ) said he couldn ’ t support a proposal that was “ cobbled together ” at the last minute . Sen. Mike Johanns ( R-Neb . ) , a retiring senator once eyed as a potential Gang supporter , announced his opposition with a list of eight complaints about the Corker-Hoeven deal .
And Sen. Richard Burr ( R-N.C. ) wrote on Twitter : “ Any effort to deal w/ illegal immigration must secure the border — Corker-Hoeven amendment and current bill do not achieve this goal . ”