On Monday night , the Trump administration was handed the latest in a series of courtroom defeats over its treatment of families entering the US without papers .
Judge Dolly Gee of the Central District of California formally refused the administration ’ s request to modify the Flores court settlement , which governs the treatment of children in immigration custody . The Flores agreement was the court ruling that the administration had pointed to for its policy of family separation — because it couldn ’ t keep children detained longer than 20 days , per Flores , it had to split children from their parents while the parents were in detention .
Gee rejected the administration ’ s request to allow Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) to keep migrant families in detention facilities for as long as it took to process their cases ( a process which , for asylum seekers , can take months or longer ) .
It ’ s a defeat on the second front of a legal war for the Trump administration and its “ zero tolerance ” policy at the US-Mexico border . In the Flores case , the administration is fighting for indefinite family detention . In a separate federal case in San Diego , it ’ s being stopped from resuming family separation and hounded to quickly reunite the nearly 3,000 families separated while the policy was in full effect through mid-June .
But Monday night ’ s ruling also makes it clear that the administration has the power to start separating some migrant families again .
The judges in both court cases — as well as the ACLU , which is the lead plaintiff in the family reunification lawsuit — agree with a core principle of the government ’ s argument on immigration policy : that it can ’ t be forced to release anyone who comes into the US without papers just because they bring their child with them .
In some cases , Monday night ’ s ruling says , the government can force parents to make a choice : stay with their children in immigration detention indefinitely , or remain detained by ICE while their children are sent to the custody of Health and Human Services ( just as they were under the family-separation policy ) and ultimately placed with another adult in the US .
A Department of Justice lawyer said Tuesday that the government interprets the judges as giving parents two options : “ remain detained together ” for longer than 20 days , or “ release the child ” and separate the family .
The Trump administration isn ’ t using that power — at least , not now . It stopped separating families as a policy after President Trump ’ s June 20 executive order , and it ’ s not going to try to resume them after Monday night ’ s judicial ruling .
But the door to resuming family separations is officially open . If the administration refrains from going back there , it will be by its own choice .
Trump ’ s attempt to detain all migrant families indefinitely got smacked down
Under the Obama administration , Judge Dolly Gee , in a ruling affirmed by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals , ruled that the 1997 Flores agreement prevented the government from keeping children in immigration detention indefinitely even if they were being held with their parents . The Obama and Trump administrations have interpreted the ruling as a requirement to generally release children from immigration detention after 20 days .
The family separation policy was an attempt to fulfill this requirement by releasing the children ( to Health and Human Services , or HHS ) but keeping their parents . On June 20 , Trump directed Attorney General Jeff Sessions to try to eliminate the requirement instead — by asking Judge Gee to reverse her own ruling of a few years ago .
The DOJ not only did that , but sent an update , after Judge Dana Sabraw ordered the government not to separate any more families , saying that Sabraw ’ s ruling automatically allowed them to detain families for longer .
Gee tore into that argument Monday night . She forcefully rejected the government ’ s claim that the current levels of families entering the US from Central America without papers ( often to seek asylum ) represent some kind of crisis or even a marked departure from 2014-2015 . She made it clear that the administration is still subject to the 2015 ruling that requires children to be released from custody quickly ( 20 days ) , period . And she totally dismissed the administration ’ s request to hold children ( with or without their parents ) in unlicensed facilities — which will cramp the administration ’ s efforts to quickly scale up child and family detention with temporary sites on military bases .
Trump says the only options are detention or separation . The courts are agreeing — sort of .
DHS doesn ’ t have to detain someone who comes into the US without papers . It can release them on their own cognizance to show up for their court hearing ; use an ankle bracelet to monitor them ; or enroll them in a case management program .
The Trump administration doesn ’ t see these as options , though . It has told the courts , over and over again , that parents simply won ’ t be released from detention . In the administration ’ s telling , the only two options are for parents to be kept with their children ( with no time limit ) , or for the family to be separated .
Each of the court rulings the administration is currently contending with theoretically forecloses one of those options : Sabraw ’ s ruling in the Ms. L case prevents family separation ; Gee ’ s ruling in Flores prevents long-term detention .
But Monday night ’ s ruling clarifies that the two rulings don ’ t work together : that parents can be forced to choose between waiving her right to keeping her children with her , and waiving the child ’ s right to be released from detention .
Detained parents may choose to exercise their Ms. L right to reunification or to stand on their children ’ s Flores Agreement rights . Defendants can not make this choice for them .
In other words : The government can force a choice between separation and indefinite detention .
Lee Gelernt , the deputy director of the ACLU ’ s Immigrant Rights Project — and the lead attorney in the Ms. L reunification case — agrees that the government can do this , and thinks that it ’ s an acceptable solution .
“ In the first 20 days , ” he explained to ███ , “ parents will make a decision : Do I want the child released or to stay with me ? ” Generally , he says , the parents of younger children will probably want to be kept with their children — but the mother of a teenager , for example , might choose to send him to HHS and live with a relative or family friend , rather than staying in immigration detention with her .
But Gelernt and the judges stress that the Trump administration isn ’ t allowed to detain parents — with or without their kids — as a general rule . They ’ re supposed to use “ prosecutorial discretion ” to determine whether an individual migrant is a security risk , or is likely to skip out on a court date . Parents who pose a low risk are supposed to be released with their kids . Only parents who are deemed risky should be forced to choose whether their kids are detained with them or released alone .
The administration is still choosing to release families instead of separating them
The Trump administration has promised to keep fighting Judge Gee in court , in the hopes that the Supreme Court will allow it to detain families in immigration detention indefinitely . Gee ’ s Flores ruling “ handicaps our ability to detain and promptly remove unaccompanied alien children and family units , ” said Department of Homeland Security spokesperson Katie Waldman — instead encouraging “ catch and release . ”
But DHS says that its current “ operational guidance ” — the practices that went into effect after Trump ’ s executive order , in which families are no longer separated simply for entering without papers — is still in effect .
In other words , even though the administration could be forcing some parents to choose separation or detention , it is instead choosing not to force that choice — it is releasing parents if it can ’ t detain them . ( The 31 or more children under five set to be reunited with their parents on Tuesday , for example , are expected to be released once the family ’ s back together . )
Some advocates are concerned that , as rumors swirl of parents being forced to sign forms they didn ’ t understand , some parents will unwittingly waive their Flores rights and allow their families to be kept indefinitely even if the government wouldn ’ t be separating them .
But it would be easier for the government to press parents to accept indefinite detention if it were using separation as the bad-cop alternative .