WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - President Donald Trump vowed on Thursday to declare a national emergency in an attempt to fund his U.S.-Mexico border wall without congressional approval , a step likely to plunge him into a battle with Congress over constitutional powers .
Conceding defeat in his earlier demand that Congress provide him with $ 5.7 billion in wall money , Trump agreed to sign a government-funding bill that lacks money for his wall , but prevents another damaging government shutdown .
The bill , passed overwhelmingly by both the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives on Thursday , contains money for fencing and other forms of border security . But it ignores the wall , which Trump in his 2016 campaign promised Mexico would pay for , arguing it is needed to check illegal immigration and drugs .
The bill was expected to go to the White House on Friday for the president ’ s signature before he flies to his private Mar-a-Lago golf club in Florida for a holiday weekend break .
“ President Trump will sign the government funding bill , and as he has stated before , he will also take other executive action - including a national emergency , ” White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said .
The top Democrat in Congress denounced the president ’ s move . Asked by reporters if she would file a legal challenge to an emergency declaration , House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi said : “ I may , that ’ s an option . ”
Top Senate Democrat Chuck Schumer accused Trump of a “ gross abuse of the power of the presidency . ”
Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said he would support Trump on the emergency . Earlier this month , McConnell had cautioned Trump that declaring an emergency could divide Senate Republicans , the Washington Post reported .
An emergency declaration could infringe on Congress ’ authority to make major decisions about taxpayer funds , a fundamental check and balance spelled out in the Constitution .
For weeks , as the president ’ s wall-funding demand to Congress went nowhere , even after a historic 35-day partial government shutdown , the White House explored whether an emergency declaration could be invoked to redirect taxpayer funds committed by Congress for other purposes toward the wall .
The national emergency strategy , expected to be declared by Trump on Friday , was already dividing Republicans .
Senator Susan Collins , a Republican moderate , said in a statement : “ Declaring a national emergency for this purpose would be a mistake on the part of the president . ”
But Representative Mark Meadows , chairman of a right-wing Republican faction in the House , said : “ At this point , President Trump must look at taking executive action - and I will stand with him to protect our sovereign borders . ”
Congressional aides said House Democrats would take various steps to try to block Trump ’ s emergency , possibly including a lawsuit . The short-term result of that could be a court injunction blocking any diversion of funds while judges weigh the matter , possibly leading to a Supreme Court decision .
A senior White House official said the administration had found nearly $ 7 billion to reallocate to the wall , including $ 600 million from a Treasury Department forfeiture fund , $ 2.5 billion from a Defense Department drug interdiction fund and $ 3.5 billion from a military construction budget .
The funds would cover just part of the estimated $ 23 billion cost of the wall promised by Trump along the 2,000-mile ( 3,200-km ) border with Mexico .
A source said lawyers from the White House and other agencies had vetted the figures and believed they would withstand a legal challenge .
The Republican-led Senate passed the government funding bill by a vote of 83-16 and the Democratic-led House by a vote of 300-128 , with 86 House Republicans voting in favor . The measure would provide more than $ 300 billion to fund the Department of Homeland Security and other agencies through Sept. 30 , the end of the current fiscal year .
It also includes $ 1.37 billion in new money to help build 55 miles ( 88.5 km ) of new physical border barriers . That is the same level of funding Congress appropriated for border security measures last year , including barriers , but not concrete walls .
Funding for those agencies was due to expire on Friday , which would trigger another partial federal shutdown on Saturday morning if Trump unexpectedly refuses to sign the bill .
Some of Trump ’ s fellow Republicans have warned him that declaring a national emergency could set a dangerous precedent , opening the door for a future Democratic president to circumvent Congress and declare emergencies on perhaps climate change , gun control or healthcare insurance .
Pelosi said : “ If the president can declare an emergency on something that he has created as an emergency - an illusion that he wants to convey - just think of what a president with different values can present to the American people . ”
Democratic Senator Ron Wyden said : “ I will pull out all the stops to stop this horrendous , bizarre idea . As people get a chance to sort through what the implications really are , we will have strong bipartisan support for opposing this . ... We are the appropriators , not the president . ”