Immigration reform is the “ No . 1 ” legislative priority for the Department of Homeland Security this year , trumping cybersecurity issues , Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said Monday at a ███ Playbook breakfast .
“ …I would say , frankly , that our No . 1 priority in terms of legislation is immigration , ” Napolitano told ███ ’ s Mike Allen at a breakfast marking the 10th anniversary of the agency . “ It is high time for immigration reform . ”
Napolitano appeared with the only other two secretaries to have led the department : former Homeland Security Secretaries Michael Chertoff and Tom Ridge , in their only joint appearance marking the department ’ s anniversary .
Napolitano also addressed reports that DHS has released immigrant detainees from detention centers as a cost-saving mechanism due to budget uncertainties tied to last week ’ s sequestration and other looming budget fights . Napolitano said that “ several hundred ” detainees were released — not “ thousands , ” as news reports from last week had indicated . She stressed that those moved from detention centers were low-risk , and that the process would continue “ for the foreseeable future . ”
“ With sequestration looming and the end of the [ continuing resolution ] in a couple weeks , it ’ s like the perfect storm , ” Napolitano said . “ We really have to manage so many different things because we don ’ t have a budget . ”
Napolitano said DHS secretaries are “ between a rock and a hard place ” on such issues , saying that even as Congress calls on the department to maintain thousands of beds for such detainees , the funding isn ’ t there and there isn ’ t the opportunity to shift money around . Ridge slammed Congress , saying the body is sticking DHS with needlessly complicated immigration questions .
“ We ’ ve had three secretaries that had to do triage because Congress can not find a way to create an immigration policy…a broad-based immigration policy for the United States of America , ” he said , adding , “ But let ’ s be very , very clear . The job of the secretary of Homeland Security… with regard to securing the borders would be a heck of a lot easier if the U.S. Congress would forget about partisanship [ to ] come up with a broad-based comprehensive immigration plan . The story ends right there , ” he said to applause .
The impacts of sequestration are also evident beyond releases from immigration detention centers , Napolitano said .
“ Now that we are having to reduce or eliminate basically overtime both for TSA and for customs , now that we have instituted a hiring freeze…we will begin today sending out furlough notices , ” Napolitano said . “ We are already seeing the effects , ” adding that lines are “ 150 to 200 percent as long as we would normally expect . ”
The three reflected on the brief history of the agency , which Napolitano called the “ largest reorganization of the federal government since [ the Department of Defense ] . ” Chertoff , the second Homeland Security secretary , said that one of the challenges , but also the assets , of DHS , was that “ no one was in the trenches…everything had to be dealt , really , from scratch . ”
The organization was then able to focus on the question of , “ How can we promote people operating in a joint fashion ? ” Chertoff said . “ Because that ’ s really what the value proposition of the department was . ”
“ It ’ s all about risk management , ” said Ridge , the first department secretary . “ It has been since Day 1 . ”
All three said technology has been a major driver of change at DHS , and Napolitano expressed hope that as technology continues to improve , air travel passengers will face fewer burdens going forward .