In the late 1980s , a young journalist named Jason DeParle moved in with a Filipino family in Manila to learn more about global poverty . Now a veteran New York Times reporter and author of the 2004 book American Dream : Three Women , Ten Kids , and a Nation ’ s Drive to End Welfare , DeParle followed the family he met as they have grown to include more than four dozen people over three generations , spread across the globe as migrant workers .
His latest book , A Good Provider Is One Who Leaves , follows Rosalie Comodas Villanueva , who was 15 when DeParle was living in Manila , from her childhood in a shantytown in the Philippines through college and eventually to a career as a nurse . She worked in Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates before moving her husband and three children to a large home in the Houston suburbs . Through it all , she supports her family back in that Manila shack .
“ Migration has become the defining story of the twenty-first century , ” DeParle writes . “ By the accident of an old friendship , I had an intimate view . ”
We caught up with DeParle to learn more about this story , where Rosalie ’ s family fits into the kaleidoscope of the American immigration experience , and how her story resonates in the time of Trump ’ s draconian immigration policies .
Let ’ s start with the title . What does it mean and why is migration such a way of life for the Comodas and other families like them ?
The title comes from the main character ’ s aunt , who was watching the men in her generation go abroad and then be able to build their families nicer houses . She lived in a straw house and saw that when people went abroad , they could come back and build cement block homes . So she encouraged her husband to go to Saudi Arabia and told him “ a good provider is one who leaves. ” It serves as an informal motto for the family , because it ’ s a family of 11 siblings who then grew up and had 45 children . And out of the first generation , nine of the 11 went abroad and in the second generation , something like 24 out of the 45 have gone abroad . So they ’ ve taken it to heart . They do leave . And most of them are good providers .
One of the things that really jumped out at me was your discussion of the feminization of migration . Why did you choose to tell this story primarily through women ?
If it was a choice , it wasn ’ t one I consciously made . I moved in with a family in a shantytown in 1987 . The father was abroad in Saudi Arabia , and the mother was home , raising the kids on the money he sent back . So she happens to be the person I spent the most time with . Then in her children ’ s generation , migration in the Philippines feminized—three-quarters of the migrants going abroad by the 1990s from the Philippines were women . I think the stories took me in that direction more than me deciding to take the story in that direction .
The second generation went abroad around the time when social media , cellphones , and the internet were becoming ubiquitous . I loved the chapter “ The Facebook Mom. ” Could you describe how technology has shaped migration ?
By the 1990s migration is feminizing , in part because the jobs are feminizing . As rich countries around the world age , there ’ s a huge need for caregivers . As women go to work in the paid workforce , there ’ s an increased need for childcare . As medical care expands , there ’ s a need for more health care workers . So in all these fields where there ’ s a lot of female employment , there ’ s demand for female workers .
“ Most of the conversation about immigration is focused on illegal immigration…And that ’ s a very important story—we ’ re focused on it for a reason—but I think it obscures the rest of the immigration story . ”
But the consequence of the feminization of migration is that you have a lot of kids left—a lot of mother-child separation . When the mothers go abroad , oftentimes they can ’ t take the kids with them ; in the case of nannies , they go abroad to raise someone else ’ s kids while leaving their own children behind . That ’ s a source of pain—often for the children , sometimes even more for the mothers .
And all this happened to coincide with the rise of cheap , instantaneous communication including cellphones and social media and webcams and Facebook . It gave mothers and children new tools to stay in touch . Thinking of Rosalie ’ s family , when her father went abroad first in the early 1980s , if he had a question for his family , he would send a letter or sometimes an audiotape . By the time it got to the Philippines and came back with an answer , a month would have passed . When the next generation when went abroad , often they were talking to their families three times a day . They knew what they had for breakfast , they could keep track of the kids ’ homework , and they could see their friends on Facebook .
You ’ ve described Rosalie as the sort of immigrant who is invisible in the political debate . Where do you see her story fitting into the current American conversation about immigration .
Most of the conversation about immigration is focused on illegal immigration , and currently most of it is focused on the crisis at the border . And that ’ s a very important story—we ’ re focused on it for a reason—but I think it obscures the rest of the immigration story . Three-quarters of immigrants in the country are here legally . And there ’ s substantial middle-class immigration and professional immigration . You know , for most of the post-1965 era , the modern migration era , Filipinos have ranked second only to Mexicans in terms of actual numbers in the US , yet they ’ re virtually invisible . So I think their story has been overlooked as Filipinos , as legal immigrants , and as middle-class immigrants .
One of the big questions about immigrants since the 19th century has been assimilation—fitting in , learning the language , educating their children in American schools , and all the problems that may involve . How does this play out in your story ?
There are a lot of critics of immigration who say this generation of immigrants is failing to assimilate the way previous generations of immigrants did . But I think that , if anything , they might be assimilating faster . English acquisition is almost universal . Nearly half the new immigrants already arrived with a college education . Half live in the suburbs . And certainly , in the family that I followed , they achieved in three years a degree of assimilation that used to take three generations . They bought a house in the suburbs , they have kids on the honor roll , the kids learned English—not only learned English but forgot Tagalog . They can ’ t speak Filipino anymore . Assimilation took place at a kind of breakneck speed that ’ s completely at odds with the political conversation about it . In a country of 44 million immigrants , no single story is universal , but this is the one narrative that is certainly missing from the presidential Twitter feed and missing from the discussion of immigration more broadly .
It does seem like the million-dollar question here is where does Trump fit into all of this ? Has the Trump administration changed anything for folks like the Villanueva family—literally or figuratively ?
It ’ s probably too early to say . I don ’ t think any of us really know what effect a narrative of spite is going to have on the immigrant population . The fear is if you tell people long enough and loudly enough that they ’ re not welcome , they ’ ll come to believe you . My fear is that it will turn into a self-fulfilling prophecy . You ’ ll say , look , immigrants don ’ t want to join us . And by creating such a hostile environment , you ’ ll create an ethnic reaction and separate ethnic identity . That is exactly what we don ’ t want .
On the other hand , you know , American culture consists of lots of other things besides Donald Trump . Maybe they ’ ll all watch enough Rosa Parks movies and get enough lessons on Harriet Tubman and black history month that Donald Trump ’ s views will not change their experience of being an American . But a lot of that obviously is going to depend on the circumstances of the individual family , especially their legal status . The family I followed , of course , is middle class and legal , so they ’ re not really affected in any immediate way .