A Customs and Border Protection officer near an enclosure holding Central American migrants who illegally crossed the U.S.-Mexico border in El Paso , Texas , March 27 , 2019 . ( Jose Luis Gonzalez/Reuters )
Of course we have a border crisis — just not the one Trump keeps ranting about .
When President Trump shut down the government in an attempt to force Congress to fund a border wall , Democrats and liberal journalists — including many mainstream reporters — responded by insisting there was no crisis .
“ I ’ m from the border , there ’ s no crisis there , ” Representative Henry Cuellar of Texas told Politico . “ There is no crisis on the border , ” Representative Jerrold Nadler of New York declared . “ There is no crisis at our nation ’ s border , ” wrote the Washington Post ’ s E. J. Dionne .
Later , when the president issued an emergency declaration to do an end run around Congress on wall funding , the “ no crisis ” chorus sounded again . House speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate minority leader Charles Schumer released a joint statement that read , in part : “ The President ’ s unlawful declaration over a crisis that does not exist does great violence to our Constitution and makes America less safe , stealing from urgently needed defense funds for the security of our military and our nation . ”
They were all wrong . Of course we have a border crisis . It ’ s just not the one Trump keeps ranting about .
To listen to Trump , the border crisis is a national-security catastrophe . It ’ s like he found an old VHS copy of Chuck Norris ’ s 1985 classic Invasion USA , in which drug-peddling guerrillas swarm into Florida from the south and wage a bloody assault on suburban America ( blowing up a lot of nice houses in the process ) .
“ We ’ re talking about an invasion of our country with drugs , with human traffickers , with all types of criminals and gangs , ” Trump explained upon signing the emergency declaration .
From the day he announced his candidacy on June 16 , 2015 , Trump has tried to fold his immigration agenda into both his “ American carnage ” and national-security narratives . “ When Mexico sends its people , they ’ re not sending their best . . . . They ’ re sending people that have lots of problems . . . . They ’ re bringing drugs . They ’ re bringing crime . They ’ re rapists . And some , I assume , are good people . ”
While it ’ s true that criminals and drug traffickers exploit holes in our border security , the picture Trump paints doesn ’ t line up with the reality of the very real crisis we are facing .
First , according to the Center for Migration Studies , in 2016 and 2017 , 62 percent of the newly undocumented had overstayed their visas , and 38 percent had crossed the border illegally . CMS reports that “ visa overstays have significantly exceeded illegal border crossings ” for seven consecutive years .
More to the point , the immigrants swarming the border aren ’ t primarily Mexican anymore , but Central American . They aren ’ t single Mexican men looking for work but rather families , often with a dismayingly large number of children in tow . They ’ re bringing kids to take advantage of asylum laws . And because they are requesting asylum , they aren ’ t trying to sneak in ; they ’ re seeking out border officials to file paperwork .
By definition , a wall would not stop any of that .
Last week , U.S. officials announced that the border system is at a “ breaking point ” because of an “ unprecedented ” wave of migrants , most of whom are families or unaccompanied children . Customs and Border Protection commissioner Kevin McAleenan anticipates the final number to be some 40,000 children to be taken into custody by the CBP in March . And , as the Los Angeles Times reported , a shortage of facilities has led to families being held in makeshift camps , including under a Texas bridge .
A major driver of this very real crisis is the Flores agreement , which came out of a two-decades-old court case . It makes it hard to hold children in detention for more than 20 days , which in turn means they must be released . Releasing the kids without the parents is problematic for obvious reasons , so the parents often get released too . Traffickers and the poor Central Americans they prey upon know this , which is why their numbers keep increasing — as they did under President Obama as well .
Solutions , or at least partial remedies , would surely include reforming the asylum system and spending on new construction , not of a wall but of more and better detention facilities .
But that ’ s a lot to ask because this mess is a perfect illustration of our political dysfunction . Democrats have two incentives to downplay both the existence and nature of the crisis . The first is a longstanding reluctance to enforce immigration laws , for both political and ideological reasons . The second is they hate Trump and don ’ t want to lend credibility to any crisis talk , lest they empower Trump to declare a victory of any kind .
Meanwhile , the president and his party are fixated with solving a different crisis from the one we actually face .