Labor unions are throwing their political muscle behind lawmakers ' efforts to overhaul immigration regulations , with the hope that organizing immigrant workers can swell unions ' shrinking ranks .
When one car wash in Los Angeles unionized , its workers saw benefits improve . One worker , Manuel Aguilar , saw his weekly pay double and he was able to move into a bigger house . Here , he washes a car Monday .
The Service Employees International Union plans to spend millions of dollars on advertising , rallies and letter-writing campaigns to lawmakers in support of an overhaul . On Tuesday , AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka and other labor leaders are set to meet with President Barack Obama on immigration , along with chief executives from companies including Coca-Cola Co. and Goldman Sachs Group Inc .
Union leaders see immigrant workers—particularly newly legalized ones who might become more likely to join—as a bright spot that could safeguard their future amid public-sector budget constraints and a trend toward weakening collective-bargaining rights . The percentage of all wage and salary U.S. workers in a union , at 11.3 % , is roughly half what it was 30 years ago .
Behind the push is a fundamental shift in the demographics of unions . Hispanic union membership jumped 21 % over the past 10 years while white membership fell nearly 13 % , according to figures from the Labor Department 's Bureau of Labor Statistics .
Andrew Reyes washes cars in a car wash in South Los Angeles Monday . Mae Ryan for The Wall Street Journal
While the shift is partly the result of the bulging U.S. Latino population over that time , it also reflects a changing U.S. job market . Manufacturing jobs that formed the bedrock of unions have gone overseas or become nonunion . Left to replace many of them are low-paying but growing service jobs in health care and retail that attract immigrants .
The union efforts come as Mr. Obama and a bipartisan group of senators are pushing for a bill that would provide a straightforward path to citizenship for the nation 's estimated 11 million illegal immigrants . Nearly three-quarters of them are active in the labor force , estimates show . Tens of thousands of them already belong to unions , labor experts say .
Immigration Law in America Review legislative milestones and key shifts in immigration policy .
The government does n't track how many undocumented workers belong to unions , and many get jobs by using false Social Security numbers . Unions do n't ask workers their status .
But many undocumented workers avoid joining unions `` because they are under constant threat of deportation , '' said Ana Avendano , head of the AFL-CIO 's immigration and community-action program .
To be sure , it remains unclear whether the legislation will have sufficient support , particularly in the House , to pass . Conservative lawmakers and their supporters have long contended that giving legal status to people who broke the law to come to this country is unacceptable amnesty . They argue that any border-security measures included in the bill will never come to pass .
`` When you legalize those who are in the country illegally , it costs taxpayers millions of dollars , costs American workers thousands of jobs and encourages more illegal immigration , '' Rep. Lamar Smith ( R. , Texas ) said .
A potential sticking point is how to craft a program to bring in low-skilled foreigners for jobs , as unions worry that an influx of workers could depress wages and take jobs from Americans . Labor officials want the overhaul bill to focus more on keeping out criminals than those seeking work in farms or factories .
Gaining legal status `` would make it much easier for these workers to join together and improve their working conditions by joining a union , '' said Eliseo Medina , secretary-treasurer of the SEIU , who labeled passage of immigration legislation as the union 's top priority this year .
The SEIU has organized immigrants in cities including Houston and Los Angeles with the promise of wage increases , paid personal days and vacation . About one-fourth of SEIU 's 2.1 million members are Hispanic , including many Latin American immigrants . Most are legal residents or U.S. citizens , according to Mr. Medina , who said many are janitors , security guards or health-care aides .
`` Among the first questions we get from immigrants who are undocumented is , 'If I join , will it get me in trouble ? ' `` said Neidi Dominguez , coordinator for the Clean Carwash Campaign in Los Angeles , an effort backed by the AFL-CIO to unionize car washers .
About five years ago , the federation joined with local community groups mobilizing to improve working conditions for car washers , mainly immigrants sometimes paid less than the hourly minimum wage and largely relying on tips . The campaign is pushing car-wash owners to sign accords that guarantee minimum wage , ensure worker safety and give meal and rest breaks .
Los Angeles has about 500 car washes that employ roughly 10,000 workers , most of them Latin Americans believed to be unlawfully in the country . Three car washes have signed union contracts , and employees are now members of the local United Steelworkers union .
`` As immigrants who lack documents , we often accept being underpaid because we feel vulnerable , '' said Manuel Aguilar , a 51-year-old who has washed cars since emigrating from El Salvador in 1994 .
Since his employer signed a union contract a year ago , Mr. Aguilar says his weekly pay has doubled to $ 600 a week . He also gets breaks , free drinking water and working gear . Thanks to the raise , he recently moved with his wife and two children from a one-bedroom apartment to a two-bedroom house , which he also rents .
`` With papers , more of us will want to join the union , '' said Oscar Sanchez , 35 , who works at the same car wash. `` We wo n't fear deportation . ''