Conservatives saw it as raising a white flag when Republican congressional leaders pledged not to withhold funding for the Department of Homeland Security in the fight over President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty , stoking fears that for the next two years House Speaker John A. Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell will consistently surrender .
For the Republican base , Mr. Obama ’ s unilateral move to grant legal status and work permits for up to 5 million illegal immigrants was an unlawful power grab that created a constitutional crisis .
If Republican leaders were not willing to use Congress ’ power of the purse — the most potent weapon possessed by lawmakers to restrict a president — to stop a brazen unconstitutional act , conservatives reasoned , would the GOP-controlled Congress ever go to the mat to fight Mr. Obama ?
The conservative core of the party has long been leery of Mr. Boehner and Mr. McConnell , who are viewed derisively as establishment stalwarts . The refusal of the leaders to threaten a government shutdown or even close a single agency to force Mr. Obama to revoke his immigration edicts seemed only to confirm the right wing ’ s worst suspicions .
“ The anger I see from my audience at the Republican Party can not become any more palpable , ” nationally syndicated talk radio host Steve Deace said . “ We have a president who looks for new and unique ways to shred the Constitution on an almost daily basis , and we have a Republican Party leadership that refuses to do anything about it . ”
He said Republican incumbents should expect a backlash and primary challenges next year because of their weak attempt to stop the amnesty .
“ People are this angry about it . They feel as if they are already not represented and essentially they have been betrayed by most of the people they just worked to elect in November , ” said Mr. Deace . “ That ’ s why people are angry at this , because they realize the people that are in charge of our party don ’ t believe in almost anything in our party platform . They don ’ t . They are just treacherous . ”
Mr. Boehner and Mr. McConnell declined to use the power of the purse to try to stop deportation amnesty when they pushed through a spending bill in December that funded all of the government except Homeland Security for the remainder of the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30 .
They promised a showdown over immigration before temporary funding for Homeland Security expires Feb. 27 . But faced with a spate of terrorism in Europe and cyberattacks by North Korea , the Republican leaders also promised not to shut down Homeland Security and jeopardize the safety of Americans .
Meanwhile , Mr. McConnell and his team expressed doubts about getting the 60 votes in the Senate needed to approve the House-passed spending bill for Homeland Security that included policy riders blocking Mr. Obama ’ s immigration moves .
Republicans have a 54-member majority in the Senate , forcing them to secure support from at least six Democrats to clear the 60-vote bar for advancing most legislation in the chamber .
“ We can only do what we can do , ” said Rep. Andy Harris of Maryland , though he vowed that Republicans would keep trying . “ The fact is , we don ’ t have 60 votes in the Senate . ”
With Republicans bracing for defeat , Democrats intensified their calls for a “ clean ” spending bill for Homeland Security .
Rep. Louie Gohmert , a Texas Republican who unsuccessfully challenged Mr. Boehner in the speaker election because of the immigration issue , lamented that his party ’ s leaders had forsaken the only leverage they had when they ruled out a government shutdown in December .
Republican leaders and their supporters on Capitol Hill insist that they can not win a shutdown showdown because liberal-leaning mainstream media would perpetuate the narrative that Republicans are to blame for the difficulties and inconveniences of shuttering government offices .
They said that was what happened when Republicans attempted to defund Obamacare and shut down the government for 16 days in October 2013 .
The Republican leadership team also points out that the 2013 shutdown didn ’ t stop Obamacare and a shutdown of Homeland Security this year won ’ t stop or even slow down Mr. Obama ’ s immigration policy because agents of work permits — like more than 90 percent of Homeland Security employees — are designated as essential personnel who work even during a shutdown .
“ They ’ ll keep stamping work permits just as fast during a shutdown , ” a Republican leadership aide said .
Those pushing for a Homeland Security shutdown , however , are using the same argument .
They say the agents who protect the U.S. are all essential personal and would work through a shutdown , invalidating claims that cutting off funding makes America less safe .
Tea party champions such as Sen. Mike Lee of Utah insisted that they are not giving up on the House-passed bill until the Senate votes it down , which at the very least will put all senators on record of either supporting or opposing the amnesty .
After that , Republicans will have to come up with a way to confront Mr. Obama .
“ I ’ m not going to speculate about that . We ’ re going to have a plan , ” said Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn , Texas Republican .