'You know , you tease the ones you love , all right ? ' Boehner said . Boehner clarifies immigration joke
Speaker John Boehner clarified his recent jabs at the reticence of House Republicans to take up an immigration overhaul this year , while giving no signals that reform bills were coming to the floor anytime soon .
Several lawmakers who attended the closed-door party meeting at Republican National Committee headquarters Tuesday said that Boehner explained his comments back home in southwestern Ohio last week , where he theatrically mimicked House Republicans ’ reaction to doing immigration reform in remarks that went viral .
“ There ’ s no mocking . You all know me . You know , you tease the ones you love , all right ? ” Boehner told reporters following the meeting . “ But some people misunderstood what I had to say . ”
The Ohio Republican reiterated an old line that the party has used as a reason they couldn ’ t move forward on an immigration overhaul this year : “ I wanted to make sure the members understood the biggest impediment we have to moving immigration reform is that the America people don ’ t trust the president to enforce or implement the law that we may or may not pass . ”
When asked whether there will be a vote on immigration reform , Boehner responded : “ We continue to work with our members . We all know we have a broken immigration system . We ’ re going to continue to work with our members and have discussions to see if there ’ s a way forward . ”
A handful of House Republicans interviewed after the private party meeting Tuesday seemed to hold little grudge against Boehner for his remarks , and there was minimal opposition to Boehner raised during the meeting , lawmakers said .
Rep. John Fleming ( R-La . ) said Boehner outlined several key points during the meeting : That House Republicans will not go to conference negotiations with a sweeping bill passed by the Senate last June ; there is no “ secret conspiracy ” to do comprehensive immigration reform ; President Barack Obama needs to prove to lawmakers that he will abide by existing laws ; and the House may pass laws written in a way that Obama couldn ’ t “ flout . ”
“ He was really just , I think , trying to get ahead of any criticism that he may get from , ” Fleming said of Boehner . “ Because I do think some members were offended by that , and I think he was trying to put it in proportion in saying that it was not as serious as maybe it seemed to be . ”
“ Look , people say all kinds of things , ” said Rep. Jim Jordan ( R-Ohio ) when asked for his reaction to Boehner ’ s remarks . “ No big deal . ”