President Trump ’ s original travel ban was disastrously implemented , the Homeland Security inspector general said in a new memo to Congress on Monday that concluded department employees illegally tried to prevent some people from the affected countries from even getting on planes to reach the U.S. , despite court orders to the contrary .
Inspector General John Roth released the findings in letters to Democratic members of Congress , in which he also accused the Trump administration of trying to use legal tactics to try to hide the illegal behavior from the public .
“ It would deprive Congress and the public of significant insights into the operation of the department , ” Mr. Roth wrote .
He concluded that leadership was lacking when Mr. Trump issued his original Jan. 27 travel ban , halting all travel , including immigration and visitors , from seven majority-Muslim countries that had been identified by Congress and the Obama administration . Customs and Border Protection , the Homeland Security agency that screens arrivals , was left without guidance on the many questions surrounding the order , Mr. Roth said .
CBP also defied two court orders in trying to prevent passengers from getting on planes at overseas airports , issuing “ no board ” instructions to airlines even after courts had halted the travel ban policy , the report concludes .
For passengers who reached the U.S. , though , Mr. Roth said they were actually treated well by CBP officers — contradicting some of the more overheated reports from immigrant-rights activists at the time .
Mr. Roth said they couldn ’ t substantiate reports of passengers being abused or children being handcuffed .
“ In fact , we found evidence that many CBPOs went the extra mile and provided water and food from their own personal funds , ” he said .
The administration also made wide use of waivers , letting most passengers who reached the U.S. in despite the directions of the executive order , Mr. Roth concluded . That suggests that Mr. Trump ’ s executive order was more bark than bite when it was actually being carried out .
The original order was blocked by a number of courts , and Mr. Trump responded with a revised order in March . That second version was also blocked by lower courts , but the Supreme Court partially overruled them in June , allowing some of the ban to take effect .
Mr. Trump then updated the policy this fall , and that third version is going through court scrutiny yet again .
Mr. Roth ’ s new memo looks at the early days after the original policy was put in place on Jan. 27 , until it was fully halted by a judge in Seattle on Feb. 3 .
The inspector general said he submitted his findings to the Homeland Security Department Oct. 6 , but the department is still deciding whether it will classify any of the report as secret , for various reasons .
Democrats who released Mr. Roth ’ s memo Monday said hiding the findings is “ frankly unacceptable . ”
“ The rule of law and our constitutional protections mean little if law enforcement is empowered by the president to disregard them , ” said Sens . Richard Durbin and Tammy Duckworth , both Illinois Democrats . “ If the Trump Administration decides to bury an inspector general report suggesting that ’ s what happened , there will be repercussions in Congress . ”
Tyler Houlton , spokesman for Homeland Security , didn ’ t respond directly to Mr. Roth ’ s findings of illegal behavior , but insisted officers “ conducted themselves professionally , and in a legal manner . ”
He also defended the attempt to shield the report ’ s contents , saying that the ability to claim those privileges is “ well-recognized law . ”