Democrats and Republicans sparred Saturday over the part of President Obama 's executive order on illegal immigration that allows some applicants to avoid deportation despite having committed crimes .
The section at issue states in part that young illegal immigrants eligible for the program must have “ not been convicted of a felony offense , a significant misdemeanor offense , multiple misdemeanor offenses , or otherwise pose a threat to national security or public safety . ”
The language leaves open the door for some illegal immigrants with misdemeanor records to stay .
The first news reports on the change stated those eligible could have no criminal history , but documents released later in the day showed that to be incorrect .
Department of Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano , the first administration official to announce the plan , said Friday morning the policy change was an attempt to keep the agency ’ s enforcement resources focused on removing the most potentially dangerous illegal immigrants , including felons and repeat offenders .
She also attempted to assure Americans by saying those eligible under the program must apply for a two-year suspension of deportation and a work visa , after which they can reapply for renewal . She also said each applicant would be evaluated on a case-by-case basis .
“ Discretion , which is used in so many other areas , is especially justified here , ” she said .
Still , the attempt a reassuring the public that those eligible , included illegal immigrants as old as 30 , did not satisfy Arizona GOP Rep. David Schweikert .
“ I am extremely disappointed by this election year executive order for several reasons , ” he said Saturday .
Schweikert called the order backdoor amnesty full of unintended consequences that puts hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants ahead of millions of unemployed Americans in the workforce .
He also said called applicants being eligible despite having a criminal record “ the latest facet of the plan , that we are just discovering … seriously dangerous and inexcusable . ”
The Department of Homeland Securtity ’ s 8-page memo on the major , election-year policy change attempts to clarify several anticipated questions on criminal history , including what qualifies as a “ significant misdemeanor . ”
The response states it part : “ A federal , state , or local criminal offense punishable by no more than one year of imprisonment or even no imprisonment that involves : violence , threats , or assault , sexual abuse , larceny , driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs , the unlawful possession or use of a firearm , drug distribution or trafficking , or unlawful possession of drugs . ”
A senior Capitol Hill Democratic staffer told FoxNews.com on Saturday the executive order essential follows what has always been U.S. immigration policy .
“ It pretty clear in most immigration laws that you want to weed out the most serious criminals , ” he said . “ The president wants to weed them out . This is for low-priority offenders . ”
The staffer pointed out the guidelines are similar to those in the DREAM Act , the Democrat-sponsored immigration reform legislation stuck on Capitol Hill .
He also argued applicants will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis , which could result in a person being disqualified for one serious offense , and somebody being accepted with four , less-serious misdemeanors .
The change is expected to impact roughly 800,000 illegal immigrants .
The executive order will apply to illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. before they were 16 and are younger than 30 .
They also must have no major criminal offenses , have been in the country for at least five continuous years , have graduated from a U.S. high school or have earned a GED , or served in the military .
Individuals who have been convicted of a felony offense , a significant misdemeanor offense , or three or more other misdemeanor offenses not occurring on the same date and not arising out of the same act , omission , or scheme of misconduct are not eligible to be considered for deferred action under the new process .