Any legal pathway allowing illegal aliens to permanently remain in the United States , and eventually obtain American citizenship , is amnesty , Center for Immigration Studies Policy Director Jessica Vaughan says .
Last week , President Trump told Telemundo his administration is working on a plan to give a “ road to citizenship ” for nearly 800,000 illegal aliens enrolled in former President Obama ’ s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program .
“ I ’ m going to be doing an immigration bill , ” Trump said . “ One of the aspects of the bill that you will be very happy with , and that a lot of people will be , including me and a lot of Republicans , by the way , will be DACA . It gives them a road to citizenship . ”
White House Deputy Press Secretary Judd Deere told ███ that Trump “ is willing ” to work with Congress to provide citizenship for DACA illegal aliens but claimed the plan would “ not include amnesty . ”
Over the weekend , Trump campaign adviser Mercedes Schlapp said the president would “ provide support ” to DACA illegal aliens . Schlapp confirmed her work on a number of “ legalization ” plans for DACA illegal aliens while working in the administration .
“ When I was at the White House , we worked on several immigration proposals trying to get Democrats to come on board that would have included legalization for DACA recipients , ” Schlapp said .
In an exclusive interview with SiriusXM Patriot ’ s ███ Tonight , Vaughan said any plan providing legal status , including citizenship , to illegal aliens is amnesty .
I do take issue with the White House spokesperson saying ‘ It ’ s not an amnesty. ’ Vaughan said . “ Of course it ’ s an amnesty . Everybody knows it ’ s an amnesty . That ’ s the only way out of this for people with DACA . I don ’ t know why they feel like they have to keep pretending that it is not . ”
“ Any form of legal status for people who are here illegally , if they get a green card and are on the path to citizenship , that ’ s an amnesty , ” Vaughan said . “ Let ’ s just call it what it is if you ’ re going to do it . ”
As ███ has reported , a DACA amnesty would likely drive a flow of what is known as “ chain migration ” whereby newly naturalized citizens can bring an unlimited number of foreign relatives to the U.S .
Newly naturalized citizens from Mexico , according to Princeton University researchers Stacie Carr and Marta Tienda , bring on average about six foreign relatives each to the U.S .
Should all 800,000 DACA illegal aliens sponsor six foreign relatives to come to the country , that would equate to a chain migration flow of nearly five million foreign nationals — a foreign population twice the size of Chicago , Illinois .
“ A lot of the DACA family members are already here , ” Vaughan said . “ I think that with an amnesty , a lot of them will get status through chain migration if our system isn ’ t changed , specifically the unlimited category of parents . ”
A DACA amnesty would put more citizen children of illegal aliens — commonly referred to as “ anchor babies ” — on federal welfare , as ███ reported , while American taxpayers would be left potentially with a $ 26 billion bill .
Additionally , about one-in-five DACA illegal aliens , after an amnesty , would end up on food stamps , while at least one-in-seven would go on Medicaid .
At the southern border , a DACA amnesty has the potential to trigger a border surge that could triple the number of illegal aliens pouring through the border . Since DACA ’ s inception , more than 2,100 recipients of the program have been kicked off because they were found to either be criminals or gang members .
“ There are more people with DACA who have criminal records than there are who are doctors , ” Vaughan said .
John Binder is a reporter for ███ . Follow him on Twitter at @ JxhnBinder .