Freedom Caucus chair Mark Meadows decided two immigration bills were n't good enough and added his own the mix .
The only “ fix ” necessary to end Donald Trump 's barbaric policy of separating families at the border is for him to reverse course on the sick policy he created . Yet Trump 's GOP allies , suddenly feeling the strain of growing public outrage , are scrambling to put forth legislation that will give them cover from Trump 's state-sponsored terror .
In the Senate , Politico writes Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn of Texas is working with a small cohort of his colleagues who have realized that Congress “ may have to step in and do something if President Donald Trump won ’ t back down . '' In other words , even Trump 's allies think he 's headed off the rails .
The same goes in the House , where immigration hardliner Rep. Bob Goodlatte of Virginia is arguing against taking up his own anti-immigrant bill because he thinks Paul Ryan 's `` compromise '' bill has a better chance of passing , thereby restraining Trump to some extent . ( In fact , the `` compromise '' bill wo n't end the administration 's `` zero tolerance '' policy , but it would modify how officials enforce it in regard to housing families . )
`` That is what has in my opinion the best chance of passing and getting 218 votes . We should focus on that , '' Goodlatte argued [ on NPR ] , saying he supported setting aside his own bill to do so . `` We do n't need to vote on both of these at the same time , '' the Virginia Republican said .
And CNN reports Freedom Caucus chief , Rep. Mark Meadows , is putting a third GOP bill on the table that would more narrowly address the family separation issue , allowing children “ to be detained indefinitely ” with their parents .
The round of frenzied action signals desperation is settling into GOP lawmakers as they try to find a way of containing Trump without actually telling him to simply change his policy—god forbid they speak a shred of truth to the man . At the same time , Trump ’ s aides are busily showing him cheery pictures of detained kids so he can remain in his perpetually distorted news bubble .