Assaults on U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents reached a decade high in 2017 , and assaults on Border Patrol agents also have surged in recent years , according to government numbers that seem to support agents ’ claims that immigrants living in the U.S. illegally increasingly are looking to fight rather than flee .
The new numbers , reported by Homeland Security ’ s inspector general , could even be underselling the problem , investigators said , because the government doesn ’ t do a good job of tracking incidents , and agents and officers don ’ t always report them properly .
But the report does signal renewed danger particularly on the southwest border , where agents say a surge in illegal immigration in recent years generally correlates with growing violence .
Prosecutors , meanwhile , often refuse to bring charges or win cases against the perpetrators , the audit found .
At the border , the most frequent method of attack was projectiles — usually large rocks — which accounted for half of assaults . But bombs , clubs , knives , guns and even laser pointers to blind agents have all been used .
Most of the injuries were minor and didn ’ t require treatment , the audit found .
Customs and Border Protection recorded 1,089 assaults in 2010 , which steadily dropped through 2014 , when there were just 381 assaults . But things turned violent once again , steadily rising to 856 assaults in 2017 .
Last year was the most violent this decade at the border , with 28 assaults per every 10,000 apprehensions .
In the interior , meanwhile , ICE agents and officers saw 48 assaults in 2017 , tying 2010 as the highest in records going back to the beginning of the decade .
ICE officers , who handle deportations , and Border Patrol agents , who patrol the line between the U.S. and Mexico , say they ’ ve seen an increasing willingness on the part of migrants to resort to violence in recent years .
One of those assaults recorded in 2017 came when ICE officers tried to apprehend Lester Sadict Cruz-Garcia , an immigrant from Honduras who was arrested by police in New York on a domestic assault charge . Police released him into the community , ignoring a request by ICE that he be held .
Deportation officers then had to go out into the community to track him down at his home . When they approached him , he struggled and kicked , attempting the get away , the officers said .
They eventually got him in handcuffs and tried to get him into the back of an ICE vehicle when he bit one of the officers on the arm . The officer was taken to a hospital , where he was prescribed antibiotics .
Cruz-Garcia was sentenced in June to 364 days in jail .
In another incident last year , ICE officers in Massachusetts were trying to deport Mohammed Kenneh to Liberia . They drove him to Logan International Airport in Boston , but he knocked one officer to the ground and then used the handcuffs around his wrists to ensnare the officer ’ s hand , refusing to let go .
The officer had to be taken to the emergency room .