This is the week Washington has been waiting for . Barack Obama is expected to send up his executive amnesty for 5 million illegal aliens and double-dog dare the Republicans to do anything about it .
The Republicans have a similar itch , eager to take on the president . The game is afoot , and the Republicans understand it ’ s a shabby attempt to use the Hispanics to ensure the Democrats a permanent majority in Congress , where no one will have to speak English . Free stuff will be the lingua franca .
The nice way to say this is to say , as the president himself does , that immigration reform will be the proud legacy of a compassionate president . He opened the spigot of a steady stream of the tired , the poor , the huddled masses yearning to breathe free . Emma Lazarus could have written a poem about it .
Mitch McConnell , the leader of the Republicans in the U.S. Senate , says executive amnesty — issued in violation of ample precedent if not the law — will be “ waving a red flag in front of a bull. ” John A. Boehner , the speaker of the House , says Mr. Obama will “ burn himself ” if he does it . The Washington Post concedes that such amnesty would be “ giving the middle finger ” to the incoming Republican majorities ( and to the voters who sent them to Washington ) .
“ But Obama doesn ’ t care , ” says a congressional Democrat who doesn ’ t relish being in the minority for years to come . “ McConnell ’ s red flag , middle finger , whatever , is not just a provocation to the new Republican majority , but to the public . I think the president expects that bull to act like a cow , but this time it might not be so docile . ”
Some Democrats , forever in search of the illusive silver lining , are counting on a groundswell of anger against the Republicans when they do what they promised to do . Against all the evidence , they think the public actually loves Mr. Obama and his schemes and will soon enough be looking for opportunities to show repentance for Nov. 4 .
The president delayed his executive amnesty to help several embattled Democratic senators — Mark L. Pryor in Arkansas , Mary L. Landrieu in Louisiana , Kay R. Hagan in North Carolina , Mark Udall in Colorado and Mark Begich in Alaska — and they lost , or are about to lose , anyway . Mr. Obama is said to be pouting , because none of the Democratic incumbents wanted to be seen in public with him , so great was the partisan stench . They wouldn ’ t fall on their swords for him , so why should he care ?
The new congressional Republicans are not the docile cud-chewers of yesteryear , eager to make nice in the clutch and preserve a route of retreat . They ’ re not likely to take the advice of the consultants hired two years ago to tell the party how to more profitably behave .
“ We are not a policy committee , ” the wiseheads concluded , “ but among the steps Republicans take in the Hispanic community and beyond , we must embrace and champion comprehensive immigration reform . If we do not , our party ’ s appeal will continue to shrink to its core constituencies only . We also believe that comprehensive immigration reform is consistent with Republican economic policies that promote job growth and opportunity for all. ” ( You can actually get paid in Washington for writing and saying stuff like this . )
This was advice fortunately not taken , and the party picked up a dozen seats in the House and won back the Senate , and despite aggressive Republican pushback against Mr. Obama ’ s immigration “ reform , ” the exit polls on Nov. 4 showed that Republicans won 38 percent of the Hispanic vote , still a minority but up sharply from the 29 percent won by Mitt Romney two years ago .
Sometimes little straws in the wind measure true velocity . Two years ago , the Oregon legislature , in strong bipartisan numbers , enacted a law making illegals eligible for driver ’ s licenses , citizen or not . This year a group of dissenters managed to put a repeal referendum on the ballot . The repealers were outspent by a margin of 10 to 1 , but repeal won , 66 to 34 percent , a galvanic landslide by anybody ’ s measure . Nobody was trying to be mean to prospective legal immigrants ; exit polling on Election Day showed that most conservative voters actually want to find a way for the illegals to stay .
Voters are befuddled , says Mark Krikorian , director of the Center for Immigration Studies , and often support for immigration reform is overstated . Nobody wants to be called Scrooge . “ Whenever the public gets a clear-cut , black and white issue for tougher controls , even in Oregon , [ voters ] support them . It really highlights how this is not a Republican vs. liberal issue , like taxes and abortion , but an up-or-down issue of the elites vs. the public . ”