Democrats Used To Talk About 'Criminal Immigrants , ' So What Changed The Party ?
When bipartisan immigration discussions pop up , Democrats often insist it 's hard to find a solution because of the GOP 's immigration evolution . The days of Ronald Reagan endorsing an amnesty program and denouncing walls are long gone , replaced by President Trump 's talk of `` rapists '' and quest for a wall .
But the reality is that Democrats have moved , too , from when the party cited the flow of drugs and `` criminal immigrants '' two decades ago , the same arguments for border security that Republicans use now . The facts on the ground have changed since then , but so have political forces .
The makeup of the Democratic Party has changed , and its base has adopted a fundamentally more progressive attitude on immigration in a relatively short time span , which poses a challenge for party leaders .
In 1994 , 32 percent of Democrats said immigrants strengthen the country because of their hard work and talents . Today , 83 percent of Democrats feel that way , according to polling from the Pew Research Center .
During that same time frame , the percentage of Democrats who said immigrants are a burden on the country because they take jobs , housing and healthcare declined by about 50 percent .
The overwhelming consensus among Democrats these days is that immigrants are an asset , not a national security threat , and that immigration reform should focus on humanitarian concerns , not border enforcement .
President Trump attacks Democrats as the party of `` open borders . '' Although Democrats decry that label , leaders have to strike a balance when they talk about `` border security '' as the party 's base has shifted to the left .
In his 1996 State of the Union address , President Bill Clinton proudly told Congress : `` After years of neglect , this administration has taken a strong stand to stiffen the protection of our borders . ''
Clinton , as part of his overall law and order agenda , sought to crack down on illegal immigration .
Today 's Democratic Party also believes we must remain a nation of laws . We can not tolerate illegal immigration and we must stop it . For years before Bill Clinton became President , Washington talked tough but failed to act . In 1992 , our borders might as well not have existed . The border was under-patrolled , and what patrols there were , were under-equipped . Drugs flowed freely . Illegal immigration was rampant . Criminal immigrants , deported after committing crimes in America , returned the very next day to commit crimes again .
That same year , Congress passed and Clinton signed into law the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 .
`` The '96 laws significantly increased ... the numbers of crimes for which you were deportable , '' said Doris Meissner , the Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service ( INS ) in the Clinton administration , who now feels those laws `` by and large went overboard . ''
But Meissner also says context is important . Despite the alarming rhetoric today , warning Americans of caravans pouring over the southern border , she says that the border in the '90s was far more porous than it is today .
`` I 'm the person who took to the Congress the first proposal that included fencing and technology in 1994 , '' said Meissner , who now works at the Migration Policy Institute .
Throughout the '80s and '90s , key constituencies in the Democratic Party worried about a growing immigration population .
`` In particular , the labor movement , was on the more restrictionist , more anti-immigrant side of the debate , out of the fear that immigrants were competing with American workers '' said Cecilia Muñoz , who handled immigration policy in the Obama administration . But around the year 2000 , things began to change . The NAACP saw immigration as a civil rights issue rather than as a direct threat to black workers , and the AFL-CIO reversed its positions .
For decades , labor organizations had worried that undocumented immigrants willing to work for less pay would push union wages lower . But the AFL-CIO started to see immigrant labor as a growing base of their membership .
In 2007 , when a majority of Democrats supported a bipartisan immigration bill , two progressives now mulling a 2020 presidential run did not .
`` [ Ohio Sen. ] Sherrod Brown ... he thought , if we legalize and expanded the admission of immigrants it might affect American workers in a way that his state 's workers would suffer , '' said Frank Sharry , a longtime pro-immigration activist who leads the immigration reform group America 's Voice . `` [ Vermont Sen. ] Bernie Sanders also voted against it . ''
Brown and Sanders ' staffs now say the senators were always in favor of immigration and voted against the bill for humanitarian and labor concerns , particularly around the expansion of a guest worker program that they worried would lower wages .
But fast forward to 2013 , when the Senate voted on another comprehensive immigration bill . Labor groups supported it , and not a single Democrat voted against it .
During the era in which immigration was largely perceived as a labor force issue , Democrats were far more divided . But as the leading labor critics dropped their concerns , immigration became more of a humanitarian and civil rights concern , and Democrats became more unified .
Sharry thinks the biggest change he 's noticed is an overall shift in American public opinion .
`` Americans over the last decade have become more profoundly and deeply pro-immigrant because they know immigrants , '' he said . `` Quite frankly , the driving force was immigrants — who were well represented in the big cities of L.A. and New York and Houston and Chicago and Miami — moving to all parts of the country . ''
And in the last couple of decades , this demographic change has been magnified within the Democratic Party .
In 1995 , about a quarter of Democrats were not white . Now , 43 percent are people of color . Most of that growth in racial diversity has been among Asian-Americans and Latinos , while Asia and Latin America are the two largest sources of immigrant growth in the U.S .
But the impact of demographic change on political rhetoric is fairly recent .
The 2008 Democratic Party platform spoke about both the need to secure the country 's borders and hire more Customs and Border protection agents , but by 2016 , the platform only spoke about immigration enforcement in the sense that it needed to be `` humane . ''
The nascent 2020 Democratic field is positioning itself in a similar way .
When New York Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand served in the House of Representatives between 2007 and 2009 , she wanted to expand deportations ; now as she runs for president , she wants to abolish ICE .
Last month on CNN , Gillibrand said some of her previous positions on immigration were not `` empathetic . ''
`` I realized that things I had said were wrong , '' she said . `` I was not caring about others . I was not fighting for other people 's kids the same way I was fighting for my own . ''
There 's one final explanation for the Democrats ' shift , and that 's the influence of immigration activists .
`` You have political figures adopting the activists ' agenda and the activists ' language , '' said Muñoz , who worked in the Obama White House . `` Political leaders who are listening to them are focusing only on some pieces of the issue where the activism is most vocal ... for example , immigration enforcement . ''
She says that means other important issues , such as reforming the legal immigration process , do n't receive as much attention .
But the challenge in navigating a comprehensive debate is multi-faceted . Like nearly every political issue these days , Democrats agree the intensity around the immigration debate has ratcheted up in direct response to President Trump .