Goosed into action by an angry federal judge , federal immigration authorities will go door-to-door demanding illegal immigrants return the three-year amnesty approvals the Obama administration issued to them in defiance of a court order .
Those who don ’ t return their three-year permits will have them terminated at the end of this month , the National Immigrant Justice Center , one of the advocacy groups briefed on authorities ’ plan , said in a statement preparing immigrants for what could be a traumatic encounter .
The move comes as Homeland Security officials , fed up with slow-walking by illegal immigrants , are finally playing hardball after months of less forceful measures .
They ’ re scrambling to meet an end-of-month deadline set by Judge Andrew S. Hanen for recapturing thousands of three-year amnesties the department issued even after the court had entered an injunction halting the new amnesty program .
Unless all of the permits are recovered , Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson could personally have to appear in court to explain the foul-up , Judge Hanen said in an order earlier this month .
But the home visits also come at a tricky time , when immigration is a heated issue , and any contact by authorities can be scary for immigrants . Advocacy groups , who were given a heads-up by U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , are preparing to field calls from frightened immigrants .
“ The USCIS home visits unfortunately will add to the mounting confusion and anxiety communities feel as they await a resolution in the executive action case , but individuals should know it is critical to comply with requests to exchange their work permits , whether they receive a letter or visit at their homes , ” Vanessa Esparza-Lopez , supervising attorney for the National Immigrant Justice Center ’ s legal defense project , said in a statement .
In a new fact sheet , USCIS raised the number of erroneous “ Employment Authorization Documents , ” or EADs , it approved from about 2,500 to 2,600 — the third time it ’ s boosted that estimate .
“ USCIS is carefully tracking the number of returns of these invalid EADs and continues to take steps to collect the remaining cards , ” the agency said .
The amnesty was supposed to be the crowning achievement in President Obama ’ s immigration policy . Instead , it ’ s been a big headache , exposing bureaucratic bungling and getting the president and his top aides ensnared in a complex court case that ’ s not gone his way .
Mr. Obama had been trying to expand his 2012 amnesty , which granted two-year tentative legal status and work permits to so-called Dreamers . Under his new plan , the amnesty would last for three years and would apply to millions of illegal immigrant parents .
The Dreamers were allowed to apply for three-year permits soon after the Nov. 20 , 2014 , announcement , while parents were to begin applying this May .
But Judge Hanen , in a case brought by Texas and 25 other states , ruled that Mr. Obama likely broke the law in forming his amnesty . The judge issued an injunction halting it on Feb. 16 , and thought he ’ d nipped the entire program .
Several weeks later , however , administration lawyers admitted they ’ d been approving applications beginning in November , and that more than 100,000 Dreamers had been granted three-year status . Worse yet , the administration has twice come back to Judge Hanen and reported that thousands more approvals were sent even after the Feb. 16 injunction — a clear violation of the court order .
In a document filed late last week , the administration said it had recaptured fewer than 1,200 of the initial 2,100 wrongful amnesties . And , in a stunning admission , lawyers said they ’ d discovered another 500 amnesties they hadn ’ t known about before that also were sent after the Feb. 16 injunction .
“ The government fully appreciates the urgency of the situation and is proceeding with expedited remediation , ” the administration ’ s lawyers promised Judge Hanen .
The three-year permits have already been canceled in the government ’ s own computer systems , and have been changed to two-year authorizations , the lawyers said .
But Judge Hanen seemed miffed that the government has not yet collected all of the erroneous amnesties , saying he detected a “ cavalier attitude ” from the government about its bungle .
“ The government has conceded that it has directly violated this court ’ s order in its May 7 , 2015 advisory , yet , as of today , two months have passed since the advisory and it has not remediated its own violative behavior , ” the judge wrote . “ That is unacceptable and , as far as the Government ’ s attorneys are concerned , completely unprofessional . ”
He set an Aug. 19 hearing , and said unless the government can fix things by July 31 , each of the defendants named in the case — Mr. Johnson and his top lieutenants in the immigration agencies — would have to appear to explain themselves .
“ Otherwise , the Court intends to utilize all available powers to compel compliance , ” Judge Hanen wrote .