President Obama ’ s marquee deportation amnesty has been stalled by the courts , but the rest of his executive actions on immigration , announced exactly a year ago , are moving forward — including his move protecting more than 80 percent of illegal immigrants from any danger of deportation .
The amnesty , dubbed Deferred Action for Parental Accountability was supposed to grant full tentative legal status — including work permits , Social Security numbers and driver ’ s licenses — to more than 4 million illegal immigrants . It has been halted by a federal appeals court , and its fate will soon rest with the Supreme Court .
But the rest of the dozen actions Mr. Obama announced on Nov. 20 , 2014 , are still advancing , including a far-reaching set of priorities that effectively orders agents not to bother deporting nearly all illegal immigrants .
“ There are 7 or 8 or 9 million people who are now safe under the current policy . That is a victory to celebrate while we wait for the Supreme Court , ” said Rep. Luis V. Gutierrez , an Illinois Democrat who was among the chief cheerleaders pushing Mr. Obama to go around Congress and take unilateral steps last year .
The actions — often mislabeled by the press as executive orders — also included changes to the legal immigration system , such as making it easier for spouses of guest workers to also find jobs ; allowing foreigners who study science and technology at U.S. universities to remain and work in the country longer ; pushing legal immigrants to apply for citizenship ; and waiving the penalty on illegal immigrant spouses or children of legal permanent residents so they no longer have to go to their home countries to await legal status .
On enforcement , Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson , called for a more coordinated approach to border security , and that paid off with a major drop in arrests of illegal immigrants in the Southwest . Apprehensions were at their lowest levels since the 1970s .
At Mr. Obama ’ s direction , Mr. Johnson announced changes that would let most rank-and-file illegal immigrants off the hook and instead focus deportation efforts on serious criminals , gang members and other security threats , and only the most recent of illegal border crossers .
“ Immigration and Customs Enforcement is doing what I told them to do — to reprioritize and focus on convicted criminals , ” Mr. Johnson said this month as he took stock of the changes . “ This is the general direction that the president and I want to go when it comes to how we enforce immigration law — focusing on threats to public safety and border security for the American public . ”
The changes are already having a major effect . Deportations , which peaked at nearly 410,000 in fiscal year 2012 , dropped to about 230,000 in fiscal year 2015 , which ended Sept. 30 . But Mr. Johnson said more of those being deported are the serious criminals and safety threats he wants his agents to worry about .
Indeed , if agents adhere strictly to his priorities , some 9.6 million of the estimated 11.5 million illegal immigrants in the country have no real danger of being deported , according to an estimate this year by the Migration Policy Institute .
“ The enforcement priorities announced last year , if strictly enforced , do protect the vast majority of unauthorized immigrants from being deported , because most immigrants have been here a long time and haven ’ t committed a serious crime , ” said Marc Rosenblum , deputy director of the institute ’ s U.S. immigration policy program .
The number could go even higher , depending on how agents follow some of Mr. Johnson ’ s other instructions . The secretary had said even some illegal immigrants with serious criminal offenses on their records should be allowed to stay if they had mitigating factors , such as deep family or community ties .
Immigrant rights activists said they are still waiting for those special circumstances to be applied more broadly .
Mr. Johnson also has been pushing , with some success , to try to get sanctuary cities to buy into limited cooperation with his deportation agents . He scrapped the Secure Communities program that trolled state and local prisons and jails for illegal immigrants and replaced it with the Priorities Enforcement Program , which targets only serious criminals .
“ It is tremendously harder now to deport even criminals , much less garden-variety illegal aliens . They have truly dismembered the immigration enforcement system , from the Border Patrol to the immigration courts , ” said Jessica Vaughan , policy studies director at the Center for Immigration Studies , which advocates for stricter immigration controls .
But the jewel of the executive actions was the deportation amnesty , which was delayed first by a federal district court in Texas and last week by an appeals court .
All sides in the debate agree that was a huge blow to Mr. Obama .
“ Without being able to give away a benefit , like a work permit , these changes are less permanent , and easier to undo in some ways , than would have been the case had the president been able to implement DAPA , ” Ms. Vaughan said .
Mr. Obama said he took the series of steps in response to inaction from Congress , where his push for a broad bill granting illegal immigrants a path to citizenship stalled in 2013 . Frustrated by Republicans , Mr. Obama waited until after the 2014 elections , then announced his go-it-alone approach .
Homeland Security has issued proposals to carry out the leniency program for illegal immigrant spouses and children of green-card holders and to allow foreign students in science and technology to stay longer . Both of those still need to be finalized , as does a proposal expanding hardship waivers .
Other moves were easier to accomplish : Homeland Security now accepts credit card payments for citizenship fees .