WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama will lay out sweeping changes to the immigration system in a speech Thursday night , offering new protections to millions of people in the country illegally and sparking a bitter fight with Republicans .
The executive action is expected to shield as many as five million illegal immigrants from deportation and offer them a chance for work permits , while overhauling the enforcement system and boosting border security , people briefed on the plan said . It would represent the most significant changes to U.S. immigration policy in nearly three decades , though it would fall far short of the comprehensive legislation supporters have been trying to pass since the George W. Bush administration .
GOP reaction was swift and sharply negative , with Republicans saying the president is overstepping his authority , refusing to work with Congress and ignoring the will of voters , who this month delivered the GOP control of both houses of Congress . The White House cast the issue as an urgent policy priority .
“ Everybody agrees that our immigration system is broken . Unfortunately , Washington has allowed the problem to fester for too long , ” Mr. Obama said in a video released on the White House ’ s Facebook page Wednesday afternoon . He said he would use his authority to “ make the system work better . ”
The moves , and the GOP response , will likely extinguish an already dim chance of legislative action on immigration . Republican leaders , buoyed by their Senate win and stronger hold on the House after the midterms , warned that cooperation on other matters would be more difficult , as well .
“ Sticking your finger in the eye of a recently elected Republican Congress is about as bad a way as I can think of to start off the last two years of what could be a productive term , ” said Sen. Lamar Alexander ( R. , Tenn. ) .
As an executive action , Mr. Obama ’ s policy could be overturned by a future president , though it could prove politically complicated to strip people of protected status once they have it .
President Obama is also expected to make a speech at Del Sol High School in Las Vegas on Friday . European Pressphoto Agency
Republicans were debating among themselves how to counter the president ’ s move . Some GOP lawmakers were pushing leaders to write limits on Mr. Obama into legislation that must pass by Dec. 11 to keep the government funded—a course sure to draw a presidential veto threat and raise the prospect of a partial government shutdown . Others in the GOP counseled a less confrontational path .
Options being discussed include passing GOP-stamped immigration bills , passing stand-alone legislation next year to block Mr. Obama ’ s action and filing suit against the president , hoping a judge would intervene .
Mr. Obama is scheduled to lay out his policy in a speech to the nation Thursday at 8 p.m. EST , and then on Friday at a Las Vegas high school . It is the same school where the president , in a speech in early 2013 , laid out principles for immigration legislation that later passed the Democrat-led Senate but died in the GOP-controlled House .
Mr. Obama got immediate backup from his party . “ We have waited long enough for House Republicans . Since they won ’ t act , the president should , and he will , ” Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D. , Nev. ) said on the Senate floor Wednesday .
Under the new policy , undocumented parents of U.S. citizens or legal permanent residents who have been in the U.S. for at least five years would win a temporary stay of deportation and be eligible for work permits , according to several people briefed , including several Democratic lawmakers briefed by Mr. Obama over dinner Wednesday at the White House .
Rep. Joe Crowley ( D. , N.Y. ) , one of those briefed , said that the new policy is expected to benefit between 4 million and 5 million undocumented residents . Another congressman at the dinner said the figure would approach 5 million . Another person familiar with the plan said about 4 million would be eligible because of their family ties and longevity , and up to a million more through other provisions .
Rep. Ben Ray Lujan ( D. , N.M. ) said that to be eligible , people will have to undergo a background check , pay any back taxes and go through an application process . He added that the plan will also include stepped up border security .
The president is also expected to expand eligibility for a 2012 program that gives safe harbor from deportation to young people brought into the U.S. illegally as children , for instance by increasing the age limit for participation , people briefed on the plan said . This group , sometimes called Dreamers , has pressed Mr. Obama to use executive authority to protect illegal immigrants . But Mr. Obama wasn ’ t expected to extend protections to their parents , their top policy goal .
Asked about the exclusion of Dreamer parents , Rep. Lujan said , “ The president is taking the action he is able to . This is a first step . ”
Mr. Obama told lawmakers that he didn ’ t want to halt his plans because some Republicans have raised the possibility of another government shutdown .
“ We ’ re not running away from this because of the artificial deadlines that have been set up , ” Mr. Crowley said , explaining the president ’ s position .
The plan is also set to reorder immigration-enforcement priorities and revamp or replace the Secure Communities program , which uses local law enforcement to identify undocumented immigrants , one person briefed said . The person said it would also include a provision sought by businesses that would make it easier for students awaiting work visas to stay in the U.S .
The United Farm Workers estimated that at least 250,000 farm workers would be protected from deportation under criteria laid out for the union president , Arturo Rodriguez , in a meeting with Mr. Obama on Wednesday . The union estimates that there are about a million undocumented farm workers in the U.S. , though others put it lower .
One provision sought by businesses , particularly high-tech companies , isn ’ t in Mr. Obama ’ s package , several people said . It would have made available employment visas that were unused in previous years .
A new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll , released Wednesday , found the president facing headwinds in laying out his policy , though public support for legalization of undocumented immigrants remains high .
The survey found 48 % of Americans disapprove of Mr. Obama ’ s acting without Congress on immigration , while 38 % approve . Even among Latinos , who overwhelmingly favor legalization for undocumented immigrants , 43 % say they approved of Mr. Obama acting alone , while 37 % didn ’ t .
Support for a pathway to citizenship for those in the U.S. illegally remained robust , with 57 % of respondents favoring such a plan and 40 % opposing . Support grew to 74 % when people were given likely details of such a plan , including requirements illegal immigrants pay a fine and back taxes , and pass a security background check before qualifying for legal status .
“ The public wants this policy , ” said Fred Yang , a Democratic pollster who co-directs the survey . “ That doesn ’ t mean they ’ ll be happy with how it might get done . ”
Mr. Obama ’ s course presents risks to both parties . For Mr. Obama , areas of agreement with Republicans in the remainder of his term—such as trade promotion and an overhaul of the corporate tax code—are sure to be more difficult , given the acrimony . Some Senate Republicans said they would be less inclined to approve his nominees .
Rep. Paul Ryan ( R. , Wis. ) warned in an interview that Mr. Obama ’ s action would make agreement on a tax overhaul less likely . It “ would definitely hurt , that ’ s for sure , ” he said .
Other Republicans worried an overheated response could backfire on the GOP . They said the party must show it can effectively govern—a challenge , given that some in the party are urging a budget showdown to protest Mr. Obama ’ s plan . Others said the debate threatened efforts to improve the party ’ s shaky standing with the growing bloc of Hispanic voters .
“ We ’ re going to have to control our response , ” said Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R. , S.C. ) . He said it was important that his party keep its criticism focused on perceived executive overreach and that Republicans not allow themselves to be cast as opposing immigration or immigrants .
“ I ’ m very concerned that there will be loud voices in our party who have been complete demagogues on immigration , who have no solution , and people in my party will cater to them , ” Mr. Graham said .
And Sen. Orrin Hatch ( R. , Utah ) said the responsibility for addressing immigration falls on both parties . “ We need to get off our duffs and solve this problem . ”
News of the president ’ s immigration plan reinforced a growing sense of partisan acrimony in Congress .
On Tuesday , the Senate narrowly defeated legislation approving the Keystone XL pipeline . The Senate then failed to advance a bill overhauling a National Security Agency program , likely ending efforts to address surveillance concerns this year .
The most immediate impact of the dispute will be on government funding after Dec. 11 . Lawmakers in both chambers have been working on omnibus legislation tying together 12 tailored spending bills that would fund the government through September 2015 , the end of the fiscal year . But GOP anger over the immigration action makes it harder to pass ambitious spending policy and more likely that Congress will simply extend the government ’ s current funding levels into early 2015 , said lawmakers and aides .
One route Republicans may pursue is to fund almost all of the government through September 2015 , but extend funding just until early next year for the agencies or programs that Mr. Obama would need to implement the executive action . Other options include passing Republican immigration bills , such as one beefing up border security , after the new Congress is sworn in .
“ We ’ ve been trying to figure out what leverage we have , and we ’ re finding it difficult to actually stop the president here in the next two months , ” said Rep. Marlin Stutzman ( R. , Ind. ) . “ We should pass our own immigration bills—respond with conservative immigration policy that Republicans agree on . ”
—Colleen McCain Nelson , John D. McKinnon and Michael R. Crittenden contributed to this article .