President Trump ’ s latest immigration proposal marks a retreat on three areas of policy in what the White House said was a “ good faith ” effort to try to break the gridlock that for more than a decade has thwarted every effort to strike a compromise on the thorny issue .
In each of those areas — the Obama-era DACA program , Temporary Protected Status and a new path for asylum for children in Central America — Mr. Trump had canceled the Obama administration ’ s initiatives .
On Saturday , he did an about-face and proposed to restore each of those programs . Going further , he offered approval to write them into law , giving them a permanence Mr. Obama could never win from Congress during his tenure .
In exchange , he is asking for $ 5.7 billion for his plans to build a border wall as well as changes to make it easier to deport illegal immigrant families and cut down on abuses of the asylum system .
He also proposed items both sides generally agree on , such as more technology to scan for drugs in vehicles at legal border crossings and a boost in the number of immigration judges to cut into the backlog of cases .
“ Today represents a compromise offer , ” Vice President Mike Pence told reporters in a briefing after the president ’ s announcement .
The embrace of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals is a major change . Just days ago , Mr. Trump said he didn ’ t want to do anything until the Supreme Court had a chance to decide on his 2017 attempt to phase out the deportation amnesty that is protecting about 700,000 “ Dreamers. ” Lower courts have split on that phaseout , leaving its future unclear . Mr. Trump proposed writing the DACA program into law for those already using it , giving them a guaranteed three years of protections .
Mr. Pence said Mr. Trump has been “ persuaded this is the right thing to do , now . ”
On Temporary Protected Status , the Homeland Security Department has signaled an end to the protection for as many as 300,000 people , some who have been protected for two decades by a program that , as its name suggests , was supposed to be temporary .
The White House in immigration negotiations last year resisted adding protected status holders into any deal , but that resistance has dissipated . Indeed , Temporary Protected Status was the issue that sparked Mr. Trump ’ s harsh comments about those countries last year when Democrats say he called Haiti and Central American nations “ s–hole ” countries .
Mr. Pence on Saturday said Mr. Trump readily embraced adding the protected status deal into his proposal this time .
The Trump administration in 2017 also canceled the Obama administration ’ s Central American Minor program , which was designed to give children looking to get asylum in the U.S. a chance to apply from their home countries rather than make the dangerous trek north .
The program drew slim participation and was nixed — drawing serious criticism from Democrats , who said the president was forcing people to take the dangerous journey .
Mr. Trump is proposing to restart the Central American Minor program , this time with the full protections of law rather than an executive action .
Democrats would prefer to look at a full pathway to citizenship for the 1.5 million people who could qualify for DACA and the hundreds of thousands under Temporary Protected Status .
They also said Mr. Trump ’ s offer is disingenuous because he put Dreamers and TPS recipients in danger .
“ It was effectively saying , ‘ Look , I created a problem by taking away protections for Dreamers . I created another problem by taking away protections for refugees . I ’ m willing to undo part of the damage temporarily that I have inflicted to get my wall , ’ ” Rep. Adam B. Schiff , California Democrat , said on CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation ” program . “ Well , that ’ s really not much of an offer . And it wasn ’ t intended to be . ”
Mr. Trump has moderated his own request from an original plan for $ 18 billion to construct 700 miles of border barriers to the current proposals of $ 5.7 billion to build 230 miles .
He also wants to make it easier to deport illegal immigrant families by cutting down on abuses of the asylum system — items he has sought for two years . He has been stymied by Democrats who say illegal immigrants deserve a chance to make claims in the U.S .
Mr. Trump ’ s deal also includes items that both sides generally agree on , such as more technology to scan for drugs in vehicles at legal border crossings and a boost in the number of immigration judges to cut into the backlog of cases .
The Senate , led by Republicans , is slated to vote on Mr. Trump ’ s plans next week .
But House Democrats are unlikely to go along . Speaker Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , rejected the president ’ s proposal . She said she will have her chamber vote instead on those few areas of overall agreement such as the immigration judges and scanning technology .