House Republicans have declared the Senate-passed legislation dead on arrival . Immigration bill 's starts and stops
Every time the House bipartisan immigration group set a deadline this year , its members have blown it .
First , it aimed for the State of the Union . In April , the group said , “ Soon. ” Members struck a tentative deal twice in May and said a bill was coming in early June . Then a key lawmaker bolted , but the group insisted it was still on track .
It ’ s now almost mid-July , and there is still nothing the group can show for four years of secretive talks . But given the uncertainty in the House on how to go forward on immigration , it ’ s not too late for the group to help dictate the path of reform — if it acts fast .
House Republicans have declared the Senate-passed legislation dead on arrival , and two House committees have cleared five separate bills — which Democrats hate — to reform pieces of the current system . Republicans have an all-hands-on-deck meeting on Wednesday to discuss various options .
Majority Leader Eric Cantor ( R-Va. ) said in a memo Friday that his chamber “ may ” start considering border security bills while reviewing other immigration plans . Leadership ’ s strategy could mean either moving each bill separately through the floor or bundling the committee-approved measures into a larger package for a full floor vote .
Republicans could also decide to take up take the House bipartisan bill , when it ’ s released , and pick it apart . Putting the Senate-passed bill through House committees and letting members rewrite it is another option , although that now seems more unlikely .
Given that there ’ s no obvious path forward , the bipartisan group of seven — formerly eight — feels there ’ s an opportunity to find a sweet spot between the two parties .
“ It ’ s pretty clear that the Senate bill , as it stands , has little chance to pass the House , ” group member Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) told ███ . “ So ultimately , I think you ’ re going to see all the work that we ’ ve been doing is exceedingly relevant . ”
They do have a bill — right now , it ’ s about 500 pages and has been reviewed by House legislative counsel . The group is still cagey on when it will be released , although Kentucky Rep. John Yarmuth , one of the group ’ s Democratic members , said he would be “ stunned ” if that doesn ’ t come by the August recess .
“ There is absolutely no hesitation in moving forward , ” Yarmuth said in a phone interview . “ And still , I think both sides are optimistic that ultimately , this can be the vehicle that gets through the House . ”
Immigration advocates also believe that it ’ s not too late for the bipartisan group to wield influence .
“ I think having a House bipartisan bill is useful in that it offers an alternative to the two more evident groups in the House GOP : the do-nothing crowd and the play small ball caucus , ” Frank Sharry , executive director of the pro-reform group America ’ s Voice , said in an email .
The Democratic side — led by California Rep. Zoe Lofgren ’ s office , according to two sources — did the actual writing of the legislation . That ’ s left Republicans to pore over the bill with extra scrutiny before signing off , and they ’ ve found several wrinkles in the language that they want to smooth out before its official unveiling .
Lawmakers and their aides have let few details of their reform plan slip outside its tight circle . From what is known , their legislation will be mostly more conservative than the plan the Senate passed .