President Trump on Saturday called on Democrats to end a “ horrible law ” that he says separates children from their parents when they cross the border -- and also accused them of “ protecting MS-13 thugs . ”
“ Put pressure on the Democrats to end the horrible law that separates children from there [ sic ] parents once they cross the Border into the U.S. ” he tweeted .
Trump made the remarks amid a pushback from Democrats and activists at a “ zero tolerance ” policy enforced by the Justice Department . That policy refers all illegal border crossings for prosecution , including illegal immigrants with children .
Those parents are housed at adult detention centers , and consequently their children are separated from them , registered as “ unaccompanied minors ” and handed to the Department of Health and Human Services .
Trump has blamed Democrats for the separation of children from their parents before . Last week he told Homeland Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen that the breaking up of families occurred because of “ bad laws that the Democrats gave us . ”
The Associated Press reported that he appeared to be referring to a 2008 law to combat child trafficking -- a bipartisan law authored by Sen. Dianne Feinstein , D-Calif. , but signed into law by Republican President George W. Bush .
While the law says nothing about separating families , it does say that children travelling alone from countries other than Mexico and Canada must be released in the “ least restrictive setting ” -- namely a family or shelter .
The Justice Department ’ s zero-tolerance policy , designed to deter prospective illegal immigrants , means that illegal immigrants are no longer released with their children into the U.S. and consequently that their children are separated from them .
“ If you cross the border unlawfully , then we will prosecute you . It ’ s that simple , ” Sessions said earlier this month . “ If you are smuggling a child , then we will prosecute you . And that child may be separated from you , as required by law . ”
SESSIONS SAYS ALL ILLEGAL BORDER CROSSERS WILL BE PROSECUTED ; CHILDREN MAY BE SEPARATED FROM PARENTS
But Trump called on Democratic lawmakers to end the practice , apparently as part of a deal that includes the ending of so-called “ catch and release ” whereby illegal immigrants are released into America while they wait for their court hearing . He also said that the diversity lottery visa and so-called chain migration -- where immigrants can sponsor family members for visas -- must end .
“ Catch and Release , Lottery and Chain must also go with it and we MUST continue building the WALL ! ” he tweeted .
He also returned to accusing Democrats of “ protecting ” MS-13 gang members . He has said repeatedly that their opposition to strong border policies , as well as the promotion of “ sanctuary policies ” in states like California and New York , mean criminal gang members get released back into communities .
Trump was criticized by Democrats for describing MS-13 members as “ animals. ” This week he accused Democrats of “ trying to defend ” them , noting that he was criticized for his remarks by Democratic leaders Rep. Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , and Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-NY .