The House passed a stopgap government funding measure Thursday night in a 217-185 vote that includes $ 5.7 billion for President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE ’ s wall on the Mexican border and additional security — raising the odds that a shutdown will begin Friday at midnight .
Passage of the measure over united Democratic opposition passes the hot potato to the Senate , which is set to consider the bill Friday . The bill is not expected to pass the Senate , where Democrats have rejected money for Trump ’ s wall .
Eight Republicans voted against the bill , which was approved by the House a day after the Senate approved a similar measure that also funds the government through Feb. 8 but does not include the money for Trump 's wall . That bill was approved by voice vote .
“ The bill that ’ s on the floor of the House , everyone knows , will not pass the Senate , ” Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles ( Chuck ) Ellis SchumerSchumer : Trump 's reported Russian meddling remarks among 'most disturbing things ' yet Senate Democrats say top NRA officials knew about Kremlin ties Office of Director of National Intelligence not planning to release whistleblower complaint MORE ( D-N.Y. ) said moments before the House approved the measure .
Pressed on the odds of a government shutdown after the House vote , senior appropriator Tom Cole Thomas ( Tom ) Jeffrey ColeFight over Trump 's wall raises odds of 'continuous ' stopgap measures Senate spending talks go off the rails as soon as they begin Social determinants of health — health care is n't just bugs and bacteria MORE ( R-Okla. ) told reporters : “ They are certainly higher than they were this morning . ”
Passage of the bill capped a wild day at both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue .
Republicans started the day planning to hold a vote on the stopgap measure approved Wednesday night by the Senate . But they reversed course after Trump said he would not sign that bill .
Top Republicans gathered with Trump at the White House on Thursday afternoon , where the president asserted he would not sign legislation that didn ’ t include the $ 5 billion in wall funding he requested .
Conservatives in the House had also rejected the measure , arguing to their leaders that it would be nearly impossible to secure wall funding after Democrats take back the House majority in January .
During a raucous , closed-door conference meeting Thursday morning , Republican after Republican stood up at the open mics and expressed outrage over leadership ’ s initial play call . Members credited that internal revolt with leadership ’ s decision to consider attaching border wall funding and disaster aid to the package .
“ 100 percent of the people who stood up and spoke said they want to stay and fight , ” said Rep. Barry Loudermilk ( R-Ga. ) . “ And leadership listened . ”
House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyOcasio-Cortez blasts McCarthy as a 'bumbling , sloppy , dishonest mess ' over Trump defense ███ 's Morning Report - Dems to hit gas on impeachment GOP senators attack whistleblower 's credibility MORE ( R-Calif. ) indicated the House-passed legislation could be a place to start negotiations with the Senate . The California Republican said he believes there is still time for them to hash out a deal before the partial government shutdown goes into effect .
`` We have time right now to get it done . I 've watched these bodies move rather rapidly when they want to . I 've watched the Senate argue about 60 votes and all that and they were able to voice vote a [ continuing resolution ] , ” he told reporters .
Members of the Republican Study Committee , who huddled ahead of the vote , said they are prepared to stay through the holidays if it means securing wall funding .
“ We 'll decide when it comes back over , but I think the resolve of this group is to send it right back to them and continue the volley because we feel like this is a non-negotiable that we 've got to protect it , '' Republican Study Committee Chairman Mike Johnson James ( Mike ) Michael JohnsonHouse Democrat calls it 'unconstitutional ' to cite God in hearing oaths Conservatives call on Pelosi to cancel August recess Nadler shuts down Republican point of order after impeachment question MORE ( R-La . ) told ███ .