If there ’ s one thing that ’ s going to be discussed about the recent Brexit referendum , it ’ s immigration . The UK voted to leave the European Union last Thursday—and many Britons have had it with their inability to govern themselves as a sovereign nation . One man explicitly said he voted to stop the flow of immigration ; he didn ’ t ’ care about Europe or trade deals . Some were concerned about jobs , while others noted the pernicious system in which un-elected bureaucrats stuck their beaks into how the UK governs its affairs . One woman said what ’ s the point passing any sort of laws in the UK , when Brussels will change them .
Yet , immigration seems to be a huge issue , where many think that the massive influx of immigrants has placed an enormous strain on the country ’ s welfare state ( via Daily Signal ) :
Stephen Booth , the co-director of Open Europe , a nonpartisan think tank based in London and Brussels , said that of the roughly 5 million net immigrants to the United Kingdom between 1990 and 2014 , over three-quarters came from outside Europe . But immigration from the European Union now makes up nearly half of the United Kingdom ’ s net inflow , Booth said . The combination of European Union expansion in 2004 and 2007—which brought in poorer countries like Bulgaria , Romania , and Poland—and the Eurozone economic crisis has influenced substantial internal immigration to Britain and its relatively strong economy . Proponents of immigration say it has grown the British economy , increased tax revenue , and attracted skilled workers . But critics say immigration has overwhelmed Britain ’ s public resources , and changed Britain ’ s culture and values .
In a letter to the UK-based Guardian , Richard Mountford of Tonbridge , Kent said that this Brexit vote was a protest against mass immigration flow :
Britain voted to leave the EU in the month we learned that last year ’ s net migration to the UK was a record 335,000 people ( UK population grew by half a million last year , 24 June ) . The vote was a protest against mass immigration and the linked issues of stagnant wages and rising rents . The EU needs to respond urgently by offering the UK ( and any other member state that wants it ) an opt-out from the free movement of people . This would address the main reason for the vote to leave , and make it perfectly legitimate for the UK government to offer a second referendum , rather than rush to start the exit process . An opt-out would also assuage anti-EU sentiments in several other EU countries
Here are more testimonials on Brexit . Again , immigration seems to be a substantial factor :
After the votes were counted , Britain voted 52/48 to leave the EU . UK Prime Minister David Cameron bet the mortgage by backing the “ Remain ” camp . He lost everything . He announced his resignation the morning after the vote . A new prime minister is projected to be installed sometime in October . Cameron is going to remain prime minister in a caretaker role .