President Trump said on Twitter that he will do everything in his power to put a stop to the caravan of thousands of migrants on their way to the Southern border , including using military power , if Mexico does n't stop them .
In a series of tweets Thursday morning , Trump also blamed Democrats for the “ assault on our country ” by illegal immigration .
“ I am watching the Democrat Party led ( because they want Open Borders and existing weak laws ) assault on our country by Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador , whose leaders are doing little to stop this large flow of people , INCLUDING MANY CRIMINALS , from entering Mexico to U.S , ” he said .
“ In addition to stopping all payments to these countries , which seem to have almost no control over their population , I must , in the strongest of terms , ask Mexico to stop this onslaught - and if unable to do so I will call up the U.S. Military and CLOSE OUR SOUTHERN BORDER ! ..
“ The assault on our country at our Southern Border , including the Criminal elements and DRUGS pouring in , is far more important to me , as President , than Trade or the USMCA . Hopefully Mexico will stop this onslaught at their Northern Border . All Democrats fault for weak laws ! ”
I am watching the Democrat Party led ( because they want Open Borders and existing weak laws ) assault on our country by Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador , whose leaders are doing little to stop this large flow of people , INCLUDING MANY CRIMINALS , from entering Mexico to U.S ..... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 18 , 2018
.... In addition to stopping all payments to these countries , which seem to have almost no control over their population , I must , in the strongest of terms , ask Mexico to stop this onslaught - and if unable to do so I will call up the U.S. Military and CLOSE OUR SOUTHERN BORDER ! .. — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 18 , 2018
.... The assault on our country at our Southern Border , including the Criminal elements and DRUGS pouring in , is far more important to me , as President , than Trade or the USMCA . Hopefully Mexico will stop this onslaught at their Northern Border . All Democrats fault for weak laws ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 18 , 2018
Trump ’ s tweets come in response to the caravan of more than 4,000 people who are traveling from Honduras toward the U.S. ’ s southern border .
The president also threatened earlier this week to withhold aid from Honduras if the country failed to stop the caravan .