The viral hashtag sprang up in response to a now widely shared New York Times article noting that the federal government had been unable to make contact with 1,475 unaccompanied minors awaiting deportation hearings .
First things first : Despite reports to the contrary , those children are not “ missing ” or “ misplaced . ”
Immigration experts point out that these children are not in government custody , nor are they supposed to be . Instead , this is a population of minors who arrived at the US border unaccompanied by parents or adults , were then detained by immigration authorities , and then were largely released into the care of parents and other close relatives .
The government recently tried to reach about 7,600 of these children with a single phone call each . In 1,475 cases , those phone calls went unanswered — the so-called “ missing . ”
But as Diane Eikenberry , associate director of policy at the National Immigrant Justice Center , puts it , “ If you can ’ t reach somebody after one phone call , you usually would not describe that person as missing. ” ( You can read a more in-depth interview on the “ missing ” children here . )
Immigration advocates like Eikenberry aren ’ t spending a lot of time worried about # WhereAreTheChildren . Instead , they say the real crisis is the Trump administration ’ s new policy of separating undocumented families apprehended at the US border — a policy that may have gotten conflated with the “ missing ” children story that went viral this weekend .
Both stories raised concerns about the same issue : how the United States treats children who enter the country without legal status . But advocates worry significantly more about the new policy of separation than the so-called “ missing ” children . They fear that this policy — which has already led to more than 600 children being separated from their parents — will create traumatic situations for families and overwhelm the very immigration infrastructure put in place to protect these minors .
The real crisis advocates worry about : the separation of migrant families at the border
The Trump administration announced on May 7 that it would begin separating all families apprehended at the border , trying to cross into the United States without documentation .
My colleague Dara Lind has a helpful rundown of how this policy came about :
An increasing share of border crossers seeking asylum come as “ family units ” : one or more adults with one or more children . ( The Trump administration refers to them as “ purported ‘ family units ’ ” to underline the fact that they could be lying about their family relationship . ) And it ’ s much harder for the government to detain whole immigrant families than it is for them to detain adults . Federal court rulings have set strict standards on the conditions under which families can be detained . Under the Obama administration , courts ruled that they couldn ’ t be kept in detention for more than 20 days . The Trump administration ’ s solution , now codified in policy , is to stop treating them as families : to detain the parents as adults and place the children in the custody of Health and Human Services as “ unaccompanied minors. ” In some cases , according to immigration lawyers , parents separated from their children have begged to withdraw their asylum applications — on the logic that it would be easier for them to reunify their families in their home countries .
Attorney General Jeff Sessions has described this as a “ zero tolerance ” policy . “ If you cross the border unlawfully , then we will prosecute you . It ’ s that simple , ” he said in a statement earlier this month .
When pressed by NPR on whether this policy was “ cruel and heartless , ” White House Chief of Staff John Kelly told NPR , “ The children will be taken care of — put into foster care or whatever . ”
For families facing the prospect of children in “ foster care or whatever , ” the reality can be devastating . Lomi Kriel , a reporter for the Houston Chronicle , recently wrote about a 28-year-old father who was separated from his 18-month-old son last summer , after the pair were apprehended at the southern border , crossing without documentation :
Esteban Pastor hoped U.S. Border Patrol agents would free him and his 18-month-old son after they were arrested for crossing the southern border illegally last summer . He had mortgaged his land in Guatemala to fund his sick toddler ’ s hospital stay , and needed to work in the United States to pay off the loan . Instead agents imprisoned the 28-year-old in July for coming back into the country after having been deported , a felony . They placed the toddler in a federal shelter , though where , Pastor didn ’ t know . Three months later , in October , the father was deported — alone . His child , he said agents told him , was “ somewhere in Texas. ” “ I cried . I begged , ” he said . “ No one could tell me anything . ”
Hundreds of these situations are playing out now for families that tried to cross into the United States . The Trump administration estimates that it has apprehended 638 adults trying to cross into the country without documentation since the new separation policy began . They were traveling with a total of 658 children .
This is beyond other family separations that occurred — perhaps as many as 700 of them , according to New York Times reporting — before the Trump administration announced this official change in policy .
And keep in mind that these individuals have not been convicted of crimes . Many are arriving in the United States planning to seek asylum from horrific violence in Central America , particularly Honduras , El Salvador , and Guatemala . The United Nations estimates that the number of refugees seeking asylum from these places has increased sixteenfold since 2011 .
Immigration advocates are worried about what these separations will mean for the minors going forward in the United States . There is the obvious trauma of losing contact with a parent , especially for the youngest children .
“ The children we talk to in government custody , their number one concern is often how quickly they can get to the person they see as their family figure , ” Eikenberry says . “ For young kids , that is all they can think about . ”
Those facilities can be a tough place for children to live . “ These facilities do have a little bit of an education program , but it ’ s still federal detention , ” says Jennifer Podkul , director of policy at Kids in Need of Defense ( KIND ) , a nonprofit based in Washington , DC , that represents unaccompanied minors in court . “ Even low-security facilities have barbed-wire fences around them , and communication with those outside is monitored . Everybody knows that detention is not good for kids . ”
Most of these minors are likely to be released from detention into the care of a close relative . This is the goal in the case of children who arrive unaccompanied as well as those separated from their family ( although with those recently separated from their family , it may be more challenging as their parent is in government custody ) .
The government agency that oversees this program estimates that , on average , unaccompanied children spend 51 days in these facilities — and in 2017 , 93 percent were released into the care of guardians , largely parents and other close family members .
But even then , the separation of families at the border could mean that this group of children has a worse chance at making a case for asylum in the United States .
Advocates worry about two distinct hurdles . First , the separation policy creates a larger number of unaccompanied minors in the United States — which means a bigger pool of children vying for limited attorney services from the pro bono firms that typically take their cases .
KIND , where Podkul works , is one of those organizations — and it ’ s already worried about how it will handle the uptick in minors who are facing deportation hearings on their own .
“ We ’ re a bit in panic mode , ” says Podkul . “ There are very limited organizations that have this specialty and provide these services ; less than half of children get representation , and now they ’ ve just added 600-plus kids . ”
That could have real effects for children , as those who receive representation are significantly more likely to win in deportation hearings . One 2014 study found that unaccompanied minors with representation have a 73 percent chance of winning their case , compared to just 15 percent for those without an attorney .
What ’ s more , Podkul says that children are less able to defend themselves against deportation hearings when they aren ’ t able to contact their parents .
The parents , for example , likely know better why they believe their children ought to be given asylum in the United States . They ’ re more likely to be carrying the paperwork to make that case too .
“ These cases get a lot harder when these kids are separated from an adult , ” says Podkul . “ If a child has traveled with an adult , the parent often knows the full story of why they ’ re seeking asylum . They have documents like birth certificates or police reports . But once these kids are separated , they ’ ve lost communication . It makes our job a lot harder . ”
Why the 1,500 “ missing ” children aren ’ t a top concern for immigration advocates
On April 28 , Steven Wagner testified before a Senate subcommittee on homeland security . Wagner runs the Administration for Children and Families , a federal agency that oversees the Office of Refugee Resettlement ( ORR ) .
ORR is responsible for oversight of unaccompanied minors awaiting a court hearing on their immigration status , a process that can take years . And while these minors do spend some time in government-run shelters and facilities after their apprehension , ORR typically attempts to place most children with a family member who agrees to take custody .
In 2017 , ORR estimated that these children spent an average of 51 days in a government facility before being released to outside custody ( in 2018 , that number appears to have risen to 57 ) . Of the 93 percent of kids in detention who were ultimately released to a guardian outside of the government , about half ( 49 percent ) went to their parents , 41 percent to another close relative , and an additional 10 percent to “ other-than-close relatives or non-relatives . ”
“ There is an actual statutory mandate that these children are supposed to be placed into the least restrictive setting , ” Eikenberry says . “ In almost every case , this is with a family caregiver , not in some sort of detention . ”
In late 2014 , ORR began to place phone calls to those family caregivers 30 days after the child is placed in the new home . This is what Wagner was describing when he told Congress about what his agency learned from those phone calls in late 2017 . Here ’ s the relevant part of his testimony :
From October to December 2017 , ORR attempted to reach 7,635 UAC and their sponsors . Of this number , ORR reached and received agreement to participate in the safety and well-being call from approximately 86 percent of sponsors . From these calls , ORR learned that 6,075 UAC remained with their sponsors . Twenty-eight UAC had run away , five had been removed from the United States , and 52 had relocated to live with a non-sponsor . ORR was unable to determine with certainty the whereabouts of 1,475 UAC .
In other words : 1,475 of 7,635 phone calls to the sponsors of unaccompanied children were not picked up . Immigration advocates don ’ t find this figure especially concerning . They say there are plenty of reasons why families might miss a phone call , ranging from boring logistics to more widespread fears of the federal government .
“ A lot of these families may have a pay-as-you-go phone number , ” says Podkul at KIND . “ I definitely had times when I couldn ’ t get ahold of a client for weeks . [ There is also ] a climate of fear . Parents and families that are undocumented might be scared to pick up the phone . ”
Immigration advocates are pretty torn on how aggressively the government should track unaccompanied minors — whether it ’ s actually a problem that there isn ’ t more than a phone call made to ascertain this population ’ s whereabouts .
On the one hand , immigration advocates want to make sure that unaccompanied minors are getting the services and support that they need . Podkul , for example , thinks it ’ s important to ensure that these children have access to representation as they move through court proceedings on their immigration status .
At the same time , advocates worry about aggressive monitoring of this same population , particularly if the United States wants to use that information as a means to surveil unaccompanied minors in a way to obtain information that could be used against them in deportation hearings .
“ It worries me because of all the other ways we see the Trump administration enforcing these types of laws and policies ; it serves pretty restrictive ends , ” Eikenberry says . “ If not done with a more holistic goal of keeping these kids safe and healthy , I definitely fear that lens being turned on children . ”