In California , during the fence-building frenzy of 2009 , I met a Border Patrol agent and project engineer at Smuggler ’ s Gulch — a deep canyon near the Pacific Ocean where the Department of Homeland Security had dumped in an estimated 2 million cubic yards of dirt and then fenced in the landfill to prevent access from Mexico . The canyon stream still flowed across the border , so engineers built a tunnel under the landfill to permit the water ’ s passage . The tunnel entrance and exit were gated , but the agent predicted that migrants would soon use the tunnel to cross . “ Ninety percent of this is politics , ” said the engineer .
Borderlanders have done their best to adjust to this increasingly bizarre world . Crossing times at the border first doubled , then tripled , from what they had been before the fences , but people learned to factor the holdups into their commute times . Television news programs even began reporting crossing delays along with the weather report .
Such adjustments , though , barely mitigate the outrage that many Americans feel toward the encroachment of hideous barriers into their once open land .
Nor do these daily adjustments change the fact that the border fence is harming an ancient human ecosystem . Mutual interdependence has always been a hallmark of cross-border lives . Residents on both sides of the line regard parts of Mexico and the United States as their home . For them , the border is a connective membrane , not a line of demarcation . Often describing themselves as “ transborder citizens , ” they have more in common with one another than with their host nations .
Besides sentiments of belonging and shared destiny , this “ third nation , ” as it is known , is bolstered by synergistic local economies . Border states are among the fastest-growing regions in both countries . Ciudad Juárez , once a city of 1.5 million , lost about a quarter-million inhabitants who fled from drug cartel-related violence to various destinations across Mexico . Yet the city ’ s industries continue to add jobs , fostering some $ 80 billion in trade between Juárez and neighboring El Paso in 2011 , a $ 10 billion increase from the previous year . In El Paso , the arrival of 30,000 sanctuary seekers from Juárez created a boom in real estate and restaurant businesses .
Cross-border institutions also reinforce binational ties . For more than a century , the International Boundary and Water Commission , with representatives from the United States and Mexico , has overseen water issues along the border and supported joint development projects .
The border fence , however , undermines this cooperation and cohesion , as it splinters lives and scars landscapes . Likewise , to many who live here , the border patrols , with their ever watching drones , feel more like an occupying army .