Stephen Miller stood in front of a gaggle of reporters this week and declared that “ Give me your tired , your poor , your huddled masses yearning to breathe free ” was an embarrassing footnote in American history .
He was talking about the White House ’ s push on the RAISE Act , a bill that would cut legal immigration to the US in half over the next decade ( mostly by slashing family-based immigration and ending the country ’ s “ diversity visa '' lottery ) . This was part of an effort by the White House , as John Cornyn said , to reopen a national conversation about legal immigration — specifically , to introduce the possibility that it might in fact be bad in current quantities .
The White House also recently held a press conference to talk about how Central American immigrants are feeding into the gang MS-13 : that they rape and murder people instead of assimilating , that they are criminals who have taken over America ’ s streets .
These aren ’ t just messages being sent from the White House , a `` Too Much Immigration Is Bad '' week along the lines of `` Infrastructure Week '' and `` American Heroes Week . '' They ’ re messages sent throughout the Trump administration — and sometimes , the tiniest changes are the most revealing ones .
A couple of weeks ago , the Trump administration quietly changed the name of a grant given by US Citizenship and Immigration Services to local organizations from “ Citizenship and Integration ” to “ Citizenship and Assimilation . ”
The small tweak was a shot across the bow . It ’ s a declaration of who should be considered fully American : not just putting down roots in a community , becoming integrated into its economy and civic life , but assimilating — sloughing off something of one ’ s ancestral culture to take on something American instead .
The Trump administration is reopening a conversation much bigger than `` how many immigrants should the US admit . '' It ’ s reintroducing the idea that diversity itself might not be a good thing for America . In Trump ’ s America , diversity has rendered swaths of the country unrecognizable and even hostile to longtime Americans — largely the white voters who make up Trump ’ s base . Not only do they want to take their country back , but they are anxious never to `` lose '' it again .
For the past several decades , diversity has been something that both sides of the political aisle at least paid lip service to .
Not everyone saw diversity as something worth pursuing for its own sake , to be sure — hence constant debates over “ affirmative action ” versus “ meritocracy . ”
But the idea of diversity , in and of itself , wasn ’ t a wedge issue . It was a value that everyone claimed to uphold , and some simply doubted the strength of others ’ commitment to it .
Those who believed that diversity was a threat to the American way of life — an intrusion of foreign cultures , strange religions , and alien ideas — didn ’ t find any quarter for that belief in polite company , mass media , or politics . Now , they have their champion . The idea of diversity itself is now back up for debate .
There was an obvious upside , for Republicans , in defanging diversity — turning it into a trope of apolitical , apple-pie Americana . Their base continued to be wary , at best , that newcomers to America strengthened the country . But their base was aging , and the younger generations of Americans , increasingly , took “ strength in diversity ” as a fact of life .
Crucially , those younger generations were , themselves , more ethnically diverse than their elders . The factoid that “ America will become a majority-minority nation by 2050 ” was more likely to be used as a talking point in political consultants ’ presentations about building coalitions than voiced as an anxiety by mainstream politicians . America was coming to diversity just as inevitably as diversity was coming to America , and worrying about it made you seem like not only a racist but a fool .
Back when diversity was a settled question — at least in public — it was assumed that any politician ( or company , or celebrity ) would want people of different races , religions , and abilities highly placed at public events and featured in promotional campaigns . It was assumed that the president would do anodyne photo-ops like hosting a Ramadan break-fast — things that would both remind Muslims in the US that America agreed they were Americans , and remind non-Muslims that someone can be American while observing religious holidays and eating traditional foods . There was an interest in treating everyone as , if not yet fully American , Americanizable — and an awareness that maybe it would be America that would change to meet them , as much as the other way around .
There was an interest in portraying , and treating , no one as unassimilable . Trump has given those who worried immigrants might not integrate a voice — a powerful one .
The Trump administration is anxious about assimilation because it fears it ’ s impossible
The distinction between assimilation and integration — between the vision of America as a melting pot and America as a salad , to use the standard metaphors — might seem like nothing more than a difference of degree : how much someone should have to change to become American once arriving here .
But it ’ s really a question of how diverse a country can be without breaking .
What ’ s really striking about the “ RAISE Act ” introduced in the Senate this week by Sens . Tom Cotton ( R-AR ) and David Purdue ( R-GA ) and endorsed by the White House is that its authors characterize it as a “ shift ” away from family-based immigration and toward “ merit-based ” immigration . But the bill doesn ’ t actually shift slots allocated for the former toward the latter ; it simply slashes family-based immigration , while leaving merit-based immigration flat , so that merit-based immigration becomes more common than family-based immigration by default .
By doing this , the bill wouldn ’ t just be an unprecedented cut to legal immigration . It would make the very “ merit-based ” immigrants it claims to welcome less likely to want to stay because highly skilled immigrants often want to live with their families , too .
In theory , if America took integration as the goal of its immigration policy , it would encourage people to put down roots rather than coming to the US for a few years and leaving , or staying here without fully committing to citizenship . It would encourage their spouses to work , their children to attend US schools and learn English ( and perhaps be cared for by members of the extended family when both parents are at work ) , their wages to stay in the American economy rather than being sent home in remittances .
But the worry at the core of “ chain migration ” is that at a certain mathematical tipping point , having an excess family member come renders the whole family less American ( even if each family member has had to live in the US for a decade or longer before sending for anyone else ) .
If you believe that Americanness is brittle , you want to be damned sure the people you ’ re bringing to America won ’ t break it before you make too many commitments to let them stay .
The thing about assimilation , you see , is that the people most anxious about it tend to believe that there are some people who simply aren ’ t assimilable — whether because they ’ re not evolved enough ( per early-20th-century eugenicists ) , or because their cultures and worldviews are simply irreconcilable with American views of freedom and achievement ( per early-21st-century “ anti-Sharia ” activists ) .
This is the power of the old complaint that “ when my ancestors came to this country they learned English and worked hard , nowadays immigrants just don ’ t bother. ” It ’ s false on both counts . But it also lends itself well to the assumption that these supposed individual moral failings can be prevented by changing the way America selects immigrants as a whole — that you can predict which kinds of immigrants will and will not be willing to give up who they have been to become Americans .
This is a theme Trump has hit on anew lately . In his speech Friday on Long Island , he used it to characterize MS-13 gang violence as a failure of assimilation :
You say what happened to the old days where people came into this country , they worked and they worked and they worked and they had families and they paid taxes and they did all sorts of things , and their families got stronger and they were closely knit . We do n't see that . Failure to enforce our immigration laws had predictable results . Drugs , gangs , and violence .
Trump ’ s rhetoric is powerful because it ties a specific problem of gang violence to a whole wave of migrants from Central America — deeming them all , to some extent , unassimilable .
There ’ s no indication that it ’ s true , any more than that it was true that the Mexican migrants of the last couple of decades were unassimilable , any more than it ’ s true that Muslim Americans are unassimilable .
For his audience , though , it ’ s very easy to take the high-profile incidents of “ aberrant ” behavior — especially when that behavior is an act of gruesome violence — and blow it up into a shared cultural value from a value system totally inimical to America ’ s own , and one that its adherents will simply refuse to abandon .
It ’ s easy because , in part , mass media is the primary way that this audience sees other groups . They ’ re not on the border , and they ( or their parents ) left cities like Detroit long ago . Perhaps it ’ s ironic that white people , who themselves retreated from pluralism en masse in the mid-20th-century — “ there goes the neighborhood ” — are now the ones believing that other spaces have been taken over by people alien or hostile to them , that there are now places in their own country they simply can not go for fear of being targeted for violence .
The combination of not living quite close enough to people who are different , but living within close enough range to see things they might have done wrong on local news , is potent . It leads to absurd memes like the “ knockout game ” ( the suburban legend that gangs of black teens were going around punching random white strangers in the head ) . It leads to fake news like European towns that have become “ no-go zones ” for non-Muslims . It leads to the US president saying that MS-13 has taken over whole cities in the US , and that the federal government needs to “ liberate ” those towns for its citizens .
If there are places that are simply forsaken to some Americans , places so alien to them that their very existence is a threat , diversity seems either already dead or not worth keeping alive .
Pluralism is a hard question . Of course it ’ s a hard question . But when you look at a few hundred refugees on Manus Island and see the beginnings of an inevitable horde that will overflow your country , you lose any perspective on that question . You lose any faith in pluralism entirely . All you have , instead , is a desperate need to cling to an America you deem so fragile it can ’ t bear one extra inch of stretch or ounce of weight . It ’ s a neurotic , smothering love .