The Sunday morning party in suburban Washington , D.C. , had all the trappings of anticipation .
A lace-trimmed bassinet , a jumble of gifts tied with pink and blue ribbons , a `` diaper cake '' on the table . And chatter about babies , diets , new spring outfits and the coming end of the school year .
But for Sue Costello , the grandmother-in-waiting , the happy cacophony of the baby shower masked an abiding anxiety about the future of her daughter 's family and the twins — a boy and a girl — who are due before June 's end .
That future is now in the hands of the U.S. Supreme Court . This month , justices will decide a case that will determine whether gay couples such as Sue 's daughter Kelly Costello and Fabiola Morales , who married in late 2012 , will be able to stay together , in America .
`` We are watching for that decision big time , '' Sue Costello says , `` and we 'll face it when it comes .
`` But sometimes when things change , '' she says , `` they change overnight . ''
Morales , 39 , is a native of Peru , in the U.S. on a student visa . Unlike heterosexual spouses in America , Kelly Costello , 31 , is unable to sponsor her foreign-born wife for permanent residency status because the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act defines marriage as between a man and a woman .
That means same-sex marriages , including those performed in 12 states , and Washington , D.C. , where they are legal , are not recognized under federal law , including U.S. immigration law .
Kelly Costello says she and Morales were well aware of the restrictions when they married , but said they were determined not to let a government set the course of their life together .
`` We just wanted to do as any normal couple would do and get married , '' Costello says . `` Not for any technical reason other than love . ''
Says Morales : `` We have been waiting for things to change , like the laws . But we realize we can not put our lives on hold . ''
They are among an estimated 36,000 binational , same-sex couples in the U.S. , says Steve Ralls of Immigration Equality ; nearly half of them have children . A recent effort by the advocacy group and others to include spousal sponsorship language in an immigration bill being considered by the Senate failed .
That has made the Supreme Court decision all the more consequential , Ralls said .
Unless the high court strikes down DOMA , or the Senate reconsiders what to include in its immigration bill , Morales will have to leave the country when she finishes her master 's in nursing program at Georgetown University . Or she could join the ranks of those in the U.S. illegally .
That 's not something the couple wants . They 've contemplated a move to either Peru , where Morales has family , but also would not recognize their marriage , or to a country like Canada , where their marriage would be legal under federal law .
But relocation is not something that the almost relentlessly positive couple dwells on .
`` We always say that everything happens for a reason , '' says Costello , who teaches English as a second language to elementary school children in a suburban Washington school district . `` That 's kind of our motto . ''
The women joke that when they met in Washington at a mutual friend 's party seven years ago it was love at first sight .
`` These have been the happiest years of my life , '' Morales said in the sun room of Kelly 's parents ' home , where they have been living .
Morales was working in Miami when they met , employed as a bank IT project manager and in the country on a work visa . She moved to Washington to be with Costello , obtaining a student visa that allowed her to get an undergraduate degree in nursing from Georgetown , and pursue her master 's degree .
`` She 's my best friend , she 's the love of my life , '' Morales says of Costello . `` We knew that we were going to be together forever — always together , we could do anything , and guided by God . ''
The women say they are sustained in times of vulnerability , including Morales ' struggle with multiple sclerosis , by family and their strong Catholic faith . They attend Mass weekly at a nearby church , and a priest gave a blessing at their wedding .
They wear matching gold St. Christopher medals on necklaces , and pray together daily .
`` We understand that the Catholic Church maybe still has to change a little bit more to love everybody , like people like us , '' Morales says . `` But we have found support from the Catholic Church . Not everybody is against gay people . ''
Costello , who says she has become more devout since meeting Morales , adds : `` As my Dad always says , we are all God 's children . ''
The families of both women have embraced the couple , including Kelly 's 83-year-old aunt , Deirdre Krouse .
`` You 'd think Fab was a terrorist or something , '' Krouse said at the baby shower . `` She 's a wonderful girl . She just wants to become an American citizen . ''
The couple imagine what their life might be a year from now , if the court strikes down DOMA .
`` We would love to have a home of our own in the area , '' Costello says . `` I 'd be able to sponsor Fab , and she would be working as a nurse or a nurse practitioner , feeling secure and stable . ''
Sue Costello says that the family will deal with whatever the future brings , but are holding on to the hope that historic changes in the way people view gay couples will be reflected in the court 's decision .
`` More and more people are coming to understand the fact that it 's not an abnormal thing , '' she said , noting what she sees as an inherent unfairness : another of her daughters is also married to someone who is not from the U.S. and simply got a marriage visa that allowed him to stay .
`` It 's not the same for Kelly and Fab , '' Sue Costello said of a situation her daughter says is tantamount to forcing citizens to choose between their spouse and their country .