FILE - In this June 18 , 2014 file photo , two female detainees sleep in a holding cell , as the children are separated by age group and gender , as hundreds of mostly Central American immigrant children are being processed and held at the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Nogales Placement Center in Nogales , Ariz. President Donald Trump has seized on an error by liberal activists for tweeting photos of detainees at the U.S.-Mexico border in steel cages and blamed the current administration for separating immigrant children from their parents . The photos were taken by The ███ in 2014 , when President Barack Obama was in office . ( AP Photo/Ross D. Franklin , Pool )
FILE - In this June 18 , 2014 file photo , two female detainees sleep in a holding cell , as the children are separated by age group and gender , as hundreds of mostly Central American immigrant children are being processed and held at the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Nogales Placement Center in Nogales , Ariz. President Donald Trump has seized on an error by liberal activists for tweeting photos of detainees at the U.S.-Mexico border in steel cages and blamed the current administration for separating immigrant children from their parents . The photos were taken by The ███ in 2014 , when President Barack Obama was in office . ( AP Photo/Ross D. Franklin , Pool )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — Since the government acknowledged last month that the Trump administration had lost track of nearly 1,500 immigrant children , the debate over what that means and who is to blame has roiled Twitter . Here ’ s a look at the partisan claims and a reality check behind the latest immigration fight :
— “ Speechless . This is not who we are as a nation. ” — Democrat Antonio Villaraigosa , former Los Angeles mayor now running for governor , referring in a tweet Sunday to photos showing young-looking immigrants in steel cages .
— “ This is happening right now , and the only debate that matters is how we force our government to get these kids back to their families as fast as humanly possible. ” — Jon Favreau , who was speechwriter for President Barack Obama , referring Sunday to the same photos .
THE FACTS : The photos , taken by The ███ , were from 2014 , during the Obama administration , but were presented by liberal activists as if they showed the effects of Trump ’ s immigration policy now . Villaraigosa , Favreau and some others deleted their tweets when the mistake was pointed out .
Many tweets used the hashtag “ WhereAreOurChildren , ” which grew out of testimony in April by a federal official that the U.S. government had lost track of nearly 1,500 unaccompanied minor children it placed with adult sponsors in the U.S .
Trump tweeted : “ Democrats mistakenly tweet 2014 pictures from Obama ’ s term showing children from the Border in steel cages . They thought it was recent pictures in order to make us look bad , but backfires . ”
He is right about the misrepresentation , though it ’ s not clear that many prominent Democrats jumped on this particular Twitter bandwagon .
— “ 1500 innocent children ripped from their mothers ’ arms at our border . Lost in Trump ’ s “ system ” . Give us your tired , your poor , your huddle masses yearning to breathe free — and we will torture them for wanting a better life . From Shining City to Evil Empire in under 500 days. ” — tweet Sunday by actor Jim Carrey .
— “ What is more shameful than forcibly separating , in America , parents from infant children at the border ? And then , losing track of those children ? ” — tweet Friday by Preet Bharara , fired by Trump as U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York .
THE FACTS : The nearly 1,500 children in question arrived at the border without their parents and were not forced from them by U.S. authorities . Critics are conflating those children with others , who came to the border with their parents , only to be separated there .
To call the children lost , as many have , is misleading . It ’ s more accurate to say the government lost track of them , as Bharara put it .
An official from the Health and Human Services Department told a congressional hearing last month that his department placed follow-up phone calls from October to December to U.S. households that were sponsoring the minors after they came to the border without their parents . They reached 86 percent of the children or sponsors , determining 6,075 remained with their sponsors , 28 had run away , five had been removed from the U.S. and 52 relocated to live with someone else .
The department could not verify the whereabouts of 1,475 . In some of many cases , sponsors simply didn ’ t respond to the follow-up phone call , not surprising because many are in the U.S. illegally and reluctant to speak to authorities . HHS decided 792 of those cases merited more attention and referred them to the National Call Center .
It ’ s not highly unusual to fail to keep track of many minors who came unaccompanied to the border .
During the last year of the Obama administration , HHS was able to locate 85 percent of the minors or their sponsors , according to an inspector general ’ s report . The Trump administration slightly exceeded that success rate in the last three months of 2017 , even as it is accused of losing children .
—TRUMP : “ Put pressure on the Democrats to end the horrible law that separates children from there parents once they cross the Border into the U.S. ” — tweet Saturday .
THE FACTS : No law mandates that parents must be separated from their children at the border , and it ’ s not a policy Democrats have pushed or can change alone as the minority in Congress . The policy comes from Trump ’ s own administration , which has decided to enforce criminal charges against people crossing the border illegally with few or no previous offenses . Under U.S. protocol , if parents are jailed , their children would be separated from them .
Discussing the zero-tolerance policy recently , Attorney General Jeff Sessions said : “ If we do our duty and prosecute those cases , then children inevitably for a period of time might be in different conditions . ”
A Customs and Border Protection official told lawmakers last week that 658 children had been separated from their parents at the border from May 6 to May 19 , after border agents began referring every illegal entry to criminal prosecutors . This is in addition to hundreds more who were estimated to have been removed from their parents at the border since October .
A 2008 law , passed unanimously by Congress and signed into law by President George W. Bush , says children traveling alone from countries other than Mexico or Canada must be released in the “ least restrictive setting ” — often to family or a government-run shelter — while their cases slowly wind through immigration court . The law came amid concerns about border control officials and their treatment of children .