“ I think the national party is going to draw inspiration from what Christie did , ” said John Feehery , a Republican strategist . “ The bigger lesson is you can ’ t just go to Hispanic communities six months before an election and say , ‘ Hey , I need your vote , ’ ” he said . “ I think immigration reform fits into this . ”
Republican leaders in the House of Representatives are facing growing pressure from a wide array of business , labor and religious groups to hold votes in coming weeks on immigration bills , including some measure to deal with 11.7 million immigrants here illegally . On Wednesday , the A.F.L.-C.I.O . announced it would spend more than $ 1 million in five districts over the next two weeks on television ads that sharply blame Republicans for the lack of immigration action in the House . In Chicago , about 150 demonstrators were arrested after they blocked a busy intersection calling for the House to hold a vote on the issue .
Speaker John A. Boehner , Republican of Ohio , has said he is “ hopeful ” the House will act before the end of the year . But Republican leaders were waiting to see how the two governors ’ races would alter the landscape for their party .
Mr. Christie ’ s re-election , which lifted him to early presidential front-runner status , came after a campaign with ambitious outreach to Latinos , who were 9 percent of the voters on Tuesday . He had a full-time director for Hispanic outreach and started running ads in Spanish in May .
Mr. Christie came into the race with a record on immigration that was strikingly at odds with the dominant views of his party . He has long supported a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants , which many Republicans oppose . During the campaign , he reversed himself , and said New Jersey should offer in-state college tuition rates to young undocumented immigrants , who call themselves Dreamers . For his efforts , Mr. Christie won the endorsement of the Latino Leadership Alliance of New Jersey , a major Hispanic organization .