The leeway in the rules reflected the fact that Border Patrol agents face challenges that F.B.I . agents and drug investigators do not , one senior official said . “ They have a very short period of time to make an assessment as to whether further inquiry needs to be given , ” he said . The rules will include new training requirements and will require federal agents to keep records on complaints they receive about profiling , several officials said .
The Obama administration ’ s revisions come on the heels of the president ’ s decision to grant legal status to millions of immigrants who entered the country illegally . The new rules are likely to upset some of the advocacy groups that pushed hardest for that action . “ Of course we are disappointed , ” said Tanya Clay House , the public policy director of the Lawyers ’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law , which has lobbied the administration on racial profiling for several years but has not been officially notified of the new rules . She said racial profiling is ineffective , both in general and at the border .
Mr. Holder , the nation ’ s first black attorney general , has spoken forcefully against racial profiling . He has recounted being stopped by the police as a college student and as a federal prosecutor . But while law enforcement officials were generally supportive of his efforts to broaden protections for minorities , Mr. Holder ran into objections on the issues of national security and border protection . F.B.I . agents opposed a wholesale ban on considering race and nationality in terrorism investigations . They said , for example , that an agent investigating the Shabab , a Somali militant group , must be able to find out whether a state has a large Somali population and , if so , where it is .
The Justice Department was prepared to announce its revisions to the racial profiling rules earlier this year , but the White House intervened and ordered a broad review that included the Department of Homeland Security , the parent agency of the Border Patrol . Because Mr. Holder can not , on his own , tell another cabinet department what rules to follow , the new guidelines amount to months of negotiations between the Justice Department , Homeland Security and the White House . The broad exemptions for national security and immigration were eliminated , but several provisions remain .
The rules — both the current version and the revisions — offer more protection against discrimination than the Supreme Court has said the Constitution requires . The court has said that border agents may not conduct roving traffic stops simply because motorists appeared to be of Mexican descent , but agents at checkpoints may single out drivers for interviews “ largely on the basis of apparent Mexican ancestry. ” The court ruled that the government ’ s interest in protecting the border outweighed the minimal inconvenience to motorists .
But Representative Beto O ’ Rourke , the Texas Democrat who represents the border city of El Paso , said that because the United States is so diverse , such policies unnecessarily expose millions of people to being stopped . “ How can race help a Border Patrol agent or customs officer do a better job in a city like El Paso , where 85 percent of the people are Hispanic ? ” Mr. O ’ Rourke said .
Last year , the Border Patrol settled a racial-profiling lawsuit in which Washington State residents accused border agents of racial profiling while making traffic stops near the Canadian border . The government admitted no wrongdoing but agreed to retrain its agents on the profiling rules .
Like the existing rules , the new guidelines prohibit federal agents from relying on broad stereotypes — that members of a certain race are more likely to deal drugs than others , for example . But the authorities can consider race when responding to specific leads , such as when a witness describes a gunman as tall , white and blond .