Democrats seemed pleasantly surprised with the bipartisan deal unveiled Thursday . Dems get immigration concessions
The Senate ’ s Gang of Eight delivered an immigration overhaul bill this week that was far more generous to their constituencies than Democrats and Hispanic activists expected .
The pre-bill marketing campaign — driven by leaks that seemed to come from Republican negotiators — focused on stringent new border-control measures and a long , difficult path to citizenship . The goal was to minimize conservative opposition by creating a first impression of the bill as a tough solution to the country ’ s illegal immigration problem .
But when Democrats got a look at the 844-page measure , they discovered that their negotiators extracted more concessions than they thought possible . Those include an expansive version of the DREAM Act and subtle but meaningful tradeoffs on all the major pieces of the system , from family reunification to legalization and border security .
The compromises raise a potential stumbling block for the bill as it starts what could be an arduous process through Congress . Conservatives could balk at signing on to something that has the stamp of approval from liberal lawmakers and progressive groups . And liberals may have a hard time accepting something that Republicans may argue is a clear-cut victory for them .
So far , negotiators seem to have quieted dissension on both sides . But that could change as lawmakers and activists give the bill a close look — and assess the reactions of the other side .
Democrats are reluctant to sound too positive , fearing that would scare away Republicans . Their official response to the bill has been muted , with one press release after another calling it a starting point that must be improved .
Yet that description , while an accurate reflection of their political strategy heading into the debate , understates the extent to which Democrats believe their side made off with more policy victories than it could ’ ve predicted .
It might just be that reformers ’ perspective skewed . The last major overhaul bill , in 2007 , contained almost nothing for them to like . Their expectations could be low after weeks of media leaks that put a conservative spin on the legislation . Senate Democratic aides had to repeatedly urge reformers to be patient , saying the measure wasn ’ t as one-sided as it seemed .
But the early favorable reaction from Democrats underscores how the shifting politics of immigration and major demographic change penetrated the Gang of Eight ’ s negotiations , producing a more balanced approach than the reform efforts of the past decade .
“ I must admit , I was impressed , ” Sen. Ben Cardin ( D-Md . ) said Thursday after receiving a briefing with other members of the Senate Democratic Caucus . “ You get a sense , and it looks like people seem to be responding very favorably . ”
Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , a leader of the gang , emerged from the hourlong session with a bold prediction : “ We will have the overwhelming majority of Democrats for the bill . ”
Such declarations aren ’ t what immigration reform proponents want their side to promote .
They assume that if Republicans know that Democrats support the bill and are generally pleased with it , then they won ’ t give it a chance . Or they ’ ll stop believing Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) , another member of the gang , when he describes the bill as containing “ the toughest border security and enforcement measures in U.S. history . ”
The gang ’ s press conference unveiling the bill Thursday planted seeds of doubt .
Some conservatives scoffed at Republican senators for standing alongside Schumer as he invoked the late Sen. Ted Kennedy ( D-Mass . ) , saying “ our work picks up where he left off. ” Kennedy led the failed efforts in 2006 and 2007 to overhaul the system .
“ Gang of 8ers Schumer & McCain hailing Teddy Kennedy as driving spirit of amnesty bill , ” conservative pundit Michelle Malkin posted on Twitter . “ Rubio still calling it ‘ conservative ’ reform . # wakeup . ”