CLOSE The Defense Department says it 's sending 5,200 active duty troops to 'harden ' the southern border against a migrant caravan making its way through Mexico ( Oct 29 ) AP
WASHINGTON – Just one week shy of the midterm elections , the Pentagon will deploy at least 5,200 active-duty troops to the U.S.-Mexico border in an effort to prevent members of a migrant caravan from illegally entering the country , the Department of Defense announced Monday .
About 2,100 National Guard troops already were fanned out across the border under an order from President Donald Trump this year . In recent weeks , the president has been warning repeatedly about the dangers posed by the caravan of mostly Central American migrants , which stands at about 3,500 people after 1,700 of them filed asylum applications in Mexico or accepted assistance to return to their home countries .
Administration officials said last week that they were considering a plan to send up to 1,000 active-duty troops to the border , but that deployment , dubbed Operation Faithful Patriot , will now surpass 5,200 , said Gen. Terrence O ’ Shaughnessy , commander of U.S. Northern Command . He said the number of troops could rise depending on the demands placed on U.S. Customs and Border Protection agents manning the border .
`` That is just the start of this operation , '' O ’ Shaughnessy said during a news conference at CBP headquarters in Washington on Monday . `` Border security is national security . ''
The troops will not conduct law enforcement activities , but some will be armed as they provide support to Border Patrol agents along the border .
CLOSE Central American migrants , hoping to eventually reach U.S. soil , waded across parts of the Suchiate River to enter into Mexico from Guatemala . ███
National Guard units have already been assisting by monitoring video surveillance feeds to direct Border Patrol agents manning the vast stretches between U.S. ports of entry . The new deployment of active-duty troops will include helicopter and other aviation units armed with night vision technology to help identify anyone trying to illegally cross the border , and to deploy CBP agents to apprehend them , O ’ Shaughnessy said .
“ We will be able to spot and identify groups , and rapidly deploy , ” he said .
The operation will also include engineering units to build temporary barriers , lay out concertina wire at ports of entry , and construct temporary housing for U.S. personnel , he said . About 800 troops are already en route to Texas from Fort Campbell and Fort Knox , and more will follow this week headed toward Arizona and California .
Typically , migrant caravans travel in numbers to seek safety and avoid risks such as kidnap , rape and extortion . When the last migrant caravan reached the U.S. border in April , a majority of people presented themselves at ports of entry to request asylum , a legal way to enter the United States .
A Homeland Security official , who spoke on condition of anonymity because plans were not yet finalized , said the president is expected to deliver a speech this week to outline further actions to halt the migrant caravan , which could include limiting , or halting , the ability of migrants to request asylum . That move would be predicated on national security arguments similar to those used to enact Trump ’ s travel ban last year on certain individuals from Muslim-dominated countries and would meet the same legal challenges by immigration advocacy and civil rights organizations .
White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders declined on Monday to detail other aspects of the new border security plan , and would not confirm whether Trump will deliver a speech on the topic this week .
`` There are a lot of options that are being discussed right now , '' she said .
Trump on Monday again claimed that the migrant caravan may have `` many gang members '' and `` some very bad people . '' Reporters from ███ and other media outlets , including The Associated Press , have not seen the presence of such individuals . Supporters of the caravan have denied such allegations . Many of the migrants are families traveling with children .
`` Please go back , you will not be admitted into the United States unless you go through the legal process , '' he tweeted . `` This is an invasion of our Country and our Military is waiting for you . ''
Many Gang Members and some very bad people are mixed into the Caravan heading to our Southern Border . Please go back , you will not be admitted into the United States unless you go through the legal process . This is an invasion of our Country and our Military is waiting for you ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 29 , 2018
Critics accused Trump of using the Pentagon as a tool in his political game by drumming up anti-immigrant fears to rally his political base in the lead-up to the midterm elections .
`` At a moment we need a president that helps the nation heal and unite , we have one that is ripping us apart and using racism , xenophobia and antisemitism as strategic weapons in the run up to the elections , '' tweeted Frank Sharry , executive director of America 's Voice , an immigration advocacy group .
U.S. Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAleenan , who has 16,500 Border Patrol agents along the southwest border , said the additional manpower is needed because the region is in a state of crisis . He said an average of 1,900 people a day have been arriving illegally or without official documents for the last three weeks , straining his agency 's resources to process illegal border crossers and process legal ones .
Monday 's news conference did not address speeding up the process by which migrants can request asylum , which they are legally allowed to do . McAleenan said on Monday that Central American migrants were already given an opportunity to request asylum in Mexico , calling into question their motivations behind ignoring those requests and marching on toward the U.S .
`` Our message to the organizers and the participants in the caravan is simple : As the president and ( Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen ) Nielsen have made clear , we will not allow a large group to enter the United States in an illegal and unsafe manner , '' he said .
The administration 's moves are the latest to show a robust response to the migrant caravan as the midterm elections draw closer . Nielsen on Friday showed off a recently completed section of border fence in Calexico , California , that including a plaque proclaiming the `` completion of the first section of President Trump ’ s border wall . '' That section had been deemed a priority and funded during the Obama administration .
On the same day , McAleenan toured ports of entry south of San Diego and explained how additional troops would help secure the border from any attempted rush by the migrants to rush the border . But McAleenan , who described the oncoming caravan as a `` law enforcement situation , '' conceded that despite the added manpower , his agency has no way to speed up the process by which migrants can legally request asylum .
That 's what happened when the last migrant caravan reached the U.S. border in April – 122 were caught trying to enter the country illegally , but 401 presented themselves at ports of entry to request asylum , according to data from U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services .