With his victory , Obama has the political capital to push through an immigration bill . Obama 's latest , familiar strategy
President Barack Obama made his plans for his newly won political capital official — he ’ s going to hammer House Republicans on immigration .
And it ’ s evident from his public and private statements that Obama ’ s latest immigration push is , in at least one respect , similar to his fiscal showdown strategy : yet again , the goal is to boost public pressure on House Republican leadership to call a vote on a Senate-passed measure .
“ The majority of Americans think this is the right thing to do , ” Obama said Thursday at the White House . “ And it ’ s sitting there waiting for the House to pass it . Now , if the House has ideas on how to improve the Senate bill , let ’ s hear them . Let ’ s start the negotiations . But let ’ s not leave this problem to keep festering for another year , or two years , or three years . This can and should get done by the end of this year . ”
And yet Obama spent the bulk of his 20-minute address taking whack after whack at the same House Republicans he ’ ll need to pass that agenda , culminating in a jab at the GOP over the results of the 2012 election — and a dare to do better next time .
“ You don ’ t like a particular policy or a particular president ? Then argue for your position , ” Obama said . “ Go out there and win an election . Push to change it . But don ’ t break it . Don ’ t break what our predecessors spent over two centuries building . That ’ s not being faithful to what this country ’ s about . ”
Before the shutdown , the White House had planned a major immigration push for the first week in October . But with the shutdown and looming debt default dominating the discussion during the last month , immigration reform received little attention on the Hill .
Immigration reform allies , including Obama ’ s political arm , Organizing for Action , conducted a series of events for the weekend of Oct. 5 , most of which received little attention in Washington due to the the shutdown drama . But activists remained engaged , with Dream Act supporters staging a march up Constitution Avenue , past the Capitol to the Supreme Court Tuesday , to little notice of the Congress inside .
Obama first personally signaled his intention to re-emerge in the immigration debate during an interview Tuesday with the Los Angeles Univision affiliate , conducted four hours before his meeting that day with House Democrats .
Speaking of the week ’ s fiscal landmines , Obama said : “ Once that ’ s done , you know , the day after , I ’ m going to be pushing to say , call a vote on immigration reform . ”
When he met that afternoon in the Oval Office with the House Democratic leadership , Obama said that he planned to be personally engaged in selling the reform package he first introduced in a Las Vegas speech in January .
Still , during that meeting , Obama knew so little about immigration reform ’ s status in the House that he had to ask Rep. Xavier Becerra ( D-Calif. ) how many members of his own party would back a comprehensive reform bill , according to a senior Democrat who attended .
The White House doesn ’ t have plans yet for Obama to participate in any new immigration reform events or rallies — that sort of advance work has been hamstrung by the 16-day government shutdown .
But the president emerged on Thursday to tout a “ broad coalition across America ” that supports immigration reform . He also invited House Republicans to add their input specifically to the Senate bill — an approach diametrically different than the House GOP ’ s announced strategy of breaking the reform into several smaller bills .