On Wednesday , President Donald Trump signed an executive orders building up security on the US/Mexico border — including directing money to start building his famous wall — and increasing immigration enforcement within the interior .
Later this week , he ’ s expected to sign an order imiting legal immigration to the US for refugees fleeing persecution and visa-holders from several majority-Muslim countries .
Details about the forthcoming executive orders are still unconfirmed . But here ’ s what we can say with high confidence .
Suspending refugee admissions : Sometime this week — likely Thursday or Friday — Trump is expected to sign an order suspending refugee admissions to the US for a certain period of time ( possibly for four months ) . This is something the president has broad authority to do ( President George W. Bush suspended refugee admissions for three months after 9/11 ) but that would severely disrupt the lives of thousands of refugees in the midst of a global refugee crisis . The executive order might make an exception for “ religious minorities ” who are persecuted in their home countries — presumably intended for Christians in the Middle East .
Suspending visas from seven majority-Muslim countries : Trump is also expected to sign an executive order stopping people from several countries from entering the US on visas . The list of countries reportedly includes Iraq , Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and , Yemen — all majority-Muslim countries . These countries don ’ t account for a large portion of entries to the US , though they do account for a larger portion of refugee admissions . The visa suspension might last 30 days . While it ’ s possible that a ban that targeted only majority-Muslim countries could face a court challenge , current US law and court cases give the president broad authority to restrict immigration from particular countries .
There may be other executive orders related to immigration that are also signed this week . President Trump ran on cracking down on immigration — both at the border and from refugees and Muslim immigrants — and it appears that he is making it a priority for his first week in office .