A federal court on Wednesday tossed out Texas ’ s attempt for a preemptive legal defense of the state ’ s new anti-sanctuary city law , shifting the battleground to yet another federal court .
Hours after Gov . Greg Abbott signed the anti-sanctuary law , SB 4 , Attorney General Ken Paxton went to a court and asked for a preliminary ruling that it was constitutional . But U.S. District Judge Sam Sparks in Austin rejected that move , saying courts aren ’ t in the business of giving advisory opinions .
Instead , the battle over the state law will be fought out in another federal court in San Antonio , where a number of cities are battling to preserve their sanctuary policies in the face of the new law , which is slated to go into effect Sept. 1 .
Mr. Paxton had tried to get the entire legal battle shifted to Judge Sparks in Austin , but the new ruling ends that effort .
“ The health , safety , and welfare of Texans is not negotiable . We ’ re disappointed with the court ’ s ruling and look forward to pressing our winning arguments in the San Antonio cases and beyond ( if necessary ) on this undoubtedly constitutional law , ” the attorney general said in a statement .
Judge Sparks was appointed to the bench by President George H.W . Bush , while Judge Orlando Garcia , who now becomes the key jurist , was appointed by President Clinton .
SB 4 requires local law enforcement agencies to cooperate with federal deportation officers , including sharing information and helping transfer deportable immigrants into federal custody .
The law is the most aggressive one in the country , and comes at a time when President Trump is forcing a national conversation about sanctuaries . He ’ s threatened to withhold federal funding and his top deportation official has even hinted at using existing anti-smuggling laws to charge sanctuary city leaders with criminal offenses .
Undaunted , a number of jurisdictions have moved to embrace sanctuary policies , hoping to shield illegal immigrants within their boundaries from deportation .
Though policies vary widely , they generally attempt to thwart either the reporting of illegal immigrants to federal authorities , or prohibit detaining or turning over aliens sought by deportation officers .