A group of about 150 migrants carrying white flags that read , `` La paz y Dios , '' or `` Peace and God are With Us , '' separated from the larger caravan near Southern California and inched within 500 feet of the U.S. , a report Thursday said .
The migrants said they are carrying the white flags to show that they are peaceful , and will attempt to present themselves as asylum seekers near Baja , Calif. , The San Diego Union-Tribune reported .
President Trump on Thursday threatened to close the border with Mexico if his administration determines that Mexico has lost control of the situation . The Union-Tribune reported that Mexican federal police held a barrier near a pedestrian crossing and urged the migrants to apply for jobs in Tijuana . Police claimed there are thousands of jobs in the city . Federal police were dressed in riot gear and prevented the caravan from getting closer to the U.S .
Carlos Lopez , a Honduran who was leading the small group , told the paper that the conditions in Mexico are horrible . He said there are sick children and women and children are forced to remain outside in the elements . Those already in the city have camped out in tents , slept on dirt fields or under bleachers or are staying in overcrowded shelters throughout the city as they wait to figure out their next steps .
`` The whole world is watching what is happening here , '' he said .
The report said the larger group contains about 6,219 Central Americans . The federal government estimates the number of migrants could grow to 10,000 in the coming weeks , or months . President Trump warned that the caravan is a national security threat and it will not enter the U.S .
On Monday , a judge barred the president from enforcing a ban on asylum for those who cross the U.S. border illegally – a decision the administration said would cause “ countless illegal aliens to pour into our country . ''
The report said that the migrants who traveled for over a month can now see a bridge that separates them from the U.S .
Speaking to reporters while in Florida for the holiday , Trump threatened to close the U.S. border with Mexico for an undisclosed period of time if his administration determines that its southern ally has lost `` control '' on its side .
Trump also said he has given the thousands of active-duty troops he sent to the border before the Nov. 6 midterm elections the `` OK '' to use lethal force against migrants `` if they have to . '' And he said Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen , whom he has faulted for not being tough enough on immigration , is `` in there trying . ''