Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is in Washington overseeing the drama on the partial government shutdown , but his constituents back home are about to get a taste as billboards pop up this week imploring him to bring the episode to a conclusion .
The billboards say prisoners are being compensated for their jailhouse jobs and “ eating roast beef and Cornish hens ” while federal prison guards are going unpaid .
Back in D.C. , meanwhile , House Speaker Nancy Pelosi heaped pressure on Mr. Trump and Republicans by touring a temporary kitchen set up by chef Jose Andres to feed federal workers who are struggling during the shutdown .
With the TV cameras rolling , she stopped to chat with a pair of volunteers doling out fresh fruit to furloughed employees .
The moves are part of a growing effort to make the personal pain of the month-old shutdown apparent , both to politicians and to voters who may feel immune to the lapse in funding .
“ We believe this is a national food emergency , and we will be there for the national federal workers , ” Mr. Andres said in a Twitter video , adding : “ This is our action to make sure no one will be hungry , Mr. Trump . What are you doing about it ? ”
Tuesday marked the deadline for the second payroll processing period of the shutdown , meaning that with no solution workers will miss a second paycheck .
In Kentucky , sponsors of the 15 billboards say federal prison guards can ’ t even afford the commute to work without their paychecks .
“ Who is Mitch McConnell actually working for ? Is he working for the president of the United States or the law enforcement and citizens of Kentucky ? ” said Eric Young , president of the American Federation of Government Employees ’ Council of Prison Locals .
Democrats ’ PR push appears to be working , as polls show more people blaming Mr. Trump and the GOP for the impasse , which focuses on White House demands for border wall funding .
“ Democratic leaders are emphasizing the personal impact on people of normal means and saying Trump is a rich businessman who doesn ’ t care about average folks , ” said Darrell West , director of governance studies at the Brookings Institution . “ Trump ’ s strategy is to blame Democrats , but he hasn ’ t been very empathetic about the plight of workers . ”
Some companies are revving up their PR machines to ease the effects of the shutdown , without choosing sides .
Delta Air Lines donated $ 83,500 to reopen the Martin Luther King Jr. National Park in Atlanta from its namesake ’ s holiday weekend through Feb. 3 , when visitors will flock to the city for the Super Bowl .
Pop star Lady Gaga stopped midway through a song over the weekend to call out Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence in Las Vegas .
“ There are people who live paycheck to paycheck and need their money , ” she said to cheers , according to videos posted online .
Mr. Trump , a master showman , has made his own pitch by touring the southern border and touting his wall building plans to the American Farm Bureau Federation , who showered him with applause last week .
On Tuesday , he pledged on Twitter not to “ cave ” and accused Democrats of playing political games . He has recalled workers , piecemeal , to lessen the public-facing pain of the shutdown .
Mr. McConnell , who has staunchly defended Mr. Trump throughout the shutdown , said Tuesday that he has scheduled a Thursday vote on the president ’ s new immigration plan , which is combined with bills to reopen the shuttered parts of government .
It combines three years of temporary legal status for 1 million immigrants , including “ Dreamers , ” in exchange for border wall funds .
Mr. McConnell said Democrats who rejected the idea were catering to far-left interests who demanded ideological purity over compromise .
“ To refuse even to talk until the government reopens does no favors to the sidelined federal workers and contractors , ” he said .
Mr. Young , however , said Mr. McConnell should bring up bills to reopen the government without dealing with the border fight .
He said the prison guard council has worked on criminal justice changes pushed by Mr. Trump and other bipartisan measures , so the billboards that pressure Mr. McConnell shouldn ’ t be viewed as a partisan slam .
“ It ’ s a simple message , ” Mr. Young said . “ It ’ s not anything that denigrates him . ”