President Donald Trump told reporters on Tuesday that his administration is “ going to be guarding our border with our military , ” reaffirming the White House ’ s intent to circumvent Congress ’ s spending bill and beef up border security .
After Congress ’ s $ 1.3 trillion spending bill largely ignored Trump ’ s immigration priorities , the president , who begrudgingly signed the funding package in late March , has called on his administration to find ways to fund the border wall anyway . Trump said he spoke with Defense Secretary James Mattis about the idea last week , but it ’ s still not clear what directives — if any — the president has given .
One idea , reportedly pushed by White House adviser Stephen Miller , is to send the National Guard down to the border , according to Just Security ’ s Kate Brannen . Trump certainly wouldn ’ t be the first president to call on the National Guard to help enforce the border ( both Barack Obama and George W. Bush did the same ) . But it comes with legal constraints and could cost millions with little in returns , something Obama was criticized for .
There are a lot of legal limitations to using Pentagon money for the border across the board . While Congress ’ s government funding package allocated $ 700 billion for defense spending , it ’ s not a blank check to the Pentagon , and the money is appropriated to specific programs . Deviating from those regulations could be illegal .
Of course , there are some workarounds , but they have the potential to be very politically fraught — and likely pretty ineffective on the border . Trump , however , seems fixated on the idea .
Trump could use the military ’ s money on the border . His options are limited .
Currently , Congress has allocated $ 1.6 billion for the border wall through the Department of Homeland Security , with specific instructions that those funds had to go toward repairing existing fencing or toward double fencing where barriers already exist . In other words , Trump ’ s “ big , beautiful ” wall did not get funding .
On enforcement , Republicans , who went into the spending fight wanting more funding for the Department of Homeland Security to increase the number of beds for immigrant detainees and to expand the enforcement force , settled for more modest spending measures . The final compromise included funding for only an additional 328 Customs and Border Protection officers , and ICE will actually have to reduce the number of detention beds . Needless to say , this isn ’ t the kind of deportation force Trump ’ s administration was envisioning .
But Trump ’ s call to redirect money from the military toward the border is fraught . Of course , because it ’ s the legislative branch ’ s constitutional right to allocate government funding ( and it ’ s illegal to use federal funds for anything other than what Congress appropriates it for ) , Trump is legally limited .
Like Obama and Bush , he could call on the National Guard to go down to the border . But if that directive comes from the federal government , the guards legally can ’ t act as law enforcement . The Posse Comitatus Act forbids using the military in civilian law enforcement . It leaves Trump two options : have states send down their guards , which means states would have to foot the bill , or have guards on the border in non-law enforcement roles .
For example in 2010 , when Obama deployed 1,200 National Guard troops to the border , they fixed infrastructure , worked on surveillance , and processed arrests — similar to Bush ’ s 2006 ’ s Operation Jump Start . But even this was very expensive and was largely criticized for being ineffective .
“ Critics of the deployment include budget hawks , who say it is a waste of money , and residents here along the border , who say they are tired of seeing armed troops in their back yard , ” the Washington Post reported at the time . “ The 1,200 National Guard troops have helped Border Patrol agents apprehend 25,514 illegal immigrants at a cost of $ 160 million — or $ 6,271 for each person caught . ”
Another option is to tap into the emergency military construction funding known as MILCON . Up to $ 50 million can be used without congressional approval in cases of national security or to protect US military officers . As Brannen writes , “ using MILCON funding is also guaranteed to make members of Congress particularly angry , because it would be the military construction projects in their districts that would be directly losing money to the wall . ”
Not to mention that $ 50 million won ’ t get Trump much mileage on the border . For context , Congress appropriated $ 445 million for 25 miles of levee fencing in the Rio Grande Valley and $ 251 million to replace 14 miles of existing secondary fencing in the San Diego sector .
Trump told reporters Tuesday that using the military on the border would be a “ big step ” toward achieving his border security agenda .