The US Supreme Court has said that President Donald Trump can use $ 2.5bn ( £2bn ) of Pentagon funds for a section of wall on the southern border .
The court ruled by five votes to four to block a ruling by a federal judge in California that barred the president from spending the money on the wall .
The wall , dividing the US and Mexico , was Mr Trump 's major campaign promise during the 2016 election .
The decision by the Supreme Court means that the money will be used for wall projects in California , Arizona and New Mexico .
The court in California had argued that Congress had not specifically authorised the funds to be used for constructing the wall .
In a tweet , Mr Trump described the ruling as a `` big victory '' .
The president has argued that a new wall would help to curb illegal immigration , which he says is fuelling crime and placing a strain on the economy .
Democrats say they are in favour of border security but the wall would be expensive and ineffective . They argue that Mr Trump has manufactured the border emergency and that the wall has become a symbol of Trump 's anti-immigration platform .
On Friday , the US and Guatemala also signed a deal , under which migrants from Honduras and El Salvador who pass through Guatemala will be required to stop and seek asylum there first , rather than heading straight for the US .
US House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said : `` This evening 's Supreme Court ruling allowing Donald Trump to steal military funds to spend on a wasteful , ineffective border wall rejected by Congress is deeply flawed . Our Founders designed a democracy governed by the people - not a monarchy . ''
The American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) has vowed to seek an expedited decision from the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals `` to halt the irreversible and imminent damage from Trump 's border wall '' .
Gloria Smith , an attorney with environmental group the Sierra Club , which sued to block the funds said : `` Today 's decision to permit the diversion of military funds for border wall construction will wall off and destroy communities , public lands , and waters in California , New Mexico , and Arizona . ''
Mr Trump declared an emergency earlier this year , saying he needed $ 6.7bn to build the wall as a matter of national security . However this figure is far short of the estimated $ 23bn cost of a barrier along the whole 2,000 miles ( 3,200km ) of border .
Democrats claimed Mr Trump 's decision to declare an emergency exceeded his powers under the US constitution .
About 20 states , along with groups including the ACLU have filed lawsuits to try and stop the president using the emergency declaration to bypass Congress .
Environmental groups have also campaigned against building the wall claiming that it could have a negative impact on wildlife .
In February , Congress approved $ 1.38bn for the construction of `` primary pedestrian fencing '' along the Rio Grande Valley in Texas - far less than Mr Trump had sought .
The House of Representatives is also taking legal action to stop the diversion of further funds for the wall project .
According to US authorities , 104,344 people were arrested along the southwest border in June - a 28 % drop from the previous month .
The Trump administration claims the decrease is due to new policies with Mexico to curb migration , including increased security on the Mexican side of the border , and the expansion of a scheme that makes asylum seekers wait in Mexico while their cases are being processed .
However , experts say that reduced migration is also typical during the hot summer months .
The UN Missing Migrants project reports that 170 migrants have died or are missing on the US-Mexico border so far in 2019 - including 13 children .
The Department for Homeland Security says `` we are still in an ongoing border security and humanitarian crisis '' .
The number of people detained on the US-Mexico border is far lower when compared with the previous decade .
The number fell in President Trump 's first year but rose again last year - but even before the increase , when migration numbers were at historic lows , Mr Trump described the situation on the border as a national security crisis .