GREELEY , Colo.—Here on the outskirts of town sits a sprawling meatpacking plant where more than 3,000 workers slaughter and process thousands of cows a week—and where English is hardly the only language spoken inside . Indeed , the union handbook is printed in English , Spanish , Burmese and Somali .
The plant was one of a half dozen facilities owned by Swift & Co. that federal agents raided seven years ago in search of workers living in the country illegally . Some 260 people were detained here , forcing the plant 's new owner to find American replacements after some were deported . When 1,300 new jobs were added , the task grew harder , and the plant took on its international flavor , hiring Somalis and Burmese refugees .
Victor Mendoza supports his family on his $ 39,000-a-year cleaning job at the JBS plant . His wife , Maria , in background , would like to work but does n't have legal status . Matthew Staver ffor The Wall Street Journal
`` We looked everywhere , '' said Christopher Gaddis , head of human resources for JBS USA , which bought the plant soon after the raid and advertised bonuses and small wage increases to try to fill slots . Today , JBS USA estimates 15 % of the plant 's workers are refugees .
Across the country , and in Congress in particular , the debate over the future of immigration continues to bat the same questions back and forth : Will legalizing immigrants and allowing in additional low-skill laborers displace native-born workers and cut wages ? Or will new workers simply fill empty employment niches and spark a broader economic boon that benefits all ? Economists are divided , but a plant like this one—which dealt with immigrants , first illegal , and then legal—may provide some clues .
So far , there is n't any broad evidence the new , legal immigrants are taking jobs from locals . They did n't drive down wages , but did allow the addition of that second shift , with additional workers whose presence is sparking other economic activity around town .
Dig deeper , though , and there are hints of why some worry about immigration 's impact . Critics charge that , while wages have held up recently , immigrant and refugee labor have helped produce a long-term decline in meatpacking pay .
Economists disagree on what new flows of immigrants mean for American workers . Giovanni Peri of the University of California , Davis , believes when low-skilled immigrants come in , they often complement American workers , helping native-born workers climb the ladder . One of his studies showed previous waves of immigration boosted wages for low-skilled Americans .
Other researchers have found immigrants to be Americans ' direct competitors . George Borjas , a Harvard University economist who has supported limits on immigration , found that when immigrants—legal and illegal—came to the U.S. over a nearly two-decade span , they pulled down wages for low-skilled workers by as much as 4.7 % .
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office fueled the debate with its prediction that a Senate immigration bill to legalize undocumented immigrants and create new work visa programs would boost economic growth , but that wages would fall by 0.3 % by 2033 for high school dropouts and certain high school graduates .
Profiles in Immigration Waves of immigration have changed the face of meatpacking and Greeley , Colo . Hear from some of those affected .
The meatpacking industry represents ground zero for this economic debate , for it has long drawn immigrants willing to do the industry 's tough and , to some , distasteful jobs .
At the Greeley plant , cattle are herded up a curved ramp , known as the `` stairway to heaven , '' and greeted at the top by a worker in the `` knock box '' who waits for the right moment to use a pressurized gun to shoot a rod into each steer 's head . Nearby , a river of blood runs across the `` kill floor '' as cattle are heaved aloft on a chain for the various stages of dismemberment .
On a recent day at the plant , a worker on the kill floor deftly hooked a cattle 's hide , just above the shoulder , into a machine called the hide puller . A bar swooped down , yanking the hide over the cow 's head and leaving behind a naked carcass . The machine can do that 365 times in an hour . The work used to be done by hand ; workers used knives to peel the hide from the skull .
Employees work eight hour shifts , standing , with a 15-minute morning break and a 30-minute break for lunch . It is tiring and riskier than average work . For every 100 workers , 6.4 were injured or fell ill on the job in 2011 nationwide . For all occupations , public and private , there were just 3.8 incidents per 100 workers .
Since the meatpacking plant was built in Greeley in the 1950s , the northeastern Colorado city has lured immigrants . The population blossomed to more than 90,000 in 2010 , 36 % of whom were Hispanic , most of them from Mexico . Twenty years earlier , the town had 60,500 residents , 20 % of them Hispanic .
Now the area has about 2,000 refugees , too—the `` new Mexicans , '' as some in the meatpacking business called them . Asad Abdi , a refugee who got his start at the meatpacking plant in Greeley , opened a Global Refugee Center in 2008 to help immigrants learn English , find housing and jobs and apply for government benefits .
The changes have n't always unfolded smoothly , breeding tension among native-born Americans , Latinos and refugees here .
`` We 're a pretty conservative community , and I would say we do n't want illegals , '' says Greeley Mayor Tom Norton , where unemployment stood at 8.4 % in June . `` But we do want a labor force . '' There 's the rub , he says . There are some longtime residents who still want to work in meatpacking plants , but not very many .
At the time of the raid , the plant owner then denied it knowingly hired unauthorized workers , although some were deported . After taking over the facility , JBS executives went on their hiring blitz to add more than 1,000 jobs , both to ramp up for the second shift and make up for losses from the raid . They advertised on the radio , bought billboard space and ran newspaper ads . They sought out towns where workers were more likely to have factory experience .
When their efforts fell short , they focused recruiting on Denver , a popular spot for refugees , a group the U.S. government gives legal status if they have been persecuted or fear persecution in their home countries . Unlike undocumented immigrants , they can legally work in this country .
It was 2007 , and the unemployment rate hovered above 4 % . Factories were in hot competition for workers . One thing JBS did n't do was to sharply raise pay , since it would have had to do so for the whole workforce at the unionized plant . Instead , it offered signing bonuses and spread the news in the local paper : Starting in a few months wages would go up . A new union contract was set to kick in , bumping up the base hourly rate from $ 11.75 to $ 12 and nudging up the top rate to $ 13.95 from $ 13.60 .
Still , wages have fallen in meatpacking plants over time , as plants relocated to rural areas , unions weakened and jobs grew more mechanized . Production workers in meatpacking earned more than $ 13 an hour in June . In the 1980s , the pay was more than $ 19 an hour , adjusted for inflation .
An overhaul of immigration laws has the potential to build a wider pool of labor for companies like JBS , executives said . Labor unions would help ensure wages would n't decrease , meatpacking executives said .
Mark Lauritsen , international vice president and director for the food processing , packing and manufacturing division for the United Food and Commercial Workers union , agreed economic factors and unions play a bigger part in affecting wages . `` I lived through the 1980s working in a meatpacking plant when a meatpacking job went from the best job in the Midwestern United States to where the unions were busted and the wages were driven down , '' he said . `` Immigration played no part in that . '' The UFCW supports the Senate immigration bill .
New immigration policies would give people such as Maria Mendoza , 38 , who came to the U.S. illegally from Mexico , a chance to work again . She narrowly missed being caught in the 2006 immigration raid at the Greeley plant , where she was earning $ 12.75 an hour . Now , the seven-person Mendoza family survives on her husband 's $ 39,000 annual salary . He has legal status and works the cleaning shift at the packing plant .
`` The thing is , if we get legal documents , we would n't be competing for the jobs that most Americans apply for , '' said Mrs. Mendoza , who said she wants to return to work , even at a meatpacking plant . `` We 'll be competing for the jobs that Americans do n't want . ''
Finding the right kind of worker is critical . It costs between $ 12,000 and $ 15,000 to train new employees at the Greeley plant , which has a 29 % annual turnover rate . These days JBS has teamed with Citizenship and Immigration Services under a program that is designed to help improve their hiring process to ensure a legal workforce . The company said it has increased spending on compliance by 8 % to 10 % per worker .
`` We compete like hell for labor , '' said JBS 's Mr. Gaddis . `` There 's no way that anybody in our industry can undercut , from a wage perspective . People will flee in flocks of thousands . ''
On a breezy day in Greeley , the smell of `` vacas , '' or cows , wafts through downtown . The area is having its own mini-revitalization , dotted with shops such as the La Tarahumara Mexican market , the Najah African restaurant and an African barber shop . A new chophouse opened , too , featuring one of the priciest entrees available in downtown Greeley : A 22-ounce , bone-in rib eye that sells $ 42.95 . It is a JBS product .
Abdiwali Amaan , an Ethiopian refugee , saw a Swift ad in Denver for a $ 1,500 signing bonus just a few weeks before the raid . Swift , which filed an unsuccessful injunction to try to block the raid , started running ads to replenish its workforce even before the raid took place and while it was in negotiations with federal authorities .
Mr. Amaan accepted a job at the plant , earning $ 11.25 an hour , plus the bonus , in 2006 . After the raid , he took advantage of the referral bonus as well , coaxing two of his friends to come to Greeley and earning Mr. Amaan $ 2,400 . In the mornings , he would make four or five trips to the plant to drop off more than a dozen new refugee workers . He was the only one with a car .
In March 2009 , earning $ 13.45 an hour at the plant , Mr. Amaan quit . The African market he was running on the side , which sold such hard-to-find staples as Halal meats , was generating enough income to support him . The influx of new immigrants , in this case refugees , pushed him up the economic food chain . Before long he helped his brother set up a second African goods store in town . Mr. Amaan gets a 20 % take .
`` It 's more money , it 's not easier , '' says Mr. Amaan , who proudly boasts about how much he paid in taxes last year ( $ 2,900 ) before dinner at one of Greeley 's East African restaurants .
His wife is angling for him to buy a home instead of staying in their rented apartment , and the couple has an eye on future expansion opportunities . `` I hope to be a big company , '' Mr. Amaan says .
The catch with immigration is `` some people are winners and some people are losers , '' says Pia Orrenius , an economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas . Immigrants , American companies that benefit from the labor and workers who move up the food chain tend to be the winners . There is no doubt legalization is good for those who are legalized . It could , economists estimate , boost their wages by 5 % to 20 % , because they would be able to switch jobs more easily and pursue more education .
The losers find themselves in direct competition with new immigrants .
Oscar Saenz , an executive assistant in the packing division of the UFCW labor union , and who has worked in meatpacking for four decades , says the union contract at the Greeley plant is one of the best they have negotiated at any beef plant . He supports an immigration overhaul to give millions of undocumented immigrants legal status , but he worries that new work-visa programs will allow so many new workers in that it will make the union 's job harder . `` Maybe by having so many of them , we 're not going to get the wages we want for the American workers , '' he worries . It is one of the trade-offs , he says , to get a comprehensive plan passed .
Luis Benzor , 39 years old and a native-born American , thinks he is already getting the losing end of the deal . He says he applied for a job at the plant and never got a call back `` because they have Somalian people that work there . ''
After a 15-year stint in the Army , he ended up in a construction job with steadily declining wages . He was laid off . He blames illegal immigrants willing to work for lower pay .
During a nine-month stint of unemployment , he applied for jobs in retail , customer service and auto mechanic shops . He says he has had scrapes with the law in the past that may be hurting his chances , including a domestic dispute that resulted in a criminal record . But he did earn an associate degree to be a diesel mechanic and is pursuing a second degree in auto mechanics .
A spokesman for JBS declined to comment on Mr. Benzor 's application , but said it was an `` equal-opportunity employer . '' Eventually , Mr. Benzor took a diesel mechanic job for less than the starting wage at the plant .
`` We have to really look at ourselves and say , OK , if we bring more people here are we going to hurt the people who are here already ? '' Mr. Benzor says . `` You 're competing with people that come from other countries and it 's just like , what is left for us ? ''