The federal government ’ s decision to pay out billions of dollars in tax credits to illegal immigrants likely was made by midlevel bureaucrats and has never received full congressional scrutiny , according to a study that the Center for Immigration Studies is releasing Monday .
The report , written by CIS fellow David North , says the Internal Revenue Service doled out $ 4.2 billion in what is known as the “ additional child tax credit ” in 2010 to those using an individual taxpayer identification number , or ITIN , which is usually a signal of an illegal immigrant .
The issue has been known for some time . But Mr. North went deep into the data to try to look at why it ’ s happening , and said it ’ s a story of a tax credit expanding beyond its initial scope , and midlevel IRS managers twisting the law , leaving billions of dollars going to illegal immigrants .
In particular , he said he can find no evidence that the decision to allow illegal immigrants to collect the tax was made by top leaders at the IRS , and he said it wasn ’ t the intent of Congress .
“ I ’ ve been in government and I know kind of how these things work out . It struck me that [ GS- ] 15s , 16s , got together at some point and decided this is how we should handle it , and it stuck , ” Mr. North said .
Nobody was answering the phones at the IRS during the government shutdown , which began Oct. 1 .
SEE ALSO : N.J. Gov . Christie flips , says he now wants in-state tuition for illegal immigrants
But the agency in the past repeatedly has said it doesn ’ t believe the law allows it to deny illegal immigrants the tax credit , and also disputes that it has the legal authority to deny claims even when they aren ’ t backed up by documents showing that the children actually live in the U.S .
“ The IRS does not have the legal authority to deny credits during processing when documentation is not provided , ” the agency told its inspector general in 2011 .
The “ additional child tax credit ” was created to help out those who make too little to qualify for the full child tax credit . The ACTC is refundable , meaning that even if the taxpayer doesn ’ t owe income tax , he or she could get a payout the IRS .
That becomes an avenue for fraud , particularly when combined with illegal immigrant workers , whose use of the tax credit has jumped from 796,000 filers in 2005 to 1.5 million in 2008 and 2.3 million in 2010 , according to the IRS ‘ official auditor .
The IRS has tried to limit how it issues ITINs , hoping to crack down on how much it pays out in fraudulent tax credits . The numbers are now valid for only five years , and require a stricter review of identity documents .
But abuses still abound for existing ITINs , Mr. North argues .
Investigators identified one address in Atlanta where 23,994 ITIN-related tax refunds were sent — including 8,393 refunds deposited to a single bank account . Mr. North said those were pretty good indications of fraud .
He said the IRS should also look for cases where an ITIN filer goes from claiming no dependents to claiming four or five dependents the next year .
Mr. North used an auditor ’ s report to identify a town in Delaware and another on Virginia ’ s Eastern Shore with large concentrations of ITIN filers .
Frankford , Del. , had one address where 627 ITINs were registered — despite the town having a population of just 862 . Parksley , Va. , had a single address with 100 ITINs registered , in a town of 847 residents .
Mr. North visited both towns and found that while Frankford seemed oblivious to the situation , Parksley was different . One tax counselor in town told him she suspected a rival business was responsible for the ITIN applications , he said .