The White House said Friday evening that President Trump misunderstood the question when he blasted Republican leaders ’ immigration bill , and insisted he really does support the compromise plan that just hours earlier he said he “ wouldn ’ t sign . ”
Breaking an hours-long silence , White House spokesman Raj Shah said Mr. Trump is backing both the GOP leaders ’ bill and a more enforcement-heavy version from conservatives . Both are expected to be put up for votes next week on the House floor .
“ The president fully supports both the Goodlatte bill and the House leadership bill , ” Mr. Shah said . “ In this morning ’ s interview , he was commenting on the discharge petition in the House , and not the new package . He would sign either the Goodlatte or the leadership bills . ”
Mr. Trump threw the House GOP into turmoil early Friday morning when , in an interview with Fox News , he rejected the “ moderate ” bill .
Steve Doocy , the Fox interviewer , asked about both bills , referring to one as the Goodlatte bill , sponsored by Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte , and the other as a more “ moderate ” bill .
“ I ’ m looking at both of them . I certainly wouldn ’ t sign the more moderate one , ” Mr. Trump replied .
Compounding matters , Mr. Trump had a chance to clean up the mess in an afternoon tweet but failed to do so , instead laying out his principles he wanted to see .
The bizarre twist is that the GOP leaders ’ legislation perfectly matches Mr. Trump ’ s “ four pillar ” principles , granting legal status to perhaps 2 million illegal immigrants , funding his border wall , ending the visa lottery and curtailing the chain of family migration .
House Speaker Paul D. Ryan had said they wrote the bill “ hand-in-glove ” with the administration .
Conservatives said Friday they expected Mr. Trump to issue a new statement cleaning up his remark .
Yet one source from a group that supports an immigration crackdown said the comment wasn ’ t a mistake and Mr. Trump did have misgivings .
Conservative Republicans are reluctant to tackle any bill that grants citizenship rights to illegal immigrants without Mr. Trump on board , fearing a massive backlash from conservative activists . They ’ re counting on Mr. Trump to provide political cover against those who will call the bill a blanket amnesty .