President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE early Monday pressed Mexico to stop immigrant “ caravans ” trying to reach the United States .
“ Mexico has the absolute power not to let these large ‘ Caravans ’ of people enter their country , ” Trump wrote on Twitter .
“ They must stop them at their Northern Border , which they can do because their border laws work , not allow them to pass through into our country , which has no effective border laws . ”
Mexico has the absolute power not to let these large “ Caravans ” of people enter their country . They must stop them at their Northern Border , which they can do because their border laws work , not allow them to pass through into our country , which has no effective border laws ..... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) April 2 , 2018
Trump referenced “ caravans ” of people entering the United States in a tweet on Sunday following a segment on “ Fox & Friends ” that discussed an `` army of migrants '' marching from Honduras .
Trump on Monday also again urged Congress to protect the U.S. border by using the so-called nuclear option , which would alter Senate rules to allow a simple majority to pass legislation , if necessary .
“ Congress must immediately pass Border Legislation , use Nuclear Option if necessary , to stop the massive inflow of Drugs and People , ” Trump said .
“ Border Patrol Agents ( and ICE ) are GREAT , but the weak Dem laws don ’ t allow them to do their job . Act now Congress , our country is being stolen ! ”
... Congress must immediately pass Border Legislation , use Nuclear Option if necessary , to stop the massive inflow of Drugs and People . Border Patrol Agents ( and ICE ) are GREAT , but the weak Dem laws don ’ t allow them to do their job . Act now Congress , our country is being stolen ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) April 2 , 2018
Trump has repeatedly called for a wall on the southern border , which was a signature promise of his 2016 campaign .