WASHINGTON—The Trump administration has moved to deny bail to some asylum seekers at the southern border , amid a surge of Central American immigrant families .
If the ruling issued by Attorney General William Barr Tuesday takes effect , it could mean that asylum seekers could spend more time in jail while their cases are decided . The ruling is due to be implemented in 90 days so that the Department of Homeland Security can conduct additional operational planning , the Justice Department said .
But the ruling has limited practical implications because the administration is barred from holding families for more than 20 days under a court settlement and has opted to stop separating children and adults as a matter of practice .
The government has also said it no longer has space to detain most of the thousands of immigrants arriving each day at the U.S. border with Mexico . Even in cases when it does , the government says it is running out of money to drive them to jail .
The Trump administration has said that the arrivals of people seeking asylum , often in large groups and including children , have brought the system to a breaking point . An 855,000-case backlog in the immigration courts means families who file claims could wait months or years to have them heard . And Mr. Trump and key aides have criticized the practice—which the president has called catch-and-release—of letting people enter the U.S. and work while waiting for their asylum hearing .
Top officials are seeking new legislation to change the rules that prohibit the holding of children past 20 days . The administration is also weighing giving parents a choice of being voluntarily separated from their children while they are jailed , waiting for a judge ’ s ruling on their asylum case , or waiving their rights under the court settlement and agreeing to be jailed together . Legislation faces rocky prospects in a divided Congress .
Immigration advocates and lawyers have argued that the U.S. needs to respond compassionately to Guatemalans and Hondurans , especially , as they take a hazardous journey north to escape violence and poverty . They also say that being forced to give up their rights or those of their children leaves parents in an impossible position .
“ Seeking asylum is a human right , not a crime , and families forced to flee for their lives shouldn ’ t be treated like criminals , ” said Charanya Krishnaswami , advocacy director for the Americas at Amnesty International USA .
“ This appalling decision could also force parents to decide to either be locked up with their children indefinitely , or relinquish custody of them for the duration of their approval process , which could take months or years , ” she said . “ This is both a heartless punishment against vulnerable people , and a potential backdoor way for the administration to separate families . ”
Mr. Barr issued the ruling Tuesday as part of his power to set some of the rules for the nation ’ s immigration courts . In doing so , he overruled a decision made by the Board of Immigration Appeals in 2005 . His predecessor , Jeff Sessions , also sought to rework some of the board ’ s decisions , though several of those moves are now being litigated in federal court .
Immigrants who establish a credible fear of persecution in their home country—often a first step toward filing an asylum claim—are ineligible for a bond if they cross the border without authorization and turn themselves in , Mr. Barr ’ s ruling determined .