Europe is experiencing the largest movement of people across its borders since World War II , and it is struggling . It ’ s not just wrestling with capacity and enforcement , as the crush of Middle Easterners and Africans take to the Mediterranean and trek across frontiers , but also testing the limits of its humanitarianism .
The human tide has weighed heavily on some countries and inundated swaths of European countryside or urban space – eliciting fortitude and generosity of spirit , which has been undercovered . It has also revealed a dark side to the continent : fences , tear gas , riots , and hate speech .
Today ’ s migrants are as poor or traumatized as those refugees during World War II , but many are also black or Muslim . They stand out in communities that have long known nothing but homogeneity . And they are entering at a time when EU citizens question what it really means to live in the 28-member union .
These questions have been brewing for years , but the sheer scale of migration has thrust them suddenly from abstract scenarios into a situation demanding answers now . Through July of this year , some 340,000 have attempted to reach Europe ’ s doorstep according to EU statistics , nearly three times the same period of last year . And so far nearly 2,440 have died trying .
In an ongoing series called Seeking Refuge , the Monitor has searched for themes and lessons learned in the midst of one of the European Union 's greatest modern tests .
When a boat capsized in April off of Libya , killing nearly 800 migrants on board , the argument that the EU should scale back patrols to deter migration – as they were doing at the time of the tragedy – was flipped on its head .
Rescue patrols and walls factor into a migrant ’ s choices to attempt the trip , but it doesn ’ t deter his or her decision to leave war or poverty . Life is still better in Europe .
That has been put in sharp focus in Greece . We kicked off the series on the island of Kos , where migrants were steadily streaming in amid an economic crisis that sapped the Greek state 's capacity – or appetite – to house and care for thousands of newcomers . Since then tens of thousands have arrived anyway , with 21,000 showing up in one week in August alone .
2 . Much of Europe see the migrants as 'the other guy 's ' problem
Greece and Italy face the physical crush of arrivals , while Germany , Sweden , and Britain are where most migrants want to go . Germany announced this week that it expects 750,000 asylum claims this year , four times more than last year .
Yet in between are nearly two dozen countries that do not see migration as their problem . An EU plan to relocate and resettle some 60,000 migrants has sent much of Europe into an emotional tailspin . One of the countries feeling the brunt of criticism for not doing its part is Britain .
Central and Eastern Europe , meanwhile , which have almost no experience with this type of migration , condemned Brussels for placing a burden on their shoulders where they say it doesn ’ t belong – even though emigration has long been that region 's only escape valve . In the end , a broad , mandatory relocation plan was torpedoed in favor of a smaller , voluntary one – which nonetheless continues to rile .
`` There is no incentive for central European countries to accept relocation . They don ’ t see it as their problem , ” said Elizabeth Collett , director of the Migration Policy Institute Europe in Brussels .
For all of the anger directed at Brussels , critics make a valid point too . Europe 's system for accepting migrants doesn ’ t work . The policy that ’ s been most tested is the Dublin Regulation , the European treaty that stipulates that refugees must have their asylum applications processed by the EU country they first set foot in . Though the convention is meant to be mandatory , overloaded periphery countries are turning a blind eye to the migrants who wish to move on , as virtually all do .
So the migrants easily leave , and take advantage of another European rule that applies to most countries in the bloc : the passport-free Schengen zone .
Earlier in the summer , France started checking passports at its frontier with Italy to dissuade migrants from entering – a violation of Schengen rules , particularly as it happened just as Europeans kicked off the summer vacation season .
“ This is a much wider problem than Schengen , but Schengen is the victim because it becomes a symbol of all the fears , that we are defenseless , ” explained Marc Pierini , a visiting scholar on European policy at Carnegie Europe in Brussels .
Now many of those same migrants who crossed the Italian-French border are amassing in Calais , at France ’ s northern edge . This time they face a harder task moving onto their final destination , Britain , both because of geography and because Britain is not part of Schengen . Thousands have stormed the Eurotunnel this summer , leaving at least nine dead .
This migration crisis has given a high-profile platform to xenophobia . It has led Hungary , where numbers of migrants entering has dramatically spiked , to start building a wall . The Slovakian government said it would accept refugees from Syria but only Christian ones , not Muslims .
Rich Clabaugh/Staff Europe 's migration crisis : The eastern Mediterranean and western Baltic routes
And yet , there are European citizens who are trying to rise above the fear . As the newest flashpoint has appeared in the Balkans , at Greece ’ s border with Macedonia , authorities have tried to keep them back with batons . Meanwhile , one group waits for their arrival – with supplies .
“ I ’ ve never seen anything like this , ” said Gabriela Andreevska , a young Macedonian who spends most nights at the border , helping the migrants trying to reach the EU . “ So many people sleeping on concrete . They ’ re there , and you can ’ t turn a blind eye . ”
In the heated discussion about Europe ’ s migration crisis , which can bleed into the wider debate over security and terrorism , it ’ s easy to forget the most important lesson of all . Each migrant is a person , with families back home and a lifetime of aspiration and regret behind him or her .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
The Monitor captured the human element by following the path of two Syrians through Europe ’ s borders until they finally reached northern Europe . Living in a tidy apartment in Germany , well-housed and fed and nearly guaranteed to be granted refugee status , one of them was still anxious ; his mother and sister were still in war-ravaged Syria .
“ I want to bring my family , and I ’ m just wasting time , ” he said . “ I don ’ t want to see one of them in [ the news ] someday . ”