It was such an unnecessary battle to wade into — maternity tourism is not what Mr. Trump and his enablers on the restrictionist right are talking about . When they say “ anchor babies , ” they are talking about the browning of America , with its growing Latino population , and recasting it as a sinister plot by child-rearing Mexicans . They want to upend the 14th Amendment , and the country ’ s family-based immigration laws , to keep the population as white as can be . Maternity tourism by middle-class foreigners is a separate , much smaller issue ; changing the Constitution to stop it , as one immigrant rights advocate once put it , is like killing a fly with an Uzi .
2.Mr . Bush should lighten up . He probably wants to come across as a happy warrior , but he ’ s a testy and peevish one , and pedantic , to boot . “ If he ’ s interested in a more comprehensive approach ” to immigration , Mr. Bush said of Mr. Trump , “ he might want to read my book. ” As reporters kept baiting him with he-said-this-what-do-you-say questions , Mr. Bush ’ s exasperation overflowed . Hence the Asian quagmire .
3 . His campaign should get better at stage-managing press events . This one , at a Mexican restaurant , was weirdly free-form , with kids yelling and assorted invitees mumbling at the microphone . The grim , adobe-and-stucco backdrop was like a Spanish colonial dungeon ; it looked as if the grim-faced Mr. Bush had come to announce the arrest of Zorro .
4 . When he does choose to tell the truth , he should find a more persuasive way to do it . On Monday , he attacked the Trump immigration plan , which centers on building a Great Wall of Mexico and forcing millions of people to the other side of it . “ It would cost hundreds of billions of dollars , ” Mr. Bush said , as well as “ violate people ’ s civil liberties ” and “ create friction with our third-largest trading partner. ” That is a fair reading of what Mr. Trump wants . But to win the nomination , Mr. Bush has to win over a fair chunk of the aggrieved , frightened Trump voters , who probably don ’ t care about trade friction with rapist-killer-exporting countries , or the cost of a border wall . Mr. Bush may have better ideas , but they have to cut through the fog of Trump .
It ’ s commonly believed that Republicans are sealing their general-election doom with all this hating on immigrants . If anyone could avoid that fate , it should be someone like Jeb Bush , born in Midland , Tex. , and reared in Houston , with a Latina wife , Latino children and flawless command of Spanish . Even as Mr. Trump rages and bellows , there should be room for a Republican to send a message that most American voters , who are moderate on immigration , will hear . But for all his paper qualifications , Mr. Bush has been angering to many , boring to many others , inspiring to none . And then he goes and gets lectured on ethnic sensitivity by Donald Trump .