The soldiers were recruited mainly for their language skills or medical training . Many speak strategically important languages like Chinese , Korean or Russian . Many have college degrees , and some are medical doctors . More than 10,000 troops have joined the military through the program since it began in 2008 , almost all of them serving in the Army .
In recent years , though , the Defense Department has tightened its vetting of immigrant recruits . Now , soldiers joining up to be clerks , mechanics and surgeons face the kinds of extensive background checks that were formerly conducted for troops who needed top secret clearance . The added layers of scrutiny include screenings by the C.I.A . and F.B.I. , a review of at least a decade ’ s worth of personal finances , an exhaustive questionnaire and numerous lengthy interviews .
The new requirements made processing each recruit take much longer , and the backlog of reviews piled up into the thousands . Many recruits have been waiting for years to get the clearances they need to advance in their military careers , and in some cases , Ms. Cutler said , the process has dragged on so long that screenings done at the beginning have since expired and must be done over again . Then the Army started pushing the recruits out .
“ They were being discharged even if there was not a security concern , ” she said . “ These are often highly skilled individuals , many have master ’ s degrees . ”
In a court filing in July , government lawyers called the Mavni program an “ elevated security risk , ” and said that some recruits had provided false information to obtain student visas and that others had friends who were associated with foreign intelligence organizations .
However , a 2017 report by the RAND Corporation found no evidence that the Mavni program had caused any security problems . The report , which has not been officially released , found that the program ’ s recruits were generally better educated and performed better than the average enlisted soldier , and had not been involved in terrorism or espionage .
The military may want to curtail the Mavni program simply because it has become an administrative headache , clogged with too many regulations , said Margaret D. Stock , a retired lieutenant colonel in the Army Reserve who helped create the program and is now an immigration lawyer representing some Mavni soldiers .