At 9:40 pm on Tuesday , House Speaker Paul Ryan ’ s office announced the House will vote on two immigration bills next week , one conservative proposal and one compromise piece of legislation that has yet to be written .
“ The House will consider two bills next week that will avert the discharge petition and resolve the border security and immigration issues , ” Ryan ’ s spokesperson AshLee Strong said in a statement Tuesday night .
The news comes on the heel of the movement to get a majority of lawmakers to sign on to a discharge petition , pushed by a group of frustrated moderates and Democrats who want to see action on the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . DACA has been tied up in the courts ever since the Trump administration announced last year that it would sunset the program , leaving nearly 700,000 immigrants in limbo . By Tuesday , that petition was only two signatures short of forcing votes on two moderate immigration proposals , a conservative bill , and one up to Ryan to decide .
But moderates , who say they have reached an agreement with conservatives ( although the details of that deal are still murky ) , have thrown in the towel on that push — instead heeding Ryan ’ s demands to keep the debate within the Republican caucus .
Ryan has desperately wanted to avoid a messy immigration fight that would involve negotiating with Democrats too . So he called together House Republicans last week for a two-hour “ family meeting ” on immigration policy to show moderates he ’ s willing to talk meaningfully about DACA and get a majority of the GOP on the same page . Ryan ’ s strategy worked , in that it stopped the moderate ’ s revolt . But it ’ s still not clear what the compromise “ deal ” is — and whether it will bring Congress any closer to actually passing an immigration bill .
It ’ s still not clear what the compromise immigration deal is
Ryan says the House will hold two votes on immigration policy . One of those bills will be a conservative proposal by Rep. Bob Goodlatte ( R-VA ) , which gives temporary status to DACA recipients , makes deep cuts to legal immigration , and boosts interior enforcement . That much is clear . But whatever that second proposal will contain is still up for debate .
On Tuesday , moderate Republicans and conservatives met with Ryan to hash out some process questions on the “ compromise ” bill . The compromise follows a framework set forward by the White House : legal status for DREAMers , border security , an end to the diversity visa lottery , and curbing family-based legal immigration . But among the separate groups , lawmakers were still discussing some high-level questions on the actual substance of immigration policy on each of the Trump administration ’ s “ four pillars ” for a bill .
Freedom Caucus Rep. Joe Barton ( R-TX ) told ███ that the Freedom Caucus is still negotiating the degree of border security , how to verify the legal status of immigrants , and a “ pathway to citizenship , if any . ”
“ How do you set it up so it ’ s not definable as any kind of amnesty ? ” Barton said , noting this was still one of the biggest questions in the Freedom Caucus .
Meanwhile , Rep. Carlos Curbelo ( R-FL ) , who was one of the lead moderate lawmakers behind the discharge petition , said the differences on policy were small but “ important. ” He said Ryan ’ s allies were working with members of the Judiciary Committee to prepare to draft legislation , but that lawmakers were still working off an outline of a compromise . In other words , there is no compromise bill yet , per se .
But there will be votes on something — and that was enough assurance for moderates to drop the discharge petition .
Immigration has always been tough for Republicans , and President Trump has only escalated the divisions . The White House ’ s “ four pillars ” for an immigration bill cover both legal and illegal immigration .
From the beginning , Ryan made it very clear he was not happy with this discharge petition . He said it will cede control of the floor to Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi by allowing bills to get through with mostly Democratic support . And he said Trump wouldn ’ t sign on . Needless to say , a series of contentious votes on a divisive issue like immigration also wouldn ’ t be a good look for Republicans in a high-stakes election year .
The last signatures on the discharge petition would have triggered votes on the House floor on four bills using an obscure rule called the “ queen of the hill. ” Under this rule , whichever bill passes by the biggest margin wins . As ███ ’ s Dara Lind explained , two of the bills that would get votes would give permanent legal status to DACA recipients ; the third is a conservative proposal from Rep. Bob Goodlatte ( R-VA ) ; and the fourth bill is at Speaker Ryan ’ s discretion . Because Republicans have such a slim majority , it ’ s likely the more moderate proposals would pass .
So to take control of the situation , Ryan set out to negotiate a compromise between moderates and conservatives that follows the demands put forward by the White House . In stopping the discharge petition , he has succeeded . In actually making immigration law , there ’ s a lot up in the air .
The White House framework has already failed in the Senate . The House is ignoring that .
Republican leaders keep saying they want to pass something in the House that can become law . But it ’ s not clear that this is a step to make that a reality .
Any bill that is going to make it to Trump ’ s desk has to pass the Senate , where it will need support from Democrats to meet the 60-vote threshold . But looming over this House debate is Congress ’ s first immigration fight this year — the Senate ’ s . In February , the Senate struck down three immigration proposals that addressed DACA . The White House-inspired bill , which Ryan is now trying to push in the House , got the fewest votes in the Senate .
“ If I sat around as speaker of the House and thought about what can the United States Senate do , we wouldn ’ t do anything , ” Ryan said . “ So we don ’ t spend our time thinking about votes in the Senate . We spend our time thinking about how we can get consensus here in the House Republican conference and getting bills through the House . ”
One senator who has been a central figure in the immigration debate , Sen. Jeff Flake ( R-AZ ) , has already said the discharge petition would have been the best path forward .
Asked if he thinks the White House ’ s “ pillars ” are tenable in the Senate , he simply said , “ No . ”