The Trump administration ’ s announcement Tuesday , that it will end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program — removing deportation protection and work permits from nearly 800,000 young unauthorized immigrants — unless Congress passes a bill in the next six months to protect DACA recipients , isn ’ t a punt or a reprieve . It ’ s an opportunity to deflect , or share , the responsibility for what would be an unprecedented act in US history .
There ’ s never really been a time when a generation of people , raised and rooted in the United States , has been stripped of official recognition and pushed back into the precarity of unauthorized-immigrant life .
Even though DACA never officially legalized anyone , ending it would be , in a way , the biggest “ illegalization ” of immigrants in American history .
As a policy matter , it 's straightforward : Ending DACA is unprecedented because DACA itself was more or less unprecedented . Never in US history had the government offered protection to so many people who did n't have ( and were n't subsequently given ) the opportunity to get full legal status from there .
The government has a lot of power to shape immigrants ’ lives — but it ’ s never had perfect control over who immigrates to begin with . The history of immigrants who received DACA protections is unique , and the legal status to legitimize or delegitimize them is too . Often as not , when politicians try to reconcile law and reality , the result is that the law gets changed to bend to the reality — not that the reality is changed by enforcing or changing the law .
DACA was one such attempt . If Congress and the White House can ’ t agree on a bill within a six-month timeframe , and the Trump administration rescinds DACA , the US will be in wholly uncharted territory .
Undoing DACA would widen the gulf between reality and law . And that gulf is , in some ways , broader than it ’ s ever been before . What truly makes the end of DACA unprecedented , in the broad sweep of US history , is the size of that gap between the law and the reality .
With DACA hanging in the balance , America has a group of people on the verge of being socially integrated , but legally isolated — socially championed , but legally victimized — in a way we ’ ve never really seen before .
The choice between reconciling the law with the reality and creating an unprecedented chasm between the two lies with Congress and the White House . The stakes could not be higher .
Growing up an unauthorized immigrant in the US is relatively uncommon in American history
For as long as there have been immigration laws , there have been people trying to ( and often succeeding in ) circumventing them . But the stereotype of the “ illegal immigrant ” — a Mexican or Central American man who crossed the US/Mexico border without papers — comes from a phenomenon that ’ s only been in place for the past 40 or 50 years , at most .
Historically , it was easy enough to cross the US/Mexico border and work in the US — both because it was simply easier to enter the country by land without being detected than to sail into New York harbor , and because ( partly because it was so hard to regulate ) the US government didn ’ t restrict immigration from the Americas the way it did from the Eastern Hemisphere .
It was so easy , in fact , that immigrants were often simply migrating back and forth . “ Immigrants preferred to live in Mexico for most of the time , ” Stanford historian Ana Minian explains , “ and then come for short periods of time , sometimes up to a couple years , and then return to Mexico until they needed to come back again . ”
It wasn ’ t until the second half of the 20th century that the US made it harder to legally immigrate from Mexico . After that , it was still possible to come to the US and work — just not legally . So the circular migration continued , but its legal status changed .
The circular flow didn ’ t stop until the 1990s , when the US started building up border security . But instead of a bulked-up border causing migrants to settle in Mexico , immigrants often settled in the US to avoid repeated risky border crossings — and their families crossed north to settle alongside them .
Before the 1990s , it wasn ’ t necessary for a child to settle in the US without papers in order to keep a family both employed and together . After the 2000s , when net unauthorized migration from Mexico dropped to zero — and with children coming from Central America often for humanitarian reasons as much as anything else — there wasn ’ t a flow of children coming without the opportunity to get legal status upon arrival .
Surely this narrative doesn ’ t encompass every DREAMer ’ s personal story , but it helps explain why there are so many people who are currently young adults who ’ ve grown up among American citizens , as unauthorized immigrants .
It explains why so many of them haven ’ t just lived in the US since they were 6 years old , but haven ’ t even seen their home countries since then ( even a brief family visit could exile them from the US forever if they were caught upon return ) . It explains why many Americans who don ’ t necessarily support wide-scale legalization of unauthorized immigrants think of DREAMers as “ good ” immigrants . And it explains why the DREAMers , themselves , have been able to stand up and advocate on their own behalf — because they ’ re demanding rights they ’ ve seen exercised by their peers .
It ’ s harder for people with US-born family members to “ get legal ” than it ’ s ever been
The average DACA recipient , according to a study conducted in August 2017 by Tom Wong of UC San Diego ( on behalf of a coalition of liberal and immigrant advocacy groups ) , entered the US at the age of six . The average DACA recipient today , according to that same survey , is now 25 . That means that many of the people who currently have protection from deportation under DACA have been in the country for 20 years .
Simply in order to qualify for the program , DACA recipients have to have entered before 2007 — meaning even the least-settled DACA recipient has been in the US for a decade .
This , too , is unusual . In the past , people didn ’ t necessarily stay unauthorized ( much less vulnerable to deportation ) for 10 or 20 years at a time . It used to be possible for many unauthorized immigrants to “ get legal ” without leaving the US and trying to return ; it no longer is .
Before 1976 , immigrants from Latin America could apply to become legal permanent residents ( green card holders ) if they had children who had been born in the US — no matter how old those children were . ( According to Wong ’ s survey , 25 percent of DACA recipients have US-born children . ) Even if they were already living in the US as unauthorized immigrants , they ’ d be officially “ admitted ” to the country once their applications were approved .
The 1976 law forced parents of US citizens to wait to apply for green cards until the child had turned 21 . But even then , says Charles Kamasaki of UnidosUS ( formerly the National Council on La Raza ) , “ there was a largely informal — but , I think , largely followed — policy that parents of US citizens were generally deferred from deportation until they could adjust ” to permanent residency .
That all changed in 1996 . The Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act ( IIRIRA ) forced people who had lived in the US as unauthorized immigrants to wait three or 10 years outside the US ( or even be barred permanently ) before being allowed to become legal immigrants . An immigrant with family in the US could try to get a waiver , but would still have to leave the US to do so — and if the waiver was denied , she ’ d be stuck outside the US for years .
Clarissa Martinez of UnidosUS describes it as a “ squeezing ” — “ not only are the possibilities narrower ” to immigrate legally , “ but you ’ re also getting the door slammed on any possibility of adjusting in the future . ”
If the chance of “ getting legal ” was something of a toss-up , it didn ’ t seem logical to take the risk .
It ’ s impossible to predict what would have happened had the 1996 law not passed . But under the laws that existed before 1996 , most current DACA recipients would have a path to legal status : either via their US-born children , their US-born spouses , or because they would have been able to “ get legal ” alongside their parents via the DREAMers ’ US-born younger siblings .
Related 9 things you need to know to understand DACA and the DREAMers
It ’ s the combination of settledness and the difficulty of getting legal that make DREAMers generationally unique in the history of US immigration policy . They ’ re far from the first immigrants in US history who ’ ve been totally excluded ( or all but excluded ) from legality . But for a family to go through a generational life-cycle without the opportunity to legalize as a family — that ’ s something else .
This is why DREAMers themselves tend to resist the talking point that their parents are to blame for bringing them to the US . It ’ s why they ’ ve often been just as concerned about the fate of their parents and relatives who didn ’ t qualify for DACA , who might have some other form of temporary protection or might not have any protections at all , as they are with their own political fortunes . And it ’ s why they ’ ve worried , even before losing DACA , that their official recognition by the government could put their parents in danger .
Life without immigration status is hard and only getting harder
Socially , unauthorized immigrants live alongside legal immigrants and US citizens . But the legal distinctions between them affect what they can do with their lives .
The reason that many DREAMers didn ’ t find out they were unauthorized until they were in their mid-teens is because it was then that their documented peers became able to do things they couldn ’ t , like drive , get after-school jobs , or apply for federal financial aid for college . In the working world , those distinctions become absolute .
This , too , is fairly recent . Kamasaki allows that you could say that until 1986 , when the Immigration Reform and Control Act ( IRCA , or the “ Reagan amnesty ” ) allowed employers to be penalized for hiring unauthorized immigrants , “ there was no practical consequence ” to being unauthorized — “ you didn ’ t have to have work authorization ” to work in practice .
Since then , the federal government has worked to prevent people without immigration status from getting hired to begin with — the electronic screening system E-Verify isn ’ t mandatory , but many of the country ’ s biggest employers use it to check applicants ’ Social Security numbers . Unauthorized immigrants who work under-the-table , low-status jobs may well be qualified for better ones , but simply unable to get them .
States and the federal government have worked to tighten access to social services based on immigration status . Georgia has barred unauthorized immigrants from public colleges and universities .
Life without immigration status isn ’ t just about opportunities denied — it ’ s about the risk of deportation . That risk , too , has grown over the past couple of decades . Relatively few unauthorized immigrants were rounded up and deported from within the US 20 years ago . After 9/11 and the creation of the Department of Homeland Security ( which spun off immigration enforcement in the US “ interior ” into its own agency with its own , politically appealing budget line ) , that number steadily rose with capacity to track down and deport hundreds of thousands of immigrants .
There have been other times in American history when unauthorized immigrants have been at substantial deportation risk : Operation Wetback during the 1950s , for example , or farmworkers in California during the 1970s .
Stanford ’ s Minian says that immigrants of that period had to create mental maps of where immigration agents might be from day to day and avoid them , with some afraid to leave their homes during the day — or even living in trees to avoid la migra .
“ But then , the possibility of reentry was also much higher , ” she adds . “ If you got deported , you would probably just come back . And the meaning of deportation , in some ways , was n't the same , because few people had families . '' In other words , the risk was higher , but the consequences were less grave .
The immigrants protected by DACA , however , may have little beyond the US because policy has forced them to stay here . But it ’ s also forced them to stay on the margins — and made those margins a scarier and shadowier place to be than they were when the DREAMers arrived .
DREAMers , many of whom grew up thinking of themselves as American , have produced a social movement .
Realizing the truth about their immigration status meant becoming more acutely aware than their peers of the ways in which government shaped their lives , and what needed to change for them to achieve their potential . Realizing this while having been raised in the US , living among US citizens and speaking English , gave many of them the social capital to feel empowered to “ come out ” as unauthorized immigrants and demand their rights .
It ’ s not a coincidence that unauthorized immigrants have become more visible over the past decade , and that that movement ’ s been led by DREAMers . It ’ s not a coincidence that DREAMer-led organizations have been at the center of the immigrant-rights movement . President Barack Obama didn ’ t just implement DACA because the American public liked DREAMers ; he implemented it because he was under pressure from DREAMers and the groups who supported them .
But President Donald Trump was elected in part due to his promises to crack down on immigration . Instead it is those who want to see the program rolled back who have power , like Attorney General Jeff Sessions , tapped as the public face of the administration ’ s decision to set an end date for DACA , and senior adviser Stephen Miller .
The days before Sessions ’ s announcement made it clear just how embedded its recipients are in civil society . Universities , employers , churches , and local and state governments called on Trump to keep the program . He didn ’ t listen . Members of both parties warned him not to do it . He responded by trying to make it their problem to fix . Seventy percent of Americans told an NBC News poll they thought DACA should stay ; he listened to the other 28 percent .
Killing DACA wouldn ’ t silence those voices . It wouldn ’ t necessarily force DREAMers back into the shadows . It wouldn ’ t undo all the gains that they ’ ve been able to accrue over the past half-decade .
For the next six months , the forces that amassed to save DACA from President Trump will turn their attention to Congress . They ’ ll push for a bill that will do what DACA never could : allow DREAMers to become fully legalized as immigrants in the US , and eventually become US citizens . They ’ ll continue to express their hope for a permanent solution .
But behind the lobbying and rallies , behind the tightly held optimism , will be a persistent and terrifying dread — that the alternative to success is something terrible .
The Trump administration has just stuck a huge question mark on DREAMers ’ place in civil society .
The employers who wanted DACA to remain wouldn ’ t be able to keep employing DREAMers when their work authorization expires — and now have six months to figure out how they might respond to that . DREAMers may no longer be able to justify paying tuition at those universities if they can ’ t work in the US after getting the degrees — over the next six months , they have to make decisions about their educational futures .
And if the threat of losing DACA doesn ’ t necessarily force DREAMers to go back into the closet about their immigration status , it certainly offers a powerful incentive to them to keep quiet — even as the fight in Congress makes it more important than ever for them to speak up and galvanize the citizens they know to put pressure on their elected representatives .
Eliminating DACA would mean adding 800,000 more people to the most marginalized of immigrant groups — and eliminating it six months from now simply puts them on the waitlist .
It ’ s not a policy that makes sense if your goal is to reduce the size of the unauthorized workforce , or to make it easier to track down and deport “ bad hombres . ”
It is a policy that makes sense if you want to send a message : that growing up in the US and having ties here mean less than they ever have , and that the papers you hold or don ’ t have mean more .
That message won ’ t change the reality of who ’ s living in the US . But it will be inscribed in the choices that those who lose DACA make , every day , for the rest of their lives . And because they are , and remain , so embedded in American communities , those choices can ’ t help but reverberate into the collective fabric of American life as well .