Many of the so-called ‘ holds ’ in the Priority Enforcement Program intended to expedite deportation of ‘ criminal aliens ’ have past arrests but no convictions
A program intended to prioritize the deportation of immigrants who officials call “ the worst of the worst ” is missing its target , according to a new report .
An analysis of requests by federal officials for local jails to keep immigrants suspected of violating US immigration law in custody found half of the so-called “ holds ” were placed on people who had been arrested but actually had no criminal conviction .
Some had been picked up during traffic violations , or had their charges dropped . But their arrest triggered a process that ended with their federal immigration detention , and in many cases led to deportation proceedings .
US and Mexico 's mass deportations have fueled humanitarian crisis , report says Read more
Just one quarter had committed the most serious types of offenses , such as murder or sexual assault , according to the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse , which is based at Syracuse University and obtained the records through an open records request . The most common conviction was for drunk driving , followed by miscellaneous assaults and simple traffic offenses .
This comes as Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) claims it has narrowed the criteria it used under a started in 2008 called Secure Communities that contributed to a record number of deportations under Barack Obama . Under the program , federal officials ask local jails to hold undocumented immigrants they arrest in custody so that they can be transferred to federal immigration detention centers .
In November 2014 , Homeland Security director Jeh Johnson said a new program called the Priority Enforcement Program ( PEP ) would focus on “ criminal aliens ” convicted of felonies or several misdemeanor offenses . In fact , the most recent data shows ICE now targets people with no criminal record at a slightly higher rate than before .
ICE said it could not comment on an analysis performed by an external organization . But spokeswoman Sarah Rodriquez said the agency “ continues to make significant strides … through PEP to ensure a common-sense approach that focuses enforcement resources on convicted criminals and individuals who threaten public safety and national security ” .
The agency says it also tries to consider “ important community policing needs ” . But here too , it may be be falling short .
“ The policies they are implementing are not keeping anyone secure , ” said Maria Sotomayor , an undocumented immigrant who lives in Philadelphia , and who met with Johnson in May when he tried unsuccessfully to convince the city to implement the PEP program , which would have ended its “ sanctuary city ” policy that keeps ICE and police separate .
“ I told him that because of these detainers , an immigrant who is a victim of a crime will think many times before calling the police to make a report because we could get picked up too , ” recalled Sotomayor .
Before PEP was officially implemented last year , at least 377 local law enforcement agencies were refusing to honor some or all requests to hold immigrants in detention from ICE . The agency says 17 of the 25 jurisdictions with the highest number of declined detainers are now participating in the program .
Unauthorized immigration in the US About 11.3 million people live in the US without legal papers , down from a peak of about 12.2 million in 2007 . Net unauthorized immigration has been roughly even since 2010 . According to 2012 figures , there are about 8 million unauthorized migrants either working or looking for work , or 5.1 % of the labor force .
Since 2009 , more Mexicans have been leaving the US than entering , likely due to a slow economic recovery since the recession and stricter border enforcement . Barack Obama has deported more than 2.5 million people , more than any other president . His executive orders protect at least 1.2 million people from deportations .
Meanwhile , immigration advocates have sued to obtain more details how the PEP program actually differs from its predecessor .
“ We suspect this PEP program was just a name change , ” said Jessica Bansel , legal director of the National Day Laborers Organizing Network .
For example , while ICE can now ask local jails to simply inform them when an immigrant is in custody , not to detain them , Bansel noted the agency also has two new detainer forms that are specifically designed to request custody of a person who recently entered the country illegally , but has not been convicted of a crime and is not a security risk .
“ This sort of makes the whole thing a joke , ” said Bansel .