The Trump administration wants to send a message to unauthorized immigrants living in self-identified “ sanctuary cities ” : your local government can ’ t actually keep you from getting deported .
In September , Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) conducted a weeklong operation in which it arrested nearly 500 immigrants . Most of them deliberately sought out by ICE for having prior criminal convictions ; some , as has happened in the other high-profile raids whose frequency has increased under Trump , just happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time . But all of them lived in “ sanctuary cities . ”
Some ICE officials have acknowledged ( anonymously ) for months that the Trump administration is deliberately targeting unauthorized immigrants who live in cities that are trying to protect them from the Trump administration .
Because , under Trump , reminding immigrants that they might be deported — and should be worried about deportation — is both a matter of principle and an important policy weapon . It ’ s the cornerstone of this administration ’ s immigration enforcement policy — and its foremost policy accomplishment .
“ If you ’ re in this country illegally , and you committed a crime by entering this country , you should be uncomfortable , ” acting ICE Director Tom Homan told Congress in May . “ You should look over your shoulder . ”
It ’ s a variation on the “ self-deportation ” theory immigration hawks have been putting forth for years — the idea that if you put enough pressure on unauthorized immigrants , from enough different directions , you can make them so miserable that leaving the US after years of living here looks like an appealing option . But instead of pressuring immigrants from multiple directions , Trump is hammering down , again and again , to activate their single biggest fear : that the system will catch them , arrest them , and throw them into a pitiless and grinding deportation machine .
Trump ’ s policy is marked by a little more enforcement — and a lot more vulnerability
It only took five days for the administration to make its agenda clear to unauthorized immigrants in the United States .
On January 25 , Trump signed an executive order addressing immigration enforcement in the interior of the United States . Among other things , the order officially rescinded a series of Obama administration memos that laid out which immigrants should be considered priorities for deportation — and which should not .
Under the new policy , the following types of immigrants are among those prioritized for deportation : immigrants who “ have committed acts that constitute a chargeable criminal offense ” ( which includes driving without a license in states that don ’ t give licenses to unauthorized immigrants ) ; immigrants who engage in “ fraud or willful representation in any official matter ” ( which could include paying taxes under a fake Social Security number ) ; and immigrants who , despite not having committed any act that constitutes a “ chargeable criminal offense , ” are still a “ risk to public safety or national security ” in the eyes of the ICE agent arresting them .
Under the new policy , the following types of deportable immigrants are low priorities for deportation : none .
When President Trump , then-Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly , and other Trump officials bragged about “ unshackling ” immigration agents , this is what they meant . Agents had more power to decide which immigrants to arrest and put into deportation proceedings , because the pool of immigrants most vulnerable to deportation had expanded by millions .
The number of immigrants actually getting arrested and put into deportation proceedings did not , of course , expand by millions .
On the ground , the Trump administration expanded enforcement mostly by going after “ low-hanging fruit ” — immigrants whose locations were already known . Sometimes that means going after “ criminals ” ( in its first few months , the administration took a much more aggressive approach than its predecessor did in asking jail officials to hold immigrants for ICE pickup ) , but it sometimes means going after people who are coming to ICE offices for check-ins , or even going to US Citizenship and Immigration Services to interview for their green cards .
But the administration has done just enough to keep any immigrant who isn ’ t already on ICE ’ s radar from feeling really safe . It ’ s conducted a few high-profile , coordinated immigration raids — in which it ’ s arrested both the people it was seeking out and anyone else who happened to be around and deportable . One ICE source said in March that the government was deliberately planning raids in “ sanctuary cities ” — an effective way to remind immigrant communities that even if their local government was trying to lower their risk of deportation , it couldn ’ t actually protect immigrants from the feds .
Trump ’ s ICE is arresting more immigrants than it did under Obama ’ s last couple of years in office . From October to December 2016 , ICE arrested an average of 9,134 immigrants a month ; from February to June 2017 , it arrested an average of 13,085 . That ’ s simultaneously a big increase — a 43 percent jump — and a drop in the bucket , compared with the expansion in the pool of immigrants made vulnerable to deportation .
Under the last two years of the Obama administration , the government ’ s official position was that immigrants would be prioritized for deportation if they were convicted of certain serious crimes , or if they were recent border crossers or had recent final deportation orders . There were 750,000 “ convicted criminal aliens ” ; it ’ s unclear how many people fell in the other two categories , but the total number of people prioritized as of January 19 , 2017 , was almost certainly less than 2 million — possibly much lower .
On January 25 , 2017 , the pool of immigrants “ prioritized ” — or at least not unprioritized — for deportation swelled to something like 10 million .
The Trump administration ’ s eyes were much bigger than its capacity .
The administration is operating on a budget and with a workforce set under its predecessor — which devoted much more effort to deporting immigrants from within the US than the government ever had before , but was still equipped for no more than 400,000 deportations per year . And due to the staggering immigration court backlog , those deportations are often of immigrants who were arrested years prior .
A government capable of deporting all 11.1 million unauthorized immigrants over two presidential terms would need four times the deportation capacity it currently has . Even modestly increasing deportation capacity would require an investment , in the Department of Justice ( which runs immigration courts ) as well as the Department of Homeland Security , that ’ s likely to sit uneasily with congressional Republicans who aren ’ t even enthusiastic about paying $ 1.5 billion for a few dozen miles of border “ wall . ”
Actually carrying out mass arrests and deportations of long-resident , law-abiding unauthorized immigrants — “ good ” immigrants — could generate a serious outcry ( fueled by photos of families being separated by ICE agents ) . Many Republicans are already concerned about the politics of Trump ’ s decision to end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which currently protects over 700,000 young unauthorized immigrants from deportation and allows them to work in the US legally ; the politics of deporting them , along with their parents , would be even worse .
This isn ’ t a new problem . It ’ s why intellectual immigration hawks have long preferred “ self-deportation ” ( also known as “ attrition through enforcement ” ) over mass deportation . It might not be as brutally effective — even the most optimistic accounting suggests that 5 million immigrants could eventually be pushed to “ self-deport ” over the course of several years — but it ’ s much cheaper .
What Trump is doing isn ’ t quite “ self-deportation ” either , though . The point of “ self-deportation ” is that the government is using all the tools at its disposal to make it hard to support a life and a family in the US without papers — and the centerpiece of that is making it impossible to get a job under the table , by mandating all businesses use the E-Verify system and cracking down on employers who hire unauthorized workers .
The Trump administration isn ’ t doing that . Its legislative agenda on immigration is focused on “ the wall ” and on cutting legal immigration rather than E-Verify ; it hasn ’ t stepped up workplace immigration enforcement much ( drawing ire from Laura Ingraham ’ s website , which called workplace enforcement the “ soft spot ” of Trump ’ s policy ) .
Instead of using a variety of tools , it ’ s using a combination of policy and messaging to keep the threat of deportation hanging over immigrants ’ heads . It ’ s not trying to get them to go home because they can ’ t stay here ; it ’ s making sure they don ’ t get too comfortable here because they could be taken at any minute .
It ’ s a general law enforcement principle . Here ’ s how US Border Patrol agents in the Rio Grande Valley put it : When they have enough agents on a shift to catch all of the people or drugs they expect to enter the US during that time , they use their resources to catch those people and drugs . It ’ s only when they show up and realize they ’ re way undermatched ( something they emphasize hasn ’ t happened in several years ) that they bring out the floodlights and do circuits through the streets with sirens blaring — the “ high-visibility ” tactics .
ICE , the Border Patrol ’ s sister immigration force , appears to be doing something similar — not to deter immigrants from coming , but to remind those already here that their existence in the US is not a secure one .
Fear is hard to attack because it ’ s hard to see . It doesn ’ t spark political protests . It may not even be noticed by Americans who don ’ t know any immigrants . It ’ s easy to deflect onto others for causing fear — blaming immigrant organizations , for example , for spreading rumors of ICE raids . It leaves few fingerprints . And it takes little cash .
The January executive order let exactly one Obama-era protection stand — the DACA program — despite Trump ’ s promises to end Obama ’ s “ unconstitutional executive orders ” on “ day one ” on the campaign trail .
For months , the administration publicly weighed DACA ’ s fate ( even as , behind the scenes , ICE got more active in stripping protections from DACA recipients , sometimes based on disputed claims of gang affiliation ) . Every time Trump or his government declared that the program was still in effect , a DHS spokesperson hastened to clarify that they meant “ for now . ”
Trump has already mischaracterized his DACA decision as one to keep the program for the next six months while it waits for Congress to act , and then start allowing protections and work permits issued under the program ( which last for two years ) to expire . ( Democrats have announced they ’ ve reached the broad outlines of a deal on DACA , but the exact details have yet to be worked out . )
The reality is that the program is winding down now . Immigrants who would have qualified for the program had they turned 15 in August , but instead turn 15 in October , will be locked out ; immigrants whose DACA protections are set to expire on March 4 have only until October 5 to collect their paperwork ( and $ 495 ) and apply for one last renewal .
For immigrants whose DACA protections are set to last through the next six months — who , in theory , aren ’ t supposed to be worried — there ’ s a world of difference between knowing when their work permits will expire and being able to quiet their minds until then . The expiration date isn ’ t a start date ; it ’ s an end date . President Trump says the DREAMers should be turning their hopes to Congress , but his White House ’ s talking points urge them to start making plans to leave the country when their work permits expire .
And in the meantime , the Trump administration is already tightening the reins on DACA recipients . Border Patrol has started to detain DACA recipients at internal checkpoints , “ for accuracy and verification of status , ” sometimes holding them for several hours .
The Trump administration knows that telling people they have six months before being returned to the pool of vulnerability is a warning rather than a reprieve . It ’ s used that strategy deliberately with Haitians living in the US under Temporary Protected Status , issued after the 2010 earthquake — who are currently months into a six-month extension of protections that the government has all but promised will be their last .
Temporary Protected Status is issued to people who are living in the US from a particular country , who don ’ t have a legal status that allows them to stay ( either because they ’ re here on short-term visas or because they ’ re unauthorized ) but , due to a natural disaster or other crisis in their home countries , can ’ t safely return either . The longer that people are protected in the US , however , the more they put down roots here , and the less sensible it appears to revoke their protections — especially because the alternative is returning to a country that may still be on the long road to recovery from crisis . So previous governments have tended to extend TPS protections when a country comes up for review .
DHS under Kelly , however , wanted to put the “ temporary ” back in “ Temporary Protected Status. ” When TPS for Haitians came up for review in spring , Kelly granted a six-month extension but warned , “ I believe there are indications that Haiti — if its recovery from the 2010 earthquake continues at pace — may not warrant further TPS extension past January 2018 . ”
Kelly openly acknowledged he was sending a message to Haitians — and other TPS beneficiaries . “ The message is : By definition , TPS is temporary , '' he said in a press conference in Miami in June .
And by sending that message , he wanted to get recipients to “ start thinking now about what will happen in the not-too-distant future. ” The memo extending TPS through January made that a little clearer . “ The Department of Homeland Security urges Haitian TPS recipients who do not have another immigration status to use the time before Jan. 22 , 2018 to prepare for and arrange their departure from the United States — including proactively seeking travel documentation — or to apply for other immigration benefits for which they may be eligible . ”
It ’ s the same language the White House talking points would use , months later , for DACA recipients .
Some Haitians have already “ prepared for and arranged ” their travel — to Canada , where they ’ re seeking asylum . But others , clinging to the fact that the Trump administration hasn ’ t officially declared that TPS will end , are resistant to make plans to leave the country that many of them have lived in for most of their lives . “ I have nothing to go back to , ” Uber driver and would-be college student Jean Jubens Jeanty told the New York Times in July . “ Why not keep me here ? ”
This isn ’ t optimism . It ’ s simply not having alternatives . “ It ’ s very unsettling , ” a Queens College senior told the Times , “ to know that you ’ re here and you don ’ t know what tomorrow is going to bring , or what is going to happen in the next couple of months . ”
Losing TPS wouldn ’ t create certainty — it would just open up a deeper anxiety , in which fear of being deportable is replaced with fear of actually getting deported .
The government ’ s official line that Haitians should prepare to leave the US isn ’ t a promise to deport them if they don ’ t , or at least not a promise the government can keep . There are 58,000 Haitian TPS recipients ; the government will have to make a decision by January about whether to keep protecting 86,000 Hondurans with TPS , and a decision by March about the fate of 263,000 Salvadorians .
Those are numbers too big to round up and arrest with the resources the government has now , or can get in the next six months . But dumping them into the pool of vulnerability , and making it clear that they could get arrested at any time with no legal recourse ? It costs much less to send a message .
The fact that anyone living in the US without papers could be caught by ICE at any time is only part of the politics of fear . The other part is making it seem that anyone caught by ICE is inevitably going to get deported , and there ’ s nothing they or their lawyers can do to stop it .
The biggest practical obstacle to mass deportation is the immigration court backlog — in practice , it takes years to deport someone who hasn ’ t already been ordered deported . The Trump administration hasn ’ t yet put much effort into moving people through immigration court faster . Instead , it ’ s tried to portray the deportation process as a one-way journey — slow , but inevitable .
“ Trump doesn ’ t deport people , ” John Kelly used to say as head of DHS . “ The law deports people . ”
Kelly has left the department for the White House , but that sentiment remains ; on a press briefing about the process of DACA rescission , one DHS official praised Trump as “ the first president who ’ s asked us to enforce the law as written , and not some executive interpretation of the law. ” ( That official , somewhat ironically , went on to assure reporters that even after losing DACA protections , DREAMers would remain “ low enforcement priorities ” — something that is neither in the text of “ the law ” nor in the text of any of the Trump administration ’ s guidance on the matter . )
Under Obama , immigrants and their lawyers could often persuade ICE that they weren ’ t high enough enforcement priorities to merit spending resources on an immigration court prosecution ; the immigration court case would be “ administratively closed , ” and the immigrant would be given a stay of deportation .
From February to June 2016 , the Obama administration administratively closed an average of 2,400 cases a month . From February to June 2017 , the Trump administration closed an average of fewer than 100 .
An immigration lawyer told Vice that the key to closing immigration cases used to be “ shaming the government ” — but “ now , the government is shameless . ”
It ’ s certainly worked to appear shameless . Immigrants whose arrests provoked widespread media alarm and protests , like Guadalupe Garcia de Rayos ( arrested in February after 22 years in the US ) , might have been spared by the Obama administration ’ s desire to avoid bad press . The Trump administration deported Rayos in the middle of the night .
But it ’ s not actually true that the government is never showing discretion or leniency . There are cases where it has , in fact , been successfully shamed .
Jeannette Vizguerra spent most of the spring in the basement of a church in Denver ; she heard about people like Rayos getting arrested when they went in for ICE check-ins , and decided not to risk it . Because she missed her check-in , she was ordered deported in absentia — meaning she could be deported without going through immigration court . But she stayed in the church for months , and ICE agents didn ’ t dare go in and get her .
And then in May , ICE granted Vizguerra ( and another Denver-area immigrant who ’ d taken church refuge ) a stay of deportation . She was able to return home in time for Mother ’ s Day ; “ I have missed my kids . The fight is for them , ” she told reporters .
Vizguerra ’ s stay was granted thanks to the involvement of local members of Congress , under a procedure that has become more stringent under Trump . In other cases , the administration has simply decided to grant extensions ( often short-term ones ) to particularly sympathetic immigrants .
In June , ICE was set to deport Florida resident Reina Gomez , a 49-year-old with a terminal cancer that she claims can ’ t be treated in her home country of Honduras — making deportation a “ death sentence. ” But after a public outcry , she was given , first , a two-week extension to consider her asylum application — then a one-year stay . The government was shamed .
Shame isn ’ t guaranteed , and a last-minute reprieve isn ’ t something anyone can count on ( not to mention the fact that a one-year stay of deportation is no more permanent than the six months for Haitians with TPS ) . The Trump administration is using discretion much less frequently than its predecessor . But it ’ s using discretion more frequently than it allows when it claims that it ’ s really “ the law ” that deports people . Because sending people the message that there is something they can do to remain in the United States would undermine the politics of fear .
Even when the administration is trying to say that immigrants are safe from a particular fear or rumor , it ’ s unwilling to say that they ’ re safe . In a highly unusual move in early September , ICE put out a statement declaring it had no planned nationwide raid operations for the coming weeks — as a denial of widespread rumors that it was planning a massive nationwide sweep called “ Operation Mega ” to arrest more than 8,000 immigrants in mid-September . But the statement explicitly pointed to hurricane relief efforts in Florida and Texas as the reason the calendar had been cleared — leaving the obvious possibility that it could simply be rescheduled at a later date .
Similarly , the administration has all but said that it won ’ t send ICE lists of all immigrants who are set to lose DACA , allowing ICE to round up and arrest them as their protections expire . But it hasn ’ t made that promise explicitly , or promised to issue new guidance to agents about when they should and should not use DACA information for enforcement .
The rumors outstrip the policies — which is exactly the point
When a community is this taut with fear , any news or sign or rumor attracts disproportionate attention . So any policy change — or any sign that a policy change is being considered — is often greeted as a signal that “ mass deportation ” is coming , or that it ’ s already here .
Some DACA recipients are incredibly worried about getting rounded up when their protections expire . Some have even voiced a fear that they ’ ll be put in camps ( an image that evokes not only the concentration camps in which Japanese Americans were put during World War II but the “ tent cities ” of Trump pardon beneficiary Joe Arpaio ) . The panic is happening behind closed doors , far from the public debate over the fate of the DREAMers ( in which DACA recipients feel the need to portray themselves as brave , optimistic heroes ) , but it ’ s happening .
Those who never had DACA have spent the past several months making the daily calculation about safety . Jeannette Vizguerra decided not to go to her ICE meeting because she had heard about what happened to those who did . Central American families have stopped showing up to immigration court proceedings because they ’ re worried they ’ ll lose their asylum cases — and their best chance to stay in the US is to hide out of ICE ’ s sight .
Soon after Trump ’ s inauguration , local law enforcement started noting that Latinos were becoming less willing to report crimes . Judges have urged ICE not to make arrests in courtrooms because they might scare away victims from showing up to court . Immigration advocates in Houston believed it was likely , when Hurricane Harvey hit , that some unauthorized immigrants might have died because they stayed in their homes rather than evacuate along a route that featured a Border Patrol checkpoint .
The Trump administration tends to react to these fears with something resembling annoyance . Immigrants “ should feel safe to go and report criminal activity , ” acting ICE Director Homan told the press in July . But barely minutes later , he criticized , at length , the idea that “ we concentrate too much on those that are not criminal ” : “ We got to stop sending the message that people that do n't commit yet another crime should be forgotten , ” he said .
The message , he said , had to be as clear as possible : “ There is no safe haven here . ”
Unauthorized immigrants themselves have gotten that message . Even without doing the heavy lifting of mass deportation , the administration has put together an enforcement regime that does just enough to remind immigrants they ’ re vulnerable — and lets fear do the rest .