International condemnation is growing against the US policy of separating migrant families at its border .
The UK and Canadian prime ministers , Theresa May and Justin Trudeau , both called it `` wrong '' .
Pope Francis said he supported US Catholic bishops who said it was `` immoral '' .
The Republican-controlled Congress is under pressure to get President Donald Trump to change his policy .
House speaker Paul Ryan said a vote on immigration legislation , which will `` keep families together '' , will be held on Thursday .
`` Under this bill , when people are being prosecuted for illegally crossing the border , families will remain together under DHS [ Department of Homeland Security ] custody throughout the length of their legal proceedings , '' he said .
Republicans have been scrambling to pull together a bill to address the backlash . Two versions are currently being considered .
President Trump told a group of House Republicans he would back any bill they passed , a White House spokesman said on Tuesday .
In the meeting , the president said separating families was `` certainly not an attractive thing and does look bad , '' according to Representative Tom Cole .
Pictures of dozens of children sleeping in cages and audio of children crying for their parents have emerged in recent days , provoking the widespread criticism .
It comes after a `` zero-tolerance '' crackdown on illegal immigration was brought in by Attorney General Jeff Sessions .
US immigration officials say 2,342 children were separated from 2,206 parents between 5 May and 9 June .
Babies and toddlers have been sent to three `` tender age '' shelters - maintained by the Department of Health and Human Services - after being separated from their parents , the Associated Press news agency reports .
Doctors and lawyers who visited the shelters described the infants as hysterical and crying , according to the AP report .
Mr Trump has not changed immigration law , but he has changed how it is implemented .
In April , his attorney general announced the `` zero-tolerance '' policy - which would see all undocumented border crossers criminally charged and jailed immediately .
As migrant children can not be jailed with their parents , they are kept in separate facilities .
Under previous US administrations , undocumented immigrants caught crossing the border for the first time tended to be issued with court summonses .
Administration officials have offered conflicting explanations for the harrowing details of crying children kept in fenced-in rooms and despondent parents , but Mr Trump 's dual goals appear clear .
One reason is leverage . He wants to force Democrats in Congress to negotiate a legislative package that keeps migrant families intact in exchange for full funding for his much-touted border wall , speedier deportation of undocumented aliens and sweeping changes to legal immigration policy .
His other incentive comes from knowing that this could be a winning mid-term election issue . Even if he fails to get a deal , it will motivate his base to turn out in support of Republicans across the country .
According to a recent Quinnipiac poll , while 91 % of Democrats and 68 % of independents oppose separating asylum-seekers and others in the US illegally from their children , 55 % of Republicans support it .
On Tuesday Mexican Foreign Minister Luis Videgaray Caso said the practice was `` cruel and inhuman '' , and clearly violated human rights .
The US Chamber of Commerce and the Business Roundtable , two leading business groups , said the policy was `` contrary to American values '' .
French far-right leader Marine Le Pen , who in the past has praised Mr Trump 's policy of curbing immigration , told French TV that she disagreed with splitting children from parents .
A new Reuters/Ipsos opinion poll suggests that most Americans oppose the policy , with 28 % supporting it .
The White House has been disputing the terminology used to describe its crackdown .
It describes the holding centres where children have been pictured in metal chain-link enclosures with concrete floors as `` shelters '' instead of `` cages '' .
Mr Trump will meet Congress members on Wednesday afternoon to discuss a more moderate bill .
The compromise would limit , but not ban outright , family separations . It would also offer an eventual path to citizenship for undocumented adult immigrants , known as Dreamers , who entered the US as children .
The Republican legislation would also provide $ 25bn ( £19bn ) in funding for border security , including Mr Trump 's planned US-Mexico wall .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell also said he `` hoped to reach out to the Democrats '' about crafting a bipartisan deal . However Democrats argue that no congressional action is required and the president can simply reverse his own policy .
Governors from at least eight US states - including two Republicans - have reversed their decision to send National Guard troops to the US-Mexico border .
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist . You can also contact us in the following ways :