Speaker of the House John Boehner said on Tuesday that he 's moving closer toward suing President Obama over his executive actions on immigration . According to National Journal , House Republicans will vote on a resolution that would allow Congress to join the existing lawsuit that 26 states have filed against Obama , or file its own lawsuit against the president . The lawsuit is expected to allege that the program President Obama announced last fall , which would grant protection from deportation to unauthorized immigrant parents of US citizens and permanent residents , goes beyond his legal authority . It 's not clear whether the lawsuit will also claim that the president 's existing `` deferred action '' program for young unauthorized immigrants ( which has been around since 2012 ) is illegal .
What 's the difference between targeting both programs and just targeting the new set of executive actions ?
It 's hard to argue that the existing Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which has granted protection from deportation to about 600,000 unauthorized immigrants , is an acceptable use of presidential authority , but the new deferred-action program would n't be . After all , they both follow the same model : unauthorized immigrants who meet certain requirements will be able to apply for temporary protection , and have to renew that protection every few years . Any of the legal criticisms that apply to the new program apply to the existing one as well .
But the DACA program was n't controversial when it was first announced — it 's only become politically controversial in retrospect , as Obama started contemplating ( and eventually took ) executive action to give relief to a broader set of unauthorized immigrants . So the GOP did n't sue Obama in 2012 , or even in 2014 , over the existing program .
Suing him now over both programs would raise the question of why Congress is only now taking legal action over something that 's been going on for years , if it really thinks it 's such a dire threat to the Constitution . That 's relevant to the GOP 's legal case , and it 's relevant to the politics of the issue as well — since the DACA program was pretty broadly popular when it was rolled out . ( Polls are mixed on the new executive action . Depending on how the question is asked , Americans either favor letting Obama 's actions stand — by amargin of 15 percentage points — or want it to be blocked , also by a margin of 15 percentage points . )