The Obama administration moved Tuesday to carry out portions of President Obama ’ s executive action on immigration even as a federal judge has halted the president ’ s temporary deportation amnesty .
The U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services announced it is extending eligibility to dependent spouses of H1-B visa holders to obtain work permits as part of Mr. Obama ’ s immigration action . Starting in 90 days about 179,600 immigrants will be eligible for the benefit in the first year .
“ Allowing the spouses of these visa holders to legally work in the United States makes perfect sense , ” said USCIS Director Leon Rodriguez . “ It helps U.S. businesses keep their highly skilled workers by increasing the chances these workers will choose to stay in this country during the transition from temporary workers to permanent residents . ”
But Sen. Jeff Sessions , Alabama Republican , said the president was unilaterally implementing “ another policy , another program that has not been authorized by law that would add several hundred thousand new workers to our country . ”
“ There ’ s been no sense at all by President Obama , the Department of Homeland Security [ Secretary ] Jeh Johnson , the Democratic members of this Congress , no concern about the employment prospects of lawful immigrants , green card holders and native-born Americans , ” Mr . Sessions said . “ The first thing we should do is be focusing on getting jobs for Americans that are unemployed . Are we going to keep Americans on welfare and benefits while we bring in more and more foreigners to take jobs when we ’ ve got Americans ready and willing to take those jobs ? ”
The move comes as Congress considers an appropriations bill for the Department of Homeland Security that would defund Mr. Obama ’ s deportation amnesty .
On Tuesday , Sen. Ted Cruz , Texas Republican , questioned Homeland ’ s Mr. Johnson on whether the administration plans to comply with the court ’ s injunction to stop the deportation amnesty . He noted that Mr. Obama has pledged publicly to “ continue in the planning ” of the activities that the court ordered him to stop .
“ Violating an unambiguous federal court order by defying its instructions to cease and desist a particular activity would represent a significant breach of your authority , and would be an escalation in abuse of our separation of powers , ” Mr. Cruz wrote . “ For a president and his cabinet to telegraph intent to violate a federal court order requires additional scrutiny from Congress . ”
A federal district judge in Texas last week blocked the amnesty program from going forward . The administration is appealing the ruling , and White House aides said Tuesday they are eager to ease the concerns of illegal immigrants who don ’ t know whether they ’ ll be allowed to remain in the U.S .
“ It ’ s important to put [ the court ruling ] in context , because the broader executive actions are moving forward , ” said Cecilia Munoz , White House domestic policy director . “ The administration continues to implement the portions of the actions that the president and the Department of Homeland Security took , which were not affected by the court ’ s ruling . ”
Mr. Obama will hold a town hall meeting in Miami Wednesday , televised on the Spanish-language network Telemundo , where he ’ s expected to address concerns about the court ruling .
“ The president will continue to fight both for immigration reform as well as for the implementation of these actions , because they ’ re the right thing to do , ” Ms. Munoz said . “ You will hear the president express the confidence that we will prevail at the end of the day in court . ”
In addition to the work permits for certain spouses , Ms. Munoz said , the administration is moving ahead with proposed changes to legal immigration , changes in enforcement priorities “ and many other elements ” of Mr. Obama ’ s executive action that he announced last November .
USCIS is estimating that about 55,000 immigrant spouses will be eligible for the work permits annually after the first year of the program . Mr. Rodriguez said the action will allow those spouses to remain in the U.S. beyond what would otherwise be a six-year limit .
“ This is important because the inability of those spouses until now to apply for employment has imposed , in many cases , significant hardships on the families of H1-B visa holders , ” he said . “ This will now facilitate the ability of those families to remain in the United States . ”
To obtain the work permit , eligible spouses must fill out a form with supporting evidence and pay a $ 380 fee . USCIS will begin accepting applications on May 26 .
Some professional groups hailed the administration ’ s move . The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc. called it a positive step , but said giving spouses green cards would be a better move .
“ Most H-1B workers are never sponsored for green cards , particularly if they work for outsourcing companies , ” said the group ’ s president , Jim Jefferies . “ More than half of H-1Bs go to outsourcing companies , whose business model is to replace American employees with easily exploited foreign workers . ”