Tensions boiled over at the US-Mexico border Sunday , with Border Patrol agents firing tear gas into a group of nearly 500 migrant protesters attempting to force their way through fencing and into the US .
The news comes after immigrant groups pushed pass Mexican police blockades and made their way across the Tijuana River and towards the border .
`` After being prevented from entering the Port of Entry , some of these migrants attempted to breach legacy fence infrastructure along the border and sought to harm CBP ( US Customs and Border Protection ) personnel by throwing projectiles at them , '' Homeland Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said in a statement .
`` As I have continually stated , DHS will not tolerate this type of lawlessness and will not hesitate to shut down ports of entry for security and public safety reasons , '' she warned .
The weekend border clash saw some women and children caught in the crossfire . `` Young children fainted . My daughter also got gassed , '' one migrant woman told reporters .
It 's a situation weeks in the making as thousands of migrants traveling north from Central America finally reached the US border , settling in Tijuana , Mexico .
The US closed the port of entry there in both directions for a time Sunday as they processed thousands of claims from migrants for asylum .
Pedestrian crossings at the San Ysidro port of entry are also suspended at both the East and West facility . — CBP San Diego ( @ CBPSanDiego ) November 25 , 2018
President Donald Trump has threatened to shut down the border completely . `` We will close entry into the country for a period of time until we can get it under control…the whole border . I mean the whole border , '' he told reporters .
Meanwhile , Trump is also signaling his willingness to allow for a partial government shutdown until Congress gives up the money needed for the border wall – something some GOP senators want to avoid .
`` I do not want to see the government shut down , '' Sen. Joni Ernst ( R-IA ) said . `` If we can avoid that situation we absolutely need to do that . I know that ( Senate Majority Leader Mitch ) McConnell is working very hard to make sure we get funding . ''
Some Democrats say they 've tried – albeit unsuccessfully – to talk with the president , but they 're still willing to negotiate .
`` We tried to negotiate on the Dreamers , and that was led by reasonable Republicans Mike Rounds , a senator from South Dakota , and Johnny Isakson , the senator from Georgia , '' Sen. Amy Klobuchar ( D-MN ) told ABC 's , George Stephanopoulos .
`` I was in that group , a small group of us that were working to find a way out with border money as well as making sure that we protected the Dreamers , something a vast majority of Americans supported , '' she continued .
`` So of course , we 're willing to talk about this . But if he wants to just keep playing politics with it , instead of getting it done , we are n't going to be able to get it done , '' the Minnesota lawmaker charged .
Meanwhile , the mayor of Tijuana is requesting aid from the United Nations to help deal with the nearly 5,000 migrants gathered in shelters in his city , calling the situation a `` humanitarian crisis . ''