Rep. Debbie Mucarsel-Powell ( D. , Fla. ) invited a panelist to an immigration town hall this July who is an # AbolishICE stalwart and is also an active member of the Democratic Socialists of America ( DSA ) political party .
The invitation came despite her opposition to socialism and the abolishment of Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) , a position increasingly embraced by the far Left .
Mucarsel-Powell came out against abolishing ICE during her 2018 campaign to represent a South Florida district that houses many Latino voters who have fled or are descendants of those who have fled socialist or communist regimes in Central America . And socialism has already taken center stage for Republicans hoping to flip the seat red in 2020 .
One announced challenger , Irina Vilariño , is primed to run a campaign targeting socialism .
`` I am running for Congress because I want to set the record straight that under socialism there is only an equal opportunity to achieve poverty , and I want to remind the liberal extremists that in freedom , every person has the opportunity to achieve the American Dream , '' Vilariño said in April to Florida Politics .
Mucarsel-Powell took a more moderate stance on immigration in 2018 .
`` Abolishing ICE is not the answer , '' Mucarsel-Powell told the Miami Herald . `` I believe the agency must correct its abuses and should dedicate its staff to protecting the country from actual threats , like child exploitation , human trafficking , and drug-related crimes , instead of attempting to induce fear in immigrant communities . ''
But several of the photos Murcasel-Powell tweeted of the town hall held at Florida International University on July 2 show the socialist # AbolishICE activist , Thomas Kennedy , seated at the panelist table just one seat away from the freshman congresswoman .
Kennedy was invited as part of the Florida Immigrant Coalition , where he is a political director , but he is shown on social media as a vocal activist for socialism and the abolishment of ICE . Roughly a year before the event , the Miami DSA Facebook featured a posted picture of Kennedy at an # AbolishICE protest .
`` At this moment our comrade Tomas is putting his body on the line at Abolish ICE : Florida outside the # Miami ICE facility in # Miramar , to demand an end to the abuses , raids , and deportations that ICE is responsible for in our community . # AbolishICE , '' the Miami DSA Facebook page read in July 2018 .
Seventeen people were arrested that day , and Kennedy boasted on his own Facebook page of being among that group .
Requests for comment to Kennedy were either not returned or unsuccessful .
Other elements of the Miami DSA Facebook webpage voice support for the abolition of prisons , support for the Boycott , Divest , and Sanctions ( BDS ) movement against Israel , and `` national rent control . ''
Both the national and Miami DSA webpages give a nod to one of the socialist party 's key ideas : eliminating capitalism .
`` As we are unlikely to see an immediate end to capitalism tomorrow , DSA fights for reforms today that will weaken the power of corporations and increase the power of working people , '' both organizations say .
Rep. Mucarsel-Powell did not respond to a request for comment from the ███ , which asked whether she has shifted her position on abolishing ICE or if she shares any sympathies with the Democratic Socialists of America Party .
According to her campaign website , Mucarsel-Powell is a first-generation American having emigrated from Ecuador . Socialism remains a top concern for many Latino voters in the district she represents .
`` In and around Miami , seven hundred thousand Cubans are eligible to vote , along with a hundred and sixty thousand Colombians , eighty thousand Nicaraguans , and some fifty thousand Venezuelans , '' a recent report from the New Yorker noted . `` Republicans , and especially Trump , have seized on this fact to relentlessly attack left-wing populists in Central and South America . ''
The article also quoted an anonymous State Department official as saying , `` The Trump Administration 's Latin America policy has become all about Florida . ''
On the presidential campaign trail , Vermont socialist senator Bernie Sanders ( I . ) recently said he is not in favor of abolishing ICE . Sanders has received heavy support from the DSA .