With Congress gone for August , the duty of trying to stop the illegal immigrant surge on the southern border now belongs to President Obama and border governors — chiefly Texas Gov . Rick Perry , who said Sunday he will move ahead with plans to deploy 1,000 National Guard troops on the border .
One top Republican warned that the border is increasingly being tested by potentially dangerous illegal immigrants — including those associated with terrorists or enemy countries ’ armed forces .
“ Clearly our enemies and our adversaries understand that it is a weakness , ” said House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence Chairman Mike Rogers , Michigan Republican , on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union. ” “ We have seen a trend of countries that we are very concerned about , a rise in individuals being apprehended at the border . The scary part about that is those are just the ones that get apprehended . ”
The warning comes as the immigration debate shifts into a new phase now that Congress is gone for five weeks , leaving chiefly Mr. Obama , but also state officials , to try to manage with the tools they ’ ve got .
Mr. Obama mocked Congress for adjourning and said it frees him up to take the kinds of executive actions for which Republicans have chastised him in the past .
“ Without additional resources and help from Congress , we ’ re just not going to have the resources we need to fully solve the problem , ” he said in a Friday press conference . “ That means , while they ’ re out on vacation , I ’ m going to have to make some tough choices to meet the challenge — with or without Congress . ”
SEE ALSO : Pelosi charges GOP congressman during House debate : ‘ I hit the right nerve ’
Early on , the White House had hinted it had “ flexibility ” under existing law to do more to speed up deportations , but it has been more coy in recent weeks , and a spokeswoman didn ’ t respond to a request for comment Friday .
Analysts , though , have laid out several options available to Mr. Obama . One would be to declare the border situation an emergency , which would allow immigration authorities to hold the illegal immigrant children rather than turn them over to relatives in the U.S. , where they often disappear into the shadows .
Analysts have also said the administration does not have to perform as much scrutiny of every child ’ s legal situation , which could also speed up processing .
While the Obama administration mulls its own unilateral steps , Mr. Perry , the Texas governor , has been blunt about what he ’ ll do .
“ What I ’ m prepared to do is not just [ send ] the National Guard , but our Department of Public Safety , our Texas Ranger Recon Teams , the Parks and Wildlife wardens that we have deployed there , ” he told “ Fox News Sunday. ” “ And then I will suggest to you there will be other individuals who come to assist in securing that border .
“ I think that ’ s what the American people want , ” he said . “ They ’ d like to see a president who leads this country and says , ‘ You know what , we do have a problem on our southern border . We ’ re going to deal with it . ’ ”
Congressional Republicans are hoping Mr. Perry and other national leaders can step in and fill the hole left by Capitol Hill ’ s failure to act .
The Senate stalemated when a bipartisan group of lawmakers blocked Democratic leaders ’ bill , saying money isn ’ t enough to solve the problem , and the laws must be changed .
Meanwhile , in the House , GOP leaders suffered their own rebellion from conservatives who forced them to toughen up their legislation , adding in legislation to cancel Mr. Obama ’ s nondeportation policy for Dreamers , known in government-speak as “ Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , ” or DACA .
About 600,000 young adult illegal immigrants have been granted tentative legal status and work permits under DACA , and Mr. Obama has hinted he could use executive authority to add millions more illegal immigrants — likely the parents of DACA recipients and parents of U.S. citizen children — to their ranks .
The House GOP passed a bill Friday night , on a 216-192 vote , to freeze the policy , preventing Mr. Obama from expanding it and potentially threatening even current recipients .
“ It ’ s not enough for Republicans to send desperate children back to violence in their home countries , ” said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat . “ They must also vote to deport the best young immigrants and brightest in our schools ; vote to send victims of domestic violence back to their abusers ; vote to hand witnesses back to drug lords ; vote to remove the parents of American children . ”
Republicans countered that DACA and other Obama policies are responsible for the new immigration problem .
“ Word has spread around the world that our immigration laws are not enforced , which has enticed tens of thousands of kids , teenagers and families from Central America to come to the U.S. illegally with the hope of staying here , ” said Rep. Bob Goodlatte , Virginia Republican and chairman of the House Committee on the Judiciary . “ It ’ s clear that immigration enforcement is key to ending the crisis at the border and preventing similar situations in the future . ”
The border surge itself has also rearranged immigration politics . Republican senators , who little more than a year ago helped write the broad immigration bill that Mr. Obama wanted — and which passed the Senate on a bipartisan 68-32 vote — are now distancing themselves from their own legislation .
Sen. Marco Rubio , a Florida Republican who was part of the Gang of Eight senators that wrote the bill , told “ Fox News Sunday ” he now believes legalization of illegal immigrants can only come later , after the border has been secured and the legal immigration system has been fixed .
“ In my mind , especially given everything that ’ s going on now , the only way we ’ re going to ever make progress on this issue is to first deal with illegal immigration , secure the border [ and ] win people ’ s confidence that in reality this problem is under control , ” he said , couching it as a recognition of what can pass Congress right now .