WASHINGTON—After months of national debate over President Trump ’ s immigration policies , the record of his predecessor is playing a starring role in the race for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination .
The spotlight has fallen on President Barack Obama ’ s record on immigrant removals , which included the deportation of nearly three million foreigners during his eight years in the White House , after a debate this week in which the foes of former Vice President Joe Biden challenged him forcefully on the topic .
Yet it is Mr. Trump , who made his tougher stance on immigration a key plank of his 2016 presidential campaign , who is struggling to get his promised deportation machine up and running . Under Mr. Obama , removals hit a record of 409,849 in 2012 ; in 2018 , under Mr. Trump , 256,085 immigrants were deported .
That slowdown is in no small part because of the Obama administration , which , in its first term , allowed U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement to expand a Bush-era program known as Secure Communities .
That program used a little-known information-sharing requirement to collect fingerprints of people booked into local jails across the country and identify illegal immigrants for deportation . It secured record removals , but the backlash against it also created many of the obstacles that Mr. Trump has encountered in enacting his agenda , many experts say .
Secure Communities was responsible for Obama earning the title of “ deporter in chief , ” said Muzaffar Chishti , a lawyer and director of the New York office of the Migration Policy Institute , a nonpartisan think tank . But , he added : “ Secure Communities became the breeding ground for the resistance , and it led to activism in the form of enactment of state laws . ”
As jails across the country began to participate and share fingerprint files , ICE agents were able to coordinate with local jails either to send immigrants directly to immigration authorities or hold on to immigrants until an ICE agent could take custody .
The volume of deportations led to complaints that the program was sweeping up foreigners accused but not convicted of minor offenses , including traffic violations . It also had quiet support from more conservative states and jurisdictions .
Many local jurisdictions tried to back out of the program altogether and multiple lawsuits were filed , challenging the legality of local policy agencies jailing foreigners longer than their criminal sentence or for strictly civil immigration violations .
At the debate in Detroit , Mr. Biden didn ’ t seek to directly defend the Obama administration on removals , instead saying that “ everything landed on the president ’ s desk but locusts ” and that he would “ absolutely not ” repeat the practice , before lashing out at rival candidate Julián Castro , who had served as Housing and Urban Development secretary from 2014 to 2017 .
“ We sat together in many meetings . I never heard him talk about any of this when he was the secretary , ” Mr. Biden said .
“ Mr . Vice President , it looks like one of us has learned the lessons of the past and one of us hasn ’ t , ” Mr. Castro shot back .
Challenged by New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio to answer more fully on removals , Mr. Biden instead heralded Mr. Obama ’ s efforts to create protections for young immigrants brought illegally to the country as children . The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program was launched in 2012 specifically to protect young immigrants brought to the U.S. as children from deportation and offer them work permits .
Around the same time , Obama administration officials were starting to limit the types of immigrants in the country illegally it would target . A year earlier , then-ICE Director John Morton had issued a series of memos detailing when and how immigration authorities should exercise discretion .
One of the broadest efforts to block Secure Communities came from California , where state lawmakers in 2013 passed the Trust Act . That law barred local authorities from detaining someone for ICE for more than about 48 hours and only in cases when someone was accused or convicted of a serious crime . The state has since passed an even more restrictive law , greatly limiting when and how local authorities can assist immigration agents .
By 2014 the Obama administration abandoned Secure Communities altogether , replacing it with the Priority Enforcement Program , or PEP , which was intended to focus ICE resources on only the most serious criminal cases and those people who were considered a threat to national security .
Mr. Trump ’ s pledge to step up removals was complicated after he took office in 2017 by the legacy of Secure Communities , as well as a wave of resistance from religious groups , neighborhoods and activists against ICE efforts .
Many local agencies ended cooperation with ICE , either proactively or under pressure from immigrant rights advocates . Numerous cities and counties have passed so-called sanctuary policies that limit when and how local police can aid ICE . The Trump administration has struggled to push back , with some efforts to limit or withhold federal aid to such jurisdictions blocked in federal court .
Share Your Thoughts What do you think of President Trump ’ s current approach to deportations ? Join the conversation below .