Is Trump Flip-Flopping On Immigration ? Yes Or No , It 's Sure Been Confusing
Donald Trump will give a speech Wednesday outlining his immigration stance . Given the last week of news coverage , he could have some serious explaining to do .
An immigration policy centered around extreme positions — mass deportation of 11 million immigrants in the country illegally , plus building a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border — initially helped Trump stand out in the massive Republican primary field .
So it was a surprise when , last week , the Trump campaign seemed to change direction , indicating that he was open to `` softening '' his immigration position , and even at one point that he might be open to a path to legalization for some of those immigrants . Here 's a quick rundown of some of the things the campaign has said about immigration in the past week .
Aug. 20 — Members of Donald Trump 's Hispanic advisory council said Trump was open to relaxing his immigration stance , Buzzfeed reports . Trump said his solution for how to deal with 11 million people in the country illegally `` must be something that respects border security but deals with this in a humane and efficient manner , '' according to immigration attorney Jacob Monty , who attended the meeting . The Trump campaign later released a statement dismissing the Buzzfeed report , saying that Trump 's position had not changed .
Aug. 21 — CNN 's Dana Bash asks Trump Campaign Manager Kellyanne Conway about Trump 's November promise to create a deportation force . Conway first demurs , then says it 's still `` to be determined . ''
Meanwhile , members of Trump 's Hispanic advisory council do not verify to NBC News that Trump would advocate a legalization plan . Immigration lawyer Monty says he is hoping for specific policies like a guest-worker program and a `` touchback '' system , in which immigrants in the U.S. illegally would go back to their home countries and then come back through the visa process . ( Another version of `` touchbacks '' is for immigrants to not go back to a home country but to go to a consulate or embassy of that country to apply . )
Aug. 22 — Trump postpones a planned immigration speech in Colorado . In an email explaining the postponement , the Trump campaign says the speech `` is still being modified , '' according to the Denver Post .
Trump tells Fox & Friends that he 's not reversing his position . `` No , I 'm not flip-flopping , '' he said . `` We want to come up with a really fair , but firm , answer . That 's — it has to be very firm . But we want to come up with something fair . ''
Aug. 23 — In a town hall with Fox 's Sean Hannity , Trump says `` there could certainly be a softening '' in his stance on immigration , adding that `` the bad ones '' need to be kicked out of the U.S . Meanwhile , he says there could be some leniency for law-abiding immigrants , intimating he would be open to legalization but not full citizenship .
`` No citizenship , '' he said , adding , `` Let me go a step further — they 'll pay back taxes ; they have to pay taxes ; there 's no amnesty , as such , there 's no amnesty , but we work with them . ''
Conway tells CNN that Trump 's `` softening '' response in the Hannity town hall is `` very consonant with what [ Trump ] said all along . '' She adds that Trump `` wants to find a fair and humane way and effective way to address the fact that roughly 11 million illegal immigrants live among us . ''
Wednesday — When a West Palm Beach , Fla. , CBS affiliate asks Trump about his shifting immigration policy , he insists that he still has a tough stance , but is vague on exactly what that stance is . `` Well , I 'm going to announce something over the next two weeks , '' he said , `` but it 's going to be a very firm policy . '' According to CBS , he later adds , `` We 're going to build a wall , it 's got to be a very powerful wall . But we want people to come into our country , but we want them to come in legally , but we 're going to be very , very strong on immigration . ''
Thursday — Trump tells CNN 's Anderson Cooper that he is actually not open to a pathway to legalization . `` There 's no path to legalization unless they leave the country , '' he said . `` When they come back in , then they can start paying taxes , but there is no path to legalization unless they leave the country and then come back . ''
Campaign spokesperson Katrina Pierson tells CNN that it 's only Trump 's rhetoric — not policy — that has changed . `` He has n't changed his position on immigration , '' she contended . `` He 's changed the words that he is saying . ''
Saturday — In a speech in Des Moines , Iowa , Trump calls immigration a `` civil rights issue '' and emphasizes his plans to remove some — but not all — people who are in the country illegally . `` On Day One , '' he said , `` I am going to begin swiftly removing criminal illegal immigrants from this country , including removing the hundreds of thousands of criminal illegal immigrants that have been released into U.S. communities under the Obama-Clinton administration . ''
Sunday — Conway tells CBS ' John Dickerson that Trump 's position has n't changed , this time saying that Trump `` is not talking about a deportation force . ''
Trump 's vice presidential pick Mike Pence tells CNN 's Jake Tapper : `` There will be no path to legalization , no path to citizenship , unless people leave the country . ''
Trump also tweets that he will give a major immigration speech in Arizona on Wednesday .
Monday — New reports of policy specifics bounce around the media . Though Trump 's calls for a wall remained steady throughout this period , NBC 's Hallie Jackson reported that Trump may now be calling for a `` virtual wall , '' as MSNBC 's Ari Melber tweets :
CNN 's Jim Acosta also tweets that a Trump adviser told him that Trump now wants to `` Secure border first . Then have conversation on what to do with undocumented 'years from now . ' ``
However , Trump spokesman Jason Miller tells NPR that the `` virtual wall '' report is false — `` There 's going to be a physical wall '' — and that Acosta 's report is also `` erroneous . ''
One main message from the campaign : This is n't a change
These interviews , speeches and tweets do n't at all make it clear what Trump 's Wednesday speech will say . For now , at least two uniform messages are clear : ( 1 ) that Trump wants to be `` fair '' and `` humane '' in however he eventually deals with the 11 million people in the country illegally , and ( 2 ) that his immigration policy has not changed .
Should he eventually back away from a deportation force and push a path to legalization , as his campaign at times in the past two weeks has suggested he could do , it would be a seismic shift for a candidate who has made immigration a linchpin of his campaign . Trump has flip-flopped on a number of issues ( abortion , H1-B visas , Syrian refugees ) , but this would be a particularly massive change .
The label `` flip-flopper '' is a particularly sharp barb that can inflict irreparable damage on a campaign — just ask 2004 presidential candidate John Kerry . However , flip-flops are n't uniformly harmful , as NPR 's Mara Liasson wrote in 2008 . Occasionally , a flip-flop can even be a positive — if not , ever-calculating politicians would n't commit this political sin so often .
Liasson pointed to William Safire 's New Political Dictionary , which acknowledges the potential upside of a flip-flop :
`` Although the term is always pejorative and brings an irate denial , a refusal to flip-flop in the light of changing circumstances can be a sign of rigidity ; a willingness to flip-flop is expressed by supporters as evidence of flexibility . ''
Should Trump overhaul his immigration policy , it would show he 's willing to gamble that that flexibility will draw in some Hispanics ( and perhaps moderate Republicans ) without scaring off his most loyal supporters .
Many Trump supporters would seem to be fans of at least some rigidity ( see : ever-present chants of `` build the wall '' ) . However , others say they not only want Trump to be flexible on his policies , but believe he already is quite flexible .
`` [ N ] ot everything Trump says is true — I mean , it 's not true like it 's in concrete , '' Nevada voter Judy Callahan told NPR 's Sarah McCammon recently . `` He said he would stop the border flow , he would build some kind of wall , and he would work on the people that are here . That 's all there is ; the rest of it 's kind of fluff . ''
Others said they assume his policy positions are merely starting points for a negotiation . This has been a popular theme among his voters , reported by other outlets , as well .
Trump seems to bank on some voters being OK with fuzzy positions ; as he told Time , `` My voters do n't care , and the public does n't care '' about specific policy proposals . He may not want to be saddled with the flip-flopper label , but he has indicated that he 's happy to shift his positions . And as he told ABC 's George Stephanopoulos on his shifting economic policy proposals , `` Sure , it 's a change . I 'm allowed to change . You need flexibility , George , whether it 's a tax plan , where you 're going — where you know you 're going to negotiate . ''
Trump has many , many flip-flops to his name , but he is n't alone in shifting positions ; Hillary Clinton has famously pulled a U-turn on the Asia trade deal , the Trans-Pacific Partnership , or TPP . She moved from supporting it years ago to saying she does n't support it in its current form . Many perceived that as a reaction to Bernie Sanders ' successful populist campaign . Making matters worse for Clinton , Virginia Gov . Terry McAuliffe ( a longtime Clinton associate ) suggested that she might change her position again ( though he later clarified that he does n't expect her position to change ) .
Should that happen , Clinton 's supporters likewise might not punish her — 55 percent of Clinton supporters say the deal would be a `` good thing '' for the U.S. , according to the Pew Research Center , compared with only 24 percent who say it would be a `` bad thing . ''
All of which is to say that Safire 's `` changing circumstances '' certainly seem capable of changing even a candidate 's most significant policy positions . And given the overhaul of Trump 's campaign leadership amid a persistent polling deficit , the Trump campaign has had plenty of `` changing circumstances '' this summer .