Despite Political Rhetoric , 'Anchor Babies ' Are Not Exactly Easy To Stop
GOP presidential candidates are falling over themselves to get on record with tough immigration plans . A string of them — Rand Paul , Chris Christie , Lindsey Graham , Scott Walker , Bobby Jindal and Rick Santorum — have spoken out in some form against birthright citizenship . That 's the idea that being born on U.S. soil , regardless of your parents ' legal status , automatically makes you a U.S. citizen .
Ben Carson went even further , saying he wants to secure the border — where he claims there are caves in which immigrants can hide — by using drones .
`` You look at some of these caves and things out there , one drone strike , boom , and they 're gone , '' Carson said .
When it comes to the issue of birthright citizenship , while some conservatives disagree , a lot of legal scholars believe it is settled law , enshrined in the 14th Amendment of the U.S. Constitution , and that it therefore would be fantastically difficult to overturn .
The flurry of tough positions on birthright citizenship is yet another sign of the power front-runner Donald Trump , with his inflammatory immigration rhetoric , has in the 2016 GOP race . The question for other Republicans is how to take tough — but still palatable for a general election — stances on the issue .
Both Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and former Florida Gov . Jeb Bush have defended birthright citizenship , but they have said more needs to be done about women who might come into the U.S. expressly to have children . It 's unclear exactly what they would — or could — actually do .
`` If there 's abuse , if people are bringing , pregnant women are coming in to have babies simply because they can do it , then there ought to be greater enforcement , '' Bush told conservative radio host Bill Bennett this week , as reported by Politico . `` That 's [ the ] legitimate side of this . Better enforcement so that you do n't have these , you know , 'anchor babies , ' as they 're described , coming into the country . ''
When pressed on his use of the phrase `` anchor babies , '' Bush defended it . `` If there 's another term that I come up with , I 'm happy to hear it , '' he said Thursday . ( Hillary Clinton jumped at the opportunity , tweeting , `` They 're called babies . '' )
Rubio told voters in Iowa this week , as reported by the Wall Street Journal , `` I 'm open to doing things that prevent people who deliberately come to the U.S. for purposes of taking advantage of the 14th Amendment , but I 'm not in favor of repealing it . ''
The problem is that it 's not certain exactly what the government could do to stop this from happening . ( Neither the Bush nor the Rubio campaign has responded to requests for comment from NPR . )
What the U.S. could do to prevent ( the few ) `` birth tourists ''
The closest thing to a law that could slow foreign women from having babies in the U.S. is that you ca n't lie about why you want a visa to the U.S. , said Muzaffar Chishti , director of the nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute 's office at New York University .
`` If you 're a Chinese woman coming to the U.S. as a tourist , you are making a representation to the U.S. government that I am coming to be a tourist , '' Chishti said . `` If it is established by a consular officer that the woman is not really coming for tourism , but is coming to deliver a baby , you can deny the visa . There 's no doubt about that . ''
But that 's tough to enforce under current regulations , says Mark Krikorian , executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies , a think tank that tends to advocate tighter immigration policies .
`` It 's not illegal [ for a foreign tourist to have a baby in the U.S. ] , though the State Department could put through regulation if they wanted to try to stop it , '' he says , for example , by more pointedly asking pregnant women if they 're coming simply to have a baby in the U.S .
This phenomenon of having a child on a tourist visa has come to be known as `` birth tourism , '' and many of the stories about it in the past few years have tended to center around women coming from China , where families are restricted in the number of children they can have .
In addition to asking more questions of pregnant women entering the country on tourist visas , likewise , Chishti said the government could crack down more on the clinics — or `` maternity hotels , '' as they are called — where these women routinely go to give birth .
Of course , that only applies to those who go through the visa process . The number of `` birth tourists '' may indeed be very small . Earlier this year , the Center on Immigration Studies , which favors more tightly monitoring `` birth tourism , '' estimated that there are 36,000 such women annually .
Stopping other immigrants from having children is a different story
But there are millions of people who entered the country illegally . Because the law did n't detect many of them when they came in , trying to stop them from having children is difficult , to say the least .
Likewise , millions of people came in legally but have overstayed their visas . Improving the entry-exit monitoring system could do a lot to bring down the number of people who are in the country illegally , Chishti said . But that does n't mean anything about their children .
`` To be sure , this recommendation applies to reducing the pool of unauthorized in general , '' he said , but `` does not specifically address the 'anchor babies ' phenomenon , because most likely mothers would deliver babies during their periods of authorized stay . ''
It 's also possible that trying to crack down on the birthright phenomenon simply means tightening existing laws and enforcement . Krikorian says that would have been a smarter answer to the birthright question for Bush and Rubio .
`` A better-thought-out , more humane response would have been , when we enforce immigration laws better , in general , there will be fewer people here to give birth who are not citizens or green card holders , '' he says . But as it stands , he adds , simply calling for better enforcement against these so-called `` anchor babies '' is , to him , a non-answer .
`` It 's their way of seeming responsive without supporting a change in our citizenship practices , '' he says .
So , how many children are born to illegal immigrants every year ?
There are no exact counts on the number of U.S. children with parents who are in the U.S. illegally , but some organizations have tried to count .
The Pew Research Center found in a 2012 report that around 5.5 percent of all K-12 students were U.S.-born citizens who also had at least one parent who was not authorized to be in the U.S . Still , many of those children may have one parent who is here legally .
The center also estimated in 2008 that 340,000 of the 4.3 million children born in the U.S. — not quite 8 percent — were born to immigrants who were in the U.S. illegally .
Those are rough estimates , but they suggest that while the so-called `` anchor baby '' population is relatively small , the practice of immigrants who are in the U.S. illegally having babies in the U.S. is a very real phenomenon .
And that puts candidates in the tough spot not only of deciding whether they think that 's a problem , but also if and how they could fix it .