One Border Patrol agent is dead and his partner left hospitalized in serious condition in the Big Bend Sector of Texas . The FBI is leading the investigation while Border Patrol Special Operations agents and Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) Air and Marine Operations aircrews are currently searching the area for possible attackers .
Breitbart Texas learned from a trusted CBP official that details on the matter are scarce .
We do know that two Border Patrol agents working as partners in the Van Horn Station area of responsibility of the Big Bend Sector responded to “ activity. ” Whether the activity was an activated sensor or something else is currently unknown . This occurred on the morning of Sunday , November 19 , 2017 .
One of the Border Patrol agents later radioed into the communication center saying that he needed assistance and that he was injured . Other Border Patrol agents responded and found one agent injured and unconscious with injuries to his head and body . That agent , Rogelio Martinez , was later pronounced dead . Breitbart has learned that the agent ’ s family has been notified .
The responding agents also found the partner who had radioed for help . The agents transported the injured agent to the hospital where he is in “ serious condition , ” according to the official .
Border Patrol agents and Culberson County Sheriff ’ s Office deputies secured the area .
Border Patrol Agent and President of the National Border Patrol Council ( NBPC ) Brandon Judd spoke with Breitbart Texas and expressed the council ’ s deepest condolences to the family of Agent Martinez and to the family of the other agent who is not named at this time . Agent Judd said that this is another example of why the border must be secured . Judd stated , “ When all facts come to light on this matter , I believe the public will be outraged as there are those who do not value life who come across our border . Our borders must be secured and criminals must be held accountable . ”
Ildefonso Ortiz is an award-winning journalist with Breitbart Texas . He co-founded the Cartel Chronicles project with Brandon Darby and Stephen K. Bannon . You can follow him on Twitter and on Facebook .