A final deal on a changing immigration laws is at hand but still incomplete , according to two of the bipartisan `` Gang of Eight '' senators collaborating on it .
On NBC 's Meet the Press on Sunday , Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York and Republican Sen. Jeff Flake of Arizona discussed a new agreement on a low-skilled worker program as a positive sign of progress , but both said there is more to be done .
That basic agreement was brokered Friday night between AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka and U.S. Chamber of Commerce chief Tom Donohue , clearing one of the last — and perhaps largest — hurdles between the Gang of Eight and a concrete immigration bill .
`` We 're much closer with labor and business agreeing on this guest-worker plan , '' Flake said . `` But that does n't mean we 've crossed every ' I ' or dotted every 'T ' or vice versa . ''
The debate between the AFL-CIO and the Chamber had centered on wages for workers in the hotel , food service and construction industries , among others . `` With the agreement between business and labor , every major policy issue has been resolved , '' Schumer said .
But Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida was more cautious with his optimism , as The Washington Post reports , calling the deal `` premature . ''
`` In order to succeed , this process can not be rushed or done in secret , '' said Rubio in a statement issued on Sunday .
Over the weekend , Rubio also sent a letter to the chairman of the Judiciary Committee , Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont , asking that the committee take its time with the bill 's markup .
The Associated Press cited an AFL-CIO fact sheet to describe the new `` W '' visa worker program , set to go into effect in April of 2015 .
`` In year one of the program , 20,000 workers would be allowed in ; in year two , 35,000 ; in year three , 55,000 ; and in year four , 75,000 . Ultimately the program would be capped at 200,000 workers a year , but the number of visas would fluctuate , depending on unemployment rates , job openings , employer demand and data collected by a new federal bureau pushed by the labor movement as an objective monitor of the market . One-third of all visas in any year would go to businesses with under 25 workers . `` A 'safety valve ' would allow employers to exceed the cap if they can show need and pay premium wages , but any additional workers brought in would be subtracted from the following year 's cap . `` The workers could move from employer to employer and would be able to petition for permanent residency after a year , and ultimately seek U.S. citizenship . Neither is possible for temporary workers now . ''
The senators are expected to present a bill the week of April 8 .