The legislation , which would be the first major immigration overhaul since President Ronald Reagan backed amnesty for illegal immigrants in 1986 , was drafted over the last several months by the so-called Gang of Eight , a bipartisan group of senators . It is largely in step with the president ’ s goals of offering a path to citizenship for the millions of illegal immigrants already in the country while tightening border security and expanding legal entry into the country for families and workers .
But no one expects the bill to pass the Senate without some modifications . Mr. Obama ’ s Republican allies on the issue — in particular Senators Marco Rubio of Florida , a member of the bipartisan group , and Tom Coburn of Oklahoma — warned last week that the president could lose their support without stronger efforts to secure the border , as well as other changes .
“ I ’ m trying to get to where I can say yes , ” Mr. Coburn said as senators prepared to clear the way for what could be weeks of debate in the full chamber . “ But the only way you can say yes and sell it to the American people is to know that the border is secure , and this bill doesn ’ t do it . ”
Mr. Obama will try to set the tone for the legislative fight with a speech at the White House on Tuesday . But the battle will quickly shift to the Capitol , where the biggest struggle may be over how far to go in securing America ’ s border with Mexico against illegal crossings .
White House officials say they expect Democrats will have to make compromises on border security by accepting some amendments that tighten enforcement . But they said Democrats would resist any amendments that significantly undermine the core of the bill — a certain path to citizenship for those already in the country .
“ We are willing to toughen up border — many of our colleagues feel that ’ s important — but without forsaking our principles , ” said Senator Charles E. Schumer , Democrat of New York and a member of the bipartisan group . He said border security demands must be reasonable “ so that if , God forbid , there ’ s a president in 2017 who hates immigration reform , it will still go forward . ”
Mr. Obama has stayed clear of personally directing the legislative process from the West Wing , on the theory that his participation would make it more difficult for Republicans to support it . But administration officials are working behind the scenes with allies from both parties in the Senate to provide technical support as they draft friendly amendments to the legislation . They are also helping lawmakers develop talking points and prepare side-by-side comparisons to help defeat efforts intended to undermine the bill .