Migrants from Honduras approach the U.S.-Mexico border fence in Tijuana , Mexico , December 26 , 2018 . ( Mohammed Salem/Reuters )
Open borders and sanctuary cities are blurring the distinction between illegal immigrants and Americans , and activist judges are eroding the Bill of Rights .
The American Founders institutionalized the best of a long Western tradition of representative government , with the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights . These contracts outlined the rare privileges and responsibilities of new American citizens .
Yet the concept of citizenship is being assaulted on the premodern side by the legal blending of mere residency with citizenship .
Estimates on the number of undocumented American residents range from 11 million to more than 20 million . The undocumented are becoming legally indistinguishable from citizens and enjoy exemption from federal immigration law in some 500 sanctuary jurisdictions . An illegal resident of California will pay substantially less tuition at a California public university than will a U.S. citizen of another state .
Multiculturalism has reduced the idea of e pluribus unum to a regressive tribalism . Americans often seem to owe their first allegiance to those who look like they do . Citizens can not even agree over once-hallowed and shared national holidays such as Christmas , Thanksgiving , and the Fourth of July .
It is eerie how such current American retribalization resembles the collapse of Rome , as Goths , Huns , and Vandals all squabbled among themselves over what was left of 1,200 years of Roman citizenship — eager to destroy what they could neither create nor emulate .
Citizenship has always been protected by the middle classes — on the idea that they are more independent and self-reliant than the poor but can stand up to the influence and power of the elite .
Yet until recently , we had seen a decade of stagnant wages and entire regions ossified by outsourcing , offshoring , and unfair global trade . Historically , with the demise of the middle class , the end of constitutional government follows .
But citizenship also faces a quite different and even greater postmodern threat .
Many of our coastal elites see nothing very exceptional in America , past and present . They prefer the culture and values of the European Union , without worrying that the EU ’ s progressive utopian promises have been wrecked by open borders , economically stultifying regulations , and unapologetic and anti-democratic efforts to curb free expression and local autonomy .
Often , such “ citizen of the world ” mentalities fuel shame over the origins and traditions of America . Transnational organizations and accords on climate , criminal justice , and human rights are seen as superior to their American counterparts .
A new progressive iconoclasm seeks to destroy statues , rename streets and buildings , and wipe away art that does not reflect more-global values .
Does voting — the bedrock right of the democratic citizen — matter that much anymore ? In California , tens of thousands of votes were “ harvested ” by paid campaign operatives . There was also abuse in state agencies in sending out voter-registration forms to those who were not legally entitled to vote .
Lone activist federal judges frequently overturn legislation and referenda they find contrary to their own political take or legal theory — without worrying that they are thereby canceling the votes of millions in a nanosecond .
Meanwhile , the proverbial “ swamp ” of the bureaucratic , administrative , and regulatory state is so vast and unaccountable that a few clerks can harass entrepreneurs ; issue edicts with the force of legislation that ruins lives ; and indict , regulate , or audit a targeted individual into legal bankruptcy .
In recent years , we have seen a cake maker , a video maker , and a national-security adviser so hounded by federal bureaucrats that they either were nearly bankrupted , ended up in jail , or were reduced to penury through legal costs .
We still have a Bill of Rights , but many of our constitutional protections are being rendered impotent . If a rural family can not find ammunition at the local Walmart or gun store because of organized boycotts and threats to such establishments , then the constitutional right to bear arms is not always exercisable in a practical sense .
Brett Kavanaugh was nominated , audited , and confirmed by the Senate as a Supreme Court justice . But if the New York Times and cable news can relentlessly charge without proof that nearly 40 years ago he was a teenage sexual pervert , then a distinguished judge can be rendered impotent without legal impeachment .
If a student can not safely express opposition to abortion on demand , question the global-warming narrative , or object to safe spaces , trigger warnings , and race-based theme houses on campuses , does it matter that in theory we still have a First Amendment ?
We are unwinding at both ends . Tribalism , the erosion of the middle class , and de facto open borders are turning Americans into mere residents of a particular North American region between Mexico and Canada .
Yet even more dangerously , thanks to the fiats of unelected bureaucrats and officials , along with the social-media lynch mobs who boycott , harass , and shame us , our constitutional rights are now increasingly optional . They mostly hinge on whether we are judged worthy by an unelected , politically correct , and morally righteous elite .
In theory , American citizenship remains the same ; in reality , it is disappearing fast .