CLOSE A federal judge on Tuesday night temporarily blocked the Trump administration ’ s decision to end a program protecting young immigrants from deportation . Time
PHOENIX — Young immigrants soon facing the loss of deportation protections and work permits received some stunning news Tuesday , when a federal judge temporarily blocked the Trump administration from ending a program that protected hundreds of thousands of undocumented immigrants brought to the U.S. as children .
The ruling by U.S. District Judge William Alsup ordered the Trump administration to resume allowing the `` DREAMers '' to renew their deportation protections and work permits under the program known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals . The news came as bipartisan members of Congress and the White House inched closer to hammering out a compromise solution before the program begins to be phased out on March 5 .
While happy that the program , which former president Barack Obama created in 2012 , will be allowed to continue , DREAMers now worry Congress will lose the urgency to pass legislation after months of foot dragging .
Jan. 9 : In extraordinary public negotiation with Congress , Trump promises to sign DACA bill
Jan. 8 : How Trump 's wall pledge is complicating a DACA bill for 'Dreamers '
`` The message to Congress is this is a small victory , but the urgency is still there because DACA protected 800,000 DREAMers but there is still 2 million who could qualify for protection under the DREAM Act , '' said Karina Ruiz , executive director of the Arizona Dream Act Coalition , a group that is pushing for a bill that would allow 2 million to 3 million DREAMers to apply for permanent legal residency and eventually citizenship .
In a statement Wednesday , White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said : “ We find this decision to be outrageous , especially in light of the President ’ s successful bipartisan meeting with House and Senate members at the White House on the same day . An issue of this magnitude must go through the normal legislative process . President Trump is committed to the rule of law , and will work with members of both parties to reach a permanent solution that corrects the unconstitutional actions taken by the last administration . ”
President Trump took to Twitter on Wednesday saying , `` It just shows everyone how broken and unfair our Court System is when the opposing side in a case ( such as DACA ) always runs to the 9th Circuit and almost always wins before being reversed by higher courts .
It just shows everyone how broken and unfair our Court System is when the opposing side in a case ( such as DACA ) always runs to the 9th Circuit and almost always wins before being reversed by higher courts . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 10 , 2018
In his ruling , Alsup granted a request by several plaintiffs including California , the University of California system , and several California cities , to block the Trump administration from phasing out DACA while their lawsuit challenging the termination plays out in court .
Alsup ordered that until a final judgment is reached , the program must continue and those already approved for DACA protections and work permits must be allowed to renew them before they expire .
DREAMers who have never received DACA protections , however , will not be allowed to apply , Alsup ordered .
Alsup said plaintiffs were likely to succeed on the legal merits of the lawsuit claiming that the Trump administration 's decision to end the program was `` arbitrary and capricious '' and based on a flawed legal premise .
CLOSE Pushing for compromise on immigration reform , President Donald Trump urged a bipartisan group of lawmakers gathered at the White House to put `` country before party '' and negotiate a deal in two phases , first by addressing young immigrants . ( Jan. 9 ) AP
Alsup also agreed that the plaintiffs would be harmed by the abrupt end of the DACA program — in part because of the economic disruptions and loss of tax revenues that would be caused by their sudden removal from the workforce .
Under the program , the Department of Homeland Security reversed the discretion to deport DACA recipients at any time , Alsup pointed out .
`` Nevertheless , DACA has provided recipients with a major benefit , namely work authorizations for a period of deferral upon a demonstration of economic need . This has allowed DACA recipients to become part of a mainstream workforce and contribute openly to our economy , ” Alsup wrote .
On Sept. 5 , Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced that the DACA program would be phased out as of March 5 , calling the program an illegal circumvention of immigration law enacted by the Obama administration .
Trump then called on Congress to come up with a permanent solution to protect Dreamers by March 5 . DACA recipients whose permits expired before March 5 were given until Oct. 5 to apply for renewal .
Jan. 8 : In reversal , anti-immigration groups are open to deal to let 800,000 DREAMers stay
Jan. 5 : Each day , 120 'dreamers ' lose protection from deportation
In all , about 800,000 DREAMers were approved for DACA protections since the program started accepting applications in August 2012 . But as of Sept. 5 , about 689,800 DREAMers were enrolled in the program , with all of them facing the loss of DACA protections and work permits by the end of September 2019 , unless Congress acts .
In a written statement , Department of Justice spokesman Devin O'Malley defended the Trump administration 's decision to end the program , reiterating that it was an `` unlawful circumvention of Congress . ''
`` The Justice Department will continue to vigorously defend this position , and looks forward to vindicating its position in further litigation , '' O'Malley said .
Dreamers , meanwhile , said they expect the Justice Department will quickly appeal Tuesday 's court order , further throwing their lives into turmoil .
`` The Court ’ s decisions is a powerful recognition that the lives of undocumented youth should not hang in limbo , '' Erika Andiola , a DREAMer with the Fight for Our Dream organization said in a written statement .
She called on Congress to pass the DREAM Act along with a spending bill Congress must pass by Jan. 19 to avoid a government shutdown .
`` We need permanent protection , and we do not want to be at the whim of a back and forth legal strategy , '' she said .
DACA recipients are commonly referred to as DREAMers , based on never-passed proposals in Congress called the DREAM Act that would have provided similar protections for young immigrants .
Contributing : The Associated Press . Follow Daniel González on Twitter : @ azdangonzalez