Atlanta ( CNN ) - While troubles over health care and immigration continue to dog the Obama administration , Vice President Joe Biden addressed a friendly crowd Thursday , delivering the keynote speech at a naturalization ceremony .
In his remarks , Biden strongly condemned House Speaker John Boehner ’ s comments about immigration bill that passed the Senate earlier this year . On Wednesday , Boehner said the House had `` no intention '' of voting on the bill .
Biden said that he was `` extremely disappointed that Speaker of the House of Representatives announced yesterday that he will not allow the process to work , he will not allow the House to play by fair play , the American way , and let Congress actually vote their conscience to fix a broken system , '' calling it a `` step backward in the history of the country . ''
Making his case in front of 104 naturalized citizens and their families at the Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change in Atlanta , Biden encouraged the new citizens to help the other 11 million undocumented immigrants living in the United States .
`` Do n't pull up the ladder behind you when you come on board ... there are millions of people who are already acting as decent Americans that deserve a chance , that deserve a path , to earn their way ... so reach back , help as you move on , and do n't be afraid . ''
With immigration reform talks at a standstill and the fate of undocumented immigrants hanging in the balance , it is unclear what President Obama could do if the bill dies . In 2012 , the President stopped the deportation of undocumented minors under a deferred action program .
The House is in session 14 days between now and the end of the year , and the third-ranking House Republican , GOP Whip Kevin McCarthy , says there simply is n't enough time for the bill to be considered .
Biden thanked the new citizens for `` picking us , '' and got big laughs from the audience when telling a story about his Irish-Catholic mother and one of her quintessentially American beliefs .
When Biden was on his way to meeting the Queen of England for the first time , his mother told him to not bow or kiss the Queen 's ring , because `` Joey , nobody is better than you , '' and you 're not better than anybody else .
In closing , Biden pledged to let undocumented immigrants `` out of the shadows , '' saying `` they all came for the promise of a better life , and they 're incredibly capable of contributing , and many are already contributing . ''