At a boisterous rally to celebrate his granting of legal status to millions of illegal immigrants , President Obama said Friday that his action won ’ t apply to new undocumented immigrants because “ borders mean something . ”
“ Let ’ s be clear about what this deal is , and what it isn ’ t , ” Mr. Obama said at Del Sol High School in Las Vegas . “ This action doesn ’ t apply to anybody who ’ s come to this country recently . You can ’ t show up for a week and then suddenly apply . You can ’ t , because borders mean something . It doesn ’ t apply to anybody who might come illegally in the future . ”
As he did in his address to the nation Thursday night , Mr. Obama dared congressional Republicans to pass a comprehensive immigration bill , which he said would nullify his executive actions . He rejected the argument by the GOP that his move has made it more difficult to pass such a bill because he has “ poisoned the well ” with Republicans .
“ I understand that some of them are already saying that my actions sabotage their ability to pass a bill and make immigration work better , ” Mr. Obama said , laughing . “ Why ? I didn ’ t dissolve Parliament . That ’ s not how our system works . I don ’ t have a vote in Congress . Pass a bill . You don ’ t need me to a pass a bill . ”
The president signed two documents Friday directing federal agencies to carry out his executive actions , which include shielding more immigrants from possible deportation and focusing deportations more on people with criminal records .
Republicans in Congress who vehemently oppose Mr. Obama ’ s action say it will encourage more illegal immigrants to come to the U.S . There was a surge of illegal child immigrants across the U.S.-Mexico border earlier this year , in part due to the belief that they would not be returned to their homes in Central America .
Outside the high school , protesters of the president ’ s actions held signs that said “ Impeach Obama ” and “ No Amnesty. ” Some chanted , “ Worst president ever , Obama ! ”
The president was interrupted at the rally several times with joyous chants of “ Si Se Puede ” ( Yes We Can ) , a throwback to his presidential campaigns . He was also heckled at one point by a young man who apparently was complaining that the president ’ s action did not include enough illegal immigrants , such as parents of children who have already received protection from deportation by Mr. Obama .
“ We ’ re still going to have to do more work , ” Mr. Obama told the heckler , referring to the need to pass a comprehensive immigration reform bill in Congress . When the young man persisted in his shouting , the president said , “ I ’ ve heard you , young man . I ’ ve been respectful to you ; I want you to be respectful to me . ”
Astrid Silva , a woman who qualified for Mr. Obama ’ s deferred action plan because she came to the U.S. illegally as a child , introduced the president to the crowd . She criticized inaction by the GOP on immigration , saying “ House Republicans have refused to help me keep my dreams alive . ”
The president said some Americans are unfairly associating his action as only applying to Hispanic immigrants .
“ Not everybody who comes here is Latino , ” Mr. Obama said . “ I ’ m from Chicago . We ’ ve got some Irish immigrants whose papers are not in order . We ’ ve got some Polish immigrants whose papers are not in order . This is not just a Latino issue . This is an American issue . ”
Mr. Obama also said that his legal advisers told him that his authority was limited on immigration .
“ Not everything that we want to do , we can do , ” he said . “ We should be creating new programs for farm workers . We should be adding visas for the high-tech sector . We should be creating a pathway to citizenship . But only Congress can do that . ”
The president said he received many letters from Americans urging him not to take these actions .
“ There are folks who are good , decent people who are worried about immigration , ” he said . “ They ’ re worried that it changes the fabric of our country . They ’ re worried about whether immigrants take jobs from hard-working Americans . And they ’ re worried because they ’ re feeling a lot of economic stress and they feel as if maybe they ’ re the ones paying taxes and nobody else is taking responsibility . So they ’ ve urged me not to act . And I hear them , and I understand them . ”
But Mr. Obama said he also received messages from people “ reminding me why we had to act . ”
“ From American family members of hard-working immigrants who fear their families could be torn apart , ” he said . “ From dreamers , who had proudly stepped out of the shadows and were willing to live without fear , even though it was a big risk for them . From Republicans , who don ’ t agree with me on anything but are tired of their party refusing to vote on reform .
“ We didn ’ t raise the Statue of Liberty with her back to the world . We did it with her light shining as a beacon to the world , ” he said .