WASHINGTON—The Supreme Court on Thursday held that federal law authorizes courts to strip immigrant citizens of their U.S. citizenship if they obtained it as a result of making false statements to the federal government .
Federal law found at 18 U.S.C . § 1425 ( a ) makes it a crime to “ knowingly procur [ e ] , contrary to law , the naturalization of any person ” to become a U.S. citizen . ( “ Naturalization ” is the legal term for becoming a citizen . ) Moreover , a second federal statute , 8 U.S.C . § 1451 ( e ) adds that a foreigner who obtains U.S. citizenship through such a violation will lose that newly granted citizenship .
Divna Maslenjak is a Serb who , along with her husband and two children , sought refugee status in 1998 to flee Bosnia . As part of seeking protected status , she swore under oath that the family feared persecution because her husband evaded military service . They were admitted to the United States in 2000 as refugees .
In 2006 , she applied for U.S. citizenship . One question on her application asked if she had ever given “ false or misleading information ” while applying for immigration benefits . Another asked if she had “ lied … to gain entry or admission ” in this country . She answered “ no ” to both and became an American citizen in 2007 .
Those answers were false . Her husband had served in the Bosnian Serb Army . A third federal statute , 18 U.S.C . § 1015 ( a ) , criminalizes making a false sworn statement during naturalization . The U.S. government argued that her statement violating § 1015 ( a ) also counts as a violation of § 1425 ( a ) , which meant she must lose her citizenship under § 1451 ( e ) .
A judge on the federal district court accepted that argument and stripped Maslenjak of her citizenship . The Sixth Circuit appeals court affirmed .
In an opinion written by Justice Elena Kagan , the Supreme Court in Maslenjak v. United States vacated ( i.e. , set aside ) the lower court ’ s decision and remanded the case back down for more proceedings .
The federal government had argued that the citizenship-stripping provision is triggered whenever an immigrant commits a crime during the process of seeking citizenship .
All nine justices rejected that argument . “ The most natural understanding is that the illegal act must have somehow contributed to the obtaining of citizenship , ” Justice Kagan wrote . In other words , “ § 1425 ( a ) demands a means-ends connection between a legal violation and naturalization . ”
“ We hold that the Government must establish that an illegal act by the defendant played some role in her acquisition of citizenship , ” the Court declared . “ When the illegal act is a false statement , that means demonstrating that the defendant lied about facts that would have mattered to an immigration official . ”
The Court concluded that the contrary instructions given to the jury were faulty and that , instead , the jury should have been told that they needed to decide the factual question of whether Maslenjak ’ s lying about her husband ’ s military service was part of the cause of obtaining her own citizenship .
The majority vacated the lower court ’ s decision and remanded back to the trial court for a new jury proceeding where a correct explanation of the law would be provided to the jury .
Justice Neil Gorsuch wrote a decision concurring in part , joined by Justice Clarence Thomas . Justice Gorsuch wrote that the majority created a framework that was too elaborate , consisting of two complex tests with multiple parts . These new tests focus on causation , which was not the focus of the parties ’ legal briefs or oral arguments .
Respectfully , it seems to me at least reasonably possible that the crucible of adversarial testing on which we depend , along with the experience of our thoughtful colleagues on the district and circuit benches , could yield insights ( or reveal pitfalls ) we can not muster guided only by our own lights .
Justice Gorsuch added that he believes the Supreme Court should send the case back down with a less-elaborate holding , and allow the lower courts to flesh out additional details as necessary over time . After a period of trial and error , the Supreme Court could then in future cases review aspects of those legal interpretations .
“ This Court often speaks most wisely when it speaks last , ” he concluded .
Justice Samuel Alito also wrote a separate opinion concurring in the judgment , writing that when it comes to false statements , the immigration statute is violated when a person says something that is “ material ” to the naturalization process of obtaining citizenship . But contrary to the Court ’ s majority , Justice Alito believes that the statement need not actually be part of the cause of obtaining citizenship .
Ken Klukowski is senior legal editor for ███ . Follow him on Twitter @ kenklukowski .