CLOSE The White House sent a list of immigration policy demands to Congress that President Trump says must be included in legislation addressing `` Dreamers . '' Video provided by Newsy Newslook
WASHINGTON — The White House sent a long list of demands for immigration legislation to Capitol Hill on Sunday , including building a border wall , hiring thousands of border guards and expanding the use of electronic employment verification systems .
President Trump said his list of proposals `` must be included '' as part of any legislation addressing the status of immigrants who came to the United States illegally as children , and whose deportations were deferred by the Obama administration .
`` Without these reforms , illegal immigration and chain migration , which severely and unfairly burden American workers and taxpayers , will continue without end , '' Trump said in a letter to lawmakers .
The proposal represented a return to the hard-line stance on immigration that Trump championed during last year 's presidential campaign , seemingly pulling back the olive branch he extended to Democratic leaders just three weeks ago . Then , Trump suggested he would be willing to extend legal protection to DREAMers first and `` the wall will come later . ''
More : Deal , no deal , back to deal : Trump says ‘ fairly close ’ to agreement with Congress protecting DREAMers
Indeed , Democratic leaders rejected the demands Sunday , saying it shows the administration `` ca n't be serious about compromise . ''
“ We told the president at our meeting that we were open to reasonable border security measures alongside the DREAM Act , but this list goes so far beyond what is reasonable , '' said a joint statement Rep. Nancy Pelosi and Sen. Chuck Schumer , the House and Senate minority leaders .
“ The list includes the wall , which was explicitly ruled out of the negotiations . If the president was serious about protecting the DREAMers , his staff has not made a good faith effort to do so , '' they said .
The DREAM Act would give permanent legal status — and a path to citizenship — for people who arrived in the United States illegally as children .
Trump re-ignited the debate over DREAMers last month when he rescinded the Obama-era program known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA , which used executive action to give them quasi-legal status . DACA recipients who had renewed their status by last week would get a six-month grace period before deportation in order to give Congress time to work out a permanent fix .
More : Tens of thousands of immigrants may miss deadline for extending DACA protections
The White House plan contains 18 specific policy areas that Trump would like to see in a bill , but childhood arrivals were not part spelled out as one of them . `` We 're asking that these reforms be included in any legislation concerning the status of DACA recipients , '' said White House legislative director Marc Short , noting that some immigrants remaining in the United States under DACA are now as old as 36 .
Instead , the White House list includes longstanding demands of the Republican Party 's immigration hardliners , including expediting removals of unaccompanied children arriving at the border ; tightening standards for people allowed to seek asylum in the U.S. ; barring immigrants who have been convicted of a range of crimes , including drunk driving ; and barring federal grants to so-called `` sanctuary cities '' that do not turn over illegal immigrants to federal authorities .
Speaking to reporters in a conference call Sunday night , Trump administration officials insisted that the proposals came from officials at immigration enforcement agencies .
`` My experience tells me we will not stop illegal immigration unless we end the pull factors that drive it , '' said Tom Homan , the acting director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement . If there are no consequences for entering the country illegally or overstaying a visa , he said , `` then there is no integrity in the system . ''
More : Tens of thousands of immigrants may miss deadline for extending DACA protections
More : Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley : Border enforcement must be enhanced , but ' I don ’ t mean a wall '
More : Trump , top Dems discuss future of DACA . Here 's what NJ Dreamers have to say