Navigating self-interest , ideals , and public opinion in the debate about illegal immigration
Activists portray illegal immigration solely as a human story of the desperately poor from south of the border fleeing misery to start new , productive lives in the U.S. — despite exploitation and America ’ s nativist immigration laws .
But the truth is always more complex — and can reveal self-interested as well as idealistic parties .
Employers have long sought to undercut the wages of the American underclass by preference for cheaper imported labor . The upper-middle classes have developed aristocratic ideas of hiring inexpensive “ help ” to relieve them of domestic chores .
The Mexican government keeps taxes low on its elite in part by exporting , rather than helping , its own poor . It causes little worry that some $ 25 billion in remittances sent from Mexican citizens working in America puts hardship on those expatriates , who are often subsidized by generous U.S. social services .
Mexico City rarely welcomes a heartfelt discussion about why its citizens flee Mexican exploitation and apparently have no wish to return home . Nor does Mexico City publicize its own stern approaches to immigration enforcement along its southern border — or its ethnocentric approach to all immigration ( not wanting to impair “ the equilibrium of national demographics ” ) that is institutionalized in Mexico ’ s constitution .
The Democratic party is also invested in illegal immigration , worried that its current agendas can not win in the Electoral College without new constituents who appreciate liberal support for open borders and generous social services .
In contrast , classically liberal , meritocratic , and ethnically diverse immigration might result in a disparate , politically unpredictable set of immigrants .
La Raza groups take it for granted that influxes of undocumented immigrants fuel the numbers of unassimilated supporters . Measured and lawful immigration , along with rapid assimilation , melt away ethnic-based constituencies .
Immigration activists often fault the U.S. as historically racist and colonialist while insisting that millions of foreigners have an innate right to enter illegally and reside in such a supposedly dreadful place .
Undocumented immigrants themselves are not unaware that their own illegal entry , in self-interested fashion , crowds out legal immigrants who often wait years to enter the U.S .
Increased demands on social services often affect Mexican-American communities the most grievously — a fact that explains why sizable numbers of Latinos support border enforcement .
What does all this complexity mean for the Trump administration ’ s plans to return to the enforcement of existing immigration statutes ?
There is one red line to Trump immigration policies that otherwise are widely supported .
Most Americans want the border enforced . And , depending on how the question is worded , most voters likewise favor the completion of a wall on the southern border and an end to all illegal immigration .
There is little public support for sanctuary cities . They are seen as a form of neo-Confederate nullification — insurrectionary and unsustainable in a republic of laws .
Where controversy arises is over the more difficult question of the fate of at least 11 million foreign nationals currently residing illegally in the U.S .
Most Americans agree that if such immigrants are able-bodied but have no work history and are on public support , have just arrived hoping for amnesty , or have committed crimes in the U.S. , they should be deported to their countries of origin . Nearly 1 million such people were already facing pre-Trump government removal orders .
Yet for those undocumented immigrants who are working , crime-free , and have established residence , the Trump administration will learn that the public supports some sort of accommodation that might lead to a fine , followed by the opportunity to apply for a green card .
Given those realities , the next immigration fault line will hinge on the definition of a “ crime . ”
Rural or inner-city poor American citizens would go to jail for identity theft or lying on state and federal documents .
For most Americans , identity theft , falsification of government affidavits , or trafficking in fraudulent Social Security numbers are the sort of violations that would end their own careers and unwind the very cohesiveness of government .
Rural or inner-city poor American citizens would go to jail for identity theft or lying on state and federal documents . Yet immigration activists sometimes seek to downplay these sorts of crimes as simply inherent in the desperate plight of the immigrant .
In sum , after the border is closed , and as long as the Trump administration does not summarily deport employed , crime-free , undocumented immigrants who have lived here for years , its reform agenda will quickly win the debate and at last return immigration to a legal enterprise .
In turn , Trump opponents will discover that while a small percentage of the undocumented have committed violent crimes , a far larger percentage than is commonly reported may have committed identity theft or falsified government documents .
Arguing to Americans that these are neither real crimes nor deportable offenses will prove no more a winning message for Trump ’ s critics than would deporting productive and law-abiding residents who entered the U.S. illegally win support for Trump himself .