Marco Rubio , the freshman senator from Florida and perhaps a Republican candidate for president in 2016 , declares that “ 95 , 96 percent of the [ Senate immigration ] bill is in perfect shape and ready to go. ” Mr. Rubio ’ s assessment raises two questions : 95 percent or 96 percent perfect to whom ? And ready to go where ?
Conceived in secrecy and operating in concert with the White House , the Gang of Eight is neither diverse nor representative of America . Sacrificing transparency to expediency , the Gang excluded 92 percent of senators — and the citizens they represent — from its proceedings . Gang members agreed to provide citizenship to virtually anyone present in the United States in exchange for additional promises of future enforcement . Negotiated by Big Labor , Big Business and other special interests , the Gang ’ s 1,000-plus-page bill reflects its unrepresentative origins .
Senate committee consideration has done little to inspire public confidence . The Senate Judiciary Committee conducted two pro forma legislative hearings on April 22 and 23 . Betraying his reputation for fairness , Judiciary Chairman Patrick J. Leahy , Vermont Democrat , invited groups to testify on behalf of those who violate U.S. immigration law but excluded representatives of federal law enforcement officers who have sworn an oath — and died — to defend it . This anomaly precluded objective appraisal of the bill ’ s merits and prompted Immigration and Customs Enforcement union President Chris Crane to state : “ Never before have I seen such contempt for law enforcement officers as what I ’ ve seen from the Gang of Eight . ”
The Senate Judiciary Committee legislative markup of the Gang ’ s bill was a procedural formality . Broadly popular , common-sense amendments to strengthen enforcement and border security were not considered on the merits . Rather , amendment sponsors were personally derided — often by Gang members with seats on the committee — as obstructionists bent on dismantling the Gang ’ s selfless solidarity . Gang commitments crumbled as “ getting something done ” took precedence over “ getting it right. ” The product that emerged ignored the views of the special interest that should matter most : the American people .
Senate floor consideration raised additional process concerns . Supported by 70 percent of Americans , the border-security-first amendment from Sen. Chuck Grassley , Iowa Republican — which Mr. Rubio and other Gang members once touted as a precondition for their support — was quashed as a “ poison pill ” by Majority Leader Harry Reid . Authorization to complete a border fence that Congress approved seven years ago was defeated . The administration ’ s badly diminished credibility and Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. ’ s April 24 statement that awarding citizenship to unlawful immigrants is a “ matter of civil and human rights ” render future enforcement commitments uncertain . A recent Congressional Budget Office finding that the Gang ’ s bill will decrease illegal immigration by merely 25 percent from current levels added new urgency to prompt Senate passage .
Violating prior commitments and reprising methods utilized to pass “ Obamacare , ” public scrutiny and informed deliberation are now viewed as mortal threats to the Gang ’ s bill . Last-minute deus ex machina amendments supporting a “ surge ” of agents to patrol a vast , porous and unsecured border have not assuaged growing doubts about the Gang ’ s bill , but reinforced the desperation of its supporters . It is hard to envision how a bill conceived , considered and ratified in these circumstances can be considered “ 95 , 96 percent perfect . ”
Senators who vote for final passage won ’ t confer legitimacy to the Gang ’ s bill ; they will be stained by it .
If the Gang ’ s bill clears the Senate , it will do so only with a majority of majority Democratic senators . It will then head to the House , where it emphatically won ’ t “ be ready to go. ” Following the unparliamentary manner in which Obamacare cleared Congress , House leadership will ensure that immigration measures are considered under regular order to avoid alienating voters who returned control of the House to the GOP in 2010 . Speaker John A. Boehner won ’ t commandeer immigration matters from the Judiciary and Homeland Security committees . Both chairmen wisely reversed the Gang ’ s “ top-down ” Procrustean approach by focusing on areas of broad bipartisan agreement — like the need for more highly skilled workers , employment verification and enhanced border security measures . If immigration proposals pass the House , the speaker will appoint conferees reflecting the House majority to resolve outstanding differences with the Senate . Given the complexity of issues presented , the House-Senate conference won ’ t conclude quickly , nor should it . Members must be provided an opportunity to consult with their constituents over the August recess before casting votes on any House-Senate conference report .
Our Founders established a bicameral Congress to best effectuate the will of the American people . The legislative process is deliberately deliberative . Senate consideration of the Gang ’ s immigration bill not only belies its self-designation as the “ world ’ s greatest deliberative body , ” it compels the House to consider immigration legislation with the openness and even-handedness the Senate has failed to exercise . It now falls to Mr. Boehner and the People ’ s House to give voice to those the upper body has deliberately disregarded .
Robert N. Tracci served as counsel , chief legislative counsel and parliamentarian to the House Judiciary Committee from 2000 to 2006 , as deputy assistant to the U.S. attorney general from 2007 to 2008 , and special assistant U.S. attorney from 2009 to 2012 .