California Gov . Jerry Brown has agreed to send 400 National Guard troops to the US-Mexico border at President Donald Trump 's request ; however , he made it clear they will be focusing on combating drug crime – not immigration .
The liberal Democrat explained he 'll be stationing the troops not just at the border but along the coast or elsewhere statewide , noting that the move was aimed at fighting transnational criminal gangs and drug and firearms smugglers .
`` Let 's be crystal clear on the scope of this mission , '' he wrote in a letter addressed to Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen and Defense Secretary James Mattis . `` This will not be a mission to build a new wall . ''
`` It will not be a mission to round up women and children or detain people escaping violence and seeking a better life , '' he continued . `` And the California National Guard will not be enforcing federal immigration laws . ''
Brown 's words come in response to Trump 's memorandum last week ordering Homeland Security and the Pentagon to come up with a strategy to tighten security along America 's southern border .
`` The security of the United States is imperiled by a drastic surge of illegal activity on the southern border , '' the memo states . `` The combination of illegal drugs , dangerous gang activity , and extensive illegal immigration not only threatens our safety but also undermines the rule of law . ''
But Brown dismissed the notion that the border was under any real threat from an influx of immigrants .
`` Here are the facts , '' he wrote . `` There is no massive wave of migrants pouring into California . Overall immigrant apprehensions on the border last year were as low as they 've been in nearly 50 years ( and 85 percent of the apprehensions occurred outside of California ) . ''
Critics , however , were not happy with his decision , saying Brown sending troops just boosted Trump 's agenda .
`` If he 's in disagreement with Donald Trump about the justifications for having the National Guard on the border , then why would he accept it ? '' asked Pedro Rios , director for the American Friends Service Committee 's US-Mexico border program in San Diego .
This is not the first time California has taken such action . The state deployed troops to the border under Presidents George W. Bush in 2006 and Barack Obama in 2010 .