Texas Senator Ted Cruz is expressing doubt when it comes to serious border security measures in the Gang of 8 illegal immigration overhaul . Yesterday during a hearing on Capitol Hill , Cruz questioned Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano about the objective metrics used to assess border security and found her answers to be less than satisfactory .
“ We must have a clear definition of what metrics must be reached in order for the border to be secure . I am not satisfied with answers offered at today ’ s hearing , as it remains unclear how the provisions in this bill will help achieve a secure border , '' Cruz said in a statement after the hearing Tuesday . “ As it stands , the border security component – which numbers only 58 pages of the 844-page bill – largely cedes authority to the Department of Homeland Security to determine when and how the border would be secured . However , today 's hearing revealed that the last clear metric for border security - 'operational control ' - reflected that in 2010 , DHS had secured 873 miles of the more than 2,000 mile border . When that metric did not demonstrate success , DHS decided to simply abandon the metric . In order for a metric to be real , it must be meaningful . Currently , there are no objective metrics in place to ensure any triggers in this bill will be meaningful , all while the pathway to citizenship component remains contingent on this undefined border security . ”
Meanwhile Senator Marco Rubio , a member of the Gang of 8 , warned yesterday in an op-ed against passing a bill solely focused on enforcement .
`` Passing a law that only focuses on modernization and enforcement and leaves for another day the issue of those here illegally is not a good idea . Because as the enforcement measures kick in , millions of people living here illegally will be unable to work and provide for themselves and their families . The resulting humanitarian impact will then force us to scramble to address it . It is better to address it now as part of an orderly and measured process . ''
The Gang of 8 bill is set for mark-up in May .