The chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee introduced amendments Tuesday to grant gay couples the same immigration rights as other married couples , setting up a key hurdle for the immigration bill .
Amendments were due Tuesday if they were to be part of the debate that begins Thursday in the Judiciary Committee . The dozens of changes filed by senators signal a bloody fight ahead as some Democrats seek to make the bill more generous , some Republicans seek a deeper crackdown , and the legislation ’ s sponsors try to hold a tenuous center .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , an Alabama Republican who has taken the lead in fighting to stop the bill , introduced 49 amendments , including limiting the overall level of legal immigration allowed under the bill , or requiring the full 700 miles of reinforced fencing Congress called for back in 2006 , but which was only partially built .
And Sen. Chuck Grassley , the ranking Republican on the committee , introduced 77 amendments .
The gay rights fight already is getting attention as a major sticking point because it will put majority Democrats on the spot .
Sen. Patrick J. Leahy , the committee chairman , introduced two different versions : One would apply to “ permanent partners , ” which critics said could invite widespread fraud . The other would only apply to same-sex couples who are legally married , which given the laws in various states would dramatically limit who could qualify .
SEE ALSO : Report : Legalizing illegal immigrants to cost $ 6.3 trillion
“ For immigration reform to be truly comprehensive , it must include protections for all families , ” the Vermont Democrat said . “ We must end the discrimination that gay and lesbian families face in our immigration law . ”
His amendment , though , will test Democrats who want to see a bill pass but also want to expand it .
The eight senators — four Democrats and four Republicans — who wrote the bill now must decide how they will approach the amendments .
In 2007 , the last time the Senate debated a bill , the sponsors had a deal to oppose all major amendments and to try to keep the basic agreement intact . But that tactic failed as Democrats attached an amendment limiting the size of a future guest-worker program . The bill collapsed under opposition from both ends of the political spectrum .
As of Tuesday evening , the Judiciary Committee had posted 130 amendments from six members of the committee — and that didn ’ t include Mr. Sessions ’ 49 amendments , nor those of 11 other committee members .
The sheer weight of those amendments presages a long fight in committee before the bill even reaches the floor .
Republicans still felt the entire debate was rushed , given that the final version of the main 867-page bill was introduced just last week .
“ Unfortunately , members of the Senate Judiciary Committee have had less time to review this nearly 1,000-page bill than the special interests who wrote it behind closed doors , ” Mr . Sessions said .
He said the bill falls short of the promises its sponsors made to build a border fence , to have illegal immigrants pay back taxes and to prevent them from gaining public benefits .
The crux of the Senate bill is a deal to offer illegal immigrants quick legal status , but to withhold a full pathway to citizenship until the Homeland Security Department makes strides on border security and interior enforcement .