U.S. Border Patrol personnel take illegal immigrants from Honduras into custody in Falfurrias , Texas , June 19 , 2018 . ( Adrees Latif/Reuters )
A new Yale study has concluded that the population of undocumented immigrants in the U.S. is close to double the generally accepted estimate .
The population of undocumented immigrants is widely thought to be around 11.3 million . But the study , which was conducted by three Yale-affiliated researchers , indicates that the total may be more than 22 million . Even the authors were surprised by their findings .
“ Our original idea was just to do a sanity check on the existing number , ” said one of the study ’ s authors , Edward Kaplan , a professor of operations research at the Yale School of Management . “ Instead of a number which was smaller , we got a number that was 50 percent higher . That caused us to scratch our heads . ”
“ There ’ s a number that everybody quotes , but when you actually dig down and say , ‘ What is it based on ? ’ You find it ’ s based on one very specific survey and possibly an approach that has some difficulties . So we went in and just took a very different approach , ” said another of the study ’ s authors , Jonathan Feinstein , a professor of Economics and Management .
To arrive at their estimate , the authors used operational data such as deportations and visa overstays as well as demographic data such as death rates and immigration rates .
“ We combined these data using a demographic model that follows a very simple logic , ” Kaplan said . “ The population today is equal to the initial population plus everyone who came in minus everyone who went out . It ’ s that simple . ”
“ The analysis we ’ ve done can be thought of as estimating the size of a hidden population , ” he added . “ People who are undocumented immigrants are not walking around with labels on their foreheads . . . . There are very few numbers we can point to and say , ‘ This is carved in stone . ' ”
The researchers said their goal in crunching the numbers was not a political one .
“ We wouldn ’ t want people to walk away from this research thinking that suddenly there ’ s a large influx happening now , ” Feinstein commented . “ It ’ s really something that happened in the past and maybe was not properly counted or documented . ”