Members of the “ Gang of Eight ” tasked with carving out a comprehensive immigration package said Wednesday that they hope to file a bill when they return to Washington from their Easter break , and suggested that they are on the verge of a deal between business and labor leaders on visas for low-skilled workers .
The high-profile immigration talks stalled out last week when the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the AFL-CIO failed to agree on the details of a proposed guest-worker program , a snag that has bogged down ongoing negotiations .
But after touring the border on Wednesday , Democrats Sens . Charles E. Schumer of New York and Michael F. Bennet of Colorado , as well as Sens . John McCain and Jeff Flake , both Arizona Republicans , sounded optimistic about their chances of filing a bill next month .
“ Bottom line , we ’ re very close , ” Mr. Schumer told reporters . “ I ’ d say we ’ re 90 percent there . We have a few little problems , we ’ ve been on the phone all day with our four other colleagues . ”
The group also includes Republican Sens . Marco Rubio of Florida and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina , and Democratic Sens . Richard J. Durbin of Illinois and Robert Menendez of New Jersey .
They are working to convince the public and lawmakers to get on board with their plan , which grants a legal status to the nation ’ s estimated 11 million illegal immigrants on Day One , but requires the border be deemed secure before anybody living here illegally gets a pathway to citizenship .
The biggest hurdle , though , has been bridging the divide between business and labor leaders over the details of how best to revamp the nation ’ s guest-worker program — a fight that also helped derail comprehensive immigration reform in 2007 .
The senators had hoped to hammer out those differences and roll out their proposal before their two-week break , and they appeared to be on track to meet their self-imposed deadline .
But the talks broke down when the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the AFL-CIO knocked heads over how much workers would be paid as part of a proposed new visa program that would bring as many as 200,000 lower-skilled workers into the country each year .
Mr. McCain said the final product likely will be a tough pill for a lot of people to swallow .
“ Nobody is going to be totally happy with this legislation , no one will be because we have to make compromises , ” Mr. McCain said .
The trip also provided the senators with a firm reminder of the magnitude of the legislative challenges before them , as well as the difficulty involved in securing the border , when they watched a woman during a tour of the Mexican border scale over a fence .
“ Just witnessed a woman successfully climb an 18-ft bollard fence a few yards from us in , ” Mr. McCain said via Twitter . “ Border Patrol successfully apprehended her , but incident is another reminder that threats to our border security are real . ”
Mr. Schumer said the overall experience of going to the border for the first time will help him educate his colleagues , and sell them on their plan .
“ You can read and you can study and you can talk but until you see things it doesn ’ t change reality , ” Mr. Schumer said . “ I ’ ll be able to explain it to my colleagues . Many of my colleagues say , ‘ Why do we need to do anything more on the border ? ’ and we do . ”
Sen. Jeff Sessions , Alabama Republican and a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee , warned Wednesday against rushing an immigration bill through the Senate . He said Judiciary Chairman Patrick J. Leahy , Vermont Democrat , is outlining a timetable for the legislation that ’ s too rapid .
“ Specifically , it seems the chairman is arguing we can put a bill on the floor two weeks after the Gang of Eight potentially produces legislation in early April , ” Mr . Sessions said . “ The massive proposal being cobbled together by a group of senators in secret must be independently judged and reviewed by the Judiciary Committee in the full light of day . That will take months — not two weeks . ”
He added , “ No member of Congress who believes in democratic procedure can acquiesce to the ramming through of a thousand-page bill that will dramatically and directly impact the taxes , wages and security of our constituents . ”
President Obama , meanwhile , continued to apply pressure on lawmakers , saying in interviews with Univision and Telemundo , the nation ’ s two largest Spanish-language networks , that he is “ optimistic ” that when the senators get back to Capitol Hill , they will have a proposal that “ meets the basic principles that I think are required for a strong bill .
“ They are paying attention to border security , they are creating a way for people to earn their citizenship , they are improving the legal immigration system , and making sure that we can recruit the best and the brightest from all around the world that come here , invest here , and work here , ” he told Univision .
The National Hispanic Leadership Agenda — a coalition of 30 religious , business and civic organizations — also looked to crank up the heat on lawmakers , launching a Hispanics United for Immigration Reform campaign in support of a comprehensive package that includes a pathway to citizenship .
“ We are counting votes , ” said Jose Calderon , president of the Hispanic Federation . “ That is part of the work that the coalition does to make sure we can get over the top in terms of passing immigration reform this year , and so we are going to be targeting key congressional districts , key congressional members across America that are either on the fence or who we think we can get them over to our side . ”
The group said Congress should revamp the visa system , should expedite family-based immigrant visas and must open the door for citizenship .
“ If we are to restore the rule of law , the single most essential element of immigration reform is an earned legalization program with the real achievable road map to citizenship , ” said Janet Murguia , president of the National Council of La Raza , the largest umbrella organization for Hispanic groups . “ Not because enforcement is not important , but because enforcement is all we have done , and restoring the rule of law requires that we do both . ”