The Washington Post 's intrepid reporter Greg Sargent scored a big interview with one of the architects of President Obama 's Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , former-Department of Homeland Security general counsel John Sandweg . Here is how Sandweg explains the legal justification for Obama 's infamous temporary-amnesty program :
The president is doing what every single law enforcement agency across the country does : Put in place rational priorities to ensure that limited resources are focused on the populations that pose the greatest threat to public safety and border security . Every single law enforcement agency in America struggles with the fact that their resources are not conditioned to cover every single violation of the law . What prosecutors and police chiefs have done for years is implement enforcement priorities . That ’ s what the president has done .
So Obama 's entire legal justification for his DACA program rests on the premise that a broad based invitation for illegal immigrants to apply for temporary amnesty ensures `` that limited resources are focused on the populations that pose the greatest threat to public safety and border security . ''
But we already know , for a fact , that DACA did the exact opposite . Instead of conserving limited resources , DACA stretched DHS capabilities and degraded its ability to enforce good congressionally approved immigration law .
How do we know this ? Well for starters , just look at the DACA application * which requires a $ 465 filing fee . If DACA is such a saver of DHS resources , then why is Obama charging generally cash-strapped illegal immigrants $ 500 ?
More importantly , we know from subsequent reporting that Obama underpriced the cost of administering his temporary amnesty program . The New York Times reports :
Many thousands of Americans seeking green cards for foreign spouses or other immediate relatives have been separated from them for a year or more because of swelling bureaucratic delays at a federal immigration agency in recent months .
The long waits came when the agency , Citizenship and Immigration Services , shifted attention and resources to a program President Obama started in 2012 to give deportation deferrals to young undocumented immigrants , according to administration officials and official data . …
Until recently , an American could obtain a green card for a spouse , child or parent — probably the easiest document in the immigration system — in five months or less . But over the past year , waits for approvals of those resident visas stretched to 15 months , and more than 500,000 applications became stuck in the pipeline , playing havoc with international moves and children ’ s schools and keeping families apart .
( emphasis added ) In other words , instead of ensuring that limited resources were saved so that the DHS could better enforce good immigration law , Obama 's DACA program shifted existing resources away from those programs thus degrading DHS 's immigration law enforcement capabilities .
Amnesties are never free . They take huge sums of cash and employee time to administer . If DACA 's legal justification is built on the premise that it enables DHS to better enforce the law by conserving limited resources , then it is built on a lie .
* Never before his any president ever created an application process to apply for deferred action , which all presidents before Obama used sparingly .