Speaker John Boehner isn ’ t ready to let the dream die .
On Tuesday , Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell told reporters immigration is just not in the cards in 2014 . Last Thursday , rank-and-file House members sent a loud message at that President Obama is not the partner for legislation , spooking even top proponent Paul Ryan .
The editors from National Review , Weekly Standard , and numerous other top conservative pundits have urged the Ohio Republican to cut it out .
However , since the GOP retreat last week , Boehner has just kept marching along .
“ I think leadership ’ s focus and my focus is to get [ immigration ] done as early as possible , ” said Rep. Jeff Denham of California , who Boehner recently met with on the issue .
“ It ’ s part of our conference agenda right now . It doesn ’ t go on the agenda without scheduling bills and scheduling time on the floor , ” Denham added .
“ Clearly , the draft principles we outlined , members seemed to be supportive of them , ” Boehner said at a press conference Tuesday morning in response to a question from ███ , adding , “ no decisions have been made ” on whether to move forward .
“ I wouldn ’ t be surprised ” if immigration legislation came to the House floor as early as this spring , one well-connected GOP member said .
Boehner ’ s office has released several documents touting the GOP principles since the retreat , some of which include almost cartoonish defenses of a proposal .
The “ principles ” would “ eliminate the ability for any administration to arbitrarily decide which laws to enforce , ” a Q & A posted on Boehner ’ s website says .
Meanwhile , top amnesty proponents outside Congress say they were relatively pleased with the principles and how they were received by the GOP .
“ What has surprised me is how few people in House Republican caucus have stood up and opposed the policy , ” said Frank Sharry , founder and executive director of America ’ s Voice and one of the nation ’ s leading proponents for immigration reform . “ Now maybe the concern about timing , and Obama ’ s trustworthiness are excuses , ways to get to ‘ no ’ without seeming to be in league with the hardliners . For us , watching it from our somewhat distant perspective , it ’ s the dog that didn ’ t bark , ” he continued .
“ This is the party that voted against the DREAM Act in Dec. 2010 . Republicans backed Mitt Romney and his call for self-deportation in 2012 , ” Sharry added . “ And now in early 2014 the House Republicans are saying citizenship for DREAMers and legal status with no special path for the rest . That ’ s a pretty significant shift , it seems to me . ”
In the House , immigration is still going to be a tough slog , no matter what Boehner wants .
For example , the push back from conservatives has caused significant tremors of doubt within Boehner ’ s leadership team .
GOP Whip Kevin McCarthy , who on a personal level strongly supports moving forward on the issue , is feeling the heat back home , Republicans familiar with the matter say . The California Republican represents a highly conservative district with a lot of anti-amnesty sentiment . But it also has a significant percentage of Hispanics and pro-immigration bill activists have staged sit-ins in McCarthy ’ s district offices .
Majority Leader Eric Cantor has put major effort into a GOP version of the DREAM Act , which grants amnesty to the children of illegal immigrants . But he is also keeping an eye on his right flank in the event Boehner retires at the end of this Congress , leaving the seat open for Cantor to claim .
Responding to Denham ’ s claim that floor time has already been scheduled for immigration bills , Cantor spokesman Rory Cooper said , “ There has been nothing scheduled as of now . ”
Ryan , meanwhile , confirmed Tuesday that he had met secretly with top Democrat Sen. Chuck Schumer on immigration but dismissed the importance of the session , which he said occurred last year .
After raising serious doubts about whether immigration could come to the floor this year in a Sunday television interview , Ryan was more optimistic in remarks to reporters Tuesday .
“ It wasn ’ t really bad , ” Ryan said about the immigration showdown in Cambridge , MD . “ The substance of our document people really appreciated . It ’ s just , like I said , the lawlessness of the White House makes us lose confidence that the President will enforce the laws , ” Ryan said .
What took place in the meeting has emerged as a point of debate among Republicans .
GOP sources who participated in the meeting – both those who support moving on the issue and those who don ’ t – said in the hours afterwards that about 80 percent of the lawmakers who spoke were against bringing a bill forward this year .
“ I would say that ’ s ridiculous , ” Denham said Tuesday about their accounts .
The issue is complicated because some of the lawmakers who spoke in favor of the substance of the principles were not in favor of moving forward on legislation . In many cases , members only implied their stance on the underlying question rather than explicitly stating it . They also mostly only had one minute to speak each .
Still , conservative heavyweights like Reps. Tom Price and Jeb Hensarling came out strongly against moving forward , and the result of the meeting seemed to change Ryan ’ s tone in the days afterward .
One conservative lawmaker who said the meeting was deeply lopsided against bringing forward legislation in 2014 warned Boehner : “ I think he is out for a walk with nobody tagging along . ”
“ At this point I don ’ t anticipate legislation will come to the floor , ” said Rep. Tom Cotton , a freshman member running for Senate in Arkansas .
A top immigration proponent from the upper chamber , meanwhile , pitched a new argument for why Republicans can trust Obama to enforce any immigration bills they send him .
“ 80 percent of Americans , if not 90 , want to secure the border . So , lets say that for some reason the Obama administration backed away from what Congress mandated – fellow Democrats would get killed , ” said Lindsey Graham , the South Carolina Republican up for reelection this fall . “ He ’ s not running again , other people are . This scenario that he could just unilaterally back away from border enforcement and politically that not be damning to the Democratic party… the reason I know that we could move forward with securing the border is the Democratic party would get killed if they didn ’ t , ” Graham said .
Senator Marco Rubio , another Gang of Eight member , was more pessimistic . Asked if the House should move forward in 2014 , Rubio said , “ That ’ s not my role to give them advice on . They ’ re working on what is a very difficult issue . The resistance they ’ re running into is a lack of confidence that this president and the federal government will enforce the security measures no matter what they ’ re written as . ”