A Republican congressman dismissed a constituent ’ s concerns about the migrant detention crisis during a heated town hall meeting over the weekend , telling her that children being held in squalid conditions in U.S. Customs and Border Protection facilities are free to leave whenever they want .
“ The people that are there , they can leave , ” said Rep. Jim Hagedorn ( R-MN ) , a first-term congressman . “ Nobody is holding them against their will—they can leave . ”
The remark , which is factually incorrect , was made in response to an impassioned question from a female constituent who said she was “ very concerned about family separation at the border , ” which she feared was “ causing emotional damage ” for the thousands of migrant children currently in the custody of U.S. immigration enforcement .
“ It ’ s not ‘ government-sponsored child abuse , ’ ” Hagedorn said in response to the question , prompting boos and hisses from the audience at Rochester Community and Technical College on June 28 . “ These are not concentration camps—no , they ’ re not . ”
Unlike concentration camps in Nazi Germany , Hagedorn elaborated , those in ICE and Border Patrol custody “ can leave . ”
In most cases , children and adults alike can not leave immigration detention centers or Border Patrol holding facilities unless they are eligible for—and can pay—bond while their removal proceedings wind through immigration court . Increasingly indiscriminate enforcement by U.S. immigration authorities , a steadily increasing number of migrants seeking refuge and asylum due to political instability in Central America , and a massive backlog in the immigration court system have all contributed to massive overcrowding in detention centers and Border Patrol stations along the U.S.-Mexico border , to the point that children are often being held in such facilities far longer than allowed by federal law .
On Tuesday afternoon , the Department of Homeland Security ’ s Office of the Inspector General illustrated the dire conditions in such facilities with the release of a report warning that inspections of Border Patrol facilities along the U.S. southern border have revealed “ serious overcrowding and prolonged detention ” of unaccompanied migrant children .
The “ dangerous overcrowding , ” the OIG wrote , requires “ immediate attention ” —as do the conditions in the facilities , where children have been held for days without access to showers , laundry facilities , and functioning toilets .
“ While all facilities had infant formula , diapers , baby wipes , and juice and snacks for children , we observed that two facilities had not provided children access to hot meals… until the week we arrived , ” the OIG report states . Some detainees had become so constipated on a diet composed solely of bologna sandwiches that they required medical attention .
According to the report , nearly half of detainees held at facilities inspected by the OIG had been held longer than the 72 hours permitted under Border Patrol ’ s standards , with nearly half of those having been held for more than 10 days .
Hagedorn attempted to sidestep the issue of child detention , as well as the conditions in the facilities , telling the audience in Rochester that he favored an “ orderly , systemic process ” for removal and deportation of undocumented immigrants from the United States . He then asked the woman who posed the question whether she thought there should be limits on entry into the United States .
The woman responded that she was more concerned about “ little children that are being held against their will , against their will , on their own , without their parents . ”
“ They can not get up leave anytime they want ! ” the woman said angrily . “ How is a three-month-old baby , or a four-year-old , gon na leave a facility like that ? ”