Goalpara , Assam - Ali , 25 , is an electrician working at India 's largest detention centre currently under construction in Assam state 's Goalpara district in northeast India .
As he takes a break from his work to rest in front of the centre 's hospital block , a thought occurs to him .
`` Today I am working here . Tomorrow , it could be a jail for my brother-in-law , '' he says . `` It will ruin my sister 's family . ''
Ali 's brother-in-law failed to make it to the National Register of Citizens ( NRC ) , a list published in Assam this year which declared 1.9 million people as `` illegal '' migrants , who now face either detention in a camp like the one coming up at Goalpara , or deportation .
Spread around nearly 300,000 square feet ( 28,000 square metres or 2.8 hectares ) of land , the detention centre in Goalpara 's Matia village , 126km ( 78 miles ) from state capital Dispur , can house 3,000 people .
The Goalpara detention centre can hold up to 3,000 people [ Tawqeer Hussain/███ ]
The centre is situated in a remote area of Goalpara with open land on its three sides and a road linking it to the main city of Guwahati in the front .
On one side , the road to the detention centre passes through what is known as the `` ghost '' mountain .
According to local residents , legend has it that ghosts used to rule the mountain centuries ago and no human was allowed to cross it .
`` I feel it is the same situation here . Any person who goes to this detention centre will not come back , '' said Ghulam Nabi .
`` How is it human to isolate a person from the population , from his family and put him behind these giant walls ? '' asked Nabi , pointing towards the high walls of the compound .
Besides a hospital , the centre will have a dining area , school , recreational centre , and two separate lodging facilities designated for male and female inmates .
`` Male and female inmates will be kept in separate areas divided by a six feet red-coloured wall . There will be 13 male blocks of four storeys each and two female blocks of the same size , '' Rabindra Das , an engineer with Assam 's police housing board and incharge of the construction of the detention facility , told ███ .
`` The entire compound is surrounded by two walls , the inner being 20 feet high , followed by the outer wall six feet high , '' Das said .
As a security measure , the detention centre has six watchtowers for round-the-clock monitoring , supported by a 100-metre high-beam light .
Officials said the federal detention centre will be completed by April [ Tawqeer Hussain/███ ]
According to officials at the construction site , the centre was sanctioned by India 's federal home ministry in June last year and was supposed to be completed by December . However , the deadline has now been pushed to April this year .
`` It is a central government project . We have to finish the entire construction by April , '' said Das .
While the government has not yet announced a nationwide NRC , a number of detention centres are coming up across the country .
In Assam , which has witnessed a movement against mainly Bangla-speaking migrants for more than four decades , at least six detention centres are already operational .
On December 3 , India 's Minister of State for Home Affairs , G Kishan Reddy , in a written response , informed the Parliament that an existing detention centre in Goalpara has 201 inmates , Kokrajhar has 140 , Silchar 71 , Dibrugarh 40 , Jorhat 196 , and Tezpur centre holds 322 inmates .
There have been nearly 100 deaths in these centres since 2008 , including suicides by the inmates .
In July , another Minister of State for Home Affairs , Nityanand Rai , said all the states have been asked to establish detention centres according to a Model Detention Centre Manual prepared by the government .
A number of detention centres are being prepared across India [ Tawqeer Hussain/███ ]
On December 22 , the southern state of Karnataka opened a centre for undocumented migrants in Nelamangala , some 40km ( 27 miles ) from the capital city of Bengaluru .
An existing government building with six rooms , a kitchen and a security room was turned into a detention centre which can house 24 inmates . Recently , two watchtowers and a compound wall were added to secure the area .
The western state of Goa inaugurated its first detention centre on May 29 last year , while Rajasthan has a centre located inside a federal jail .
Reports said a detention centre in the state of Punjab is expected to be completed by May this year .
In the national capital of New Delhi , a detention centre has been operational since 2006 and is run by the Foreigners Regional Registration Office ( FRRO ) .
In the western state of Maharashtra , the previous BJP government identified a piece of land on the outskirts of the financial hub of Mumbai to build a detention centre .
However , current Chief Minister Uddhav Thackeray , who leads a coalition government with the main opposition Congress and other parties , recently assured the state 's Muslims to not worry , indicating that his government may not follow the centre 's order on establishing a detention centre .
Reports said the government of West Bengal state also identified two locations - near capital Kolkata and in North 24 Parganas district - to construct detention centres .
But Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee , a staunch critic of Prime Minister Narendra Modi , last week said : `` Do n't fall for rumours . I am ready to give my life but I will not allow BJP to set up detention camps in [ West ] Bengal , never . ''
Kerala , another Indian state governed by a left-wing coalition , also put on hold the identification of land for a proposed detention centre .
Though there are no official figures , India 's powerful Home Minister Amit Shah , while addressing an election rally in September 2018 , claimed the country has about four million undocumented migrants .
Shefali Hajong , whose name was excluded from the final NRC list in Assam , is a construction worker at the Goalpara detention centre [ File : Anuwar Hazarika/Reuters ]
Among the 1.9 million undocumented migrants who could not make it to the NRC list in Assam , nearly half were Muslims , according to a report by the United Against Hate group .
Now , India 's 200 million Muslims fear the process will be implemented across the country by the Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) to marginalise the community .
The passing of the contentious Citizenship Amendment Act ( CAA ) last month has aggravated such fears , leading to huge protests across the country and resulting in at least 26 deaths so far .
The CAA grants Indian citizenship to six religious groups , except Muslims , from the neighbouring countries of Pakistan , Bangladesh and Afghanistan , who came to the country before 2015 .
Critics say the law violates India 's secular constitution by making religion a basis for citizenship . Muslims , on the other hand , fear the CAA is a precursor to NRC aimed at making their nationality questionable .
Recently , Prime Minister Modi contradicted his home minister by claiming his government never considered a nationwide NRC .
`` Since my government has come to power , since 2014 to now , I want to tell [ 1.3 billion ] citizens , there has been no discussion on even the word NRC , '' Modi said at an election rally in New Delhi .
However , Modi 's government has allocated almost $ 130bn for creating a National Population Register , which activists say will serve as a database before the NRC is implemented .
Congress leader Rahul Gandhi accused Modi of lying . `` The RSS 's prime minister is lying to Bharat Mata [ Mother India ] , '' Gandhi said in a tweet .
The RSS refers to the far-right Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh ( or National Association of Volunteers ) , which draws its inspiration from European Nazis and mentors the ruling BJP .
BJP spokesman Sambit Patra told ███ that there is `` no connection '' between setting up of the detention centres and the NRC .
`` Do n't link it with Muslims . Detention centre is for foreigners who are in India illegally , '' he said .
But Tanweer Fazal , who teaches political science at New Delhi 's Jawaharlal Nehru University was not convinced .
`` It is an easily understood fact if a non-Muslim gets excluded from NRC , then CAA can be his saviour . So only Muslims are left to go to the detention centres , '' he told ███ .