U.S. Border Patrol agents detail illegal immigrants near Roma , Texas , May 11 , 2017 . ( Carlos Barria/Reuters )
There are legitimate policy arguments on all sides , but the story of immigration is getting slaughtered in the crossfire .
As the immigration debate hit another low last week , I received the news that my favorite immigrant died : my father-in-law , Paul Gavora .
I don ’ t want to politicize Paul ’ s story too much , or really at all . For me , the man wasn ’ t a talking point ; he was a hero .
Still , one of the things about today ’ s immigration debate that breaks my heart is how both sides have lost the plot . There are legitimate policy arguments on all sides , but the story of immigration is getting slaughtered in the crossfire .
Consider my father-in-law . Born Vladimir Gavora in 1931 , in the then-Czechoslovakian ( today just Slovakian ) village of Brezova pod Bradlom , Vlad grew up fast . When he was seven , the Germans invaded . When he was 13 , his father died . The same year , the Red Army moved in . He saw things then he didn ’ t like to talk about . In tenth grade , he was expelled for questioning Communist doctrine in class . In his day , it was the teachers who were snowflakes .
Expulsion slammed a door on any future he might have had at home . So in 1948 , he swam the Danube by moonlight to escape the Communists . He made it to an Austrian refugee camp , where they sent him to Germany to finish high school . Colorado State University offered him a scholarship . To get there , he signed on as a hand on a United Nations refugee ship . During a storm of biblical proportions , he was tasked with preventing panicking passengers from rushing to the top deck for air . He was tied to the railing and given a billy club to beat the passengers back — for their own good .
In college , he changed his name to Paul and met his saintly wife , Donna . He soon transferred to the University of Chicago , where he worked as a milkman while pursuing a joint bachelor ’ s-master ’ s degree under Nobel Prize–winning economist Milton Friedman . When he heard about a teaching job at the University of Alaska Fairbanks , he and a pregnant Donna packed their three young children in a car and drove north and west .
Alas , when he got to still-territorial Alaska , the job fell through . So he returned to his vocation as a milkman .
Eventually , he scrimped and borrowed enough money to open a small grocery store of his own in Fairbanks . Then he opened another . Eventually he had seven supermarkets , Fairbanks ’ s first shopping mall , and a wholesale food business that supplied native villages and the Russian far east alike . He also had nine children and invested his time , money , and love in his community .
Opinions will differ about the takeaway of Paul ’ s story . For me , one of the most important things is not that he got rich . It ’ s that the United States gave him a shot to carve out the life that he wanted — and he remained grateful for the opportunity his whole life .
Peter Schramm , another immigrant , and a scholar and friend ( who passed away not long ago ) , often told the story of his family ’ s escape from Hungary after the failed 1958 uprising . “ We are going to America , ” Peter ’ s father told him .
“ Because , son . We were born Americans but in the wrong place . ”
Today the conversation about immigration is so toxic in part because we poisonously disagree about what it means to be an American . Thanks to the identity politics of the Left and the Right , immigrants are increasingly cast either as imported victims ready-made to join the Coalition of the Oppressed or invading “ takers , ” “ rapists , ” and even “ animals. ” If White House adviser Stephen Miller has his way , the children of immigrants would be seen as a terrorism threat , which might explain why the Trump administration is snatching babies from their mothers at the border .
Of course there ’ s a kernel of truth to both sides ’ awful shouting points on immigrants , but they crowd out the greater truth : Most immigrants , even those who are in the country illegally , aren ’ t animalistic members of MS-13 , nor are they eager to be props for the latest campus debate about intersectionality . Neither victims nor villains , they are human beings desperate to make the most of the American dream as they see it .
That ’ s the immigration story in America : people leaving — or fleeing — the places of their birth for the freedom to try their best . No party owns that story . But each can abandon it .