Some present at the meeting , including Mr. McGahn , were alarmed that the president had decided to fire the F.B.I . director after consulting only Ms. Trump , Mr. Kushner and Mr. Miller . Mr. McGahn began an effort to stop the letter or at least pare it back .
Later that day , Mr. McGahn gave Mr. Miller a marked-up copy of the letter , highlighting several sections that he believed needed to be removed .
Mr. McGahn met again that same day with Mr. Trump and told him that if he fired Mr. Comey , the Russia investigation would not go away . Mr. Trump told him , according to senior administration officials , that he understood that firing the F.B.I . director might extend the Russia investigation , but that he wanted to do it anyway .
Mr. McGahn arranged for the president to meet in the Oval Office that day with Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Mr. Rosenstein , who he knew had been pursuing separate efforts to fire Mr. Comey . The two men were particularly angry about testimony Mr. Comey had given to the Senate Judiciary Committee the previous week , when he said “ it makes me mildly nauseous ” to think his handling of the Hillary Clinton email investigation might have had an impact on the 2016 election .
Mr. Comey ’ s conduct during the hearing added to concerns of Mr . Sessions and Mr. Rosenstein that the F.B.I . director had botched the rollout of the Clinton investigation and had overstepped the boundaries of his job . Shortly after that hearing , Mr. Rosenstein expressed his concerns about Mr. Comey to a White House lawyer , who relayed details of the conversation to his bosses at the White House .
During the May 8 Oval Office meeting with Mr. Trump , Mr. Rosenstein was given a copy of the original letter and agreed to write a separate memo for Mr. Trump about why Mr. Comey should be fired .
Mr. Rosenstein ’ s memo arrived at the White House the next day . The lengthy diatribe Mr. Miller had written had been replaced by a simpler rationale — that Mr. Comey should be dismissed because of his handling of the Clinton email investigation . Unlike Mr. Trump ’ s letter , it made no mention of the times Mr. Comey had told the president he was not under investigation .