Marco Rubio and Chuck Schumer have had to balance policy and politics . | AP Photos How the immigration deal got made
The meeting was supposed to be a half-hour update for immigration reform proponents — but they weren ’ t about to let the Democratic senators get off that easily .
The advocates were furious that Democrats might cave to Republican demands to make the pathway to citizenship contingent upon border security benchmarks , including the sign off of governors from southwestern states . They felt locked out of the process . And now , they had no idea what the negotiators were trading away just weeks before the Gang of Eight ’ s immigration bill was slated to be publicly released .
Frank Sharry , a longtime proponent of a comprehensive bill , aggressively protested the border language to Democratic Sens . Chuck Schumer , Dick Durbin and Robert Menendez — and as a whole , the group warned that if an anti-reform governor like Arizona ’ s Jan Brewer were given veto power , the emerging proposal would be a “ big problem for us . ”
Schumer stayed at the February session an extra 40 minutes , even missing his flight back to New York , to reassure advocates that they weren ’ t being sold out . But he also advised them to step back in line : “ This is what we have to do to get a path to citizenship . You have to understand that . ”
The intense back-channel talks between members , staffers and outside groups have produced the most sweeping immigration bill in six years . The legislation comes after weeks of tense member-level meetings — often with powerful special interests they had to keep at bay in order to craft a fragile , bipartisan coalition . The deal required painful compromises , suffered near breakdowns and endured cooling-off periods , including when the group walked away from the negotiating table for part of the Easter recess before re-engaging in the horse trading .
Powerful aides to several senators , particularly to Schumer and Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) , pieced together a compromise driven as much by trying to get the policy right as by giving the senators a way to sell it politically .
Rubio emerged as a source of constant attention , concern and lobbying within the group . Republicans and Democrats were desperate to keep him in the fold , convinced that they needed his support to sell the proposal to deeply skeptical conservatives .
“ By the way , tell your boss he already paid for the caterer , he ’ s got to go through with the wedding now , ” Schumer ’ s chief aide Leon Fresco , fired off in an email to Rubio ’ s negotiator , Enrique Gonzalez , when it looked like the Florida Republican was getting wobbly late last month .
President Barack Obama was forced to step in and personally convince Republicans that he was acting in good faith after the apparently inadvertently released draft of a White House bill .
After 24 meetings among senators themselves and marathon sessions between staff for months , the senators struck a deal that , if passed , would enact the most significant changes to immigration laws in nearly three decades . But to get there , they ’ ve had to cajole their longtime allies to get behind the effort and aggressively move to limit defections from major players who have the power to stop the bill in its tracks . And they went to great lengths to prevent media leaks , even instituting a self-imposed rule to thwart the press from staking out their consequential meetings .
“ There is always tense times in these kinds of things , ” said Sen. John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) , a leader of the group . “ But there was always a commitment to get things done . ”