SAN ANTONIO ( AP ) — After tens of thousands of migrant families , most from Central America , crossed the Rio Grande into Texas last summer , the government poured millions of dollars into two large detention centers meant to hold women and children — and keep more from coming .
But as U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement expands the centers to make space for the next wave of arrivals , the agency faces legal and political challenges that could shut them down . And a new flow of migrants raises questions as to whether the strategy has deterred migration at all .
One center is a purpose-built , 50-acre campus in Dilley , an hour ’ s drive southwest of San Antonio . Another , smaller center is tucked among derricks in Karnes City . They will be able to house some 3,400 migrants once they reach full capacity , just a fraction of those crossing , leaving ICE with few options besides releasing many with notices to appear in court , as it did in the past .
Some 130 House Democrats and 33 senators have called on the government to halt family detention , while a federal judge in California has tentatively ruled that the policy violates parts of an 18-year-old court settlement that says immigrant children can not be held in secure facilities . ICE responded by pledging to improve its centers while it awaits the judge ’ s ruling .
“ We are moving in the direction of closing these centers down , ” said Jonathan Ryan , executive director of the Refugee and Immigrant Center for Education and Legal Services .
In April , Judge Dolly Gee tentatively ruled that family detention violates parts of a 1997 settlement in a case known as Flores V. Meese . The settlement stipulates migrant children must be released only to foster care , relatives or — if they must be held — in the least restrictive environment possible in facilities licensed to care for children .
Gee placed her ruling on hold and kept it secret so that government and immigration lawyers can try to negotiate a solution by mid-June . But a memo describing the ruling by Carlos Holguin , an attorney with the Center for Human Rights and Constitutional Law in California , says Gee agreed that the settlement applied to all minors in immigration custody , including those accompanied by a parent , and found the new detention facilities not licensed to care for children .
ICE director Sarah Saldana responded to the court in a statement saying that the agency would review cases of families detained more than 90 days , increase oversight and explore ways to improve conditions . “ We understand the unique and sensitive nature of detaining families , ” she said .
In making its case for detention last year , the Department of Homeland Security argued that the centers were necessary to stamp out a widespread belief among migrants that the government was doling out “ permisos ” for them to stay , actually notices to appear in court .
According to the memo , Gee questioned whether the centers had served that purpose . Holguin wrote that the court found it “ astonishing ” that immigration authorities had adopted a policy demanding such expensive infrastructure without solid evidence that building it would discourage illegal migration . Nearly 17,000 families have already been caught at the border during the first seven months of this fiscal year , which began in October .
Family detention isn ’ t cheap . An ICE official said it costs $ 300 per day for each woman or child housed at Dilley . At a capacity of 2,400 people , it will cost the federal government $ 720,000 a day , or nearly $ 263 million a year . The smaller detention center in Karnes costs ICE $ 160 per detainee per day and is expected to have 1,000 beds by year ’ s end . The only other family detention center is in Berks County , Pennsylvania . For-profit prison operators manage all three facilities overseen by ICE .
Women with children caught entering the country illegally can be released or placed in detention . ICE says its decisions to detain or not depend on factors that include bed space and the ages and sexes of children .
The Texas centers provide considerable freedom of movement and boast amenities — Dilley has a huge indoor gym , soccer field and classrooms with touch-screen TVs and computers and the Karnes center has a library stocked with bilingual children ’ s books . But detainees would much rather have been released on the promise to show up in court , as happened to Jeysel Amaya .
Amaya , 24 , said she left El Salvador because gang members “ were threatening me and my sister , because my sister is 16 and ( one ) wanted to go with her . ”
In late April , she headed for the bus station in the border city of McAllen , her 4-month old daughter strapped to her chest in the same cloth sling she used throughout their 2,000-mile journey , and carrying a notice to show up in court near relatives in Los Angeles .