The heady sense of victory immigrant rights activists had last year after President Obama announced his deportation amnesty has faded in recent weeks as the advocates sense they ’ ve lost ground among the very Democratic leaders they were counting on to deliver at the national and state levels .
The latest blow came over the weekend in New York , where Gov . Andrew Cuomo has scrapped plans for a state-level Dream Act granting in-state tuition to illegal immigrants as part of the budget — spawning a hunger strike from young illegal immigrants who expected him to come through .
Nationally , meanwhile , Mr. Obama is taking fire after his immigration service earlier this month deported a Mennonite pastor with American citizen children who had been living without authorization for years , but who came to agents ’ attention because of a drunken driving conviction from the 1990s .
Activists said that deportation broke the rules Mr. Obama himself laid out in November , when he said he wanted to kick out “ felons , not families . ”
“ It goes to who really are our champions . That ’ s disillusioning a lot of the electorate , ” said Cesar Vargas , co-director of the Dream Action Coalition . “ Democrats would like to make people believe that Republicans have a Latino problem . Well , Democrats are definitely facing a Latino problem that many of them aren ’ t even aware of . ”
The relationship between the president and immigrant rights advocates has always been rocky , dating back to his vote as a senator to build the border fence , and then extending to his failure to make good on his campaign promise to tackle immigration reform his first year in office .
Mr. Obama had appeared to smooth things over in November when he bypassed Congress and announced executive actions to grant a temporary deportation amnesty and work permits to millions of immigrants in the country illegally . At the same time Mr. Obama also announced new enforcement priorities that were supposed to lower the chances of deportation for millions of other illegal immigrants — though they would not be eligible for the work permits included in his broader amnesty .
Buoyed by that success , and by polls that suggest the public is increasingly accepting of legalizing illegal immigrants , activists turned to states , pressing for legislation to grant in-state tuition to illegal immigrants , known as the Dream Act .
New York was a particular target , with a Democratic governor in Mr. Cuomo vowing to use the state budget to make it happen this year .
In the span of a few weeks , however , Mr. Obama ’ s immigration policy was halted by a federal judge , his agents deported Pastor Max Villatoro — the Mennonite cleric who was sent to his native Honduras on March 20 — and Mr. Cuomo failed to secure passage of the Dream Act in New York .
“ I would definitely agree that there ’ s some deep disillusionment and disappointment , ” said Manuel Castro , immigration campaign coordinator for the New York Immigration Coalition .
Mr. Castro said they will have to wait for more details about the New York negotiations to come out before knowing where the agreement broke down — though early press reports said the Assembly speaker , a Democrat , squelched a deal that would have coupled the Dream Act to an education tax credit .
But the loss of the Dream Act goes to the heart of the immigration movement , where so-called Dreamers , illegal immigrants brought to the country as children , are viewed as the most sympathetic figures in the debate .
Denise Vivar , one of the students on a hunger strike to protest the governor ’ s retreat , said her last meal was March 24 . Since then she ’ s been subsisting on water while working at her cashier ’ s job and attending classes — where she ’ s in the middle of midterm exams .
She said they were excited when Mr. Cuomo put the Dream Act in his budget , and realized he ran into political opposition from Republicans in the legislature . But she said activists would have liked to see him push harder to win .
“ It ’ s always , ‘ Yeah , we care about Dreamers , and we want them to be fully part of U.S. society , ’ but when it comes to the real deal , they always end up abandoning us , ” she said .
Even as New York was stumbling over the Dream Act , several other states are facing debates over whether to repeal their own state-level laws .
The legislature in Texas , which was the first state to adopt in-state tuition rates for illegal immigrants in a bill signed by then-Gov . Rick Perry , is poised for a committee-level debate on repeal next week , and Kansas ’ s legislature has also toyed with a repeal .
At the national level , activists are eyeing Mr. Obama ’ s deportation statistics and questioning how he ’ ll carry out removals even as the court cases continue .
Mr. Vargas called the deportation of Mr. Villatoro “ a promise broken , ” and said advocates will be watching the rhetoric in the emerging 2016 campaign for clues to see which party is making a claim for votes within his community .