“ The vote tomorrow is not a vote on just the Corker-Hoeven amendment . The vote tomorrow at 5:30 pm is a vote on Majority Leader Reid ’ s procedural motion to shut down debate on a 1,200-page substitute bill no one has read . The Corker-Hoeven amendment no longer exists as a standalone proposal . The amendment and the bill have been merged into a single 1,200-page substitute proposal . They are now one and the same , '' Sessions said in a statement . `` And the Majority Leader ’ s motion will stifle amendments and accelerate the vote on final passage before anyone has vetted the modified legislation . ''
`` Senator Rubio said he wouldn ’ t support a process that was rushed and that was not transparent . I hope that he , and all members who believe in open process , will vote against Majority Leader Reid ’ s motion to silence debate on a bill no one has read . And I would further issue a challenge to the sponsors of this bill : if your proposal is so good , then why not commit to extensive , open debate on it ? Why do we have to pass this out of here before Members go home to face their constituents over July 4th ? Whose interests do we serve ? ”
Just like they did with Obamacare , some in Congress intend to “ Pelosi ” the amnesty bill . They ’ ll pass it in order to find out what ’ s in it . And just like the unpopular , unaffordable Obamacare disaster , this pandering , rewarding-the-rule-breakers , still-no-border-security , special-interests-ridden , 24-lb disaster of a bill is not supported by informed Americans .
I am an ardent supporter of legal immigration . I ’ m proud that our country is so desirable that it has been a melting pot making a diverse people united as the most exceptional nation on earth for over two centuries . But I join every American with an ounce of common sense insisting that any discussion about immigration must center on a secure border . The amnesty bill before the Senate is completely toothless on border security .
It 's beyond disingenuous for anyone to claim that a vote for this bill is a vote for security .
Senator Rubio said he wouldn ’ t support a process that was rushed and that was not transparent . I hope that he , and all members who believe in open process , will vote against Majority Leader Reid ’ s motion to silence debate on a bill no one has read . And I would further issue a challenge to the sponsors of this bill : if your proposal is so good , then why not commit to extensive , open debate on it ? Why do we have to pass this out of here before Members go home to face their constituents over July 4th ? Whose interests do we serve ? ”
The race is on . Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , with Republican Senator Marco Rubio 's approval , is preparing to rush through the Gang of Eight 's 1200 page amnesty legislation today by shutting down debate . Not surprisingly , according to Republican Senator Jeff Sessions , nobody has actually read the thing.Sound familiar ? Meanwhile , Sarah Palin is ripping the Gang of Eight at Breitbart today :