The MLB postseason launches Tuesday night when the Washington Nationals host the Milwaukee Brewers in the single-elimination National League Wild Card Game . Here are the night 's biggest storylines .
The Nationals postseason woes — Washington has enjoyed great regular season success since 2012 , but they 've yet to capitalize on their talent in the playoffs . The Nats have n't made it beyond the Division Series since they moved to D.C. from Montreal in 2005 , and they 'll obviously need to knock off the Brewers before doing so this year . The 106-win Los Angeles Dodgers await the Wild Card winner , which wo n't make Washington 's postseason path any easier , but maybe this is finally the year they remove the weight from their shoulders behind the likes of pitchers Max Scherzer and Stephen Strasburg , third baseman Anthony Rendon , and wunderkind outfielder Juan Soto .
MVP-less — Milwaukee was n't supposed to be here after losing reigning N.L . MVP Christian Yelich to a knee injury earlier in September . But his teammates did n't falter , going on a crazy run to qualify . Still , the lineup does n't have the same thump without their star , especially considering fellow outfielders Ryan Braun and Lorenzo Cain are expected to play with nagging injuries . Second baseman Keston Hiura , coming off a stellar rookie campaign , is the team 's most intriguing player right now .
Bullpen management — The 'pen has been the biggest weakness for the Nationals for several years now , and they 're likely hoping to avoid using it much during Wednesday 's game . Scherzer , their ace , will start , but he has n't pitched like his former Cy Young-winning self lately thanks to a late-season injury . If Scherzer exits early , Washington could turn to Strasburg or fellow starter Patrick Corbin instead of their shakier relievers . Milwaukee should use its bullpen heavily ; starter Brandon Woodruff has been excellent , but he 'll be limited since he 's coming off an injury , as well . They 'll likely lean on pitchers like Brent Suter , Drew Pomeranz , Josh Hader , and maybe starter Jordan Lyles to navigate Washington 's lineup later in the game . Tim O'Donnell