President Trump has invited congressional leaders to a briefing Wednesday on `` border security '' at the White House , congressional sources confirm .
Interested in Donald Trump ? Add Donald Trump as an interest to stay up to date on the latest Donald Trump news , video , and analysis from ███ . Add Interest
The meeting will be the first sit-down between Trump and Democratic leaders Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer in 22 days since their contentious sit down in the Oval Office last month .
The meeting will include the top two leaders in each party and each chamber . The White House has not provided any information on the meeting or the administration officials who will be present .
After 11 days of no progress , the president signaled on Twitter that he 's ready to make a deal .
`` Border Security and the Wall 'thing ' and Shutdown is not where Nancy Pelosi wanted to start her tenure as Speaker ! Let 's make a deal ? '' he tweeted .
Border Security and the Wall “ thing ” and Shutdown is not where Nancy Pelosi wanted to start her tenure as Speaker ! Let ’ s make a deal ? — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 1 , 2019
White House press secretary Sarah Sanders released a statement late Tuesday criticizing Pelosi 's plan .
`` President Trump made a serious , good faith offer to Democrats to open the government , address the crisis at our border , and protect all Americans , '' Sanders said in the statement . `` We have heard nothing back from the Democrats , who so far have refused to compromise . Speaker Designate Nancy Pelosi released a plan that will not re-open the government because it fails to secure the border and puts the needs of other countries above the needs of our own citizens . The Pelosi plan is a non-starter because it does not fund our homeland security or keep American families safe from human trafficking , drugs , and crime . ''
The president has continued to blame Democrats for the shutdown , labeling it the `` Schumer Shutdown . '' However at that Oval Office meeting in December the president told Schumer he would take the blame .
`` I will be the one to shut it down . I 'm not going to blame you for it , '' he said . `` The last time you shut it down , it did n't work . I will take the mantle of shutting it down . ''
House Democrats have prepared two bills aimed at ending the partial government shutdown but neither includes any new money for Trump 's border wall .
The bills were made public Monday afternoon and House Democrats hope to vote on them by Thursday .
The measures include a mix of short-term and long-term funding plans to re-open the government agencies that have been closed for 10 days , after a dispute over funding the construction of a wall on the U.S.-Mexico border .
The first bill includes year-long funding plans for every government agency currently closed , with the exception of the Department of Homeland Security .
The second bill would reopen and fund the Department of Homeland Security only on a short-term basis . The so-called “ Continuing Resolution ” funding bill would keep the lights on at DHS only until Feb. 8 , and continue current funding of $ 1.3 billion for border security .
The president signaled he 'd reject their proposal , saying in a tweet Monday : `` The Democrats will probably submit a Bill , being cute as always , which gives everything away but gives NOTHING to Border Security , namely the Wall . ''
`` Please explain to the Democrats that there can NEVER be a replacement for a good old fashioned WALL ! '' he tweeted .
The Democrats will probably submit a Bill , being cute as always , which gives everything away but gives NOTHING to Border Security , namely the Wall . You see , without the Wall there can be no Border Security - the Tech “ stuff ” is just , by comparison , meaningless bells & whistles ... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 1 , 2019