You can view the arrival of Muslim and other African newcomers as part of Lewiston ’ s struggles . Or you can see them as the closest thing the city has to a solution .
Lewiston is more vital now than two decades ago . Of the city ’ s 36,000 residents , 6,000 are African refugees and asylum-seekers . New immigrants work in health care , retail , industry , and food service . Yet Lewiston ’ s challenges mirror those in other places with large refugee communities . And some Lewistonians blame the newcomers for whatever still feels wrong in the city – too few living-wage jobs , dilapidated infrastructure , the pockets of poverty that took hold after the mills closed .
In 2006 , The New Yorker bluntly called what was happening in the former mill town a “ large-scale social experiment. ” Yet I was seeing a slow , quiet shift – Somalis stocking shelves at the supermarket ; white and black kids sitting together at the library ; white people buying goat meat . After one member of a Somali kindergartner ’ s family came home to find “ Get Out ” scrawled on their apartment building , longtime residents helped paint over it .
When Somali refugees first arrived in Lewiston in February 2001 , Maine was the whitest and oldest state in the nation . But it offered safety , access to services , and a lower cost of living .
When I was growing up , Lisbon Street in Lewiston was the center of the world . A few times a year , my family drove there from our village 45 miles up the Androscoggin River to shop and to see my great-aunt Nell . She ’ d moved to the city decades earlier ; her husband worked in a mill there . Now in her 70s , widowed , she lived in a tidy duplex with an upright bass . During our visits she served lemonade and rolls hot from the oven . The bass grumbled whenever my sister or I plucked it .
In the early 1970s , Lisbon Street formed the spine of the small city . The sidewalks were filled with families and couples . After shopping for school supplies at Kresge ’ s , we ’ d head to Ward Brothers department store , where the saleswomen spoke English to us and French to each other . The smell inside Ward ’ s was a heady mix of everything the cosmetics counter had to offer , the carpet soft underfoot .
My sister and I didn ’ t know it , but even then Lisbon Street was in decline . The city ’ s glory years manufacturing textiles and shoes , decades that had brought trains filled with French Canadians in search of jobs , were fading as one by one the mills closed . Maine ’ s once-richest city – its Bates Mill the state ’ s largest employer for more than two decades – would struggle for years to come . The couples and young families were vanishing .
Yet whenever I came back to the fine old buildings and the river and the hills beyond , I thought , here is a place . Even at its nadir the city retained grandeur and suspense , like a stage between acts .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff People cross Lisbon Street , the main commercial thoroughfare in Lewiston , where many shops are owned by immigrants .
By the mid-1990s a tenuous renaissance was taking form with health care , banking , and other services beginning to fill the postindustrial void . Former mill spaces were converted into restaurants and galleries . Unemployment fell , though the population continued to dwindle and downtown remained stagnant . Of the families who stayed , half of those with children under age 5 lived below the poverty level .
Such was the situation in February 2001 when the first Somali refugees came north from Portland , 40 miles away , where housing was short . Maine was cold , and homogeneous ( whitest state in the nation , also the oldest ) , but it offered safety and access to services , and a lower cost of living than large cities where the federal government had first resettled the refugees . Moving to the extreme Northeast was their choice . Jokes about the snow – like the one about the kid who ran inside to tell his mom he ’ d just eaten sugar from the sky – soon embedded themselves in Lewiston-Somali culture .
By the beginning of 2003 , more than 1,400 newcomers had come to the city . They settled into triple- and quadruple-deckers . When I came north that spring to visit friends , women in hijabs were shepherding kids down streets that for years had been all but empty . It was an incongruous , surprising sight . On Lisbon , a few closed stores had reopened under Somali ownership . I went into one , bought cardamom , and wondered at signs offering translation and money-wiring services , and – back out on the sidewalk – at the palpable energy . In a place where businesses rarely stayed open after 5 p.m. , these were still lit at 8:30 .
Refugees kept coming . People I knew in Lewiston responded to the changes in accordance with their nature : curious or suspicious , or holding off on judgment . In 2006 , The New Yorker bluntly called what was happening in Lewiston a “ large-scale social experiment. ” There were , after all , now several thousand African Muslims in an overwhelmingly white town not known as a liberal outpost .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Tresor Muteba , originally from Congo , bikes in downtown Lewiston .
Yet I was seeing a slow , quiet shift – Somalis stocking shelves at the supermarket ; white and black kids sitting together at the library ; white people buying goat meat on Lisbon . A high school acquaintance who had a daughter in kindergarten with Somali children was happy about the new diversity . “ I only knew white kids when I was growing up , ” he said . After one member of a Somali kindergartner ’ s family came home to find “ Get Out ” scrawled on their apartment building , longtime residents helped paint over it . They worked late into the night , he said , so the message would be gone when kids left for school in the morning .
If there was a hostile undercurrent , and if some complained Somalis consumed the city ’ s resources , other Lewistonians were reaching out and seeking accord . In 2006 , a man rolled a pig ’ s head through the doorway of a mosque . Residents rallied around the city ’ s Muslims . The deed was denounced , the offender criminally charged . But the act spoke to a bitterness that remains .
Lewiston today has one of the highest per capita Muslim populations in the United States , most of it Somali along with rising numbers of refugees and asylum-seekers from other African nations including Congo , Djibouti , Sudan , and Chad . What ’ s happening here is isbeddel , the Somali word for transformation .
In spite of occasional news reports to the contrary , things have mostly gone well . But Lewiston is not Utopia . The city ’ s challenges mirror those in other places with large refugee communities . It has struggled financially , especially early on as the needs for social services and education intensified . Joblessness remains high among the older generation of refugees ; many elders still speak little English . The trauma of wars new immigrants escaped – loss of loved ones , sexual assault , years of privation – means that many bear heartache . For some in Lewiston , the long-term effects of trauma hinder acculturation , both for them and for their children .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Fourth graders at Connor Elementary School play recorders in music class .
Yet Lewiston is more vital than it was two decades ago . Of the city ’ s 36,000 residents , 6,000 are now African refugees and asylum-seekers . New immigrants work in health care , retail , industry , and food service . The first Somali American kids born in the city are high school juniors , and a new elementary school opened in September with a 900-student capacity – among the largest K-5s in Maine .
I ’ ve been reporting on Lewiston ’ s transformation for more than a decade now . Early on , the narrative I embraced about Lewiston ’ s newcomers was of passive refugee-victims . The life they fled in Africa did leave considerable scars , but over time I came to see that the new immigrants were not passive . Their resilience has moved and inspired me . One early acquaintance , Fatuma Hussein , founded United Somali Women of Maine to promote gender equality . She ’ d come to the U.S. at age 13 from a Somali refugee camp . The first line in my Lewiston notebook was hers : “ We are making new lives here . ”
Fatuma has made a new life . She and her husband , Muktar , have eight children , from college-aged to preschooler . The organization she founded in 2001 , known now as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine , is one of the city ’ s largest nonprofits . There are stresses : family responsibilities and a perpetually jammed schedule , plus funding pressures as other Somali nonprofits have cropped up . Then there ’ s Fatuma ’ s de facto role as spokeswoman . She ’ s become a voice of Somali women in Maine , asked to testify when the Legislature considers refugee-related bills and sometimes quoted by the media . That role has intensified in the aftermath of Donald Trump ’ s election . More and more she feels like a mandated emissary of the Lewiston Somali community , demonstrating through action that Muslims are not to be feared .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Fatuma Hussein is founder of the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine , a nonprofit that supports refugees and immigrant communities . “ In America , you can be whatever you want to be , ” she says .
Fatuma admits her kids are under a lot of pressure . She wants them to earn A ’ s . Wants them to get into top colleges . To reflect well on the Somali community . And to be happy , of course . In America , you can be whatever you want to be . She tells them this a lot . But to get there , they have to study and do right . Whenever the topic of drugs comes up , Fatuma tells them she will kill them – she uses this word – if they ever get into that kind of trouble . She ’ s exaggerating but says , “ I ’ d rather go to jail than see them having all this privilege and screw it up . ”
Fatuma was 11 , visiting relatives , when the Somali civil war erupted in 1991 after the collapse of Mohamed Siad Barre ’ s government . Her memories of what happened are fragments : being pressed into the back of a crowded flatbed truck , the truck tipping over , people on the ground , gunshots and smoke , bodies motionless . Fear in Utanga , the refugee camp where she wound up . Heartaching separation from her parents and siblings .
For Fatuma that time in Utanga , and the hard years in Atlanta when she arrived there as an adolescent with extended family , background everything . Her kids will have what she did not , and they will play their part in getting there .
The lives of Lewiston ’ s new immigrants are complex , often delineated by loss . Like Fatuma , Jamilo Maalim was separated from her parents . She was a toddler when militants attacked the family ’ s village and relatives fled with her to a refugee camp in Kenya . She lived there eight years . I met Jamilo when she was 22 , or maybe 23 . ( Record keeping , especially during escalations in the war , was haphazard , and many refugees don ’ t know their birthdate . ) Her downtown Lewiston apartment was spare but comfortable , decorated with swags of plastic flowers and photos of her daughter and son . The living room held a leatherette sofa and TV , and a soft rug where the family sat to eat their meals .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Immigrant teenagers play soccer on a basketball court at a park in Lewiston .
Jamilo ’ s physical traits – the set to her chin , upright posture , a warm but searching gaze – suggest both sensitivity and grit . When she arrived in Lewiston as a 9-year-old , she entered third grade . She was quick – learned English easily , made friends , loved gym class . Yet she struggled at home , shuttled among relatives who sometimes harshly punished .
At 17 she left school and moved to Massachusetts to live with a Somali boy she ’ d met online . She named the baby born that fall Aaliyah – Arabic for ascending . A year later , the relationship dissolved . Jamilo and Aaliyah wound up in a shelter for several months . After Jamilo returned to Lewiston with her daughter , her family pressured her into an arranged marriage . That ended after two years , just after her second child , Hamzah , turned 1 .
In spite of the instability , Jamilo kept moving forward . She returned to high school while pregnant with Aaliyah , got promoted to team leader within weeks of a new job , and played on a women ’ s soccer team . Almost daily , her extended family pressured her to return to the marriage . She wanted to raise her kids , work , and find a man with whom she could have a marriage that felt mutual . She wanted to sort through her past and choose her future .
“ Inshallah [ God willing ] , someday I will have a happy life , ” she told me not long after her marriage broke up .
Getting to know Lewiston ’ s Somali community , with its many strong , independent women , forced me to reevaluate my views on Muslim gender bias . It also made me wonder about what I ’ d absorbed – was still absorbing – about Islam overall .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Lula Abdi , originally from Somalia , helps kindergartners at Connor Elementary School learn their letters using clay figures .
Some Mainers I know describe a reexamination of values that stem from what they see as cultural richness in new immigrants . One Lewiston man put it like this : “ My Somali friends changed the way I [ see things ] . What matters are relationships . Material things do not equate with happiness. ” His observations resonated with me . For close to two centuries in Maine , my family ’ s life revolved around community , family , and faith . The values we abided by resemble the ones many of Lewiston ’ s newcomers hold close today .
A sizable minority of Mainers remains unhappy about the presence of the city ’ s newest residents . Lewiston sits in the state ’ s 2nd Congressional District . Mr. Trump won here in 2016 , giving him his only electoral vote in New England . The expansion of the city ’ s services to include translators and English as a second language instructors is anathema to many , as is coexistence with Islam . In recent years , the region ’ s anti-Islam faction has gained momentum and new followers .
Some Lewistonians blame the newcomers for whatever still feels wrong in the city – too few living-wage jobs , dilapidated infrastructure , the pockets of poverty that took hold after the mills closed .
In truth , and in spite of what some might claim , there have been setbacks along the way – most recently when several young new immigrants were arrested in connection with the beating death of a man during a fight in the downtown park . That tragedy , which occurred in June 2018 , prompted soul-searching among city leaders along with an investigation that so far has resulted in authorities charging one young person with manslaughter and two others with misdemeanor assault .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff The Androscoggin River skirts Lewiston , a city of 36,000 that was once a hub of textile and shoe manufacturing .
But here ’ s the thing : You can view the arrival of Muslim and other African newcomers as part of Lewiston ’ s struggles . Or you can see them as the closest thing the city has to a solution .
Phil Nadeau , the longtime deputy city administrator , was for more than a decade an outspoken advocate of the city ’ s rising population of refugees and asylum-seekers . In retirement he ’ s creating a website celebrating Lewistonian accord . “ I love this place , ” he told me of the city where he was born . “ I want to make sure we go down on the right side of history . ”
So much overlays the social landscape through which Fatuma and Jamilo and other new Lewistonians move . On a sunny autumn day in 2016 , Jamilo hosted Aaliyah ’ s fourth birthday party at an orchard outside Lewiston . Most of the guests were Somali . Among the tree-lined rows , women hoisted kids onto their shoulders and handed them bags for apples . One woman ’ s fiancé – the only male guest – helped . “ So many Eves , only one Adam , ” another woman joked .
At the cash register , one of Jamilo ’ s friends commented that , because they were picking the apples themselves , she ’ d thought they were free . The cashier ’ s face hardened . “ You shouldn ’ t take produce you can ’ t pay for , ” she said .
Jamilo ’ s friend protested – she was paying ; that ’ s why she ’ d brought her bag of apples to the register . If she didn ’ t have enough money , she ’ d take some out .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Immigrants from Egypt , Angola , Burundi , and other nations take an English language class .
“ I didn ’ t come here to steal your apples , ” the friend said .
The cashier glared . The friend swore . The cashier threatened to call the police . Party guests backed away from the register . Jamilo and a friend hurriedly cleaned up the remains of the lasagna they ’ d brought .
The party wasn ’ t ruined . The kids didn ’ t overhear the confrontation , and Jamilo shrugged it off . Her friend had a temper ; the cashier was rude . Jamilo had dealt with worse .
A month later , Mr. Trump won the election . Jamilo texted me the next day . She was shocked by the outcome , she said , and worried for herself and other Muslims . Then she added , “ God bless America ! I still love this country ! ” That was Wednesday . The next day at noon she left work to go home and make lunch . As she stepped into a crosswalk , a motorist sped past and shouted at her to take off her hijab . Soon afterward Jamilo texted , “ I ’ m terrified . ”
A few days after the incident , though still shaky , she reiterated her love for the U.S. “ This is my home , ” she said .
Jamilo never thinks about leaving the U.S. After Mr. Trump was elected , Somali social media lit up with rumors . Muslims would be required to wear identification bracelets . They ’ d have to sign a national registry . Muslim men would be monitored .
In the past three years , fear among newcomers in Lewiston has flowed and ebbed with the latest pronouncements out of Washington . But these are people who trekked miles across the desert , often under attack , to reach refugee camps where conditions were also perilous . Those who made it to the U.S. did so with a resolve that now characterizes their daily lives .
I first noticed this stoic reaction to what they considered bad news in the months after the presidential election . The new immigrants I knew worried about what was coming , yes . But there was a sense of continuity and a marked lack of bitterness . People were getting on with things , one man told me . In the months that followed , I saw it : Newcomers were quietly focusing on building their lives – on getting a new job , taking a college exam , preparing for a new baby .
Melanie Stetson Freeman/Staff Clothing with Somalia labels is popular in stores , like this one on Lisbon Street .
And on unity . “ We need to come together . As community , as ‘ we the people , ’ it is our responsibility to fix the divide caused by our political leader , ” community leader Abdikadir Negeye wrote in an opinion piece in the Lewiston Sun Journal . By “ we the people , ” Abdikadir means the state of Maine , the city of Lewiston – and its new immigrant community .
Bridging differences is keenly personal to Abdikadir . He ’ s Somali Bantu , a marginalized ethnic minority . More than 2,000 Bantus live in Lewiston . Most descend from various African tribes whose people were captured and sold during the Indian Ocean slave trade . Even after slavery was abolished in Somalia at the turn of the 20th century , a vast class divide remained .
Direct yet tender , Abdikadir is married to Ikran , an ethnic Somali woman . He refers to it as a “ mixed marriage. ” Abdikadir ’ s family was OK with the union ; hers pushed back and then relented . Abdikadir says he worried at first , when they were still engaged . But he loved Ikran . Their marriage would work . And so it has .
In the debate over the future of immigration in America , refugees and asylum-seekers are generally viewed as victims or as liabilities . Neither view encompasses the way I see new immigrants in Lewiston or the way they seem to see themselves : as initiators and collaborators . The proverb Iskaashato ma kufto – “ If people support one another , they do not fall ” – sums up the African way in Lewiston .
Tools in the new immigrant toolbox include consensus-seeking , de-emphasis on “ being right , ” and the goal of common understanding . In a public setting – say , a school committee meeting – newcomers feel the event should not adjourn until all who wish to speak have had a chance to do so . In part , this approach is cultural and ingrained . In part , it ’ s more newly acquired . Infighting – among clans , among ethnicities – has intensified Africa ’ s civil wars for generations . The newcomers know firsthand the costs of conflict . Those who made it to the U.S. want a fresh start – not unlike immigrants everywhere throughout the centuries .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
This much is indisputable : Before the arrival of its asylum-seekers and refugees , Lewiston was one more postindustrial city in slow fade . Now its newcomers are part of who it is – so too their life stories and their steady forward motion .
New immigrant kids in Lewiston are Mainers now . They grew up with snow and the piercing blue of a winter sky . They wear wool hats with their hijabs and go to sleep at night with the nearby Androscoggin flowing beneath the ice .