The Senate easily passed the most sweeping changes to immigration law in nearly 30 years , sending the landmark measure to the House , where conservative lawmakers threaten to slow the drive to grant legal status to many of the estimated 11 million people living illegally in the U.S .
The 68-32 vote Thursday marked a major step in a long-debated overhaul to the immigration system and drew ceremonial flourish . Vice President Joe Biden presided over the proceedings , and lawmakers rose from their desks to cast their votes , a rarely used gesture of formality .
Fourteen Republicans joined all of the Senate Democrats and two independents to support the measure , in a clear marker of how far the political calculus of immigration reform has shifted in the six years since a similar effort stalled on the Senate floor .
Immigration Law in America Review legislative milestones and key shifts in immigration policy .
The legislation , awaited by many among the nation 's growing Hispanic population , would rewrite the rules for future generations of foreigners seeking entry to the U.S .
`` Today , the Senate did its job . It 's now up to the House to do the same , '' President Barack Obama said .
Opponents denounced the measure as a deal that lacked meaningful enforcement measures and said it had been cooked up by special interest groups .
`` The bill before us rides here on a high ideal , but is nowhere close to what it promises , '' said Alabama Republican Sen. Jeff Sessions , who was one of the bill 's chief opponents . `` It is fatally flawed . ''
Supporters had hoped that 70 senators would back the bill , but they argued that 68 votes was still a formidable sign of support as the measure moves forward .
House Republican leaders have pledged to chart their own path , which is sure to diverge from the Senate 's bipartisan approach .
In particular , the two chambers are likely to clash over the Senate-backed provision to grant legal status and a possibility of citizenship to illegal immigrants , an idea rejected by many House conservatives .
`` The House is not going to take up and vote on whatever the Senate passes , '' House Speaker John Boehner said Thursday before the final Senate vote . But in a sign of how far House Republicans are from consensus on their alternative , Mr. Boehner would n't say what he wanted to see in the bill .
`` We 're going to wait to see what our constituents say next week , '' Mr. Boehner said . House Republicans will meet on the issue July 10 , after returning home for a weeklong Independence Day recess .
Mr. Boehner has said he would n't bring a bill to the House floor without support from more than half of his party 's members .
So far , at least , the House GOP seems prepared to shrug off the lopsided Senate vote .
Many Republican leaders have argued , in the wake of the party 's poor showing among Latino voters in the 2012 presidential election , that the GOP faces political risks if it does n't embrace an immigration overhaul .
But individual House GOP members see greater political risk if they vote for an immigration measure . Most House Republicans represent conservative districts , where many voters oppose a pathway to citizenship for people who entered the U.S. illegally .
Supporters of the Senate bill were optimistic Thursday , despite the apparent long odds in the House .
`` We surprised people getting it off the floor of the Senate with a large number , '' said New York Sen. Charles Schumer , a Democrat who helped write the bill . `` We 're going to surprise people in the House too . ''
If the bill were to become law , many immigrants now living in the U.S. illegally could gain a provisional status that allows them to work in the U.S. and travel freely . After 13 years , many would be able to become U.S. citizens .
Maria Barajas , who illegally crossed the border from Mexico 13 years ago with her husband and two children , said passage of the measure into law would mean brighter job prospects and the chance to open a hair salon .
`` We came with the hopes of every immigrant—for a better future , '' Mrs. Barajas said , as she watched the Senate vote on a big screen with about 200 others in Los Angeles . `` Today is the first step toward becoming whole . ''
Foreigners with higher levels of education and special skills could enter the U.S. more easily under the measure than the current system , which places more weight on family ties and country of origin . All employers would be required to use E-Verify , a government system that checks whether a person is eligible to work in the U.S .
David Cox , chief executive of Visalia , Calif.-based L.E . Cooke Co. , a wholesale nursery , said he started using E-Verify after an audit by Immigration and Customs Enforcement three years ago caused him to lose two dozen workers .
`` It was one of the worst days of my life terminating them , '' he said . `` If they get temporary status , I would hire them all back in a heartbeat . ''
First crafted by a bipartisan group of eight senators , the Senate bill emerged as a fragile compromise among Republicans , Democrats , labor unions and varied business interests .
A compromise last week that doubled the number of enforcement officers along the U.S.-Mexico border—a concession to Republicans—gave the bill a final push . In all , the legislation calls for spending more than $ 46 billion over 10 years to secure the U.S. border with Mexico .
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said the bill would boost economic growth and boost tax revenue , which in turn would shrink federal budget deficits by nearly $ 1 trillion over two decades , even with the increased security spending .
`` The fact is that the problem keeps getting worse . I mean , we now have 11 million people who are living here illegally , '' said Sen. Susan Collins , a Republican from Maine who voted against immigration legislation in 2007 .
The latest bill , she said , `` is a far better thought out , more comprehensive approach that will help ensure that a decade from now we 're not talking about 22 million people here illegally . ''
Liberals who opposed the 2007 legislation , including Sens . Bernie Sanders ( I. , Vt. ) and Tom Harkin ( D. , Iowa ) , said this bill included better labor protections and a more defined pathway to citizenship .
`` There are some things I may not like in this bill , but overall it provides that pathway of getting people out of the shadows and getting them a part of our economy , '' Mr. Harkin said .
—Miriam Jordan , Kristina Peterson and Rebecca Ballhaus contributed to this article .