Donald Trump announced plans for new immigration laws on Wednesday that would cut the total number of immigrants admitted to the US by half over a decade and prioritize those who can speak English or are well educated .
Trump 's immigration plan : could an Australian points model work in the US ? Read more
The proposed legislation , unveiled at the White House , would also cap the number of refugees admitted to the US every year at 50,000 , and eliminate the diversity visa lottery , which currently allocates 50,000 visas a year to residents of countries that do not currently send significant numbers of migrants to the US .
An estimate provided by the office of one of the bill ’ s sponsors , the Republican senator Tom Cotton , stated that if passed , the Reforming American Immigration for Strong Employment ( Raise ) Act would reduce the number of immigrants admitted to the US by 41 % in its first year and by 50 % over a 10-year-period .
Speaking alongside Cotton and another co-sponsor , the Republican senator David Perdue , Trump described the bill as “ legislation that would represent the most significant reform to our immigration system in a half century ” and heralded it as a the fulfillment of his campaign promise to create a “ merit-based immigration system that protects American workers and taxpayers ” .
Although Trump has long been vocal about illegal immigration , making a wall on the US-Mexico border his signature campaign policy , he has also advocated revamping legal immigration .
In his February address to Congress , the president advocated “ reforming our system of legal immigration ” and shifting to a merit-based system , citing Canada and Australia as models .
Cotton , from Arkansas , echoed Trump ’ s rhetoric , making a populist case for his legislation . The current immigration system shows “ we ’ re not committed to working-class Americans ” , he said , claiming it put “ great downward pressure on people who work with their hands and feet ” and meant the US “ lose [ s ] out on very best talent coming to our country ” .
Cotton and Perdue first introduced the bill in February and Cotton told reporters then that he had discussed the legislation with Trump as “ a concept ” .
Despite Trump ’ s support , however , the legislation has bipartisan detractors and is unlikely to pass Congress in its current form .
While Republicans have long been united on the issue of illegal immigration , legal immigration is far more divisive for them .
Many pro-business Republicans have long supported legal immigration , and the new legislation is likely to stoke the divides between this wing of the party and more populist Republicans .
Lindsey Graham of South Carolina , a frequent critic of Trump ’ s , denounced the proposed reduction in legal immigration , which he said would “ be devastating to [ South Carolina ’ s ] economy , which relies on this immigrant workforce ” .
For the Democrats , Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer told reporters the proposal to cut legal immigration “ doesn ’ t make much sense ” and said his party would not support the plan .
“ This is different than illegal immigration , ” Schumer said . “ This creates jobs in America . This helps America , and we think it ’ s a non-starter . ”
Later , the senior White House aide Stephen Miller got into a heated exchange while discussing the policy with reporters . Speaking at the lectern in the White House briefing room , Miller clashed with the CNN anchor Jim Acosta .
Acosta asked Miller if the proposal would violate the spirit of the poem New Colossus , inscribed at the base the Statue of Liberty , which includes the line : “ Give me your tired , your poor , Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free . ”
The White House criticized Acosta for his “ cosmopolitan bias ” and attacked him for asking about what the bill would do to the racial composition of immigrants to the United States by saying : “ That is one of the most outrageous , insulting , ignorant and foolish things said you ’ ve ever said . ”
Miller later apologized to Acosta before leaving the lecturn “ if things got heated ” but added that the CNN anchor “ made some pretty rough insinuations . ”