The announcement on Friday of the new policy prompted a wave of elation among illegal immigrant students , and praise and sighs of relief from Democrats and Latino leaders . Angry Republicans accused Mr. Obama of overstepping his legal bounds to avoid consulting with Congress and started to regroup , recognizing that the president had regained his momentum on immigration .
An important change , administration officials said , came from the Homeland Security secretary , Janet Napolitano , who approached the White House in mid-May with a plan to use existing laws to lift the threat of deportation for large numbers of illegal immigrant students .
After pressing tough enforcement since the beginning of the administration , Ms. Napolitano had been increasingly criticized by Latino and immigrant advocates who said she seemed to be thwarting the president ’ s policies . Since his first campaign in 2008 , Mr. Obama had pledged his support for legislation known as the Dream Act , a proposal before Congress that would provide a path to legal status for illegal immigrant students .
Ms. Napolitano ’ s shift helped ease rising impatience at the White House with her department . A big stumbling block , White House officials said , was resistance from career staff members and enforcement agents at Immigration and Customs Enforcement to a policy adopted a year ago . It required them to use prosecutorial discretion in picking and choosing among illegal immigrants facing deportation . It was the first time immigration officers had been asked to make such judgments as a regular practice .
The National ICE Council , a union that represents deportation agents , outspokenly questioned the policy , saying that its members had not been consulted and that they faced serious risks in distinguishing among immigrants who had violated the law .
White House officials were dismayed by the results of a review , initiated in November , of more than 411,000 deportation cases before the nation ’ s immigration courts . By this month , prosecutors had halted the deportation of only 593 illegal immigrant students .
“ Everyone was surprised by how modest the results were , ” said a senior White House official , who was not authorized to speak publicly .
At the same time , Senator Marco Rubio of Florida , a Republican whose star is rapidly rising in his party , was close to introducing his own bill to help illegal immigrant students by giving them a temporary status , something quite similar to what White House officials had in mind . They feared Mr. Rubio ’ s proposal would pre-empt the president , making it appear he did not want to work with Republicans .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
The White House was also awaiting a ruling from the Supreme Court , expected any day , on the administration ’ s lawsuit against Arizona over a tough state immigration enforcement law . Campaign officials feared an adverse decision could leave Mr. Obama empty-handed when he tried to mobilize Latino voters for the November election .
A big concern for Mr. Obama , White House officials said , was whether he had legal authority to offer relief to so many immigrants . In recent weeks , the White House counsel , Kathryn Ruemmler , and Homeland Security lawyers pored over the law and concluded they were on firm ground . The main point , the officials said , was that the policy would have to be carried out case by case — meaning the workload for the immigration bureaucracy would be huge .
The White House was less concerned about whether it would be circumventing Congress and enraging Republicans . “ Look , every time we sneeze in the direction of an immigrant , someone says it ’ s amnesty , ” the official said .
Under the policy , officials are to exercise discretion in deferring deportations of immigrants who qualify for two years . A grant of deferred action , as it is formally known , allows immigrants to apply for work permits . To be eligible , they must be 30 or younger and have come to the United States before they were 16 . They must be in school or high school graduates or military veterans , with no criminal records .
Mr. Obama was hearing often from exasperated Democratic lawmakers . Senator Durbin , who first introduced the Dream Act 11 years ago , said he advised the president recently that he would not be able to muster enough votes in the Senate to pass the bill before the November election . In a vote in late 2010 , the Dream Act was blocked by Republicans in the Senate .
“ Meanwhile , ” Mr. Durbin said , “ we were getting calls every week saying that young people were being deported . We would jump in and save them . But there was anger and uncertainty and fear among them . ”
Mr. Durbin said he had urged Mr. Obama to “ to do something much more sweeping. ” Senator Robert Menendez of New Jersey , a leading Hispanic Democrat , also prodded the White House .
The Democratic leaders ’ message found a sympathetic hearing from Cecilia Muñoz , a former immigration reform advocate who is a senior White House adviser to Mr. Obama .
In the end , the policy shift came quickly , White House officials said , with Mr. Obama making his choice early last week , leaving officials scrambling to prepare the logistics in time for his announcement on Friday .
The White House agreed that Ms. Napolitano would make the initial statements . Later Mr. Obama went before the news cameras in the White House Rose Garden .
“ As long as I ’ m president , I will not give up on this issue , ” Mr. Obama vowed , calling it “ the right thing to do . ”