Javier Palomarez is the president and CEO of the United States Hispanic Chamber of Commerce , America 's largest Hispanic business association . The opinions expressed in this commentary are his . CNN will host town hall meetings with the GOP presidential candidates in South Carolina on Wednesday and Thursday at 8 p.m . ET .
( CNN ) During the last Republican presidential debate , viewers witnessed a historic moment . Two leading presidential candidates , Sen. Ted Cruz and Sen. Marco Rubio -- both of them sons of Cuban immigrants -- debated which one would be tougher on immigration as president .
The exchange became tense when Rubio noted that Cruz does n't speak Spanish , which led to a quick response from Cruz -- in Spanish .
Besides Rubio 's questionable tactic of attempting to embarrass Cruz for an inability to speak Spanish -- not all Hispanic-Americans are fluent in Spanish , and that adds to the rich diversity of our community -- it is disheartening to watch Republican presidential candidates villainize the Hispanic community , then turn around and ask for our vote .
It has n't always been this way . Thirty-five years ago , the discourse on immigration during the 1980 GOP Presidential Debate was compassionate and reasonable .
When asked whether the United States should allow the children of undocumented immigrants to go to public schools , presidential candidate George H.W . Bush said , `` We 're creating a whole society of really honorable , decent , family-loving people that are in violation of the law , and secondly we 're exacerbating relations with Mexico . ... Let 's address ourselves to the fundamentals . These are good people , strong people . ''
In response , contender Ronald Reagan largely agreed , adding , `` Rather than talking about putting up a fence , why do n't we work out some recognition of our mutual problems , make it possible for them to come here legally with a work permit , and then , while they 're working and earning here , they pay taxes here . And when they want to go back , they can go back and cross . Open the borders both ways . ''
While the policy solutions proposed here are striking -- work visas , open borders and the recognition that the United States should maintain good relations with Mexico -- what really sets this apart from the current discourse on immigration is the tone . Both Bush and Reagan spoke from a place of understanding and compassion , and they both went on to act on it -- Reagan won the Republican nomination , but Bush became his vice president , and eventually President .
In fact , as President of the United States , Reagan would later sign legislation creating a pathway to citizenship for 3 million undocumented immigrants . This act earned him the support of many in the Hispanic community , some of whom now vote Democratic , but remember and praise Reagan as the President who made it possible for them to stay in the United States , build lives here , start businesses and raise families . Their children are now voters , too .
With this in mind , the Republican Party 's leadership already understands that the quality of its outreach to the Hispanic community in past years has been less than ideal .
In fact , the Republican National Committee 's 2013 Growth and Opportunity Project openly recognizes that the GOP has difficulty reaching out to Hispanics , stating : `` If Hispanic Americans hear that the GOP does n't want them in the United States , they wo n't pay attention to our next sentence . ... In essence , Hispanic voters tell us our Party 's position on immigration has become a litmus test , measuring whether we are meeting them with a welcome mat or a closed door . ''
Fortunately , the current crop of Republican presidential candidates are not representative of everyone in the party -- actually , they may not even be accurately portraying themselves .
Let 's recall that Rubio co-sponsored the Gang of Eight bill and that former Florida Gov . Jeb Bush has publicly stated that immigrants are an engine of economic vitality . These facts get lost in the shuffle when as presidential candidates , they try to seem tough on immigration in order to reach the GOP base .
But our finest example of contemporary principled Republican leadership on immigration has n't taken place on the national stage at all . Rather , it comes from Utah , where prominent leaders in business , law enforcement and religion from across the state , including two Republican former governors , came together in 2010 to sign the Utah Compact , a declaration of five principles guiding Utah 's discourse on immigration . The compact was also signed by the Catholic Diocese of Salt Lake City , the mayors of Salt Lake City and Salt Lake County , the state attorney general , a former U.S. senator and the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce .
If the Republican Party hopes to reach the Hispanic community during this election cycle , it should look at the Utah Compact as a modern model for reasonable discourse on immigration .
The compact 's principles recognize that immigration , including border policy , is a federal issue best addressed by the U.S. government in coordination with foreign countries .
It goes on to state that local law enforcement should be focused on fighting criminal activity , rather than on `` civil violations of federal code . '' Moreover , the compact makes the case that immigration policy should not unnecessarily separate families and commends immigrants for supporting the American economy as workers and taxpayers .
Interestingly , the compact not only acknowledges that immigrants are part of Utah 's society , but welcomes them by stating , `` the way we treat immigrants will say more about us as a free society and less about our immigrant neighbors . ... Utah should always be a place that welcomes people of good will . ''
Does any of this sound familiar ? The ideas enshrined in the Utah Compact resemble those that presidential candidates Bush and Reagan supported back in the 1980s . Perhaps it 's time for our 2016 presidential candidates -- like the Republicans in Utah -- to take a cue from the statesmen that came before them and return to the principles that allowed the Republican Party to win national elections .