“ We can NEVER allow Open Borders ! ” President Donald Trump tweeted on Saturday . | Jacquelyn Martin/AP Photo Immigration Trump warns of 'traffic ' and 'commercial ' delays at U.S.-Mexico border
President Donald Trump warned Saturday of “ traffic & commercial delays ” along the southern border as a result of the administration ’ s decision earlier this week to ramp up the number of immigration officers processing Central American migrants attempting to enter the U.S. through Mexico .
“ We have redeployed 750 agents at the Southern Border ’ s specific Ports of Entry in order to help with the large scale surge of illegal migrants trying to make their way into the United States , ” the president wrote on Twitter .
“ This will cause traffic & commercial delays until such time as Mexico is able to use … it ’ s [ sic ] powerful common sense Immigration Laws to stop illegals from coming through Mexico into the U.S. , and removing them back to their country of origin , ” Trump continued . “ Until Mexico cleans up this ridiculous & massive migration , we will be focusing on Border Security , not Ports of Entry . ”
In another post , the president implored congressional Democrats to join with Republican lawmakers and legislate fixes to “ the horrible , costly and foolish loopholes ” in U.S. immigration statutes .
“ Once that happens , all will be smooth , ” Trump tweeted . “ We can NEVER allow Open Borders ! ”
Morning Shift newsletter Get the latest on employment and immigration , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen on Monday directed Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAleenan to hasten the “ temporary reassignment of personnel and resources from across the agency to address the influx of migrants. ” She also announced plans to require that greater numbers of non-Mexican asylum-seekers stay in Mexico while they wait for their cases to be resolved .
Trump on Thursday retreated from his earlier threat to shut down the southern border , saying he would first impose auto tariffs on Mexico in an attempt to curb the rate of illegal drugs entering the U.S .
“ Before we close the border , we ‘ ll put the tariffs on the cars , “ the president told reporters in the Oval Office . “ I don ‘ t think we ‘ ll ever have to close the border. “