Pleading guilty to having committed illegal entry , which is a crime .
Paying fines , performing community service , or otherwise adhering to another form of punishment prescribed by the law . Those who do not come forward during this process are subject to automatic deportation if they remain in the U.S. , Bush said .
Paying back taxes , learning English , and refraining from committing “ substantial crimes ” to earn permanent legal residency . This is for those immigrants who follow step two .
Former Florida Gov . Jeb Bush on Monday reversed his position on illegal immigrants — now saying that he opposed a pathway to citizenship , a crucial issue in comprehensive immigration reform.In his new book , “ Immigration Wars , ” Bush presented a plan that specifically rules out the possibility of illegal immigrants obtaining full citizenship if they remain in the United States.The former governor , however , makes an exception for young undocumented immigrants , known as DREAMers , who were brought to the U.S. as minors.A copy of the book was obtained by ABC News. “ Permanent residency in this context , however , should not lead to citizenship , ” Bush said in the book , written with attorney Clint Bolick . “ It is absolutely vital to the integrity of our immigration system that actions have consequences — in this case , that those who have violated the laws can remain but can not obtain the cherished fruits of citizenship. “ To do otherwise would signal once again that people who circumvent the system can still obtain the full benefits of American citizenship , ” Bush continued . “ It must be a basic prerequisite for citizenship to respect the rule of law. ” Bush then calls for full citizenship for undocumented immigrants an “ undeserving reward for conduct we can not afford to encourage. ” According to Bush , immigrants who came to the United States without documentation as adults could apply for permanent legal residency by : The only means through which illegals can earn U.S. citizenship under the Bush plan would be to return to their home nations and apply legally , ABC reports . These immigrants , however , would be barred for either three years or 10 years if they returned to their home countries and applied for U.S. citizenship from there. “ We need to address this problem in a fair , firm , and comprehensive way , while at the same time fixing our immigration process so that in the future , millions of people do not feel the need to enter our country illegally because there are no viable means for them to do so lawfully , ” Bush said in the book.But for DREAMers , the Bush plan would provide a “ clear and definite path to citizenship ” for young immigrants who earn a high school diploma or GED , or serve in the military.These candidates would have been brought to the U.S. before they turned 18 , would have resided in the U.S. for at least 5 years , and would have a criminal record clear of any “ significant crimes , ” Bush said.These children would not have to plead guilty to a crime or suffer any legal consequences . They could obtain the existing form of permanent legal residency — a green card — and could then apply for citizenship after five years .