AUSTIN , Texas — Rep. Beto O ’ Rourke and four other Democratic members of Congress toured a remote tent city in West Texas on Saturday where they said that 2,700 immigrant teens are being held at a cost of roughly $ 1 million per day .
The lawmakers urged the nonprofit running the facility not to renew a federal contract that expires Dec. 31 , a longshot request that could effectively shutter the camp . It was supposed to be temporary but has instead taken in more children and taken on a permanent feel with soccer fields , a dining facility and tents housing separate sleeping quarters for boys and girls .
O ’ Rourke - a Texan who has been mentioned as a potential 2020 presidential candidate after nearly upsetting Republican Sen. Ted Cruz in his deep-red state - was joined by U.S. Sens . Mazie Hirono of Hawaii , Jeff Merkley of Oregon and Tina Smith of Minnesota , and California Rep. Judy Chu .
O ’ Rourke said he and his colleagues weren ’ t allowed to speak to the children in any meaningful way .
“ They kind of nodded their heads , but what are they going to say when everyone around them is watching ? ” O ’ Rourke said after touring the facility . “ But there was something in the look on their faces that we saw , the way that they weren ’ t really engaged in the sports that they were playing out on those fields . ”
“ We need to shut it down , ” Chu added . “ It is inhumane . It is a child prison . It has no right to exist . ”
O ’ Rourke made no mention about his possible White House aspirations after making his fourth visit to the camp just outside Tornillo . He noted the area was about an hour ’ s drive from his native El Paso , which borders Mexico at the westernmost tip of Texas .
“ It ’ s in a remote location on purpose so that the American people do not know what ’ s happening here , ” O ’ Rourke told reporters .
The lawmakers said 2,700 boys and girls between the ages of 13 and 17 were being held at Tornillo . They described touring the tents housing the teens , but could only ask light questions . O ’ Rourke said he asked a few of them what countries they were from - Guatemala and Honduras , they said - and received assurances that the conditions were “ OK . ”
Tornillo opened as a temporary facility in June , amid what President Donald Trump ’ s administration described as an emergency situation on the U.S.-Mexico border . Since then , the contract keeping it open has been renewed , and the numbers of kids being held inside has grown , though determining how fast and by how much has proven difficult .
The lawmakers said the contractor running the facility , BCFS Health and Human Services , told them that the tent city has cost taxpayers $ 144 million since opening , or about $ 1 million a day .
The Democrats said they urged BCFS Health and Human Services to refuse to renew its contract with the U.S. government . But even if that happened , the lawmakers said they weren ’ t sure where the children being held at Tornillo would be transferred as a result .
The Associated Press previously reported that the Trump administration waved FBI fingerprint checks for caregivers and short-staffing mental health workers at Tornillo .
O ’ Rourke said Saturday that the contractor told him that a recent agreement with Texas now allows for state background checks , but that the facility still doesn ’ t have the capacity to do FBI fingerprint checks .
The lawmakers said many of the teens have family already in the United States who would like to take them . But federal authorities have begun fingerprinting and conducting background checks on would-be “ sponsors , ” resulting in 170 apprehensions on possible immigration violations .
They also said that even with the added scrutiny , the contractor said 1,300 children have relatives ready to take them but have remained at Tornillo due to unexplained federal delays .
O ’ Rourke said public pressure could force federal authorities to close Tornillo but in the meantime federal polices mean the country is “ turning our backs on these people . ”