Members of a migrant caravan walk past police on the highway to Sao Pedro Tapanatepec , Mexico , October 27 , 2018 . ( Ueslei Marcelino/Reuters )
Law enforcement is not just a way to deal with individual violators but also a way to remind society at large that there can be no civilization without legality .
What makes citizens obey the law is not always their sterling character . Instead , fear of punishment — the shame of arrest , fines , or imprisonment — more often makes us comply with laws . Law enforcement is not just a way to deal with individual violators but also a way to remind society at large that there can be no civilization without legality .
Or , as 17th-century British statesman George Savile famously put it : “ Men are not hanged for stealing horses , but that horses may not be stolen . ”
In the modern world , we call such prompt , uniform , and guaranteed law enforcement “ deterrence , ” from the Latin verb meaning “ to frighten away. ” One protester who disrupts a speech is not the problem . But if unpunished , he green-lights hundreds more like him .
Worse still , when one law is left unenforced , then all sorts of other laws are weakened .
The result of hundreds of “ sanctuary cities ” is not just to forbid full immigration enforcement in particular jurisdictions . They also signal that U.S. immigration law , and by extension other laws , can be ignored .
The presence of an estimated 12 million or more foreign nationals unlawfully living in the U.S. without legal consequence sends a similar message . The logical result is the current caravan of thousands of Central Americans now inching its way northward to enter the U.S. illegally .
If the border were secure , immigration laws enforced , and illegal residence phased out , deterrence would be reestablished and there would likely be no caravan .
Campus protests often turn violent . Agitators shout down and sometimes try to physically intimidate speakers with whom they disagree . Most of the disrupters are upper-middle-class students . Many have invested up to $ 200,000 in their higher education , often to ensure well-paying careers upon graduation .
Protesters assume that ignoring laws about peaceful assembly poses no consequences . Usually student disrupters are right . College administrators will typically shrug at even violent protests rather than call police to make arrests .
Yet if a few bold disrupters were actually charged with misdemeanors or felonies and had arrests tarnishing their otherwise sterling résumés , there would likely be far fewer illegal and violent protests .
In the last two years , a number of celebrities have openly fantasized about doing physical harm to the president of the United States . Madonna , Kathy Griffin , Johnny Depp , Robert De Niro , Snoop Dogg , and other stars have expressed their wishes that Donald Trump might be beaten up , blown up , cut up , or shot up .
Their shared premise is that they are too famous , influential , or wealthy to expect consequences that ordinary citizens might face for making threats to the safety of the president of the United States . If the next time a Hollywood icon tweeted or voiced a threat to the president he or she was subsequently put on a no-fly list , the current assassination chic would quickly stop .
Every person assumes the freedom to eat safely in a restaurant , to walk to work without disturbance , and to relax without fear of violence . Now , that is not always the case , at least not if one is deemed politically influential and conservative .
White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders , Senators Ted Cruz and Mitch McConnell , and Representative Devin Nunes must worry that when they venture out in public , protesters will scream in their face , attempt to bar their passage or disrupt their meal — and do so without legal ramifications .
Trump is a polarizing president , and his critics have decided that extraordinary and sometimes extralegal measures are morally justified to stop him . Supposedly high-minded ends are seen as justifying unlawful means . Helping undocumented immigrants evade the law , stopping the Supreme Court nomination of Brett Kavanaugh , or otherwise thwarting Trump all warrant special immunity .
The problem with ignoring laws is that it is contagious — and can boomerang .
Sanctuary cities could in theory birth conservative sanctuary zones . Would today ’ s protesters wish for other jurisdictions to nullify federal laws and court rulings concerning abortion , gun registration and gay marriage ?
If thousands of Hondurans in a caravan are deemed above the law , then why not exempt future mass arrivals of Chinese or South African immigrants ?
If Cruz and other Republican politicos can ’ t eat in peace , will Barack Obama , Dianne Feinstein , and Nancy Pelosi soon face the same disruptions — the illegality justified by higher moral concerns ?
If students can block a right-wing speaker or storm a diner , will they also object when anti-abortion protesters bar the passage of a pro-choice campus guest ?
German philosopher Immanuel Kant noted that “ anarchy is law and freedom without force . ”
Translated to our current context , Kant might say that all our high-minded talk about the Bill of Rights means absolutely nothing without the cop on the beat and the local district attorney .