John McCain favors comprehensive reform but Jeff Sessions fears it would go awry . | AP Photos Immigration unity hits Hill reality
About that GOP epiphany on immigration after the election , there ’ s one small problem that could scuttle a deal : Republicans in Congress can ’ t even agree on what to do .
Some want piecemeal reform , picking off the most popular planks and leaving the tough stuff — like whether to give millions of illegal immigrants a path to citizenship — for later . Others side with Democrats in saying only a comprehensive deal will get at the problem .
The same rifts that existed long before the election are still there . So at least at this early date , there ’ s scant evidence that the deal that looked so promising on Nov. 7 will materialize .
“ Doing a comprehensive bill is a big mistake , ” Rep. Raul Labrador ( R-Idaho ) said . “ What you end up having is a bill that nobody likes . Everybody hates one piece of it . It ’ s a way to actually avoid doing what we need to do to solve the immigration problem . ”
Republicans such as Labrador who favor a piece-by-piece approach believe that starting with the more politically digestible pieces could build bipartisan momentum for a broader overhaul . They also note the frustration bred by big legislative efforts such as the Affordable Care Act and the Dodd-Frank financial reform law .
“ There ’ s going to be a natural desire to try to pair things up ” on immigration , said Sen. John Cornyn ( R-Texas ) , the incoming Senate minority whip . “ But at some point , the bill gets so big and cumbersome that I think by virtue of the size alone , that that makes it harder to pass . ”
The general outlines of a comprehensive package are clear . It would include provisions on border security and law enforcement , reforms to the legal immigration system and some sort of solution for the illegal immigrants living in the United States .
It ’ s that last piece that Democrats fear would get left behind if Congress took apart immigration reform . A pathway to citizenship is the one thing Democrats and immigration advocates will insist on , but it ’ s sure to encounter the strongest GOP resistance .
“ That is probably the part of immigration reform that needs the greatest reform , ” said Rep. Charles Gonzalez ( D-Texas ) , the outgoing chairman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus . “ That ’ s why I ’ ve never really understood that people really believe that this piecemeal thing is going to get us anywhere . ”
“ Why only half fix the problem ? Let ’ s go ahead and fix the whole thing , ” added California Rep. Xavier Becerra , the incoming House Democratic Caucus chairman . “ If you ’ ve got a machine that ’ s not working well , you ’ re not going to fix just half of it and have it still not work well , let ’ s go ahead and fix it right . ”