( CNN ) – Comprehensive immigration reform , approved last month by the Senate , still doesn ’ t have a clear path forward in the House of Representatives , lawmakers said Sunday .
Even the bill ’ s supporters , like Rep. Raul Grijalva , D-Arizona , weren ’ t optimistic that the measure that passed with bipartisan support in the upper chamber would find a way forward .
“ They can pick it to death. ” Grijalva said of Republican lawmakers , speaking on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union. ” “ They can try to take away a pathway to citizenship , which are nonstarters for many of my colleagues . Or they can go forward and allow something comprehensive , something that is bipartisan and something that will move us off this position . But right now , the comments by ( House Speaker John ) Boehner have been anything but encouraging . ”
Boehner has said since the spring that the House would not take up the Senate ’ s version of immigration reform , which includes a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants that hinges upon new requirements for bolstering border security .
Even after Republicans huddled Thursday to determine a way forward on immigration reform , it was still unclear what measures the body would take up . GOP lawmakers reiterated their opposition to the Senate bill and said they would take their time in crafting legislation that fulfills their wishes for even greater strengthening of border security .
The question of a pathway to citizenship , however , still divides Republicans . Participants in the meeting described a 50-50 split over the undocumented immigrant issue .
While some Republicans have labeled any pathway as “ amnesty , ” others have been urging their party to embrace a track to legal status as a way to show the party 's commitment to fixing a broken system and addressing concerns of Hispanic Americans - the nation 's largest minority demographic , which voted heavily for Democrats in last year ’ s election .
That argument was blasted Sunday by Rep. Steve King , an Iowa Republican who ’ s remained firmly opposed to allowing undocumented immigrants a pathway to citizenship .
“ It 's a mistake for Republicans to believe the election was about immigration , ” King said on “ Fox News Sunday. ” “ I do n't remember a debate between Barack Obama and Mitt Romney on immigration . I remember waking up the morning of the 7th of November , after the election , and hearing immigration was the reason that Mitt Romney was n't president-elect on that day . ”
King expressed skepticism at the effectiveness of any immigration law , including one bolstering border security , saying he doubted President Barack Obama would effectively enforce the new provisions .
But even Republican Senate Leader Mitch McConnell said Sunday the House should vote on some kind of immigration measure , saying the current system was sorely in need of a revamp .
“ I 'm a big fan of what legal immigration has done for our country , ” McConnell said , pointing to his wife , Elaine Chao , who was born in Taiwan and went on to become U.S. labor secretary under George W. Bush . “ I hope , even though the Senate bill in my view is deficient on the issue of border security , I hope we can get an outcome for the country that improves the current situation . I do n't think anybody is satisfied with the status quo on immigration , and I hope the House will be able to move forward on something . ”
McConnell appeared on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press , ” as did Sen. Harry Reid , the Senate majority leader , who said the House would have to vote on immigration since so many Americans support some kind of change to the system .
“ Yes , they will act , ” Reid said . “ They have to . This is something that the vast , vast majority of Republicans , Democrats , and independents support , and John Boehner should let the House vote . ”