After years of protecting and supporting sanctuary cities across the country , which allow illegal aliens to evade federal immigration laws , Senator Dianne Feinstein and Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton are trying to save face in light of the killing of 32-year-old Kate Steinle by illegal alien Francisco Sanchez in San Francisco last week . Sanchez admitted in a jailhouse interview that he went to San Francisco after being deported five times because he knew he would n't be turned over to Immigration and Customs Enforcement .
“ I strongly believe that an undocumented individual , convicted of multiple felonies and with a detainer request from ICE , should not have been released , ” Ms. Feinstein said according to the Washington Times . “ We should focus on deporting convicted criminals , not setting them loose on our streets . As a member of the Judiciary Committee , I am looking at whether additional federal legislation may be necessary . ”
Feinstein may be condemning sanctuary city polices that protect violent felons now , but back in 2013 she offered an amendment to the Gang of 8 legislation that protected cities like San Francisco from federal crack downs and emboldened local law enforcement to keep federal immigration agents out of jails . In other words , her amendment allowed sanctuary cities to continue their harboring of illegal aliens and evasion of federal law .
`` The city made a mistake , not to deport someone that the federal government strongly felt should be deported , '' Clinton said during an interview with CNN . `` So I have absolutely no support for a city that ignores the strong evidence that should be acted on . ''
In 2007 during her first presidential run , Clinton defended sanctuary cities and claimed they keep all citizens safe . Via Breitbart :
“ If local law enforcement begins to act like immigration officers what that means is that you will have people not reporting crimes . You will have people hiding from the police . And I think that is a real direct threat to the personal safety and security of all the citizens . So this is a result of the failure of the federal government and that ’ s where it needs to be fixed . ”
These are the consequences of liberal utopia , open border , free immigration for all policies . While Feinstein and Clinton claim sanctuary cities were never intended to protect violent felons like Francisco Sanchez , they fail to acknowledge that their allowance of law breaking by all illegal immigrants leads to tragedy .