The proposal is scheduled to undergo its first major vetting on Friday . Immigration bill ready for debut
Senate negotiators have reached an agreement on a bill to make the most substantive changes to immigration laws in nearly three decades .
The bipartisan Gang of Eight plans to file its bill Tuesday , according to a leading supporter , Marco Rubio . A small group of interest groups are scheduled to attend a closed-meeting with senators before the bill is introduced .
A public roll-out was delayed because of the deadly blasts at the Boston Marathon , but the legislation is certain to spark an emotional debate that will dominate Washington for the remainder of the year .
Champions of the bill will argue it ’ s high time that lawmakers do something to address the 11 million undocumented immigrants living inside the United States . But foes will decry the legislation as “ amnesty ” for creating a 13-year pathway to citizenship for that population , as well as slam the bill ’ s ultimate cost , including potentially providing millions of people with pricey new federal benefits . Conservatives are also likely to demand that the complex bill gets a long and adequate hearing , although only two congressional hearings are currently scheduled .
Expected to attend the press conference with the bipartisan senators are a who ’ s who of interest groups from an array of interest groups from all sides of the political spectrum , including : Tom Donahue , president and CEO of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce ; Richard Trumka , AFL-CIO president ; Eliseo Medina , SEIU secretary-treasurer ; Clarissa Martinez , director of civic engagement and immigration , National Council of La Raza ; Al Cardenas , chair of the American Conservative Union ; and Grover Norquist , founder and president of Americans for Tax Reform .
Meanwhile , Sens . Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) and John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) — members of the bipartisan group that crafted the bill — will go to the White House Tuesday to meet with President Barack Obama about the deal , according to a source familiar with the meeting .
Some immigration reform proponents decided to move forward with their plans despite the gang ’ s decision to delay the public roll out . Brent Wilkes , head of League of United Latin American Citizens , said that he planned to brief the group ’ s national board of directors based on the 17-page summary of the legislation that has leaked out . Latinos United for Immigration Reform also is holding a conference call to go over the specifics . The group has several town halls scheduled across the country .
One immigration lobbyist said that the leaks have caused confusion .
“ It ’ s like herding cats until you actually see this bill , ” the lobbyist said , noting that there are rumors that some of the details are still being hashed out .
The legislation would have a far-reaching impact on virtually every corner of the American economy .
The bill would affect visas for high-tech workers , create a new “ W-visa ” program to attract low-skilled workers — one of the last stumbling blocks before senators reached a deal . It would also require businesses to implement new electronic-verification requirements to check the immigration status of their employees . In a requirement for conservatives if undocumented immigrants are legalized , the bill would call for billions of dollars to be spent on tightened security at the U.S.-Mexico border with a goal of apprehending 90 percent of those crossing the border in “ high-risk ” areas .
The proposal , which is expected to be officially unveiled this week is titled the “ Border Security , Economic Opportunity , and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013 , ” according to a copy of the summary provided to ███ . The massive piece of legislation will undergo its first public vetting on Friday at a hearing before the Senate Judiciary Committee .