Rubio 's most recent comments about immigration reflect a complicated political reality . Rubio sparks immigration debate
Marco Rubio ’ s latest comments supporting scaled-back immigration reform may not be the death knell for the effort that they seem .
Immigration reformers argue that the remarks don ’ t actually change the political calculus in the GOP-led House , which was never going to pass the Senate ’ s comprehensive bill anyway . Reform foes say Rubio lost any credibility he had with House conservatives by authoring the Gang of Eight bill in the first place .
The Florida senator has long called for giving House Republicans some space to come up with their own plan . And some advocates believe Rubio ’ s call to focus on piecemeal aspects of reform could actually pave the way for some kind of agreement between the House and Senate .
“ This is making a more doable ask for House Republicans . House Republicans are trying to pass pieces that add up to a package , ” said Tamar Jacoby , the president and CEO of ImmigrationWorks USA , a pro-reform business group . “ ‘ We ’ ll meet you halfway ’ is essentially what the message is . ”
But Rubio became the target of criticism on Monday from some outside reform advocates and opponents as they alternatively groused that he is either ditching the Senate Gang of Eight bill he once so fiercely supported or still trying to repair his image with conservative voters who don ’ t want to legalize the millions of undocumented immigrants in the country to begin with .
Rubio ’ s comments come amid a small and very narrow window for action on immigration reform before the end of the year . House Republican leaders have no current plans to vote on any type of reform legislation — but that could change if momentum grows for action in the House .
Since the Senate bill ’ s passage in June , Rubio has stayed away from efforts to publicly pressure House Republicans on immigration reform . He has repeatedly opted not to meet with the other seven Gang senators to devise a strategy on how to move reform through the House , and his comments are the next chapter in Rubio ’ s hands-off effort in the House .
Randy Johnson , a senior vice president at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , said during a conference call Monday that he believed at least one or two immigration bills , “ if not more , ” will come to the House floor in the weeks ahead . He added that he viewed Rubio ’ s comments as a way to allow House Republicans to find their own way on immigration reform .
“ It certainly wasn ’ t saying , ‘ Let ’ s pull the plug on what ’ s going on in the House ’ or that the House should pull the plug , ” said Johnson , who oversees the Chamber ’ s immigration reform efforts .
The Florida Republican — a champion of immigration reform in the Senate — went mostly quiet after senators passed the landmark legislation he co-authored in June . As his favorability ratings within the GOP took a hit , Rubio backed away from his legislative achievement and instead highlighted more conservative-friendly measures , such as ways to dismantle Obamacare .
Still , his most recent comments about immigration — relayed through a spokesman — reflect a complicated political reality for the first-term senator and oft-mentioned 2016 GOP presidential candidate who has staked major political capital on passing the first significant overhaul of immigration laws in a generation .
Once a darling of the tea party movement , Rubio saw his poll numbers plummet in the months since the Senate immigration bill passed with 68 votes — a political consequence of his pro-reform efforts that his office acknowledged . A CNN/ORC International poll released in September showed that Rubio had the backing of 9 percent of Republicans and GOP-leaning independents for the 2016 presidential nomination . Those figures had tumbled from earlier this year .
Now Rubio is calling for a smaller-scale approach to immigration reform , urging lawmakers to focus on narrower bills that have broad consensus rather than gambling on a comprehensive approach that lacks “ sufficient support ” in the Republican-led House . He would not oppose going to a conference committee but would want any House-Senate negotiations to be limited to what the House passes .
“ We should not allow an inability to do everything to keep us from doing something , ” Rubio spokesman Alex Conant said Monday .