A divided U.S. appeals court late Friday refused to immediately allow the Trump administration to enforce a ban on asylum for any immigrants who illegally cross the U.S.-Mexico border .
The ban is inconsistent with an existing U.S. law and an attempted end-run around Congress , a panel of the 9th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals said in a 2-1 decision .
“ Just as we may not , as we are often reminded , ‘ legislate from the bench , ’ neither may the Executive legislate from the Oval Office , ” 9th Circuit Judge Jay Bybee , a nominee of Republican President George W. Bush , wrote for the majority .
A spokesman for the U.S. Department of Justice , Steven Stafford , did not have comment . But he referred to an earlier statement that called the asylum system broken and said the department looked forward to “ continuing to defend the Executive Branch ’ s legitimate and well-reasoned exercise of its authority to address the crisis at our southern border . ”
At issue is President Donald Trump ’ s Nov. 9 proclamation that barred anyone who crossed the U.S.-Mexico border between official ports of entry from seeking asylum . Trump issued the proclamation in response to caravans of migrants approaching the border .
A lower court judge temporarily blocked the ban and later refused to immediately reinstate it . The administration appealed to the 9th Circuit for an immediate stay of Judge Jon Tigar ’ s Nov. 19 temporary restraining order .
In a dissenting opinion Friday , 9th Circuit Judge Edward Leavy said the administration “ adopted legal methods to cope with the current problems rampant at the southern border. ” Nothing in the law the majority cited prevented a rule categorically barring eligibility for asylum on the basis of how a person entered the country , Leavy , a nominee of Republican President Ronald Reagan , said .
In his Nov , 19 ruling , Tigar sided with legal groups who argued that federal law is clear that immigrants in the U.S. can request asylum regardless of whether they entered legally .
The president “ may not rewrite the immigration laws to impose a condition that Congress has expressly forbidden , ” the judge said in his order .
The ruling led to an unusual public dispute between Trump and Chief Justice John Roberts after Trump dismissed Tigar — an appointee of Trump ’ s predecessor — as an “ Obama judge . ”
Roberts responded with a statement that the federal judiciary doesn ’ t have “ Obama judges or Trump judges , Bush judges or Clinton judges . ”