Before the vote in Virginia , pundits on both the right and left were speculating that Mr. Gillespie ’ s anti-immigrant strategy was working . But in the end , election results and polling data in Virginia proved all that thinking was wrong . While each state has its own demographics and distinct politics , Virginia has voters who span demographic and economic spectrums . Majorities of voters of all races and ethnicities rejected anti-immigrant stereotypes as ugly and wrong .
According to an election eve survey of voters by Latino Decisions , Latino voters said that Mr. Gillespie ’ s MS-13 ads made them less enthusiastic about him , by a 45-point margin . But it wasn ’ t just Latino voters . By a 23-point margin ( 52 to 29 ) , whites in Virginia also said the MS-13 ads turned them away from Mr. Gillespie , as did African-American and Asian-American voters by larger margins .
Data speaks louder than punditry , and our regression analysis of survey data paints a clear picture . Exposure to Mr. Gillespie ’ s MS-13 ads actually helped drive white college-educated voters away from the Republicans . When we analyzed findings for white independents and Republicans , voters who were aware of the MS-13 ads were significantly more likely to vote for Mr. Gillespie ’ s Democratic opponent . What should be alarming for Republicans is that this effect wasn ’ t limited to the governor ’ s race . The Gillespie campaign had coattail effects , but of the wrong stripe . Across all racial groups , those who were aware of Mr. Gillespie ’ s MS-13 ads were significantly more likely to vote for Democratic candidates for Virginia ’ s House of Delegates .
This means that not only is it morally just for Democrats to position themselves as the party that stands against hatred and bigotry and in favor of inclusiveness and opportunity , but it is also a strategically sound position for winning votes . Simultaneously , it sends a clear , welcoming message to Latino , African-American and Asian-American voters , while also winning over enough of the white voters who also oppose immigrant bashing .
This phenomenon is particularly true of voters who will decide crucial House and Senate races in 2018 : people of color and white college-educated voters — also known as the Democratic base . Mr. Trump and his fellow Republicans are clearly gearing up for a similar anti-immigrant effort in 2018 . But now the mask has been pulled off . Voters get it . Democrats have an opportunity to speak out strongly against bigotry . And in doing so , they have a path to victory in 2018 and beyond .