President Trump looks like he might be gearing up to touch the third rail of immigration policy in 2017 : ending the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which allowed young unauthorized immigrants to work legally and protected them from deportation .
Axios reported Thursday night that Trump is “ seriously considering ” ending DACA , after months of refusing to make a decision about the future of the 780,000 immigrants it ’ s protected .
He ’ ll have to make a decision in the next few weeks . A group of state officials , led by Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton , is threatening to sue the administration to end DACA if Trump doesn ’ t pull the plug by September 5 — which could result in the program being put on hold in federal courts .
But politically and legislatively , ending DACA could open the floodgates .
The unauthorized immigrants it protects are politically sympathetic and well-connected — they ’ ve gone to school in the US , are fluent in English , and may not have even known they weren ’ t in the country legally before applying to college . Some polling finds Americans oppose ending the program by a two-to-one margin .
That may be why Trump has been reticent to kill DACA , even as he ’ s cracked down on immigration enforcement in his first months in office . In July , he told reporters he ’ s still wrestling with it : `` It ’ s a decision that I make and it ’ s a decision that ’ s very , very hard to make . ”
Trump ’ s own White House is divided — Attorney General Jeff Sessions ( who would be in charge of defending DACA in court if the state officials ’ lawsuit went forward ) wants to kill it , while the Department of Homeland Security ( which was , until recently , led by Trump Chief of Staff John Kelly ) is reticent to get rid of the only remaining vestige of President Obama ’ s efforts to prioritize deportations so that long-resident unauthorized immigrants with no criminal records weren ’ t targeted .
But the threat of a lawsuit may have tipped the scales . And then all legislative hell could break loose .
The Trump administration has had several opportunities to end DACA — either by nullifying the existing protections for the 780,000 people who ’ ve already been approved under the program or by refusing to accept any new people or renew the two-year protections for existing DACA recipients when they expire .
It hadn ’ t taken any of them yet . Even when it formally killed an abortive 2014 program expanding deferred action , it explicitly made clear that it wasn ’ t killing the program that was already in effect .
This has been a sore spot for immigration hardliners , who understood Trump ’ s campaign promise to roll back President Obama ’ s “ unconstitutional executive orders ” as a promise to end DACA . ( DACA ’ s constitutionality hasn ’ t been successfully challenged , but immigration hawks believe the president ’ s legal authority to protect immigrants from deportation in individual cases doesn ’ t extend to a program that allowed certain immigrants to apply en masse . )
In June , a group of 10 Republican state officials , led by Texas AG Paxton , took matters into their own hands . They wrote the administration a letter asking them to end the DACA program — and threatening to file a federal lawsuit over the program ’ s constitutionality if the administration failed to act .
That letter changed the calculus about whether to end DACA in two big ways . First of all , it shifted the focus from the Department of Homeland Security , which administers the program — and whose secretary , John Kelly , appears loath to go after DACA recipients — and toward the Department of Justice , which would have to defend DACA if the states took it to court .
That means , ultimately , it would come down to US Attorney General Jeff Sessions — a longtime immigration hardliner on legal and unauthorized immigration — as to whether , and how , to stand up for the program .
While Sessions ’ s relationship with Trump has been strained for much of his presidency , it ’ s clear he has a lot of influence on this issue . In July , then-Homeland Security Secretary Kelly told members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus that the decision about DACA was entirely up to Sessions . And even if Trump decided to overrule his AG , it ’ s not clear how he could compel him to forcefully defend a program in court that Sessions wants to end .
It might not matter anyway . Here ’ s the other way the state AGs ’ letter changed the calculus : If the administration doesn ’ t end DACA , and the states sue them over it , the program will likely be put on hold — at least temporarily — by a federal judge .
The challenge to DACA would be used to revive the suit against the 2014 deferred action program — which guarantees it would be heard by Southern District of Texas Judge Andrew Hanen . Republican state officials selected Hanen ’ s court when they challenged the 2014 deferred action program , and he hasn ’ t disappointed them — he ’ s clearly skeptical of the government ’ s actions to limit immigration enforcement . It ’ s not an ironclad guarantee that Hanen would rule against DACA , but it ’ s a pretty safe bet . And the fairly conservative Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals might agree .
Under those circumstances , the program would at least be on hold for months or even years . And not only would the administration ’ s hand have been forced , but it would look like a loss for Trump — yet another court defeat on immigration , this time from the other side .
It ’ s not hard to imagine that President Trump might want to avoid a public loss . If he ’ s convinced that DACA is going to end anyway , he may choose to do it himself — no matter how sympathetic he feels toward the DREAMers .
If DACA falls , it could start a chain reaction in Congress
The deadline given by the state attorneys general in their letter to the administration was September 5 . That happens to be the day Congress is slated to return from its August recess .
Congress can ’ t stop the Trump administration from ending DACA , or Republican state governments from suing if it doesn ’ t . But if DACA does end , the pressure to act shifts to the legislative branch .
While immigration isn ’ t nearly as bipartisan an issue as it used to be — Democrats have overwhelmingly opposed efforts to ramp up enforcement , while few Republicans are still willing to come out in favor of legalization for unauthorized immigrants — there are still some Republican members of Congress who want to keep DACA recipients in the US . After the 2016 presidential election , members of both parties introduced a bill that would grant legal status to DACA recipients in case Trump ended the program ; this spring , a group of Republican members of the House introduced their own legalization bill , called the “ Recognizing America ’ s Children ” ( RAC ) Act .
Those bills haven ’ t moved yet because there hasn ’ t yet been a threat to DACA . But if nearly 800,000 people are suddenly forced out of their jobs and faced with the threat of deportation at any time , supporters of legalization are likely to start pushing hard for Congress to take action .
Some conservatives , whether openly or behind closed doors , admit that they ’ re willing to accept a compromise that results in DACA recipients getting to stay in the US . ( After all , they ’ re US-educated and fluent in English ; for people worried about immigrants as threats to cultural integration , DACA recipients are not the most imminent risk . ) But they want something in return : expanded immigration enforcement to target new arrivals and unauthorized immigrants living in the US , cuts to legal immigration in the future , or both .
The White House itself is reportedly envisioning a grand bargain : In return for allowing DACA recipients to become legal immigrants , they want future cuts to legal immigration ( possibly in the form of the Trump-endorsed RAISE Act , which would cut legal immigration to the US in half over the next decade ) ; mandatory verification of legal status for anyone hired for a job in the US ; and expanded funding for border ( including a wall ) and interior enforcement .
Right now , Democrats aren ’ t willing to agree to any of this . They ’ re not even interested in giving the White House a few billion dollars to build a few dozen miles of border barriers — something Trump says he ’ s willing to shut down the government over if he doesn ’ t get it .
The question is whether Trump will hold the line if congressional Republicans decide they ’ re less interested in falling in line behind the president than they are in making a deal . And if they are , the question is what kind of deal they would accept . Several factions in Congress have been pushing narrower bills to deal with discrete aspects of immigration policy — but the White House ’ s desire to think bigger might be inspiring those factions to ask for more too .
The possibilities aren ’ t endless , but they ’ re close . Once Congress agrees to crack open the door on immigration , it ’ s going to be hard to keep it from opening all the way , into a free-for-all over immigration policy writ large . And if DACA ends , there ’ s going to be a lot of pressure on Congress to open that door for the sake of nearly 800,000 American-raised DREAMers .
House Speaker Paul Ryan ( and , to a lesser extent , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ) really doesn ’ t want this fight . It would expose the fissures in his party between traditional pro-business conservatives who have been open to some form of legalization — like Ryan himself — and the hardline populists who rose to power over the past few years and are currently sitting in the White House . It would bog down the congressional agenda at a time when Congress is already worried about getting everything done .
And it certainly looks like Trump himself doesn ’ t want this fight . He told reporters Thursday that he wants a “ comprehensive ” solution on immigration ( though it ’ s not clear what “ comprehensive ” means to Donald Trump ) but that the politics “ aren ’ t ready . ”
If they ’ re not ready now , they won ’ t be ready in September . But thanks to state officials from Trump and Ryan ’ s own party , that fight might be coming , ready or not .