The Obama administration released thousands of illegal immigrant children to sponsors with criminal records , including arrests on charges of child molestation , human trafficking and homicide , a top senator charged Tuesday .
If true , it would be a stunning black mark on President Obama ’ s immigration record , according to analysts , who said the first job of the government was to protect the children from dangerous situations — and it apparently failed .
At least 3,400 children were placed in homes where sponsors had criminal records , said Sen. Chuck Grassley , chairman of the Judiciary Committee , citing information from a whistleblower .
“ Allegedly , proper screening is not taking place and children are paying the price , ” the Iowa Republican said in a letter demanding answers about the procedural breakdown from Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson and Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell .
HHS didn ’ t deny the numbers but said it does try to prohibit those with “ serious ” criminal records from sponsoring children and does conduct some level of background checks on all sponsors .
The accusations were made just as the Border Patrol confirmed another surge of illegal immigrant children along the southwestern border , with nearly 5,000 unaccompanied minors and 6,000 more women and children traveling together streaming across in October .
Those are huge increases over last October , when 2,500 unaccompanied children and fewer than 2,200 family members traveling together were caught at the border .
Customs and Border Protection officials said they were “ closely monitoring this situation ” and blamed smugglers for enticing would-be migrants to make the perilous journey by promising they can earn “ permisos , ” or free passes , once they reach the U.S . The permisos are the court appearance documents that the Border Patrol issues before releasing them into the interior of the U.S. , where they can easily disappear .
In the case of unaccompanied children , the Border Patrol turns them over to the Office of Refugee Resettlement , which is part of HHS . That office then houses the children in dormitories until sponsors can be found for them .
But the pressure to handle tens of thousands of children at a time overwhelmed the office last year . As a result , the office handed over children to sponsors who were not properly vetted , according to Mr. Grassley and other analysts .
“ They were so overwhelmed with cases they were more interested in processing them quickly than in making sure it was done safely , ” said Jessica Vaughan , policy studies director at the Center for Immigration Studies . “ They seemed to be operating under this delusion these were harmless kids being reclaimed by well-meaning relatives and there was nothing to worry about . And that is truly delusional . ”
She said conducting background checks has become routine even for youth sports coaches and library volunteers and it ’ s stunning that the Obama administration doesn ’ t require that for someone who is taking full custody of a child .
HHS spokeswoman Andrea Helling said the department does try to vet the people it allows to sponsor children .
“ It is not the practice of the Office of Refugee Resettlement to place unaccompanied children with sponsors who have serious criminal convictions . The safety of the children is our primary concern , and any allegation of even potential harm is taken seriously and will be investigated , ” she said .
Under the Obama administration ’ s interpretation of the law , children caught crossing the border illegally without parents are deemed “ unaccompanied alien children , ” or UACs . They are supposed to be processed quickly by the Border Patrol and then turned over to HHS , which puts them in juvenile homes until they can be reconnected with relatives or placed in foster families .
That often meant placing them with relatives who themselves were in the U.S. illegally .
HHS , faced with nearly 10,000 children a month at the peak last summer , cut corners , including no longer requiring that all sponsors go through fingerprint checks . Fingerprints are required if a sponsor is not a parent or legal guardian , and in cases in which a child is considered particularly vulnerable .
HHS does conduct a background check that includes running a sponsor ’ s name through criminal databases , and they listen to see whether a sponsor “ self-reports ” a criminal history during the vetting process .
As of August , HHS also now conducts follow-up visits 30 days after a child is released to a sponsor . In May , HHS began accepting calls to its hotline for children or their sponsors to report on disruptions , including conflicts that could endanger the safety of a child .
Immigrant rights advocates involved in monitoring the children ’ s cases could not be reached for comment Tuesday .
But last year , at the height of the surge , one nonprofit estimated that as many as 10 percent of the children were sent to live in unacceptable or dangerous conditions .
Mr. Grassley said Tuesday that the whistleblower , whom he did not identify , raised his concerns with the Obama administration in August , yet the children identified as having been put in jeopardy have not been removed from those homes .
The whistleblower saw information on just a subset of 29,000 children , and 12 percent of them were placed in homes where sponsors had records . Extrapolating across the nearly 110,000 unaccompanied children caught at the border over the past two years , that could mean nearly 13,000 children may have been placed in dangerous situations .