WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - House of Representatives Speaker Paul Ryan urged President Donald Trump on Friday not to rescind an Obama-era program that protects immigrants who entered the United States illegally as children , as more Republicans lined up against the move .
White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said Trump will announce on Tuesday whether he will end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA , program , which protects nearly 800,000 young men and women from deportation . It also makes those covered , so-called Dreamers , eligible for work permits .
“ We love the ‘ Dreamers , ’ ” the Republican president , already facing calls from leading business figures and Democrats to preserve the program , told reporters in the Oval Office , without tipping his hand on the decision .
Ryan and Senator Orrin Hatch on Friday joined a small but growing number of lawmakers from the party that controls Congress and the White House to speak out against killing DACA , created in 2012 by Democratic former President Barack Obama and long the target of conservative immigration hard-liners .
“ I actually don ’ t think he should do that , and I believe that this is something Congress has to fix , ” Ryan said in an interview with WCLO radio in his hometown of Janesville , Wisconsin .
Ryan said he believes Obama exceeded his authority in creating DACA by executive order , bypassing Congress , but there now are “ people who are in limbo . ”
“ These are kids who know no other country , who were brought here by their parents and don ’ t know another home . And so I really do believe that there needs to be a legislative solution . That ’ s one that we ’ re working on . And I think we want to give people peace of mind , ” Ryan added .
Nancy Pelosi , the top House Democrat , said she was “ heartened ” by Ryan ’ s comments and asked him to meet with Democratic lawmakers next week to discuss a “ comprehensive legislative solution . ”
Hatch said in a statement rescinding the program would further complicate a U.S. immigration system sorely in need of legislative reform .
“ Like the president , I ’ ve long advocated for tougher enforcement of our existing immigration laws . But we also need a workable , permanent solution for individuals who entered our country unlawfully as children through no fault of their own and who have built their lives here . And that solution must come from Congress , ” the longest-serving Republican senator added .
Tennessee ’ s Republican attorney general , Herbert Slatery , said his office will not participate in a lawsuit challenging DACA that is expected to be filed by a group of Republican state attorneys general next week , and urged Congress to pursue a legislative fix .
“ Many of the DACA recipients , some of whose records I reviewed , have outstanding accomplishments and laudable ambitions , which if achieved , will be of great benefit and service to our country , ” Slatery wrote in a letter to Tennessee ’ s two Republican U.S. senators .
About 200 Dreamers and their supporters turned out on Friday for a rally in downtown Los Angeles to urge national leaders not to end the program .
Among them was Docnary Reyes , 21 , who came to the United States from Guatemala with her parents in 1997 when she was a toddler . Before obtaining DACA in 2014 , Reyes had to work under-the-table cleaning apartments , she said .
Her work authorization allowed her to obtain a paid internship last year working on a project involving cyanobacteria . The Los Angeles resident will continue her education at the University of California , Davis , to study environmental restoration .
“ I feel like I really care about our environment and not enough people do , ” Reyes said .
Trump made a crackdown on illegal immigrants a centerpiece of his 2016 election campaign and has stepped up deportations since taking office in January . But business leaders say immigrants make important economic contributions and that ending the program would hit economic growth and tax revenue .
Leading business figures including Facebook Inc ( FB.O ) CEO Mark Zuckerberg have rallied in defense of the program and the Dreamers .
Congress under presidents of both parties has been unable to pass comprehensive immigration reform .
Spokeswoman Sanders said Trump , who previously has called DACA illegal , is not taking the decision lightly .
“ The president ’ s priorities on immigration are to create a system that encourages legal immigration and benefits our economy and American workers , ” Sanders told a news briefing .
Most of the Dreamer immigrants came from Mexico and other Latin American countries . More than 200,000 live in California , while 100,000 are in Texas . New York , Illinois and Florida also have large numbers .
What to do about Dreamers has been actively debated within the White House and Trump administration . One senior administration official described the debate as a “ tug of war ” between factions in favor and against the move .
DACA supporters argue that the people it protects grew up and were educated in the United States and were integrated into American society , with little connection to the countries in which they are citizens . Opponents of the program argue that illegal immigrants take jobs from U.S. citizens .
There are deep divisions in the United States over the fate of roughly 11 million illegal immigrants , most of them Hispanics . Trump as a candidate promised to deport all of them .
Undoing DACA could have political consequences for Trump and his fellow Republicans , further alienating Hispanics , a growing voting bloc in the United States . Trump ’ s pardon for an Arizona sheriff who critics accused of targeting Hispanics , his planned wall along the U.S.-Mexican border and his comments about Mexico sending “ rapists ” and drug dealers into the United States already had antagonized many Hispanic Americans .