A federal judge late Monday halted President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty , ruling he overstepped his powers in trying to grant legal status and “ benefits and privileges ” to millions of illegal immigrants , in a stunning decision that chides the president and throws the White House ’ s plans into disarray just a day before applications were to be accepted .
The White House said it will appeal Judge Andrew S. Hanen ’ s decision , but it ’ s unclear whether the case could reach the circuit court in New Orleans or even the Supreme Court before Wednesday , which is when the Homeland Security Department had planned to begin accepting the first applications under the new amnesty .
“ The DHS was not given any ‘ discretion by law ’ to give 4.3 million removable aliens what the DHS itself labels as ‘ legal presence , ’ ” Judge Hanen wrote in issuing an injunction . “ In fact , the law mandates that these illegally-present individuals be removed . The DHS has adopted a new rule that substantially changes both the status and employability of millions . These changes go beyond mere enforcement or even non-enforcement of this nation ’ s immigration scheme . ”
In the immediate sense , the ruling will become a major part of the debate over homeland security funding that has roiled Capitol Hill , with Republicans insisting Mr. Obama ’ s actions were unconstitutional and should be halted through Congress ’ s spending power , and Democrats backing their president by filibustering to block funding for the Homeland Security Department altogether .
The ruling doesn ’ t mean those illegal immigrants are going to be deported immediately — indeed , Judge Hanen said they are likely not to be deported at all under Mr. Obama , who had set “ priorities ” putting them in little danger of ever being kicked out of the country , even without the formal amnesty .
The judge said Mr. Obama does have the right to set those priorities , but said it is likely a step too far for him to have set up a proactive program to grant them other benefits .
“ The DHS may continue to prosecute or not prosecute these illegally-present individuals , as current laws dictate . This has been the status quo for at least the last five years and there is little-to-no basis to conclude that harm will fall upon the defendants if it is temporarily prohibited from carrying out the … program . ”
One immigrant-rights group called his decision “ judicial vigilantism , ” while another called it a “ minor legal bump ” and said it ’ s “ merely a matter of time ” before they win legal status .
White House press secretary Josh Earnest was dismissive of the judge ’ s ruling , saying it contradicted Mr. Obama ’ s own lawyers , who told him he was “ well within his legal authority . ”
“ Top law enforcement officials , along with state and local leaders across the country , have emphasized that these policies will also benefit the economy and help keep communities safe . The district court ’ s decision wrongly prevents these lawful , commonsense policies from taking effect and the Department of Justice has indicated that it will appeal that decision , ” Mr . Earnest said early Tuesday .
Judge Hanen ’ s exhaustive opinion , which ran to 123 pages , eviscerated the administration ’ s legal arguments . Where Mr. Obama claimed he was only issuing “ guidance ” and using his powers of prosecutorial discretion to make decisions on a case-by-case basis , the judge ruled that wording was “ disingenuous ” and ignored the substance of what the president was trying to do .
He also said Mr. Obama hurt his own case by saying he ’ d acted to “ change the law , ” implying a much more substantive legal program than his administration was arguing in court .
The president ’ s new plan , known as Deferred Action for Parental Accountability , announced in November , was designed to cover more than 4 million illegal immigrant parents of U.S. citizens and legal permanent residents , granting them a three-year stay of deportation , Social Security numbers and work permits to compete legally for jobs . The November order also expanded a 2012 program for so-called Dreamers , or illegal immigrants brought to the U.S. as children .
The initial Dreamer program is still in place , and covers more than 600,000 illegal immigrants , but Judge Hanen halted its expansion , as well as the new program for parents .
About 95 percent of those who applied for the 2012 Dreamer program were approved , while nobody who didn ’ t meet the strict criteria was — both factors that Judge Hanen said suggested this wasn ’ t “ discretion , ” but rather a new substantive legal policy that should have gone through the usual rule-making process .
“ While [ the program ] does not provide legal permanent residency , it certainly provides a legal benefit in the form of legal presence ( plus all that it entails ) — a benefit not otherwise available in immigration laws , ” the judge wrote . “ In this case , actions speak louder than words . ”
Still , almost none of those who would have been approved for the amnesty are in danger of deportation , thanks to Mr. Obama ’ s other , less-noticed policies that order immigration agents only to go after illegal immigrants with serious criminal records . That likely means only a couple million of the nearly 12 million illegal immigrants in the U.S. are likely to be in any danger of deportation .
Immigrant-rights advocates had expected the ruling and had been working ahead of time to discredit Judge Hanen , saying he had a “ bias ” against them , based on a December 2013 ruling .
In that ruling , Judge Hanen had spotted the surge of illegal immigrant children crossing the border earlier on , and had been critical of how Homeland Security officials had handled it , accusing them of being complicit in human trafficking because they would deliver the children to their illegal immigrant parents in the U.S. without trying to deport either party .
Last summer ’ s spike in illegal immigrant children from Central America bore out Judge Hanen ’ s concerns , with the administration belatedly admitting that the ease of getting across the border and being connected with family here in the U.S. was helping spur the surge .