Gov . Andrew Cuomo joined the chorus of New York officials calling for the release of an Ecuadorian native detained while delivering pizza at a Brooklyn Army base after his impending deportation was halted , at least for now , by a federal judge .
`` There ’ s compelling evidence that Pablo Villavicencio was improperly detained , '' Cuomo said late Saturday . `` He should be immediately released from ICE custody and an investigation should be launched into the circumstances of his arrest . ''
Villavicencio , 35 , was taken into custody June 1 at Army Garrison Fort Hamilton after military police officers conducting a routine check discovered a deportation order from 2010 . He was turned over to Immigration and Customs Enforcement and is being held at an ICE facility in New Jersey .
New York 's Legal Aid Society said it sought an emergency stay after learning Villavicencio 's deportation was imminent . Federal Judge Alison Nathan issued an emergency deportation stay pending a hearing July 20 .
Villavicencio 's wife , Sandra Chica , and his two children are American citizens .
More : DREAMer was killed weeks after being 'escorted ' back to Mexico by ICE
More : Census urged to exclude undocumented immigrants in congressional seat count
`` I 'm grateful to hear that # PabloVillavicencio has won an emergency petition that keeps him in our country , '' Brooklyn Borough President Eric Adams tweeted . `` He belongs at home , with his wife and children . ''
Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand , D-N.Y. , said the case was an example of the Trump administration 's `` inhumane '' immigration enforcement policy .
`` It is completely shameful for ICE to separate a father from his wife and kids like this , '' she said .
Villavicencio 's lawyers argue that he is the family 's primary provider , that he was in the process of applying for permanent legal resident status when he was detained , and that he was a victim of racial profiling .
“ Although we are disappointed that Pablo will remain detained , today ’ s stay is a victory for him and his family , and also for due process and the fair administration of justice , ” Legal Aid Society lawyer Gregory Copeland said .