Why has Donald Trump softened his rhetoric about immigration , and maybe his positions as well ?
Well , nobody knows for sure except Mr. Trump himself and maybe new campaign chief Kellyanne Conway . But here are two words that might explain the surprising shift : “ white voters . ”
White voters ? Shouldn ’ t Hispanics and other minorities groups be the target of any Trump immigration retreat ? They ’ re the groups that Trump ’ s tough words and proposed policies ( “ Build the wall ! ” ) have infuriated . They ’ re the ones whose support for the GOP nominee is scraping historically low levels .
That ’ s all true . But right now Trump ’ s most pressing electoral problem is with whites , not minorities . Currently he ’ s not running as well with white voters overall as Mitt Romney did in 2012 . He ’ s substantially below the percentage of the white vote he probably would need to win .
Trump has long had an imbalance issue with whites . For all the working-class white males that thrill to what they see as Trump ’ s willingness to defy all political correctness , there are more-educated whites that recoil from what they define as irresponsible behavior . Add one in the first category , subtract one ( or two ) from the second .
Now Trump may be trying to produce a magic formula for reassuring the first group that he ’ s all he ’ s said he was , while indicating to the second that he ’ s also a normal Republican candidate so they can vote for him after all . That might explain his recent outreach speech to African-Americans , delivered to a mostly white audience ; it could lie behind his waffling as to whether he ’ d organize a “ deportation force ” to go after undocumented immigrants from Day 1 of a Trump presidency .
“ Trump ’ s biggest issue remains what it has been since the Republican National Convention : People who might otherwise be his supporters have trouble believing that he is a reasonable candidate , ” says Jeffrey Engel , director of Southern Methodist University ’ s Center for Presidential History .
Where Trump stands on immigration policy , exactly , is perhaps a separate issue . Right now his position appears to be in flux .
On Thursday , Trump seemed to back away from his previous calls to establish a force to round up and deport the estimated 11 million immigrants in the nation illegally . He also hinted that he could “ work with ” those immigrants , perhaps on some sort of legalization process . But supporters , including big-name backers from author Ann Coulter to former vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin , were aghast at the suggestions , and Trump subsequently appeared to at least partly roll back his words .
Campaign manager Conway has also publicly hinted at change in Trump ’ s immigration views . An expected major speech on the issue next week might provide more clarity on the issue .
But with Election Day less than three months away Trump clearly needs to do something to change the direction of the race . And white voters represent his biggest opportunity .
Given all the talk of Trump as the candidate of “ alt-right ” white nationalism , it might seem surprising that Trump has not yet rallied the white support won by Mr. Romney four years ago . But it ’ s true , and shows that focusing on the electorate along racial grounds sometimes glosses over important differences within a racial group .
Romney won about 59 percent of votes cast by whites in 2012 . Breaking it down by educational levels , he won 61 percent of noncollege whites , and 56 percent of white college grads .
Trump ’ s doing worse . In a recent Washington Post poll he had about 52 percent of the white vote . An NBC News survey shows him with 50 percent . An Economist YouGov survey has him at 46 percent .
To win the White House Trump needs a big boost in that number . Romney lost , remember , and white voters will be a smaller percentage of the electorate this November , due to the growth of minorities . Romney would have won with about 63 percent of the white vote . Trump will need a bit more , perhaps 65 percent .
That ’ s not impossible . Ronald Reagan won 66 percent of the white vote in 1984 . Trump is already outperforming Romney among working-class whites , particularly men . He needs to do much better among educated whites . That ’ s particularly true for college-educated white women , a substantial majority of whom back Hillary Clinton , but it holds for college-educated white men as well .
Trump might be the first GOP candidate to lose the overall college educated white vote since 1952 , according to Democratic pollster Celinda Lake . This group is particularly worried about someone with Trump ’ s temperament and inexperience serving as commander-in-chief .
How can Trump better appeal to this demographic ? Maybe he should just act less wild , says Professor Engel .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ Trump has to demonstrate that he is back within the grounds of normal discourse , to at least suggest that he has a basic level of understanding about issues and compassion , in order to alleviate the concerns of white voters who are questioning his basic competence and even sanity , ” says Engel .
And maybe he should moderate his immigration views . According to Washington Post/ABC News data , fully half of whites without a college degree support Trump ’ s immigration policies . Among college-educated whites , that percentage falls to around 35 percent .