Facing mounting outrage in the media over its new “ zero-tolerance ” policy at the border , the Trump administration is deliberately misleading Americans about the thousands of migrant children it has forcibly separated from their families . The objective , according to people close to Donald Trump , is twofold : “ deterrence , ” as Chief of Staff John Kelly explained last month , and political extortion . “ The thinking in the building is to force people to the table , ” a White House official told The Washington Post last week . A second official confirmed that the president is hoping to use the detained children as leverage to force Democrats to cut a deal on immigration : “ If they aren ’ t going to cooperate , we are going to look to utilize the laws as hard as we can . ”
The images emerging from these detention centers , where traumatized young children are kept in chain-link pens , have drawn comparisons to some of the worst episodes in American history , including the internment of Japanese Americans during WWII . Instead of ending the controversial policy , however , President Trump has promoted a contradictory and confusing message about family separation . At times , he has blamed Democrats for what he has described as their “ law ” ( it is not a law ) ; at others , he has suggested that family separation is indeed his policy , but that Democrats have forced him to take action by not agreeing to new immigration-reform legislation . In a series of tweets Monday morning , he wrote that it is “ the Democrats fault for being weak and ineffective with Boarder [ sic ] Security and Crime ” and called on Congress to “ change the laws. ” He also indicated that the policy is driven by racial or cultural concerns , describing migrant children as Trojan horses for “ the worst criminals on earth ” and declaring that the U.S. should not repeat Europe ’ s “ big mistake ” of “ allowing millions of people in who have so strongly and violently changed their culture . ”
Over the weekend and into Monday , a number of Trump officials made similar obfuscations about the policy . In every instance , however , the implication was clear : the problem could go away if Democrats will just play ball . “ This is up to the Democrats . They could fix this right now . If you close those loopholes , we could do this humanely , ” White House Deputy Press Secretary Hogan Gidley said during an interview with Fox & Friends on Monday , before accusing Democrats of bolstering drug cartels and the “ child-smuggling industry. ” Senior White House adviser Kellyanne Conway similarly put the onus on Congress to address the crisis at the border during an interview with NBC ’ s Meet the Press on Sunday . After asserting that “ nobody likes this policy , ” Conway said , “ If the Democrats are serious , and if a lot of Republicans are serious , they ’ ll come together . They won ’ t just talk about just this week , just the Dreamers , or just the wall , or just catch and release . It ’ s all of the above , ” she said . Even First Lady Melania Trump appeared to lay responsibility for her husband ’ s policy at Congress ’ s feet , issuing a rare policy statement saying that she “ hates to see children separated from their families , ” but “ hopes both sides of the aisle can finally come together . ”
Secretary of Homeland Security Kirstjen Nielsen , meanwhile , seems unsure whether her agency ’ s policy exists . “ We do not have a policy of separating families at the border . Period , ” she tweeted on Sunday , blaming Democrats , journalists , and advocacy groups of “ irresponsible and unproductive ” reporting on the border . On Monday , however , Nielsen appeared to reverse herself , defending the separation of migrant families as necessary when prosecuting migrants who cross the border illegally . “ There are some who would like us to look the other way , ” the Homeland Security secretary said at a speech before the National Sheriffs ’ Association in New Orleans . “ Past administrations may have done so , but we will not . We do not have the luxury of pretending that all individuals coming to this country as a family unit are , in fact , a family . We have to do our job . We will not apologize for doing our job. ” Attorney General Jeff Sessions , who addressed the group after Nielsen , said while he doesn ’ t enjoy separating children from their parents , the situation could be fixed if only Democrats would accede to building Trump ’ s border wall and passing new laws to crack down on illegal immigration .
The mixed messaging has become a problem for Republicans seeking to defend the Trump policy , but unsure whether they are supposed to be blaming Democrats , defending “ law and order , ” or pretending the policy doesn ’ t exist . “ The policy is incredibly complicated and it is one we need to do a better job of communicating , ” White House Director of Legislative Affairs Marc Short told The Wall Street Journal . “ We ’ ve not talked about the history of how we got to this point . ”
The history of the policy , however , does not support the administration ’ s narrative . It is true that at the height of the 2014 migrant crisis , when there was a surge in unaccompanied minors crossing the border , the Obama administration placed a large number of families in detention centers . But these families—many of them fleeing violence in Central America—were allowed to remain together while their claims were being processed . Under Trump ’ s “ zero-tolerance ” policy , however , all adults caught crossing the border are criminally prosecuted , with no exceptions . As a result , thousands of children have been taken away from their parents and treated as if they had tried to cross the border alone . In some cases , undocumented adults are being deported without their children , who remain detained in federal immigration facilities with no way to contact their parents . Immigration experts worry that some families may be permanently separated .