To prevent her government from collapsing , German Chancellor Angela Merkel has just agreed on a compromise that will make it harder for migrants to enter the country .
It ’ s a particularly strange move for Merkel , who has been a strong advocate for open borders since the onset of the European migrant crisis in 2015 . But given that Merkel ’ s leadership was very literally at stake , she agreed to tighten the German border to save her fragile coalition .
Her main opposition comes from German Interior Minister Horst Seehofer , who leads the conservative Christian Social Union ( CSU ) party . Seehofer wants to turn away some migrants from the German border , including those who have already applied for asylum in other European Union countries . His support is crucial for Merkel to stay in power , as the CSU is one of her main coalition partners .
Back in February , Germany ’ s two largest political parties — the center-left Social Democratic Party ( SPD ) along with the combined center-right Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) and the CSU — renewed a coalition governing agreement with Merkel at the helm . The CSU governs the wealthy German state of Bavaria , while the CDU , which is Merkel ’ s party , governs the country ’ s other 15 states .
The coalition ensures that Merkel has a majority in Parliament , but she needs the support of all three parties to stay in power . This could change , though , with the upcoming Bavarian elections in October . The rival Alternative for Germany ( AfD ) party , which is a far-right , anti-immigration group , is gaining support and could threaten the coalition . Some speculate that the rise of the AfD may be the reason why Seehofer wants to take a hard stance on migration .
“ What ’ s happening now has nothing to do with content , ” Nils Diederich , a political science professor at the Free University Berlin , told the Washington Post . “ It ’ s solely aimed at the upcoming Bavarian state elections . ”
If approved , the migration proposal will establish border camps , or “ transit centers , ” where incoming migrants will be screened along the Germany-Austria border . Migrants who have already applied for asylum in another EU country will be sent back to their relevant countries if those countries consent . If not , they will be sent to Austria , “ on the basis of an agreement . ”
“ The security of our country begins on our borders , ” Merkel told reporters after meeting with coalition members .
Merkel is waiting for the approval of the SPD , the third party in her coalition . But they ’ re reportedly skeptical of the agreement , and rejected a similar plan several years ago . The party has also typically been supportive of open borders in the past . So now the plan is largely up in the air , with no clear resolution if the SPD doesn ’ t approve .
“ We have many open questions , ” SPD leader Andrea Nahles said on Tuesday . Nahles added that the vague plan lacked the consent of or bilateral deals with other EU countries , such as Italy and Austria . “ That ’ s why I consider the deal for now as an uncovered cheque . ”
Germany has seen a recent anti-immigration backlash in part because conservative groups have claimed that crime levels have risen , but they ’ re actually at the lowest levels since 1992 .
In 2015 , Merkel enacted an open-door policy to take in refugees fleeing war from Syria , Iraq , and Afghanistan , reportedly taking in more than 1.4 million people ; now , about 10,000 immigrants flow in each month .
Right now , all asylum seekers are allowed to enter the country while they wait for their cases to be reviewed , but the agreement will challenge this long-instituted policy .
The EU doesn ’ t think migration should be their problem anymore
Merkel ’ s new curb on migration comes in the middle of a massive immigration debate in Europe . Other countries including Italy and Austria have also been outspoken critics of Merkel ’ s open-door policies .
Last month , EU leaders met to discuss migration policies in Brussels , agreeing on a compromise that outlines new border restrictions that largely attempt to keep migrants in Africa and the Middle East .
Although the new deal reached at the two-day EU summit didn ’ t include many concrete plans , it signals that the EU is trying to contain would-be migrants before they leave their home countries . Among other things , the EU is pushing to set up centers in Africa where migrants would be screened for asylum eligibility before being allowed entrance into Europe .
But containing migrants in Africa doesn ’ t solve the migration crisis ; some of these North African migrants have been displaced to bordering countries like Algeria . Just last month , the Associated Press reported that over 13,000 African migrants were being expelled from the country — some sent into the Sahara desert without food or water , forced to travel to Niger barefoot . The EU said they were aware of the mass exodus , but that “ sovereign countries ” are allowed to expel migrants as long as they adhere to international law .
Put together , this suggests that Europe doesn ’ t really want to fix the migrant crisis . And the many people searching for a better life — or safety — in Europe ? They ’ re probably going to have to find another home .