Alaska Rep. Don Young issued an apology Friday for using the term `` wetbacks '' when discussing migrant works , acknowledging it is an `` insensitive term '' that he says should have been left behind with the last century .
The apology came after House Speaker John Boehner and other Republican Party leaders denounced Young on Friday for using the term .
The 79-year-old Young , the second-most senior Republican in the House , had issued a statement late Thursday saying he `` meant no disrespect '' in using the derogatory term to describe the workers on his father 's farm in central California , where he grew up .
But lawmakers on both sides of the aisle made clear Friday they did not find the explanation acceptable .
`` Congressman Young 's remarks were offensive and beneath the dignity of the office he holds . I do n't care why he said it -- there 's no excuse and it warrants an immediate apology , '' Boehner said in a brief statement .
Senate Republican Whip John Cornyn , R-Texas , said the comments `` do nothing to elevate our party , political discourse or the millions who come here looking for economic opportunity . ''
`` Wetbacks '' often refers to Mexican migrants who have entered country illegally . Young , an Alaska congressman , discussing the labor market during an interview with radio station KRBD in Ketchikan , Alaska , said that on his father 's ranch , `` we used to have 50-60 wetbacks to pick tomatoes . '' He said , `` It takes two people to pick the same tomatoes now . It 's all done by machine . ''
He added that during the interview , he had `` discussed the compassion and understanding I have for these workers and the hurdles they face in obtaining citizenship '' and said the country must tackle the issue of immigration reform .
`` Shame on Don Young , '' said Congressional Hispanic Caucus chairman Ruben Hinojosa , D-Texas . `` It is deeply disheartening that in 2013 , we are forced to have a discussion about a member of Congress using such hateful words and racial slurs . ''
As resources committee chairman in the late 1990s , Young took on environmentalists and the Bill Clinton administration in pushing for oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and logging in Alaska national forests . He headed the transportation committee during much of the George W. Bush administration , during which he defied his own party 's anti-tax positions by supporting an increase in the federal gas tax to help pay for bridge and highway construction .
It was under Young 's chairmanship that the `` bridges to nowhere , '' two proposed Alaska construction projects , became a symbol for questionable special projects inserted into spending bills .
He also is currently under investigation by the House Ethics Committee , which is looking into whether he failed to report gifts on his annual disclosure forms , misused campaign funds and lied to federal officials . The investigation comes from an earlier Justice Department probe into whether Young accepted gifts in return for political patronage . Young has said that Justice cleared him of those charges .
`` I 've been under a cloud all my life , '' he told reporters in Juneau Thursday . `` It 's sort of like living in Juneau . It rains on you all the time . You do n't even notice it . ''
Young said he plans to run for re-election next year , saying he does n't know anyone who can do a better job than he does in representing the state .