The Department of Justice ( DoJ ) told a federal judge Tuesday that it may have mistakenly separated a father and toddler who could both be US citizens for as long as a year , in the process of enforcing the Trump administration ’ s “ zero-tolerance ” immigration policy .
Trump forced to reinstate 'catch and release ' after court defeats Read more
The American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) called the revelation “ horrific ” and blamed the administration ’ s poor execution of the practice of family separations .
“ The fact that a citizen got caught up in this mess shows just how poor the government ’ s record-keeping was , and this is just the latest example , ” said Lee Gelernt , the deputy director of the ACLU ’ s Immigrants ’ Rights Project .
On 26 June , in a suit filed by the ACLU against the government over the separation of families at the southern border , federal judge Dana Sabraw granted a preliminary injunction requiring the reunification of children under the age of five by 10 July .
In a hearing on Tuesday , just before the deadline , the DoJ was asked to account for each failed reunification of the 102 younger children in its care . It noted 27 cases where it found reunification was not currently feasible , including one “ because the parent ’ s location has been unknown for more than a year … and records show the parent and child might be US citizens ” .
Previously the DoJ had only revealed that the child ’ s father could not be located . The ACLU and the court were only made aware that both father and child might be US citizens on Tuesday .
“ It actually happens much more frequently than you would believe , ” Gelernt said . “ They [ Immigration and Customs Enforcement ] make mistakes . ”
In total the DoJ said it expected to have 38 children under five reunified by Tuesday ’ s 10pm PT deadline , 16 “ soon thereafter ” and another 20 depending on a number of conditions including whether or not parents can be located , and “ if those parents request reunification ” .
In Tuesday ’ s hearing , Sabraw said that the families were improperly separated and that he would not extend the deadline , meaning that the government is technically in violation of the court order as of Tuesday night . “ These are firm deadlines . They ’ re not aspirational goals , ” Sabraw said .
The complications the government has run into complying with Sabraw ’ s order foretell a troubled road ahead . Children under five represent just 5 % of the 2,000 to 3,000 – the government has admitted it does not have an exact figure – who have been separated from their parents in recent months . Sabraw ’ s injunction requires the remaining 1,900 be reunified by 26 July .
The identity of the children and parents as provided to the judge by the government under court order are currently shielded by law .
The Legal Aid Society in New York said it is representing at least two of the separated children under five .
One boy , from El Salvador , was due to be released to his mother , according to Beth Krause , the supervising attorney of Legal Aid ’ s Immigrant Youth Project .
“ I have no details about where , when , under what conditions , ” she wrote in an email on Tuesday morning . The other boy , from Honduras , would remain with a foster family while the father remained in government custody , although it was not clear to her why .
“ I know very , very little about this case , ” she said . “ It ’ s all very frustrating . ”
The revelation comes on the same day that the Trump administration announced it would be implementing an ankle monitor system to track migrant families – a decision that was forced by Sabraw ’ s injunction and another federal court decision that came down on Monday .
After Trump signed an executive order ending his administration ’ s family separation policy in June , agencies had planned to detain families and children together until the parents ’ immigration proceedings were complete , a process that can take months . That proposal ran afoul of the decades-old Flores v Reno settlement , which stipulates that migrant children can not be held in detention for more than 20 days .
On Monday , another federal judge in California rejected a DoJ request to allow the long-term detention of migrant children , meaning that they could no longer separate families or hold them together in detention without running afoul of the federal courts .