Boehner said the ENLIST Act was 'inappropriate ' on a must-pass bill such as the NDAA . GOP blocks immigration proposals
House GOP leaders formally blocked a pair of immigration measures from getting a vote on a critical defense policy bill early Wednesday , dealing another blow to the prospects of legislation to rewrite the immigration system this year .
The Republican-led House Rules Committee , which hews closely to the wishes of leadership , declined to include legislation written by Rep. Jeff Denham ( R-Calif. ) — giving a path to green cards for immigrants who came here as children if they serve in the military – among the amendments that will get a vote on the National Defense Authorization Act .
“ I am disappointed that my ENLIST amendment was not ruled in order this year , ” Denham said Wednesday . “ I will continue to push for a vote on the stand-alone bill so that undocumented young people who want to perform the ultimate act of patriotism will have that opportunity and be able to earn legal status through their sacrifice . ”
Another immigration measure , from Rep. Joaquin Castro ( D-Texas ) , that would allow young immigrants who have been granted a reprieve from deportations by the Obama administration to enroll in U.S. military academies was also blocked from a vote .
“ I ’ m disappointed that expanding opportunity to all of our students to the U.S. military academies is not allowed to be part of the discussion about our nation ’ s defense readiness , ” Castro said in a statement Wednesday . He plans to introduce the measure as a standalone bill with Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen ( R-Fla. ) .
Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) said Tuesday that including Denham ’ s legislation , called the ENLIST Act , on a must-pass bill such as the NDAA was “ inappropriate , ” although he noted that Republican leaders have supported the measure in the past . Boehner added that there are talks about allowing the bill to get a stand-alone vote on the House floor .
More than 300 amendments were filed to the NDAA , and 162 of them will be considered on the legislation – a sweeping annual measure that sets policy for the Pentagon .