Congress approved a humanitarian aid plan for migrants at the US-Mexico border , but the political crisis over how to deal with migrants attempting to reach the US continues .
Migrants continue to die en route to the border , including a Salvadorean father and daughter whose bodies were photographed lying face down in a river near the border . The photo has led to condemnation .
President Donald Trump has repeatedly used the term `` invasion '' to describe the situation on the US southern border .
In February he declared a `` national emergency '' in order to force through funding for his planned border wall .
However his opponents say his government has created a `` manufactured crisis '' .
The number of border apprehensions dropped by 28 % in June , according to US authorities .
The decline follows a record number of apprehensions between ports of entry in May - the highest in over a decade .
Apprehensions on US-Mexico border in 2019 Between ports of entry
Drops in migrations are typical during the summer months , where temperatures can soar above 32C , but this June saw a sharper decline than previous years .
Trump administration officials have attributed the decrease to new policies with Mexico to curb migration .
It 's impossible to say for certain , but US Border Patrol says it has made 688,375 southwest border apprehensions since October 2018 . The previous US fiscal year there were 303,916 , according to US Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) .
The number fell dramatically in President Trump 's first year but rose again last year .
The number of migrants apprehended at the border surged in May to the highest level since 2006 , with 132,887 detained - including 11,507 unaccompanied children . It was the first time that detentions had exceeded 100,000 since April 2007 .
The UN Missing Migrants project reports that 170 migrants have died or are missing on the US-Mexico border so far in 2019 - including 13 children . Border Patrol figures show that 283 died last year , but human rights activists say the number is likely to be higher .
Looking at the wider picture , until numbers rose this spring , there has been a sharp fall in the number of people arrested in the last 18 years .
But even before the 2019 spike , when migration numbers were in fact at historic lows , Mr Trump described the situation on the border as a national security crisis .
This year 's surge in migration is significant , if not the highest ever .
And changing migrant demographics have undoubtedly overwhelmed US agencies - but the situation along the border is a different kind of crisis than what the president described for years .
Apprehension numbers released by the CBP include asylum seekers ( a person who applies for refugee status at a US port of entry or from within the country ) .
In fiscal year 2018 , 92,959 people were deemed to have made claims of credible fear '' and asked for asylum at the border . That 's a pretty big jump from fiscal year 2017 , when 55,584 claims were made .
Kate Jastram , senior staff attorney for the Center for Gender and Refugee Studies at the University of California Hastings College of the Law , says that families fleeing violence in Central America began to make up a much larger part of border crossings beginning in 2014 .
She says that has more to do with conditions in those countries than any immigration policy implemented by the Trump administration .
`` Single men from Mexico were by and large not seeking asylum , they were looking for work , '' says Jastram . `` [ Now ] we have families and children specifically seeking protection . ''
In November 2018 , a caravan of 7,000 migrants arrived at the US-Mexico border , many claiming to be fleeing violence in countries like Honduras , Guatemala and El Salvador . Mr Trump labelled the caravan an `` invasion '' .
Overall , the rate of asylum denials is on the rise in the US and has been for the past six years .
What has the Trump administration done to address all this ?
President Trump and his administration have tried a variety of deterrent measures affecting both illegal entrants and asylum seekers in recent years .
asylum seekers caught crossing illegally must wait across the border in Mexico for adjudication
border officials have decreased the number of asylum cases they process each day , a strategy called `` metering ''
last June , then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced that claims of domestic and gang violence would no longer qualify as grounds for asylum in the US - this was defeated in court
most controversially , in spring , thousands of migrant children were separated from their parents at the border as a part of a `` zero tolerance policy '' that prosecuted anyone found crossing illegally
`` This situation is child abuse , '' Democratic Speaker Nancy Pelosi said of the government 's policy .
`` It is an atrocity that violates every value we have , not only as Americans , but as moral beings . ''
In May , an inspection at an El Paso Border Patrol station found that at one point 900 migrants had been crammed into the 125-person facility .
Do most illegal entries take place at the southern border ?
Illegal border crossings are not limited to the southern border - in 2017 , for example , there were also 3,027 illegal apprehensions along the Canadian border and 3,588 from the coastal border .
While cross-border migrants often make headlines , the largest number of illegal migrants settling in the US each year is those who stay in the country after their visas expire . This has been the case since 2007 , official statistics say .
In 2016 , there were a total of 739,478 overstays , compared to 563,204 illegal border crossings .
It 's also important to note that , according to the Pew Research Center , overall the number of immigrants living in the US illegally has actually declined since 2007 , in large part due to a dip in the number of people coming from Mexico . Apprehensions at the south-western border peaked at 1.64 million in 2000 .
In total , Pew estimates that in 2017 there were 10.5 million unauthorised immigrants living in the US .
A White House briefing report on immigration says 3,755 known or suspected terrorists were prevented from entering the US in the fiscal year 2017 .
But that includes terror suspects who have been stopped at any US border , and the vast majority are stopped at airports .