Yet another federal judge has found that the Trump administration ’ s attempts to strong-arm state and local governments into being as hostile to immigrants as possible is illegal .
U.S. District Judge Edgardo Ramos of the Southern District of New York ruled on Friday that that the executive order signed by President Donald Trump last January , which withheld funding from sanctuary cities , was both illegal and unconstitutional . Ramos agreed with the states that the order was a violation of the Administrative Procedure Act , which requires courts to “ hold unlawful and set aside agency action . . . found to be . . . in excess of statutory jurisdiction , authority , or limitations , or short of statutory right , ” per Ramos ’ ruling .
The ruling falls in line with a number of recent court decisions shooting down Republican actions against asylum-seekers and sanctuary cities , as does Ramos ’ decision to single out Section 1373 of the U.S. immigration code—like a California judge ruled in October , Ramos found that section , which requires of information-sharing between the federal government and sanctuary cities , was a violation of the Tenth Amendment .
What sets Ramos ’ decision apart from the previous sanctuary city cases in California is that his will affect a wide swath of states up and down the East Coast—per the Providence Journal , cities in New York , New Jersey , Massachusetts , Rhode Island , Connecticut , Washington D.C. , and Virginia will all now be legally allowed to function as havens for asylum-seekers , so long as their own state governments allow them to .
As has been pointed out before , while some cities under Democratic control have fought to maintain this legal status , their actual commitment to protecting undocumented immigrants and asylum-seekers has fallen flat time and again , with police departments ( including those in New York City ) routinely working with ICE and federal agencies to detain and deport community members .
As far as Trump ’ s larger war on migrants and refugees goes , however , this is undoubtedly good news .