On Friday , Donald Trump signed an executive order halting admission of refugees for 120 days and halting travel from seven majority-Muslim countries — Iraq , Iran , Syria , Yemen , Sudan , Libya , and Somalia — for 90 days while the federal government undertakes a review of admission procedures . He has also imposed an annual cap of 50,000 refugees . The instant backlash , which has culminated in thousands of protesters creating chaos at the nation ’ s airports , is the result more of knee-jerk emotion than a sober assessment of Trump ’ s policy .
It ’ s a well-documented fact that would-be terrorists are posing as refugees to obtain admission into Europe , and visa screenings have routinely failed to identify foreign nationals who later committed terrorist attacks in the United States . As the Islamic State continues its reign of terror across a large swath of the Middle East , it should be a matter of common sense that the U.S. needs to evaluate and strengthen its vetting .
Trump ’ s executive order is an attempt — albeit , an ill-conceived attempt in several ways , about which more momentarily — to address this problem . Rhetoric about “ open arms ” aside , the United States . has been modest in its approach to refugees for the past two decades . During the George W. Bush administration , the U.S. regularly admitted fewer than 50,000 refugees . Barack Obama ’ s tenure was little different . He normally admitted numbers on par with Bush ’ s , despite operating under a slightly higher cap ( around 80,000 , a holdover from the end of the Bush years ) . It was only at the end of his second term , when he dramatically expanded the cap to 110,000 , that Obama pursued refugee admissions aggressively . Trump ’ s order is , to this extent , a return to recent norms .
Similar myths have dominated the public understanding of the Syrian-refugee program . Until ratcheting up the program in 2016 , the Obama administration admitted fewer than 2,000 Syrian refugees between 2011 and 2015 — this at the time that the former president was dithering over his “ red line. ” The 13,000 Syrian refugees admitted during 2016 , pursuant to President Obama ’ s expansion , still constitute an infinitesimal fraction of the refugee population , which is in the several millions , of that war-torn country . Trump has suspended that program temporarily , pending review .
When that program comes back on-line , it will include a directive to prioritize Christians , Yazidis , and other persecuted religious minorities — against which the Obama administration effectively discriminated at the same time that it was declaring Christians to be victims of “ genocide ” at the hands of ISIS . Given the unique threats these groups face , moving them to the front of the line should be an obvious measure , and contrary to outraged claims otherwise , prioritizing religious minorities is in accordance with law ; religion is already used as a criterion for evaluating refugee-status claims .
Finally , there is recent precedent for Trump ’ s order . In 2011 , the Obama administration halted refugee-processing from Iraq for six months in order to do exactly what the Trump administration is doing now : ensure that terrorists were not exploiting the program to enter the country . No one rushed to JFK International to protest . Also , the seven countries to which the order applies are taken from Obama-era precedents .
All of this said , Trump ’ s order displays much of the amateurism that dominated his campaign . There seems to have been no guidance provided by the White House and the Department of Homeland Security to the officials nationwide who would be responsible for executing the order ; and on Saturday , as refugees were being detained at airports across the country , it was reported that local officials were struggling to contact Customs and DHS higher-ups .
In 2011 , the Obama administration halted refugee-processing from Iraq for six months in order to do exactly what the Trump administration is doing now .
The confusion extended to the question of whether the executive order applied to green-card holders . It took DHS secretary John Kelly more than 24 hours to clarify that this is not the case .
Similarly , the White House should stipulate that this policy does not apply to the many Iraqi refugees who have acted as aides and translators to Allied forces in the region . The order allows the relevant officials to intervene on a case-by-case basis to “ issue visas or other immigration benefits to nationals of countries for which visas and benefits are otherwise blocked , ” but this permission seems to have gone initially unnoticed . Kelly , who served in Iraq , should make sure that this power is used liberally .
Most of this confusion could have been avoided if the White House had slowed down , taken time to brief the officials responsible for carrying out the order , and ensured that the legal details were airtight . Instead , it seems that White House political advisers overrode cautions from DHS lawyers and pushed the order forward , to their own detriment . The country is now embroiled , once again , in spectacular protests , and reasonable policy has been drowned in outrage . The White House ’ s approach here has probably damaged future efforts in this area .
The United States needs to bolster its immigration policies across the board , and assessing whether our refugee-admitting procedures are adequately protecting American citizens is entirely reasonable . But President Trump has failed abjectly in the prudential considerations without which even good policy is often doomed . Refugees are not the only thing in need of more vetting .