The Republican-controlled House voted Thursday to resume the deportation of hundreds of thousands of immigrants brought illegally to the United States as children , the first immigration-related vote in either chamber of Congress this year and a measure of the daunting challenge facing supporters of a sweeping overhaul of existing law on the subject .
The party-line vote of 224-201 was aimed at blocking implementation of President Barack Obama 's 2012 election-year order to stop deportations of many so-called DREAM Act individuals . Democrats on the House floor reacted with boos when the provision was added to a routine spending bill for the Department of Homeland Security .
The vote was largely symbolic , since the administration has threatened to veto the overall legislation on budgetary grounds . It nevertheless stood as a stark warning from conservatives who dominate the ranks of the Republican House majority about attempts in the Senate to grant a chance at citizenship to an estimated 11 million immigrants residing in the country illegally .
And the White House reacted sharply , saying the House-passed measure would affect `` Dreamers '' who are `` productive members of society who were brought here as young children , grew up in our communities , and became American in every way but on paper . ''
Rep. Steve King , R-Iowa , said in a statement that the vote prohibits the administration `` from implementing executive amnesty '' without congressional action . `` Bipartisan support for my amendment is the first test of the 113th Congress in the House of Representatives on immigration . My amendment blocks many of the provisions that are mirrored in the Senate 's ` Gang of Eight ' bill . If this position holds , no amnesty will reach the President 's desk , '' he said .
The vote took place as Senate leaders set Friday for the opening of debate on White House-backed legislation that would create a chance at citizenship for those in the country unlawfully , at the same time it takes steps to assure the borders are secure against future illegal immigration .
The measure was drafted by a bipartisan group of eight senators , then approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee last month on a vote of 13-8 . It also creates a new low-skilled guest-worker program , expands the number of visas available for high-tech industry workers and reorders the system for legal immigration that has been in place for decades .
Debate is expected to consume weeks on the Senate floor as lawmakers of differing views try to change it more to their liking . Notably , Sen. Marco Rubio , a Florida Republican who was part of the group that drafted the legislation , is saying he wants changes before he will support it on final passage . His office did not respond to a request for reaction to the House vote .
In the House , 221 Republicans and three Democrats voted for King 's proposal , while 195 Democrats and six Republicans opposed it .
`` I ca n't believe they just did that , '' said Sen. Dick Durbin , D-Ill. , a leading supporter of the DREAM Act . Ana Avendano of the AFL-CIO , said in a statement that King and his allies are playing to `` a dwindling base of anti-immigrant Republican primary voters . We hope and expect that the leadership of the Republican party will understand that this is not only abhorrent policy but suicidal politics . ''
Speaking to a group of reporters , a White House official , Cecilia Munoz , said , `` If part of what is driving this debate is a recognition , particularly on the Republican side , that they need to do better with the Latino community , this is really not the right way . ''
Obama announced a new policy in June 2012 that puts off deportation for two years for many of those brought to the United States as children , specifically if they were under 16 at the time and are no older than 31 now . They also must be in school , graduated from high school or have served in the military and have no criminal record . The order offers relief from deportation from many young immigrants who would be covered by the so-called DREAM Act , which has repeatedly failed in Congress .
Democrats argued vociferously against King 's proposal when it was debated Wednesday evening . `` We should not hold children responsible for the actions of adults and their parents . We should give them an opportunity , '' said Rep. Luis Gutierrez , an Illinois Democrat who has been involved in a sputtering attempt to produce a compromise immigration bill in the House .
Those efforts were dealt a potentially fatal blow on Wednesday , when Rep. Raul Labrador , R-Idaho , announced he was leaving the group because of a dispute over health care .
House GOP leaders have not yet announced a plan for considering immigration legislation , although it appears likely that several smaller bills will be considered rather than a comprehensive measure that covers the elements that are combined into one in the Senate .
One of them , introduced during the day by Rep. Trey Gowdy , R-S.C. , permits state and local authorities to enforce federal immigration laws .
There is little , if any , support among the GOP rank and file for a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million or so immigrants estimated to be living in the United States illegally , although there appears to be some sentiment to allow many such individuals to remain in the country .
Speaker John Boehner has said privately he hopes to have committee action complete by the end of June , with a vote in the House by the end of July .