CLOSE We break down what DACA is and what it could mean for thousands of immigrants . ███
After months of uncertainty , President Trump will announce on Tuesday that he is ending a controversial program that protects nearly 800,000 young undocumented immigrants from deportation , media reports indicated late Sunday .
Politico and Reuters , citing unnamed sources , reported that Trump had decided to end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals Program , known as DACA , which Trump inherited from President Barack Obama .
Reuters , citing sources familiar with the situation , said Trump will give Congress six months to craft a bill to replace DACA . But a senior White House aide told Politico that John Kelly , Trump 's chief of staff , “ thinks Congress should ’ ve gotten its act together a lot longer ago . ”
Attorney General Jeff Sessions helped persuade the president to terminate the program , Politico reported , but White House aides cautioned that “ nothing is set in stone ” until an official announcement has been made . The White House could still change its mind .
The White House informed House Speaker Paul Ryan of the president ’ s decision on Sunday morning , Politico reported , citing a source close to the administration .
It 's not clear from the reports how the six-month delay would work or whether or not Congress will act in that time period .
Ending DACA would fulfill a campaign promise that is sure to please Trump 's supporters but terrify DREAMers — immigrants illegally brought to the United States as children — whose lives will be upended .
Reaction Sunday night was swift : Sen. Bernie Sanders , I-Vt. , tweeted : `` If Trump decides to end DACA , it will be one of the ugliest and cruelest decisions ever made by a president in our modern history . ''
More : Democrats take to Twitter to react to reports of Trump ending DACA
Sanders added that if Trump ends DACA , Congress must act immediately to restore it . `` Taking legal protections away from 800,000 young people raised in this country is absolutely counter to what we stand for as a nation , '' he said .
Taking legal protections away from 800,000 young people raised in this country is absolutely counter to what we stand for as a nation . — Bernie Sanders ( @ SenSanders ) September 4 , 2017
U.S. Rep. Joaquin Castro , D-Texas , said : `` For all the members of Congress over the past 5 years who said DACA should 've been done 'legislatively ' here 's your chance . # DefendDACA . ''
Although Trump has taken a clear stand against illegal immigration throughout the campaign and his presidency , he had wavered on the future of DACA . During the campaign , he vowed to end it . After winning the November election , he said he would treat DREAMers with `` great heart '' and said they `` should n't be very worried . ''
DACA was created in 2012 by the Obama administration after several failed attempts in Congress to pass a law to protect these undocumented immigrants . While announcing the program during a speech in the Rose Garden , Obama said those DREAMers did n't make the decision to enter the U.S. illegally and should n't be punished as a result .
`` They are Americans in their heart , in their minds , in every single way but one : on paper , '' Obama said . `` It is the right thing to do . ''
The program he established grants two-year stays for undocumented immigrants brought to the United States before their 16th birthday who have attended school or joined the military and have not committed any serious crimes . It also grants them work permits . Enrollees can renew their status after each two-year period , and some are currently on their third term .
More : 1,850 U.S. leaders to Trump : Do n't kill DREAMer protection program
The program was created through a memorandum from the Department of Homeland Security , which means it could be rescinded at any time without any input from Congress . That was always a concern of applicants , who knew their protections could be taken away by a future president and the personal information they provided could be used to arrest and deport them .
Obama later tried to expand the number of undocumented immigrants he could protect from deportation . In 2014 , he proposed a new program that would extend similar protections to undocumented immigrants whose children were born in the U.S. and thus are citizens .
That 's when Republicans decided to fight back . Republican leaders from 25 states sued in court to block the deportation program for adults , convincing a federal judge in Texas to halt the program two days before it was to go into effect . The Department of Justice appealed that ruling up to the Supreme Court , but a 4-4 split left the lower court 's ruling intact , effectively killing the program for adults .
With Trump in office , those Republican leaders assumed Trump would move quickly to end DACA . As the months dragged on , they grew impatient . Republican leaders from 10 states , led by Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton , sent a warning to Trump : end DACA or we 'll sue . They gave Trump a deadline of Sept. 5 .
Kelly , the president 's chief of staff and his former secretary of Homeland Security , told members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus in July that DACA would probably not survive that kind of lawsuit . He hinted that the program 's days could be numbered .
A variety of groups have pleaded with the Trump administration in recent weeks to maintain the program . On Aug. 14 , more than 100 law professors signed a letter to Trump insisting that DACA is perfectly legal . On Wednesday , a group of more than 1,850 governors , state attorneys general , faith leaders , police chiefs , sheriffs and civic leaders signed a statement urging Trump to keep the program .
`` As the leaders of communities across the country—individuals and institutions that have seen these young people grow up in our communities—we recognize how they have enriched and strengthened our cities , states , schools , businesses , congregations , and families , '' the statement read . `` We believe it is a moral imperative that the administration and the country know we are with them . ''