Two Republican senators called into question whether President Donald Trump used the term “ shithole countries ” in a meeting with lawmakers on immigration last week , as critics of the president didn ’ t back down and continued to suggest his words were racist .
“ I am telling you that he did not use that word , ” Sen. David Perdue ( R. , Ga. ) , who attended the meeting , said on ABC ’ s “ This Week. ” Mr. Perdue said much of the reporting on the meeting has been a “ gross misrepresentation . ”
Mr. Trump also denied making unspecified remarks attributed to him from the meeting . “ Did you see what various senators in the room said about my comments ? They weren ’ t made , ” he told reporters Sunday evening .
He also said he would tell a person who said he was racist : “ No , no , I ’ m not a racist . I am the least racist person you have ever interviewed , that I can tell you . “
The comments showed no signs of quelling a political storm over Mr. Trump ’ s words at an Oval Office meeting last Thursday on the future of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA , which Mr. Trump has said he is ending . The reported vulgarity prompted condemnation world-wide , including at the United Nations and among countries that have long been U.S. allies .
While others at the meeting cited Mr. Trump saying “ shithole countries , ” Mr. Perdue ’ s statement was the first outright denial that Mr. Trump referred to some countries in the vulgar fashion at the meeting .
Senator Tom Cotton , ( R. , Ark . ) , who also attended the session , said on CBS ’ “ Face the Nation ” that “ I did not hear that word either , ” but that “ the president did react with pretty tough language ” to show his displeasure at a suggested compromise on immigration . Mr. Trump , in Florida , seized on the comments . “ Did you see what various senators in the room said about my comments ? They were not made , ” he told reporters .
Democrats and some Republicans have called for an apology from Mr. Trump for the reported remarks , which have sharpened the debate over the future of DACA . Some lawmakers fear of a government shutdown as some Democrats say DACA should be reauthorized as part of any long-term government funding bill .
DACA provides work permits and safe harbor from deportation to about 690,000 undocumented immigrants who were brought to the U.S. as children , often known as Dreamers .
Mr. Trump has challenged Congress to replace the program with legislation offering similar protections , but lawmakers have so far been unable to agree on how . The president has said funding for a border wall must be part of any agreement on DACA .
On Sunday , he blamed Democrats for problems reaching an agreement . “ DACA is probably dead because the Democrats don ’ t really want it , they just want to talk and take desperately needed money away from our military , ” he tweeted .
Mr. Cotton said the president ’ s message at the meeting was that immigration policy should be retooled to favor a more merit-based admissions system , and phase out lotteries and rules favor people whose relatives already reside in the U.S .
At the Oval Office meeting , Mr. Cotton said , the president was frustrated that Sens . Lindsey Graham ( R. , S.C. ) and Dick Durbin ( D. , Ill. ) , in presenting a bipartisan proposal , “ proposed not to fix that system but to expand it , to create more quotas and more set-asides for other countries . ”
By Mr. Durbin ’ s account , the president responded with a vulgarity , saying , “ Why are we having all these people from shithole countries come here ? ” Mr. Trump also reportedly said the U.S. should focus on bringing in more immigrants from Norway . Mr. Graham has confirmed the incendiary comments , and has said he directly confronted Mr. Trump about them .
Rep. Mia Love ( R. , Utah ) on Thursday condemned Mr. Trump for his comments and called on the president to apologize .
When asked on CNN “ State of the Union ” if the comments were racist , Ms. Love said yes .
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen , who was at the Oval Office meeting , said Sunday “ I don ’ t recall him saying that exact phrase . ”
Speaking on Fox News Sunday , Ms. Nielsen suggested Mr. Trump did use forceful words . “ Undoubtedly the president will continue to use strong language when it comes to this issue because he feels very passionate about it , ” she said .
She added , “ I take of a little bit of offense to the comments and suggestions that the president is racist . ”
Xavier Becerra , California ’ s attorney general , mocked the notion that someone in a recent meeting with the president could n't remember if he used a particular explosive term . “ It ’ s disturbing to see so many people with short-term memory losses , ” Mr. Becerra told Fox . “ In every respect what he is showing us is that he is a racist . ”