An eight-year-old boy from Guatemala has died in US government custody , officials say , the second migrant child to die in US detention this month .
The border agency says the boy died on Monday night hours after showing signs of illness . A Texas congressman named him as Felipe Alónzo-Gomez .
The child was detained with his father on 18 December after illegally crossing the US-Mexico border .
A seven-year-old girl died earlier this month just hours after being detained .
Jakelin Caal , also from Guatemala , developed a high fever and died of liver failure . Her funeral was held in her village on Tuesday .
Thousands of migrants have travelled from Central America - mainly from Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador - to the US border .
Many say they are fleeing persecution , poverty and violence in their home countries and plan to seek asylum in the US .
In a new , lengthy statement , the US Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) said the boy , whose identity has not been officially confirmed , died at 23:48 local time ( 06:48 GMT ) on 24 December . The cause of death is still unknown .
After being detained in El Paso , Texas , he and his father were taken to a local processing centre , where they spent two days . They were then sent to El Paso Border Patrol Station , where they were held for another two days .
On 22 December , they were transferred to Alamogordo Border Patrol Station , in neighbouring New Mexico .
On Monday morning , an agent noticed that the boy `` was coughing and appeared to have glossy eyes '' . He was taken with his father to a hospital where he was diagnosed with a common cold and given Tylenol ( paracetamol ) .
While being evaluated for release , he was found to have a fever of 103F ( 39.4C ) and held for more observation . He was released shortly afterwards with a prescription for an antibiotic and ibuprofen .
The boy and his father were taken to a temporary site at the Highway 70 checkpoint , where the child received the medication . Two hours later , he vomited .
His father declined further medical assistance , the CBP said , as the child had been feeling better .
The child appeared lethargic at around 22:00 , when he was sent back to the hospital . While being transported , the boy vomited and lost consciousness , and doctors at the hospital were unable to revive him .
The CBP earlier said the boy died just after midnight . It did not explain why they were held for so long .
His father remains in custody . The Associated Press news agency reported they had plans to go to Johnson City , Tennessee .
CBP Commissioner Kevin McAleenan said the death was `` tragic '' and announced that the agency would conduct further medical checks on all children in custody , with a focus on those under the age of 10 .
He also said the CBP would review its policies and work with Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) to improve custody conditions .
Human rights groups criticised the CBP and Guatemala 's foreign ministry called for an investigation .
Texas Congressman Joaquin Castro called for a congressional investigation , saying the administration 's policy of turning people away at the border `` is putting families and children in great danger '' .
The Trump administration has tried to deter asylum seekers from crossing the border irregularly between ports of entry , warning that they could face arrest , prosecution and deportation .
But , at the same time , it is restricting access to those trying to cross through official ports of entry , creating a long wait for applicants .
Among them are thousands of Central American migrants who travelled together in so-called `` caravans '' , and arrived at the border with California in recent weeks .
President Trump has vowed to keep each migrant on the Mexican side of the border until courts have decided their cases .