LONDON – Last week 's terror attack by a British-born Muslim proves again that a radical community exists within Britain . Its goal : create an Islamic nation . And there is a quieter force at work that will likely achieve that desire long before guns , bombs and violence .
Britain 's policy of mass immigration has brought what one expert calls `` demographic upheaval '' to the United Kingdom that could change almost everything .
It 's now a demographic certainty . Someday the white native English will be a minority in their own country , including the native Welsh and the Scots .
Professor David Coleman is a supernumerary fellow in human sciences and university professor in demography at Oxford . He 's has written that uncontrolled immigration could lead to `` finis Britanniae . ''
`` Which simply means the end of Britain , and by that , I mean the end of Britain as we know it , '' Coleman said .
`` The point I was making is the change in the number of people and particularly the change in the origins of people , in their religion , in their cultural background , would make Britain unrecognizable compared with the present time , '' he said .
Immigration can strengthen a nation . But several western nations , including the United States , are debating the wisdom of large-scale immigration from the Islamic world . And experts wonder what will happen as Muslim numbers continue to grow in officially Christian Britain .
In the dystopian masterpiece Children of Men , ethnic division and civil war wracks Britain in 2027 . Armed Muslim gangs fight a government that is hunting down and deporting immigrants while trying to maintain order .
Britain 's future is not likely to be this violent , but it may not be peaceful either .
When the Christian activist group Britain First took large crosses through Luton 's Bury Park last year , angry Muslims confronted them .
MUSLIM MAN : It ’ s not a Christian country , mate .... You ’ re jealous . You ’ re jealous that we ’ re taking over .
Urban areas are becoming increasingly Islamic whereas rural area are becoming increasingly English , and there 's a retreat away from these two populations . That 's the future .
Policy analyst George Igler says he does believe it will take 40 or 50 years before the native British are a minority .
`` This is a nonsense . It 's going to be much sooner . And more importantly , when you look at places like Luton . When you look at the experience of women in Cologne . We already have a window into what this future will be like . It 's going to violence and sexual violence against non-Muslims . It 's going to be insistence on Sharia Law , '' Igler said .
Professor Coleman , who stressed he is not anti-Muslim but is simply looking at statistics , nevertheless said the changes could be drastic .
`` There are strong currents in Muslim society which wish to see Muslim approaches to diet , to marriage and would like to see Sharia Law incorporated formally into British Law or in respect to some extremist groups would like to see Sharia Law replace British Law , '' he said .
More than a half million non-British citizens immigrated to the United Kingdom in 2016 . European Union rules prevented Britain from stopping migration from within Europe , but that brought European migrants .
Coleman says Brexit , Britain 's exit from the E.U. , will not necessarily stop the influx of immigrants from non-European Islamic nations .
Great Britain was a factory for Muslim terrorists long before last week 's attack on Westminister Bridge by a British-born Muslim . At least 850 British citizens have left the U.K. to join ISIS .
`` Look , we have around 100 Sharia courts in this country . We 're the only western country with a functioning network of Sharia tribunals and councils . They 're dealing with marriages , divorce , even with criminal matters . They 're marrying children , '' said Anne Marie Waters , from Sharia Watch .
If demographic trends continue , British schools will change when most of the pupils are from non-British backgrounds , as will British foreign policy and military alliances .
`` England is not going to be England anymore , '' Igler says .
In its street protests against the Islamization of Britain , the English Defence League used to sing 'we want our country back . ' If current demographic trends continue , it may be too late for that .