She has made peace with losing the election – but not with Donald Trump . Now she is fighting to undo the damage of the president ’ s child-separation policy – and has no time for debates over civility
When Hillary Clinton made her first public appearance after losing the 2016 election , it was her admission that she had felt like “ never leaving the house again ” that made headlines . Twenty months later , other details of the speech seem much more significant . That Clinton had left her house to address the Children ’ s Defense Fund , a child advocacy organisation , said a lot about where the defeated candidate saw her future . Her warning about “ the little girl I met in Nevada who started to cry when she told me how scared she was that her parents would be taken away from her and be deported ” , told us more about her country ’ s future than we knew . But when I quote her words back to her , it ’ s not the accuracy of her prescience that makes her shudder , but its inadequacy .
“ I was hopeful that I wouldn ’ t see the worst of my fears come true . But it has been worse . I have to tell you , even I did not believe this would happen . ”
I previously met Clinton in Claridge ’ s hotel in London last autumn , when she was on a publicity tour to promote her book about the election . The frosted grandeur of that rather regal occasion has vanished today , when we meet at an out-of-town campus of Swansea University , where she is visiting the law school to which she has given her name . Looking more like her old secretary of state self than the glossy , coiffured version we saw on the campaign trail , she launches straight into the politics of Donald Trump ’ s already notorious family-separation policy .
Clinton has no doubt that Trump deployed the policy for the strategic purpose of making his wall look like a more palatable option . “ He is playing to his base – and his base was attracted to him for a number of reasons , one of which was his anti-immigrant rhetoric . And that was exemplified by the wall . So the wall became more of a symbol than a real plan . He has now decided that he has to do whatever he can to get the wall , to satisfy the base . And I think , ” she adds , “ he has gone so far in that direction that he does things which are truly unimaginably cruel and unrelated to the outcome . ”
What does she mean by that ? “ I mean , you do not have to take children away from their parents to negotiate to get what you want on the wall . There are enough different strands in the immigration debate that he could give a little somewhere and try to get [ something ] in return , like you do in a democracy , in a political legislative process . But he has chosen instead to be very oppositional to anyone who criticises him , to be very intimidating to everyone in his own party by threatening to unleash his base against them . And so he has adopted these all-or-nothing positions . ”
Trump called it off , Clinton believes , only because “ even for him , the optics were terrible ” , but she says that his executive order ending the policy has not even begun to solve the problem . “ The question of how we reunite the children who were taken from the parents is the one that ’ s keeping me up at night. ” Does she worry some may never be reunited ? She looks stricken . “ Yes , I do . Absolutely I worry about that . I ’ m worried that some children will not be reunited . ”
Clinton ’ s expression grows increasingly bleak as she catalogues the bureaucratic chaos . For a start , many of the children are nonverbal ; others don ’ t speak Spanish , but obscure Mayan languages . And all are confused and traumatised . Having been “ funnelled through a whole panoply ” of Homeland Security agencies notorious for “ very poor record keeping and incompetence ” , many of which are privately run , some babies have been transported all the way from the border to Detroit and New York . Others have gone to foster care families ; some parents have already been deported without their children . “ You just could not even imagine a worse child-welfare tragedy . ”
She tells me she has raised $ 1.5m in the days before we meet , to “ flood the border with lawyers , interpreters , experienced social workers , psychologists . We just have to get as much expertise down there to force the federal government to give us everything. ” It ’ s the kind of resource-focused , pragmatic response we would expect from someone with a reputation for technocratic efficiency , so I ’ m a bit taken aback to see tears fill her eyes . When the MSNBC anchor Rachel Maddow broke down and wept on air while reporting plans to build “ tender age ” detention facilities for infants , “ didn ’ t that make you cry ? ” Clinton challenges me . “ Well , I felt exactly the same way. ” Dabbing her eyes , she lets rip .
“ I mean , you just … who thinks like that ? Who does these things ? How can anybody look in the mirror ? How can they actually live with themselves ? If you heard about it in some third-world banana republic , you ’ d say : ‘ That ’ s horrible ! Stop it ! Who would do that ? ’ Now it ’ s happening in our country , and it ’ s just so distressing . I think a lot of us keep waiting for the bottom – and it just seems to be bottomless . ”
Throughout the presidential campaign , Clinton was criticised for exercising a degree of emotional self-control that looked cold and inauthentic , while Trump ’ s volatility was taken as evidence that he meant what he said and really cared . Lately , however , Democrats have been provoked to condemn the president with a passion some on the left warn is becoming “ uncivil ” . I ’ m curious to know what Clinton thinks of this .
This administration should be working 24/7 to reunite those kids . And if they aren ’ t , yes , there should be consequences
“ Oh , give me a break , ” she erupts , eyes widening into indignation . “ Give me a break ! What is more uncivil and cruel than taking children away ? It should be met with resolve and strength . And if some of that comes across as a little uncivil , well , children ’ s lives are at stake ; their futures are at stake . That is that ridiculous concept of bothsideism. ” She adopts a mockingly prim voice . “ ‘ Well , you know , somebody made an insulting , profane remark about President Trump , and he separated 2,300 children from their families , that ’ s both sides , and we should stop being uncivil – oh and , by the way , he should stop separating children. ’ Give me a break , really , ” she growls , rolling her eyes . “ I mean , this is a crisis of his making that will damage kids for no good reason at all , and I think everybody should be focused on that until the children are reunited . ”
Before Trump signed his executive order , there were calls in the UK for the prime minister , Theresa May , to cancel his forthcoming visit until the policy was rescinded . “ Until the children are reunited , ” Clinton mutters under her breath . Her expression suggests she regrets the interjection as soon as I ask her to repeat it . “ I ’ m not going to speak for your government , ” she corrects herself hastily . “ You guys have to make your own decision . But this administration should be working 24/7 to reunite those kids . And if they aren ’ t , yes , there should be consequences . But I ’ m not going to comment on what you guys should do . That ’ s up to you . ”
In recent speeches , Clinton has quoted from Madeleine Albright ’ s new book , Fascism : A Warning . I wonder if now , when she watches footage of detention camps , she is beginning to think this is what fascism looks like . She hesitates cautiously .
“ Well , here ’ s what I believe . There are certain characteristics of authoritarian leaders trying to isolate and demonise minorities , which we see happening . Looking to undermine the rule of law in as many ways as possible , some of which we have seen happening . Going after the press – and recently he called the press the nation ’ s No 1 enemy . There are certain behaviours that I think would raise anybody ’ s alarms. ” The US ’ s democratic institutions are “ not breaking ” . They are , however , “ bending ” . She is “ very worried about the increasing number of leaders who are determined to suborn democracy and take those powers on to themselves ” .
She mentions Turkey , Italy and , above all , Hungary . “ It ’ s sinister. ” Can Hungary plausibly remain in the EU ? “ I think it ’ s a really good question . Because there should be some standards that are complied with , and rule of law , free press , those basic pillars of democratic politics and governance , should be absolutely required . ”
The morning we meet , Clinton has flown to Swansea from Dublin , where she had given a speech at Trinity College . Her improbable relationship with Swansea University has a certain sentimental charm . The politician ’ s great-grandparents came from Wales and her grandmother was raised on Methodist hymns and memories of rolling Welsh hills . According to genealogists , Clinton ’ s ethnic breakdown is 31.2 % Welsh . So when the law school approached Clinton following her election defeat , she , to their delight , agreed to a partnership .
During her day in Swansea with academics and local politicians , she answers questions on everything from lowering the voting age to 16 ( interested , but undecided ) , using cannabis oil for medicinal purposes ( broadly in favour , but would like to see more research ) and raising the UK ’ s age of criminal responsibility from 10 ( emphatically yes ) . Her command of her brief is staggering , right down to the latest neuroscientific evidence of the impact of toxic stress on adolescent brain development . The only questions I see floor her concern Melania Trump .
What did Clinton make , I ask , of her public statement about “ hating ” to see families separated ? “ I didn ’ t know what to make of it. ” I ask how she interpreted the jacket the first lady wore to visit a child detention centre , bearing the opaque and intriguing slogan : ‘ I really don ’ t care , do u ? ’ Clinton slumps back in her chair , wide eyed , arms spread , defeated by the mystery . “ That , I have no idea . I have no idea . I can ’ t even … I don ’ t have any idea . I don ’ t know. ” Does she feel sorry for the first lady ? “ I don ’ t know . I honestly don ’ t know . ”
Clinton will spend the evening and the next day in Swansea , before travelling on to give a speech in Oxford . Since her defeat , she has taken precisely two three-week breaks ; once back in the US she will resume campaigning tirelessly for the Democrats until the midterm elections in November . At 70 years old , the schedule would be punishing enough , even if she were garlanded in universal praise and gratitude . As it is , Trump supporters continue to chant , “ Lock her up , ” and many on her own side are barely any kinder , fearful that she damages their brand . A recent Atlantic magazine headline read : “ Hillary Clinton ’ s High Profile is Hurting the Democrats ” .
Nowadays , Clinton ’ s own speeches seldom fail to warn about the dangerously polarised divisions poisoning US politics . Few Americans would dispute the description ; in fact , this may be about the only point on which all sides can agree . But surely Clinton must be aware that every media report and profile invariably describes her as a “ polarising figure ” . Has she ever considered the possibility that her most effective contribution to healing the country ’ s divisions would be to withdraw from public life ?
“ I ’ m sure they said that about Churchill between the wars , didn ’ t they ? ” she flashes back sharply , a fraction too quickly for the line to sound spontaneous . “ I mean , I ’ m not comparing myself , but I ’ m just saying people said that , but he was right about Hitler , and a lot of people in England were wrong . And Churchill was a pain . He kept popping up all the time. ” Besides , she goes on , “ I love what I do and I care about a lot of things , so I ’ m very interested in what people are doing to try to figure stuff out and solve problems . So it ’ s not really work to me . No , it doesn ’ t feel like work . ”
She assures me she has made her peace with her defeat . “ I ’ m OK. I ’ m fine. ” But having devoted her whole life to public service , she must still wonder why her country preferred a man memorably surprised to find the presidency “ more work ” than he had expected . I wonder if Americans who found Trump ’ s leisurely work ethic more relatable now regard Clinton ’ s resolve to keep going as not so much heroic as weird . If she decided to call it a day , I begin to say , no one would blame …
“ I would , ” she interrupts . “ I would blame me . Yes . I would . It feels like a duty . It feels like patriotism , and it feels necessary . I ’ m not going anywhere . ”