Just a dozen days ago , Speaker Boehner and his GOP leadership team embraced a set of principles for updating the nation 's immigration laws .
In that moment , the House seemed about to acknowledge the most pressing issue before the Congress – the elephant in the room , if you will . But then , last week , the Ohio Republican who presides over the House majority went public with grave doubts about the feasibility of that overhaul .
Why the whiplash ? Boehner said a thorough-going revamp could not be done because House Republicans did not trust President Obama to carry it out once enacted . That could be a reason not to pass any legislation of any kind on any subject , of course , but Boehner seemed to lack an alternative explanation . He did not want to say that the wind had shifted after just one week .
The truth is , the wind had shifted ; and it had taken only a weekend . Within hours of leadership bringing forth its principles on Jan. 30 , they were being denounced by conservative activists , bloggers and radio talk shows . The central objection : the idea that those now in the country illegally should have a path , albeit a difficult one , to legal status .
To be clear , this was not a path to citizenship , with full rights and voting privileges . This was a path to not being arrested and deported . But that notion was immediately labeled amnesty for lawbreakers . And if there is one thing we 've learned from every effort toward immigration reform since 1986 , once the amnesty charge sticks the bill is dead . This time , the amnesty charge appears to have been fatal before the bill was even a bill .
It can surely be argued that the terms of the Jan. 30 principles had little in common with the 1986 legislation , which did mean amnesty for millions . But Boehner did not make that argument . He scarcely mounted a defense at all .
So will the real John Boehner stand up ? Probably not . He 's just had his legs cut out from under him .
Democrats immediately seized the moment as proof Boehner never really intended to press ahead on immigration this year . New York Democrat Charles Schumer , one of the authors of the 2013 deal by which the Senate passed a bipartisan immigration overhaul , saw Boehner 's `` ca n't trust Obama '' riff as a bluff . Fine , Schumer said , pass the law and make it effective on Jan. 20 , 2017 , the day Obama leaves office .
Or did you mean you would n't trust any president to enforce the law ?
It could be that Boehner is merely playing for time . Having offered a bit of an overture to immigrant groups on one hand , he then placates his intraparty protestors on the other . Time will pass , the issue will languish for another year and the Senate bill will die with the 113th Congress .
Next year , there will be more Republicans in the Senate — perhaps even a Republican majority . Then the GOP could update the nation 's decrepit immigration laws in a fashion more to its liking . And if that fashion has some appeal for the target immigrant groups — the Hispanics and Asians who voted more than 70 % for Obama in 2012 – then it makes some sense to do it closer to the presidential election of 2016 .
That all makes for good politics , except that whenever the GOP leadership really does get serious about immigration , it will still have to face its rank and file 's aversion to anything that smacks of amnesty . Some say that aversion may be abating , but if so it was not evident last week in the blogosphere .
In all likelihood , Boehner understands the great opportunity his party is in danger of wasting . If Republicans offered some form of legalization , polls and other evidence suggest most immigrants would go for it . They want the chance to become citizens eventually , to be sure , but for the moment the most pressing need is the legal right to live and work here . One step at a time .
And if Democrats blocked such a legalization bill , holding out for citizenship , they could be cast as the obstructionists . They might well blunt their advantage with immigrant voters – now and for some time to come . It would , at the very least , pose an excruciating choice .
The chance to force the Democrats into that box would seem awfully tempting . The Speaker has seemed , at times , tempted . But so far at least , the watchdogs to his right have kept him from yielding .