CHARLOTTE , N.C. — Democrats broke yet another barrier Wednesday when they invited an illegal immigrant young adult onto the stage at their nominating convention in Charlotte — part of a historic Hispanic outreach program the party hopes will cement ties to the fast-growing ethnic voting bloc in the country .
It ’ s likely the first time an illegal immigrant has taken the podium at a major party convention , and highlights President Obama ’ s own stance on the issue : The student , Benita Veliz , had her deportation halted under Mr. Obama ’ s non-deportation policies .
In a pointed political appeal , Rep. Luis V. Gutierrez , the Illinois Democrat who has become his party ’ s de facto leader in pushing immigration reforms , said the fate of Ms. Veliz and a million other illegal immigrants rests on whether Mr. Obama gets re-elected .
“ President Obama is protecting immigrants . Mitt Romney wants to send them back , ” Mr. Gutierrez said . “ This election will determine whether high school valedictorians , football team captains , and student council presidents will be treated with respect — or treated like suspects . Whether they reach their dreams , or whether Mitt Romney turns their dreams into nightmares . ”
But Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach , who helped draft the Arizona immigration crackdown law and stiffer enforcement language in the Republicans ’ 2012 platform , said that in hosting Ms. Veliz , the Democratic National Convention is sending the wrong message .
“ The DNC leaders are now portraying law breakers as heroes , ” he said . “ They are promoting the myth that Dream Act amnesty recipients are not responsible for their law breaking , referring them as ‘ children. ’ … When these adults choose to stay illegally in the United States in defiance of federal law , they are defying our country ’ s laws . Now the DNC is cheering them on . ”
The Democrats ’ convention reflects the rising power of Hispanics in American politics , with the party putting one Hispanic after another on the podium , trying to counter Republicans who highlighted their own cadre of telegenic rising Hispanic stars , such as Sen. Marco Rubio , New Mexico Gov . Susana Martinez and Texas Senate candidate Ted Cruz .
Democrats responded with speeches by talk-show host Cristina Saralegui , who has been labeled the Latina Oprah ; keynote speaker Julian Castro , the mayor of San Antonio ; and Ms. Veliz , the illegal immigrant who spoke to delegates just ahead of Ms. Saralegui .
Mr. Veliz said she was brought to the U.S. as a child , graduated as valedictorian of her high school at 16 and earned a double-major degree from college at 20 .
“ I ’ ve had to live almost my entire life knowing I could be deported just because of the way I came here , ” she said . “ President Obama fought for the Dream Act to help people like me . ”
The Dream Act was legislation the Senate blocked by filibuster in 2010 that would have legalized most illegal immigrants under age 30 .
Eighteen months after it failed , and after repeatedly saying he didn ’ t have the power to act unilaterally , Mr. Obama reversed himself and said he could , in fact , stop deportations for those who would have qualified for the Dream Act — known as “ dreamers . ”
His policy does not grant citizenship , but does allow a tentative legal status and gives them the chance to work in the U.S. legally .
That move helped defuse pent-up anger among Hispanics who had long argued the president had the authority to issue the non-deportation order .
“ I think I ’ m a reflection of a community of people . I was frustrated , I was angry , I thought that things didn ’ t happen quick enough , I shared those with others , and I ’ m [ now ] very happy , ” Mr. Gutierrez told reporters Wednesday ahead of his speech .
Republicans have decried Mr. Obama ’ s order as illegal , and said adding those new legal workers will only hurt unemployed Americans .
“ Giving amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants under 30 would encourage more illegal immigration and make it harder for 23 million Americans to find full-time jobs , ” said House Judiciary Committee Chairman Lamar Smith , a Texas Republican who has pushed for stricter immigration enforcement .
Mr. Romney has criticized Mr. Obama ’ s non-deportation policy as too flimsy , though his campaign won ’ t say whether he would leave it in place if he wins the White House . Instead , they refer to a speech in which the candidate warned future presidents could alter it .
Overall , Mr. Romney has staked out a position as the most fervent opponent of illegal immigration of any major party presidential nominee .
Mr. Obama , meanwhile , has tried to walk a tricky line , boosting deportations of illegal immigrants but carving out large categories and exempting them from being deported .
Hispanic outreach is part of a broader appeal Democrats are making to convince minorities , women , gay voters and other specific demographics that they have more to lose on domestic issues by voting for Mr. Romney .
One key ingredient is the flood of minority faces from the podium , where an Hispanic mayor from San Antonio became the first Hispanicto deliver a party ’ s keynote address on Tuesday — part of a night that also highlighted top black officials nationwide .
“ The people on stage yesterday — you can ’ t compare that to any other convention , ” said Rep. Michael M. Honda , California Democrat and former chairman of the Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus .
On the sidelines of the convention , Democrats have been holding caucuses to fire up various ethnic groups .
Mr. Honda said that a decade ago the Asian caucus members at conventions could be counted on one hand , but this year there are 321 here .