After a Senate committee passed the Gang of Eight immigration bill this week , audience members at the hearing chanted , `` Sí se puede . '' That might not be the case once it 's the House of Representatives turn to take up immigration reform .
Supporters of reform believe that the Democrat-controlled Senate will be much more willing to pass a bill with a pathway to citizenship than the GOP-controlled House . Any hope that the bipartisan Gang of Eight bill could quickly sail through both chambers was quashed on Thursday , when GOP leaders in the House said they would not simply take up and pass the legislation as is .
`` The House remains committed to fixing our broken immigration system , but we will not simply take up and accept the bill that is emerging in the Senate if it passes , '' House Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) , Majority Leader Eric Cantor ( R-Va. ) , and other top lawmakers said in a joint statement . `` Rather , through regular order , the House will work its will and produce its own legislation . ''
That does n't necessarily mean that the immigration reform effort will die in the House , but there 's certainly an appetite to churn out a more conservative product . Whether the House can actually produce such a bill , and then square it with the Senate 's , remains to be seen .
Here are three big reasons why immigration will be heavy lift in the House :
Earlier this year , both Boehner and Cantor sounded optimistic tones on immigration reform . The duo had remained coy about how they will handle the issue , but their tone gave supporters hope that longstanding Republican opposition to a comprehensive bill had disappeared .
The reality is that Republican leadership is facing dueling tensions within their party . On one hand , party elites and political strategists see the writing on the wall : Republicans need to act on immigration reform in order to tap into the Hispanic and Asian-American electorate ( and actually have a shot at winning national elections ) .
But on the other hand , there 's a large group of conservative GOP lawmakers who are n't so fond of immigration reform , to put it mildly . In fact , there 's a good chance that a majority of House Republicans oppose legalizing immigrants in the country without authorization , since they think it amounts to `` amnesty . ''
So , leaders like Boehner and Cantor might see the long-term political logic behind bucking many in their conference and cooperating on immigration reform . But that decision would come with significant short-term political peril .
For every Paul Ryan , Sean Duffy and Raúl Labrador who want to compromise on immigration , there 's a Steve King , Louie Gohmert and Steve Stockman who will fight tooth and nail against it .
The latter trio is leading the opposition to immigration reform in the House . All three are known for making outlandish , and sometimes offensive , statements about immigration reform or immigrants .
In the 21st century , that would seem to marginalize a politician . But if King & Co. are able to foment conservative outrage against the bill , we could see a repeat of 2007 . Then , a similar bill was sunk by a revolt from talk-radio hosts , grassroots groups , and right-wing lawmakers .
King and other Republicans are already trying to compare immigration to President Obama 's healthcare law . And we all remember how conservatives reacted to that .
The House has its own bipartisan Gang of Eight , which has been meeting on and off for nearly four years to craft a comprehensive immigration reform bill .
The group of four Democrats and four Republicans announced they had reached a deal in principle last week . But that pronouncement now appears to have been made prematurely .
Politico reports that lawmakers agreed on a compromise over whether immigrants applying for citizenship should receive government-subsidized healthcare . But other significant issues remain unresolved , like provisions around border-security .
If the group is unable to agree on a comprehensive proposal , that could lead to a flood of bills that deal with immigration issues on a piecemeal basis . Some House Republicans prefer to tackle immigration issue-by-issue , but Senate leaders have called that approach a non-starter , fearing that a pathway to citizenship -- crucial for Democrats -- could be left aside .
Theoretically , the Senate bill could be reconciled with a series of House bills . But judging by the level of dysfunction in Congress , that approach would have a slim chance of succeeding .
Boehner may have summed it up best on Thursday , when he spoke to reporters at his weekly press conference .
`` The House will work its will , '' he said . `` Do n't ask me how because if I knew I 'd certainly tell you . ''