This electoral cycle , nativism has migrated from the tea party margins of the GOP and into the mainstream of conservative discourse , with presidential candidate Donald Trump as its icon .
But even as debates over immigration intermingle with anxieties about security and terrorism , public opinion toward immigrants themselves remains broadly favorable . That may underscore two seemingly contradictory realities in US politics : Americans ’ growing acceptance of the foreign-born and an increasingly vocal opposition to unauthorized immigration .
A new national survey of Americans from the Pew Center conducted from Aug. 9 to Aug. 16 and published on Thursday , found that more than three-fourths of respondents agreed that `` undocumented immigrants are as hard-working and honest as U.S. citizens '' , while 67 percent said they were `` no more likely than citizens to commit serious crimes . '' Seventy-one percent of Americans responded that undocumented immigrants in the US mostly fill jobs that citizens do not want .
Those findings reflect warming attitudes toward immigrants as a whole over the decades . In April , the Pew Center found that 59 percent of Americans agreed that immigrants strengthened the country , compared to 33 percent who said they were a burden .
That marked a `` dramatic '' shift since 1994 , the first year the Pew Center carried out that survey , when it found that the public 's beliefs were practically a mirror image of what they are today : Sixty-three percent of Americans that year said immigrants were a burden , compared to just 31 percent who said they strengthened the country .
`` You see a longer-term , basic trend toward a greater feeling of acceptance toward immigrants themselves , '' says Roberto Suro , a professor of public policy and journalism at the University of Southern California .
In the 1970s , with the population 's percentage of foreign-born reaching historical lows ( 4.7 percent in 1970 ) , Americans began to turn restrictionist , even as public policy grew more liberal . Since then , the percentage of foreign-born has risen to more than 12 percent , thanks to large-scale immigration from Latin America and Asia .
Part of the reason why much of the public now sees immigrants in a positive light , Mr. Suro tells The ███ , is that Americans in much of the country have grown accustomed to living with them .
`` I think it 's partially familiarity , '' he says . `` We 've just gotten a lot more used to it . The world did n't come to an end . ''
So what might explain the resurgence of nativism ? Some studies have linked it to economic downturns , a theory that might seem to be borne out by surveys showing that supporters of Donald Trump tend to hail from communities with ailing economies .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
But partisanship itself may also be behind such feeling . Americans may tend to feel positively toward immigrants , but on points of immigration policy , their opinions diverge sharply according to party identification .
`` The loudest voices in both parties have tended to espouse very much opposed views of immigration policies , '' says Suro . Those who listen to those political leaders often find media framing around immigration posed in terms that echo their grievances . `` We know that highly partisan people tend to go to news sources that are echo chambers for certain views , and the partisan media on the question of immigration is highly polarized . ''