CLOSE Speaking from Phoenix , Donald Trump outlined 10 steps he says will make America safer and help fix the U.S. immigration system .
Phoenix speech was nothing short of a full-throated rant designed to whip up his base .
Donald Trump was said to have been considering ways to recast his hard-line positions on immigration without offending his base . Given the centrality of the issue to his presidential campaign , this would have been the political equivalent of a reverse pike four-and-a-half somersault high dive .
Trump seemingly began the maneuver Wednesday with a presidential-like visit to Mexico City , where he met with President Enrique Peña Nieto . But anyone thinking Trump would complete the move — however inartfully — with a shift to the center on immigration would have been sorely disappointed .
His speech delivered later in the day in Phoenix was nothing short of a full-throated rant designed to whip up his base with angry — and largely inaccurate — descriptions of current policies and trends .
No . 1 among his 10-step immigration plan was a renewal of his call to build a “ great wall along the southern border , ” to be staffed with an additional 5,000 border agents .
A wall along the southern border , supposedly to be paid for by Mexico , has long been a Trump staple . In the world of political promises , such a wall has undeniable emotional potency as a symbol of America ’ s resolve to secure its border .
But in the world of bricks , mortar and budgets , Trump ’ s wall along the 1,989-mile border with Mexico would be hugely costly ( estimates range anywhere from $ 5 billion to $ 25 billion ) and only marginally effective .
Start with the simple fact that roughly 40 % of undocumented immigrants in the United States are people who overstay their visas , not people who sneak into the country . A wall wouldn ’ t affect them .
Add to this the fact that 670 miles of wall and fencing has already been erected in recent years , with other stretches of the border covered by “ virtual walls ” of electronic monitors and patrols . Other parts of the border , moreover , have significant natural barriers , such as the Sonoran Desert .
You wouldn ’ t know it from listening to Trump , but as a result of these existing barriers , and falling birth rates in Latin America , illegal immigration has been declining over the past decade .
That doesn ’ t exactly call out for one of the largest public works projects the United States has ever undertaken , one that would involve getting massive amounts of concrete and steel to remote and roadless places .
There are much better uses for infrastructure money — and much better ways to curb the flow of undocumented workers .
Principal among them is E-Verify , the system the federal government developed to track the status of job applicants . E-Verify remains voluntary in much of the country , and sanctions against companies that repeatedly hire undocumented workers are weak .
The government doesn ’ t press harder largely because business groups push back . They need undocumented workers to fill jobs that are difficult or impossible to fill with Americans .
Trump ’ s wall is best viewed as a stage prop for an immigration policy that ’ s likely to end in an ugly belly flop .
███ 's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board , separate from the news staff . Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique ███ feature .