Mike Pence defended Republican running mate Donald Trump 's immigration position as consistent but responsive to practical considerations , a stance campaign manager Kellyanne Conway described as a softening in `` approach '' as opposed to policy , in separate television appearances Sunday .
Mr. Trump has sent mixed signals in the past week about his plan for approximately 11 million illegal immigrants currently in the U.S. , indicating he might ease off earlier proposals to deport them and finding himself criticized by some campaigners against illegal immigration as a result .
Mr. Pence , the GOP 's vice-presidential nominee , said Sunday that Mr. Trump 's positions on core matters of immigration policy had remained solid , that securing the border was chief among those , and that the question of people living in the U.S. without authorization was one Mr. Trump would resolve in the future .
`` Nothing has changed about Donald Trump 's position on dealing with illegal immigration ... and his position and his principles have been absolutely consistent : we 're going to secure the border , we 're going to build a wall , have a physical barrier , we 're going to enforce the laws of this country , end sanctuary cities , implement E-Verify , and we will have a mechanism for dealing with people in this country , you heard the word humanely again , '' said Mr. Pence on CNN 's `` State of the Union . ''
`` What you heard him describe there , in his usual plainspoken , American way , was a mechanism , not a policy . You 're going to hear more detail in the next two weeks that lays out all the policies , but there will be no change in the principle here , '' he continued . `` There will be no path to legalization , no path to citizenship , people that want to gain legal status , you heard Donald Trump say again and again , will have to leave the country . ''
On Saturday , Mr. Trump said at an Iowa rally that he would deport “ criminal illegal immigrants ” right away , but he didn ’ t offer any detail on whether he would install a “ deportation force ” to remove millions of people from the country , as he had pledged earlier .
On Sunday , Mr. Pence described Mr. Trump as acting like a CEO , listening to all sides on the issue before taking a decisive stance . He also said that Mr. Trump 's position was stark in comparison with Hillary Clinton 's on matters like border security , whether to allow people in the U.S. without authorization to obtain it , and the U.S. response to Syrian refugees . `` We can not have a more clear choice , '' he said .
He was asked later by CNN 's Jake Tapper about the citizenship of children born in the U.S. to parents without legal status . Mr. Pence responded : `` I think the whole question of anchor babies , as it 's known , the whole question of citizenship of natural-born Americans is a subject for the future . ''
Ms. Conway , Mr. Trump 's new campaign manager , also said on `` Fox News Sunday '' that the major pieces of the GOP nominee ’ s immigration proposals remained the same , but would not say that Mr. Trump would stick by an earlier primary-campaign pledge to deport 11 million people living in the U.S .
“ What he has said now is he will look at that , ” Ms. Conway said . “ The softening is more in approach than policy . ”
Mr. Trump last year said he would set up a “ deportation force ” to conduct a wholesale removal of illegal immigrants . Ms. Conway on Sunday said Mr. Trump hasn ’ t discussed that approach since last November .
“ The signature piece of his campaign has always been to build the wall . That has not changed , ” she said .