The Trump administration is considering an order to block the entry of migrants at the southern border using the same authority as its earlier travel ban , a person familiar with the matter said , as thousands of Central Americans make their way toward the U.S .
The action , if implemented , would effectively bar those seeking asylum from entering the country . President Donald Trump is weighing a range of possible options designed to prevent undocumented migrants from crossing the U.S.-Mexican frontier , according to a White House official familiar with the discussions . Both people spoke on condition of anonymity as no final decision has been made .
The travel ban , announced shortly after Trump took office , affected people from seven countries , five of them with Muslim majorities . The executive order being looked at now would deny asylum claims based on national security concerns and would give broad authority to officials at the border , the person said .
The New York Times reported on Thursday night that the administration was considering an order that would bar migrants , including those requesting asylum , who try to enter the country from Mexico , a significant escalation of presidential power on immigration policy .
The White House official wouldn ’ t confirm the Times report and others , saying that several legal , executive and legislative remedies were on the table .
Trump has repeatedly sought to underscore undocumented immigration as an issue before the midterm congressional elections on Nov. 6 , and he has blamed Democrats for the so-called caravan of Central American migrants that is headed toward the border .
“ Every time you see a Caravan , or people illegally coming , or attempting to come , into our Country illegally , think of and blame the Democrats for not giving us the votes to change our pathetic Immigration Laws ! ” he said on Twitter .
He claimed that Middle Eastern terrorists are among the the thousands of people traveling from Honduras , but later said that there was no evidence to support that assertion .
The Trump administration plans to send at least 800 additional troops to the U.S.-Mexico border , according to a third person familiar with the deliberations .
The president has also threatened to cut off U.S. aid to three Central American countries ; Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador over the migrants heading from Central America toward the U.S. border .
The Times article , citing anonymous sources , said that details of the possible executive order were still the planning stages and that whatever emerged was sure to be met with legal challenges .
In June , a sharply divided Supreme Court upheld Trump ’ s ban on travel from the seven countries . The restrictions indefinitely bar more than 150 million people from entering the U.S .
The troops that Trump is sending to the border would join 2,100 National Guard troops who were previously deployed to perform support duties for Department of Homeland Security personnel .
Trump said on Twitter on Thursday that he was “ bringing out the military for this National Emergency ” and promised immigrants unlawfully crossing the border “ will be stopped ! ”
Cutting aid to the Central American countries is more complicated . Much of the money for El Salvador , Guatemala , and Honduras was appropriated by Congress in the form of anti-corruption and good-governance programs . Those initiatives have broad support from lawmakers , who have already promised to put up a fight should Trump try to make good on his threat .
The migrants began crossing into southern Mexico last Saturday , avoiding that country ’ s migration authorities and federal police by jumping off the border bridge crossing the Suchiate river or by crossing the river in improvised rafts made of tires and boards , according to images from El Financiero Bloomberg TV .
Under standard U.S. procedures , the migrants , assuming they reached the southern border , would be detained for not having the required documents and asked whether they ’ re afraid of returning to their home .
A person who answers “ no ” would not be admitted into the country . A person who expresses fear of persecution or torture would be interviewed by an asylum officer to establish whether there is credible fear of persecution .
Michael J . Bars , a spokesman for the U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , said in an email that the “ extremely low bar ” for establishing credible fear allows economic migrants to abuse the system by posing as asylum seekers , then disappear before their court dates to live illegally in the U.S .