Former President Obama lashed out at President Trump for ending the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) amnesty program , which was thought to be on shaky legal ground .
Obama ripped Trump as “ cruel , ” lacking “ basic decency ” and acting “ contrary to our spirit , and to common sense. ” The former president claimed DACA recipients “ pose no threat ” and “ are not taking away anything from the rest of us. ” ( RELATED : Sympathetic Media Scrambles To Trot Out Shiny ‘ Dreamers , ’ But Forgets All The Nightmares )
“ To target these young people is wrong – because they have done nothing wrong . It is self-defeating – because they want to start new businesses , staff our labs , serve in our military , and otherwise contribute to the country we love . And it is cruel , ” Obama wrote in a lengthy Facebook post , following Attorney General Jeff Sessions ’ announcement that the administration would be gradually rolling back the amnesty program . ( RELATED : Cotton : DACA ‘ A Mess of President Obama ’ s Making ’ )
“ What if our kid ’ s science teacher , or our friendly neighbor turns out to be a Dreamer ? Where are we supposed to send her ? To a country she doesn ’ t know or remember , with a language she may not even speak ? ”
“ Let ’ s be clear : the action taken today isn ’ t required legally . It ’ s a political decision , and a moral question . Whatever concerns or complaints Americans may have about immigration in general , we shouldn ’ t threaten the future of this group of young people who are here through no fault of their own , who pose no threat , who are not taking away anything from the rest of us , ” Obama claimed .
“ They are that pitcher on our kid ’ s softball team , that first responder who helps out his community after a disaster , that cadet in ROTC who wants nothing more than to wear the uniform of the country that gave him a chance . Kicking them out won ’ t lower the unemployment rate , or lighten anyone ’ s taxes , or raise anybody ’ s wages . ”
Obama had previously hinted that he would “ weigh in ” if Trump took action on DACA , despite longstanding precedent against former presidents criticizing the current president .