In Christmas Day Message , Pope Francis Shines Light On Migrant Suffering
In his annual Christmas Day address , Pope Francis offered a message of hope and a call for kindness to migrants around the world .
`` May the Son of God , come down to earth from heaven , protect and sustain all those who , due to these and other injustices , are forced to emigrate in the hope of a secure life , '' the pontiff said from the balcony of St. Peter 's Basilica .
`` It is injustice that makes them cross deserts and seas that become cemeteries , '' he said . `` It is injustice that turns them away from places where they might have hope for a dignified life , but instead find themselves before walls of indifference . ''
The Christmas speech is titled `` Urbi et Orbi '' : to the city and the world .
He prayed that God would comfort those who are suffering , and he called on people to show good will and find solutions to ongoing humanitarian crises . Francis urged an end to conflicts in the Middle East , Latin America , Ukraine and Africa , and prayed for those who are persecuted on the basis of religion .
`` May Christ bring his light to the many children suffering from war and conflicts in the Middle East and in various countries of the world , '' Francis said in his seventh Christmas address as the head of the Roman Catholic Church .
`` May he bring comfort to the beloved Syrian people who still see no end to the hostilities that have rent their country over the last decade . Today may he stir the consciences of men and women of good will . May he inspire governments and the international community to find solutions to allow the peoples of that region to live together in peace and security , and put an end to their unspeakable sufferings . ''
Last week , Francis placed a cross encircled by a life jacket inside the Vatican , in memory of the migrants who drowned in the Mediterranean Sea as they sought refuge in Europe .
In a separate message on Wednesday , the pope and two other religious officials urged leaders in South Sudan to uphold their commitment to form a coalition government next year . Increased stability would allow the pope to visit the country , which he has said he hopes to do in 2020 , Reuters reports .
The pontiff concluded his message with a call to recognize the suffering around us and act to help those in need .
`` May he soften our often stony and self-centered hearts , and make them channels of his love , '' he said . `` May he bring his smile , through our poor faces , to all the children of the world : to those who are abandoned and those who suffer violence . Through our frail hands , may he clothe those who have nothing to wear , give bread to the hungry and heal the sick . Through our friendship , such as it is , may he draw close to the elderly and the lonely , to migrants and the marginalized . On this joyful Christmas Day , may he bring his tenderness to all and brighten the darkness of this world . ''