Advocates will begin confronting representatives at hearings and public events . Immigration groups turn to anger
Immigration reform advocates are done playing nice with House Republicans .
After holding their fire for years at the urging of the Obama administration , several immigration reform groups now plan to unleash their anger at the right .
A new , more aggressive campaign kicks off Tuesday , when these groups say they will begin confronting Republican lawmakers at public appearances , congressional hearings and events back in home districts . The goal : Shame Republicans in swing districts into taking up the issue — or make them pay at the ballot box in November .
It ’ s unclear if the strategy will truly damage Republicans with their constituents . Or worse , whether it might backfire and oust some of the movement ’ s best potential allies across the aisle .
Still , the groups believe it ’ s time to try something new . The movement embraced a distinctly positive message when Barack Obama took office in 2009 and stuck with it publicly even until last month , when the groups applauded House Republican leaders for releasing a set of immigration reform principles at a GOP winter retreat .
But things changed last week when Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) dashed hopes that a major immigration overhaul could happen this year — leaving immigration groups to say enough is enough .
“ Obviously , persuasion only got us so far , ” Kica Matos , a spokeswoman for the Fair Immigration Reform Movement , said Monday . “ What we are now doing is to switch tactics from persuasion to punishment . ”
Matos declined to say which members of Congress are at risk for the in-your-face treatment but warned that the campaign would be “ relentless and constant. ” America ’ s Voice and CASA in Action are also leading the effort . The plan for now is to engage in daily confrontations for at least the next two months , Matos said .
The groups also plan to target House Republicans in swing districts with a wide section of Latino voters — even if they ’ ve expressed support for immigration reform before . That means that lawmakers such as Rep. Jeff Denham ( R-Calif. ) , who has gone as far as to sign onto a Democratic-backed comprehensive bill , aren ’ t safe from the wrath of the pro-reform groups .
The strategizing extends to allies on Capitol Hill . House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and House Democratic Caucus Chairman Xavier Becerra have been in talks with key advocacy groups such as America ’ s Voice , Alliance for Citizenship , and two powerful pro-reform labor unions — the AFL-CIO and the Service Employees International Union — among other faith-based , Latino and Asian organizations . The focus of those conversations is to figure out how best to put pressure on House Republicans to move on immigration reform this year , according to a Democratic aide familiar with the talks .
“ We ’ re not going to go away , ” added Kevin Appleby , director of migration policy for the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops . “ The speaker ’ s comments were a reality check that we have to redouble our efforts . We need to translate the overwhelming support of the American public for this into public power , and I think it would be a mistake to let Congress — and especially the House — off the hook . ”
Another Catholic bishops event being planned for the coming weeks , most likely along the Arizona border , will highlight the dangers that immigrants face while crossing the U.S-Mexico boundary , Appleby said . That is meant to be a domestic version of Pope Francis ’ s first official trip outside Rome to Lampedusa , Italy , last summer — where the pope commemorated immigrants who tried to cross into Italy from North Africa .
Appleby said the bishops will also be “ focusing like a laser ” on key House Republicans who are Catholic to see whether they can persuade the lawmakers in favor of reform .
There ’ s also a split in the pro-reform coalition over whether it would be wise for Obama to use his executive discretion to defer deportations for a broader subset of undocumented immigrants in the United States — particularly those who would likely qualify for legalization .
Some groups , like the AFL-CIO and longtime reform advocate Rep. Luis Gutierrez ( D-Ill. ) , have urged Obama to use his executive authority on deportations . So far , the White House has not threatened to take unilateral executive action , wanting to give House Republicans space to bring forward their own proposal .
While this latest salvo will only increase the amount of pressure advocates put on the White House , taking any action could play into Republicans ’ hands . GOP lawmakers have long said Obama does not enforce current immigration laws and used that as a reason to stop any momentum on the issue . Some proponents , like Appleby , think that Obama taking unilateral action would kill chances of an immigration deal in Congress .