And through them presses a wild motley throng . . .
If you think we have reached peak stupidity — that America ’ s per-capita quantity has never been higher — there is solace , of sorts , in Daniel Okrent ’ s guided tour through the immigration debate that was heading toward a nasty legislative conclusion a century ago . The Guarded Gate : Bigotry , Eugenics , and the Law That Kept Two Generations of Jews , Italians , and Other European Immigrants Out of America provides evidence that today ’ s public arguments are comparatively enlightened .
Late in the 19th century , immigration surged , as did alarm about it , especially in society ’ s upper crust , particularly its Boston portion , which thought that the wrong sort of people were coming . Darwinian theory and emerging genetic science were bowdlerized by bad scientists , faux scientists , and numerous philistine ax-grinders with political agendas bent on arguing for engineering a better stock of American humans through immigration restrictions and eugenics — selective breeding .
Their theory was that nurture ( education , socialization , family structure ) matters little because nature is determinative . They asserted that even morality and individuals ’ characters are biologically determined by race . And they spun an imaginative taxonomy of races , including European “ Alpine , ” “ Teutonic ” ( aka “ Nordic ” ) , and “ Mediterranean ” races .
Racist thinking about immigration saturated mainstream newspapers ( the Boston Herald : “ Shall we permit these inferior races to dilute the thrifty , capable Yankee blood . . . of the earlier immigrants ? ” ) and elite journals ( in The Yale Review , recent immigrants were described as “ vast masses of filth ” from “ every foul and stagnant pool of population in Europe ” ) . In The Century , which published Mark Twain , Henry James , Rudyard Kipling , W.E.B . Du Bois , and H. G. Wells , an author informed readers that “ Mediterranean people are morally below the races of northern Europe , ” that immigrants from Southern Italy “ lack the conveniences for thinking , ” that Neapolitans were a “ degenerate ” class “ infected with spiritual hookworm ” and displaying “ low foreheads , open mouths , weak chins . . . and backless heads , ” and that few of the garment workers in New York ’ s Union Square “ had the type of face one would find at a county fair in the west or south. ” The nation ’ s most important periodical , The Saturday Evening Post , devoted tens of thousands of words to the braided crusades for eugenics and race-based immigration policies . Popular poet Edgar Lee Masters ( Spoon River Anthology ) wrote “ The Great Race Passes ” :
On State Street throngs crowd and push , Wriggle and writhe like maggots . Their noses are flat , Their faces are broad . . .
Eugenics was taught at Boston University ’ s School of Theology . Theodore Roosevelt , who popularized the phrase “ race suicide , ” wrote to a eugenicist that “ the inescapable duty of the good citizen of the right type is to leave his or her blood behind him in the world , and that we have no business to permit the perpetuation of citizens of the wrong type. ” Woodrow Wilson warned against the “ corruption of foreign blood ” and “ ever-deteriorating ” genetic material .
Amateur ethnologists conveniently discovered that exemplary southern Europeans ( Dante , Raphael , Titian , Leonardo da Vinci ) were actually from the north . One wrote , “ Columbus , from his portraits and from his busts , whether authentic or not , was clearly Nordic. ” ( Emphasis added . ) Okrent writes : “ In an Alabama case , a black man who married an Italian woman was convicted of violating the state ’ s anti-miscegenation law , then found surprising absolution when the conviction was vacated by an appellate court ’ s provocative declaration : ‘ The mere fact that the testimony showed this woman came from Sicily can in no sense be taken as conclusive evidence that she was therefore a white woman . ’ ”
The canonical text of the immigration-eugenics complex , Madison Grant ’ s The Passing of the Great Race , is available today in at least eight editions and is frequently cited in the internet ’ s fetid swamps of white supremacy sites . At the 1946 Nuremberg “ Doctors ’ Trial , ” Nazi defendants invoked that book as well as the U.S. Supreme Court ’ s Buck v. Bell decision upholding states ’ sterilization of “ defectives ” ( Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes , a eugenics enthusiast : “ Three generations of imbeciles are enough ” ) and America ’ s severely restrictive Immigration Act of 1924 . It based national quotas on 1890 immigration data — before the surge of the “ motley throng. ” Okrent writes , “ These men didn ’ t say they were ‘ following orders , ’ in the self-exonerating language of the moment ; they said they were following Americans . ”
Four years before the 1924 act , 76 percent of immigrants came from Eastern or Southern Europe . After it , 11 percent did . Some of those excluded went instead to Auschwitz .