President will end Obama program giving work permits to illegal immigrants , sources say , but Congress will now be given time to draft replacement law
Donald Trump has decided to scrap a program giving work permits to people who came to the United States illegally as children but will give Congress up to six months to find a legislative alternative , according to reports .
What is Daca and who are the Dreamers ? Read more
The US president decided to delay enforcement of his decision to end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( Daca ) program in order to give Congress time to devise legislation to replace it , two sources familiar with the situation told Reuters on Sunday .
The Obama administration policy protects nearly 800,000 young men and women often called “ Dreamers ” from deportation and allows them to work legally .
The decision to give Congress half a year to come up with an alternative represents a compromise after Republicans and business leaders asked Trump to keep the program . They included Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg and Apple chief executive , Tim Cook , who tweeted that 250 staff were “ Dreamers ” and “ I stand with them ” .
Tim Cook ( @ tim_cook ) 250 of my Apple coworkers are # Dreamers . I stand with them . They deserve our respect as equals and a solution rooted in American values .
“ Dreamers ” are a fraction of the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants in the United States , most of them Hispanic . Trump as a candidate promised to deport all of them , but many Americans have rallied to support the young adults who have spent large parts of their lives in the United States .
The decision , to be announced on Tuesday , will seek to placate both sides in the immigration debate at a time when the president is also grappling with North Korea ’ s nuclear program and Houston ’ s recovery from Hurricane Harvey .
House of Representatives speaker Paul Ryan urged Trump on Friday not to rescind the program and was joined by senator Orrin Hatch , also a Republican .
Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen , a Cuban-American Republican from Florida , tweeted her dismay with the decision to scrap Daca : “ After teasing # Dreamers for months with talk of his ‘ great heart , ’ @ POTUS slams door on them . Some ‘ heart ’ . ”
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen ( @ RosLehtinen ) After teasing # Dreamers for months with talk of his `` great heart , '' @ POTUS slams door on them . Some `` heart '' ...
Trump ’ s base may also be disgruntled about the president ’ s decision to leave open the option of a fix . Representative Steve King , a hawk on immigration and Iowa Republican , tweeted his opposition to the plan on Sunday night .
Democrats , such as Minnesota senator Al Franken , also wanted the program to continue . Franken called the reported decision a “ disgrace ” . Nancy Pelosi , the top House Democrat , last week asked Ryan to meet her party to discuss a “ comprehensive legislative solution ” .
Treasury secretary Steven Mnuchin downplayed the warnings from business figures , telling Fox News Sunday he was “ less concerned about the economic impact ” .
Asylum once defined America . Now , it stands imperiled | Roger Ekrich Read more
Most of the Dreamers came from Mexico and elsewhere in Latin America . More than 200,000 live in California , while 100,000 are in Texas . New York , Illinois and Florida also have large numbers .
Congress under presidents of both parties has been unable to pass comprehensive immigration reform . The Daca issue has been actively debated within the White House and Trump administration . One senior administration official described the debate as a “ tug of war ” between factions .
Daca supporters argue that the people it protects are US-educated and integrated into American society , with little connection to the countries in which they are citizens . Opponents of the program argue that illegal immigrants take jobs from US citizens .