A federal judge on Monday blocked the Trump administration 's policy requiring Central American asylum-seekers to wait in Mexico while their cases are decided in the U.S. , ruling that Department of Homeland Security overstepped its legal authority .
That policy was one of the last attempts by outgoing Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen to gain control of the southern border , which has seen such an increase in illegal crossings that she resigned from her post over the weekend .
U.S. District Judge Richard Seeborg in San Francisco ordered the Trump administration to allow the plaintiffs in the case — 11 migrants from El Salvador , Guatemala , and Honduras — to enter the U.S. within two days . He issued a nationwide preliminary injunction that prevents the administration from forcing future asylum-seekers back into Mexico . The order goes into effect on Friday .
Seeborg , who was nominated by former President Barack Obama , ruled that the Trump policy was not properly implemented and violated both U.S. laws and the 1951 United Nations Convention on Refugees , which the U.S. is a party to . The asylum-seekers , Seeborg ruled , were already fleeing dangerous conditions in their home countries , only to be returned to Mexican border towns `` where they face undue risk to their lives and freedom . ''
Trump complained of Seeborg 's ruling Monday night on Twitter : `` A 9th Circuit Judge just ruled that Mexico is too dangerous for migrants . So unfair to the U.S. OUT OF CONTROL ! '' he said .
The ruling marks the third straight time the Trump administration has been shot down in its attempts to limit or halt asylum-seekers who have been arriving at the U.S. border in record numbers .
`` Try as it may , the Trump administration can not simply ignore our laws in order to accomplish its goal of preventing people from seeking asylum in the United States , '' said Judy Rabinovitz , deputy director of the ACLU 's Immigrants ' Rights Project who argued the case .
In December , another federal judge struck down the Department of Justice 's attempt to cut off asylum for victims of domestic abuse and gang violence . In November , another federal judge struck down Justice 's attempts to cut off asylum for people who crossed into the country illegally , which is allowed under U.S. law .
In that case , U.S. District Judge Jon Tigar wrote that Trump `` may not rewrite the immigration laws . ''
Monday 's ruling follows a suit filed by Central American migrants who were among the first to be returned to Tijuana after requesting asylum at the San Ysidro Port of Entry in southern California , and several humanitarian groups that have been assisting migrants .
The policy , officially called the `` Migrant Protection Protocols '' but informally referred to as the `` Remain in Mexico '' plan , started in January at the San Ysidro Port of Entry in southern California . The policy has expanded to the Calexico Port of Entry about 120 miles east of San Ysidro , and Homeland Security officials say the plan is to gradually roll it out to all other ports along the U.S.-Mexico border .
It allows migrants from countries other than Mexico to request asylum at U.S ports of entry , but then requires them to return to Mexico to wait for a decision . Previously , asylum seekers were released into the U.S. and given a notice to appear in immigration court to proceed with their case .
'Incredibly hard jobs ' : Nielsen resignation : Donald Trump 's Cabinet agencies are increasingly led by 'acting ' secretaries
More : 'It was long past time for her to go ' : Dems welcome Kirstjen Nielsen 's departure as DHS secretary
The U.S. and Mexican governments had been negotiating a joint plan , where Mexico would assume responsibility of the waiting asylum applicants , but when those talks broke down , the Trump administration announced in December it would unilaterally implement the policy , forcing Mexico and collection of humanitarian groups to care for those migrants in Mexico .
Nielsen has argued that the policy is needed — and allowed under law — to stem the flood of Central American migrants who are taking advantage of immigration `` loopholes '' by requesting asylum knowing they will be allowed to stay in the country .
In the 2017 fiscal year , Border Patrol agents apprehended 6,301 members of family units a month . In 2018 , that rose to 8,934 a month . In the first five months of 2019 , it jumped to 27,230 a month .
The Trump administration says those numbers represent a security and humanitarian crisis that forced them to implement the new policy forcing all those asylum-seekers to stay in Mexico .
`` The ( Migrant Protection Protocols are ) a lawful implementation of DHS 's broad prosecutorial discretion over when and how to initiate removal proceedings…and whether to limit entry into the country during the pendency of those proceedings , '' Justice Department lawyers wrote in a court filing .
Advocacy groups say the plan puts already-traumatized refugees in yet another traumatizing situation by fending for themselves in northern Mexico , a region that can be incredibly dangerous for people with no family there , no connections , and no protection .
`` Instead of being able to focus on preparing their cases , asylum seekers forced to return to Mexico will have to focus on trying to survive , '' read the lawsuit . `` These pressures may deter even those with the strongest asylum claims to give up , rather than endure the wait under such conditions . ''
Several of the first asylum-seekers returned to Mexico filed a lawsuit in February , leading to Seeborg 's decision .