Latino voters were a key to President Obama 's victory in November , turning out in big numbers and supporting Obama by more than 2 to 1 over Republican Mitt Romney .
Now , many of those voters say it 's time for Obama to do something he did not do in his first term : push hard for and sign a comprehensive immigration overhaul .
Let 's start with a group of Latinos — young and old , some U.S. citizens , some not — heading from Florida to Washington , D.C. , for Obama 's inauguration and for meetings with members of Congress . As caravans go , it 's a small one : 13 people in two vans .
The group is pushing the president to follow through on promises to fix a broken immigration system . They also want him to suspend deportations , which have reached record levels in Obama 's first term .
`` Politicians sit there and they preach and talk ... about family values , and how [ for ] a society to succeed , it needs great family values , '' says Daniel Barajas , 30 , during a stop in Charlotte , N.C. `` But they just sit there on the side , twiddling their thumbs , while families are being ripped apart daily [ by deportations ] . ''
Barajas says he sees the president as the lesser of two evils . He says Republicans are far worse with their call for a high-tech border fence and talk of `` self-deportation '' — a phrase used by GOP nominee Romney .
Another member of the caravan takes a more positive tone . Carlos Lopez , 20 , has never been to Washington and has never seen the president , let alone an inauguration .
`` One of the reasons that I 'm pretty excited about it is because I 've never been to one . So it 's going to be really interesting . There 's going to be a lot of people , '' he says . `` And I 've never seen snow because I 've been stuck in Florida this whole time , so I 'm pretty excited about that as well . ''
Unfortunately for Lopez , snow is n't a sure bet for Monday 's inauguration . Still , he says he 's happy to take part in the celebration of a new term for Obama . There is , however , a `` but . ''
`` I think the 'but ' is Obama promised immigration reform four years ago and did n't do anything , '' he says . `` And now he 's said it again . He 's promised it , you know . And that 's [ why ] I came here — to push him and make sure he knows that we 're there . And we 're going to be pushing till it comes through , you know ? ''
For Latinos , their lopsided vote in support of the president in the election , their strong turnout and their overall population growth make them a rising political force .
Some key Republicans , including House Speaker John Boehner , Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and others , now also see risk in taking a hard line and alienating these voters .
In Washington on Thursday , another group advocating for an immigration overhaul , the Campaign for Citizenship , held an event featuring the so-called dreamers — young people who were brought illegally to the U.S. as children and remain undocumented .
The DREAM Act , which failed to pass in Congress , would have provided a path to citizenship for them .
Alejandra Gomez , who lives in New Mexico , told an emotional story about her two brothers ' deportation last year .
`` My prayers for 2013 is that President Obama and the Congress will act to finally fix our immigration system and create a path to citizenship for families like mine , so that families like mine can reunite , '' she said .
Gomez said she does support the president , and she urged others to do so during the election . But she also says now is the time for this issue to be settled .
The president again begins a term of office calling immigration a priority . Many Latinos hope that 's for real this time .