Cracking down on visa overstays and on employers would be more cost-effective .
Since 2005 , the federal government has added hundreds of miles of walls and fencing along the U.S.-Mexico border . It has doubled the size of the Border Patrol by hiring more than 10,000 agents . And it has ramped up spending so rapidly that it is plagued with duplicative programs .
So when President Trump says he is moving ahead with a massive border wall , it has all the hallmarks of a multibillion dollar boondoggle . And his insistence that Mexico be forced to pay for his costly campaign pledge threatens to rupture relations with an important ally and trading partner .
Physical barriers certainly have a significant place in border security . But any major expansion of the existing barriers should be done in the context of cost-benefit analysis . By any reasonable accounting , the surge of spending on border enforcement has already reached a point of diminishing return .
The federal government now spends more policing immigration than it does on all other law enforcement activities — combined . More , that is , than on drug trafficking , gangs , counterfeiting , identity theft , financial fraud , would-be assassins , routine interstate crime , illegal arms sales , computer hacking , corporate malfeasance , government corruption and the domestic part of the war on terror .
Most of California , Arizona and New Mexico already have some kind of barrier . Texas is another matter , thanks to the difficulties of building along the snaking , flood-prone Rio Grande River , and the fact that much of the border land is in private hands .
Since 2007 , the estimated number of undocumented immigrants has dropped from 12.2 million to slightly more than 11 million , thanks to some combination of increased enforcement , declining birth rates and rising economies , particularly Mexico 's .
This isn ’ t to say illegal immigration has stopped outright . But it is being offset by people returning to their home countries . What ’ s more , an estimated 35 % to 50 % of the inflow is people who come in legally and overstay their visas , people who are not impacted by walls or other border control efforts .
Taking all this into account , Trump 's wall would be a colossal waste of money . His idea of forcing Mexico to pay for it has already led to cancellation of next week 's scheduled meeting between Trump and Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto . Slapping a 20 % tax on imports from Mexico , which a Trump spokesman floated Thursday as a way to recoup the construction costs , would set off a mutually destructive trade war and effectively make U.S. consumers pick up the tab .
Cracking down on visa overstays and on employers who hire illegal workers would do far more to improve immigration enforcement than spending an additional $ 12 billion or more on steel and concrete .
███ 's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board , separate from the news staff . Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique ███ feature .