Do n't open the front door if immigration officials knock . If you are taken into custody , tell them your name and nothing else . Definitely do n't sign anything .
That is some of the advice being given in New York City and around the country at training sessions , put on by advocacy organizations , aimed at helping immigrants living in the country illegally get in as little trouble as possible if they encounter U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials .
Called `` know your rights '' training , the sessions have been pushed by some groups as a way to prepare for a possible crackdown on illegal immigration under President Donald Trump . Similar trainings are scheduled in New Mexico and El Paso .
The idea , organizers said , is to give immigrants guidance on how to legitimately push back against attempts to detain them , mostly using tactics designed to keep agents from learning anything they do n't already know . The government ca n't deport someone unless they can prove they are in the U.S. illegally .
At a training session Tuesday in Queens , a little more than two dozen people sat in a room listening to Yaritza Mendez , an outreach coordinator at the pro-immigrant advocacy group Make the Road New York . She spoke about various ways ICE agents can find a person , and what to do if they come knocking .
Even people in the country illegally have constitutional rights , Mendez said , such as not being subjected to unreasonable searches and seizures , not answering questions and not signing any documents without speaking with an attorney .
Volunteers took part in a role-playing exercise . The audience broke into laughter when a woman wearing a vest with `` ICE '' taped on it burst into the room after knocking loudly on a door .
`` I try to make it interactive because it 's long and very sad , in a way , '' Mendez said .
A lady sitting at the back had a question . If immigration officials knocked on her door , what if she opened it a crack but kept the chain on ?
No , Mendez said . Not even a crack . That 's guidance that closely mirrors something criminal defense attorneys have long been telling clients . Letting a law enforcement agent peek inside could give them the probable cause they need to enter without a warrant .
Other advice dispensed during the session : Make sure any warrants presented have the right name and addresses and are signed by a judge . Do not volunteer information . Do not show the agents any fake documents , since doing so is a crime that could land them in much deeper trouble .
Plan ahead for the worst . For example , she said , parents in danger of being detained should have paperwork in place to have someone look after their children , instead of scrambling to find someone in an emergency .
Most of the people in the audience were immigrants in the country illegally .
But they were also people like Pascalina Chirinos , 63 , a legal permanent resident from Venezuela who has been in the U.S. for about five years .
She said she attended so she could share the information with friends and neighbors , but also to know her own rights if she were ever caught up even in passing in immigration enforcement efforts .
`` In reality , all of us are afraid , '' Chirinos said in Spanish , through an interpreter . `` The air that we breathe is very tense . ''
In Los Angeles , Pablo Alvarado , executive director of the National Day Laborer Organizing Network , said his organization is trying to train more people to conduct know-your-rights presentations at schools and churches to keep up with rising community demand .
`` We 're training the trainers , '' he said . `` People do n't have to be lawyers to share what the constitutional rights of people are . ''
Mendez said Make the Road has been getting calls from churches and other institutions like a local hospital to come and give the trainings in those places for their staffs and clients .
The atmosphere is `` fearful , '' she said . `` You do n't know what is going to happen the next day . ''