Republican leaders will huddle to plot strategy with their members Wednesday afternoon . | House GOP Flickr Immigration reform heads for slow death
Republicans walked away from their 2012 debacle hell-bent on fixing their problems with Hispanics . Now , they appear hell-bent on making them worse .
In private conversations , top Republicans on Capitol Hill now predict comprehensive immigration reform will die a slow , months-long death in the House . Like with background checks for gun buyers , the conventional wisdom that the party would never kill immigration reform , and risk further alienating Hispanic voters , was always wrong — and ignored the reality that most House Republicans are white conservatives representing mostly white districts .
These members , and the vast majority of their voters , couldn ’ t care less whether Marco Rubio , Bill O ’ Reilly and Karl Rove say this is smart politics and policy .
Republican leaders will huddle with their members Wednesday afternoon to plot their public strategy . But after holding countless listening sessions , it is clear to these leaders that getting even smaller , popular pieces of reform will be a tough sell . The House plans a piecemeal approach : a border-security bill this month , maybe one or two items a month in the fall .
Rep. Tom Cotton ( R-Ark . ) held a town meeting last week where 25 of the 100 people spoke out on immigration — and every single one of them argued for staying clear of anything remotely resembling the Senate-passed bill .
“ Our constituents don ’ t trust our government , ” Cotton said . And he is reluctant to pass even pieces of immigration reform that he thinks are needed — like a better tracking system for people in the country on visas — because he is concerned they could become “ a Trojan horse in a conference committee for a package that puts legalization first and enforcement later . ”
Top Republican and Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill see the momentum swinging decidedly against getting a deal this Congress . Rubio persuaded only 13 fellow Republican senators to back the bill ; the editors of the National Review and Weekly Standard offered a rare , joint editorial in opposition to it this week ; and private GOP headcounts show only a small fraction of House Republicans would ever vote for anything approximating the Senate deal .
Rep. Steve King ( R-Iowa ) , a leader of the House ’ s hell-no-on-immigration-reform caucus , held a jam-packed meeting Monday night to walk through why his party should proudly defeat the bipartisan bill . King said the Senate ’ s immigration plan would help “ elites who want cheap labor , Democratic power brokers , and those who hire illegal labor . ”
“ It would hurt Republicans , and I don ’ t think you can make an argument otherwise , ” King said . “ Two out of every three of the new citizens would be Democrats. ” Some might dismiss this as the rantings of a bombastic right-winger — but his take is mainstream theology among House Republicans .