“ I can ’ t even begin to picture how we would deport 11 million people in a few years where we don ’ t have a police state , where the police can ’ t break down your door at will and take you away without a warrant , ” said Michael Chertoff , who led a significant increase in immigration enforcement as the secretary of Homeland Security under President George W. Bush .
Finding those immigrants would be difficult , experts said . Police officers across the country would need to ask people for proof of residency or citizenship during traffic stops and street encounters . The Border Patrol would need highway checkpoints across the Southwest and near the Canadian border . To avoid racial profiling , any American could expect to be stopped and asked for papers .
To achieve millions of deportations , the Obama administration ’ s focus on deporting serious criminals would have to be scrapped , said Julie Myers Wood , a director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement , also known as ICE , under Mr. Bush . “ You would not care if the person had a criminal record , ” she said .
Large-scale raids , rare under Mr. Obama , would resume at farms , factories , restaurants and construction sites , with agents arresting hundreds of workers and poring over company records . And prosecutors would bring criminal charges against employers hiring unauthorized immigrants .
Mr. Trump has said he would triple ICE ’ s deportation officers , to 15,000 from about 5,000 . But even if that could be accomplished quickly — difficult given the vetting and training required — it would still be insufficient , experts said . The F.B.I . and other agencies would have to set aside some of their missions to help .
John Sandweg , who led ICE for seven months under Mr. Obama , said wholesale deportations could make it easier for immigrant gang members and drug traffickers to escape detection . “ If the agents are looking for volume , they won ’ t spend the time to do the detective work tracking down the high-value bad guy who has fake documents , the hardened criminals in the shadows , ” he said .
To prevent flight after arrest , the authorities would have to detain most immigrants awaiting deportation . Existing facilities , with about 34,000 beds , would have to be expanded to hold at least 300,000 , Mr. Sandweg estimated , perhaps with tens of thousands of people in detention camps , similar to the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II .