The stakes are high for Obama , McCain and Rubio . | AP Photos Leaders begin immigration dance
LAS VEGAS — The immigration reform plan President Barack Obama outlined Tuesday sounds a lot like the new bipartisan proposal from the Senate — and on the broad points , it is .
But the differences are in the details . And those details , with the liberal stamp Obama put on his approach here , could be the difference between a deal and another failed effort on an issue that Washington has struggled with for years .
Obama ’ s speech launched a campaign for legislation built on several overarching principles : provide a path to citizenship for the country ’ s approximately 11 million undocumented immigrants , streamline legal immigration , crack down on employers who hire undocumented workers and strengthen border security .
That ’ s all in the blueprint offered Monday by a group of eight senators , led by Republican John McCain and Democrat Chuck Schumer .
Senior administration officials said the contrasts and omissions aren ’ t red lines for the president . But they do foreshadow the points of tension in the upcoming legislative negotiations .
Perhaps the biggest hurdle is a trigger for citizenship that Republicans such as Florida Sen. Marco Rubio describe as a must-have .
Obama wouldn ’ t make citizenship for undocumented immigrants contingent upon a declaration that the U.S.-Mexico border has been secured . And he highlighted that difference with the Senate plan in his speech Tuesday , saying “ it must be clear from the outset that there is a pathway to citizenship . ”
The president didn ’ t explicitly endorse the need for a temporary worker program , as he did in his 2011 immigration blueprint . The Senate proposal would set up a process for American companies to hire low-skilled labor under certain circumstances — a concept that ’ s divided labor and business — but the White House doesn ’ t view such a program as essential , given the current economic conditions .
Obama also didn ’ t embrace a proposal from the Senate group that would set up an expedited citizenship process for agricultural workers who commit to working in the industry .
And although he didn ’ t mention it in his speech , his plan explicitly includes protections for gay couples . Unlike the Senate blueprint , Obama ’ s plan “ treats same-sex families as families by giving U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents the ability to seek a visa on the basis of a permanent relationship with a same-sex partner . ”