There is no way Texas Gov . Rick Perry can support the bipartisan immigration reform bill because , he says , it fails to deal satisfactorily with border security .
`` You can not have a legitimate conversation about immigration reform until you deal with the issue of border security . And , as far as I 'm concerned , this bill does not address it , '' Perry told ███ TV in an exclusive interview .
`` Until you address border security , I 'm not going to be much inclined to have an academic conversation , which is all it will be . ''
The proposal , drafted by the bipartisan group of senators known as the `` Gang of Eight , '' is expected to pass the Senate .
But Perry agrees with Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz , who also believes the proposed legislation doesn ’ t go far enough in securing the nation 's borders .
`` Sen. Cruz is absolutely correct . . . and when you add individuals like [ Texas Rep. ] Michael McCaul , who 's chairman of the Homeland Security Committee [ and ] knows that border incredibly well . . . the legislation 's not going to get a warm welcome in the House until they do address issues about securing the border , '' he said .
Perry said he has been very concerned about the Obama administration 's treatment of border security , particularly because of Texas ' important role in shoring up the nation 's economy .
`` We 've seen major reductions in the number of border patrol agents and the focus on the border , '' he said .
`` If the administration did not have Texas ' ability to create jobs , the unemployment numbers and the job-creation numbers in this country would be even more dismal than they are by a substantial margin . ''
As for the the Internal Revenue Service 's alleged harassment of more than 200 conservative groups , including those aligned with the tea party and the Texas-based True the Vote , Perry called the scandal `` very troubling . ''
`` It appears that this is targeted at any conservative group that did not fall in line with the Obama administration 's philosophical beliefs , '' he said .
`` If this goes to the highest levels of the White House , then obviously there are a lot of options out there that are appropriate up to and including . . . the removal of individuals up to and including the president of the United States , if he is culpable . ''
Perry hopes the Obama administration is not directly involved , but growing wary .
`` You want to believe the leaders of your country would never be involved in that , but what we 're seeing out of this administration is a pattern of disregard for our laws , '' he said .
`` Benghazi and the IRS and The Associated Press — all of those stories are making people on the left and the right step back and scratch their head . ''
Perry — who ran unsuccessfully for the the Republican presidential nomination in 2016 and is on the GOP shortlist for 2016 — already is talking like a potential candidate .
He disagrees with former Florida Gov . Jeb Bush , another 2016 possibility , that Texas ' political landscape is shifting dramatically and in three years it likely will be a blue state .
`` Not even close . Texas is a red state because they believe in freedom , '' Perry said . `` You 're not going to see Texas turn blue or even purple anytime in the near future , and I will suggest to you possibly never . ''
Bush has hedged when asked about his future plans . Perry wo n't commit yet , either , on seeking re-election in 2014 or running for president .
He his focus is on the few days left in the Texas legislature 's session .
`` Texas is one of the fastest-growing economies , the fastest-growing state in the nation , '' he said .
`` We have our challenges . . . and , hopefully , at the end of this legislative session or this summer , we will have addressed those . . . Once that is behind us , I 'll sit down with family and friends and make the decision . ''