Homeland Security Secretary John F. Kelly on Sunday said anyone in the country illegally is subject to deportation by law but so-called “ Dreamers ” should rest easy and that undocumented residents should still report domestic violence and other crimes .
Mr. Kelly said President Trump tasked him with two key objectives on immigration — secure the Southwest border and root out the “ worst ” of those who reside in the U.S. unlawfully and deport them .
He said that means they aren ’ t interested in chasing down so-called “ Dreamers ” shielded by President Obama ’ s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) .
“ If you are simply here illegally , we don ’ t really have the time to go after you , ” Mr. Kelly told CNN ’ s “ State of the Union . ”
Mr. Kelly was trying to address somewhat mixed messages on who is at risk for deportation , as Mr. Trump cracks down on illegal immigrants but suggests Dreamers shouldn ’ t worry .
Those get-tough policies were tested in recent weeks , after 23-year-old Juan Manuel Montes , who was granted the amnesty , was deported to Mexico in February .
Immigrant rights groups and Democrats rallied to his cause , but Mr. Kelly has said Mr. Montes gave up his right to be part of the program through “ illegal actions . ”
Mr. Kelly also said illegal immigrants should still report local offenses , after law enforcement said they feared a drop in reported crimes from certain communities was the direct result of Mr. Trump ’ s immigration policies .
“ They should report that crime , ” Mr. Kelly said , also noting they can usually do so anonymously .
Sen. Richard Durbin , Illinois Democrat , said if Mr. Trump really wants to protect people , he should stop targeting sanctuary cities that refuse to alert federal officials of illegal immigrants in their custody , so that undocumented residents can come forward freely when crimes occur .
Mr. Trump should ask local police officials , “ point blank , what is the most important thing we can do to maintain law and order ? ” Mr. Durbin told CNN .
Mr. Durbin also warned Mr. Trump not to insist on funding to pay for his border wall with Mexico in a stopgap funding bill that must be passed by Friday , saying it amounted to a “ poison pill ” that could lead to a government shutdown .
“ Don ’ t you remember ? He said the Mexicans were going to pay for it , ” Mr. Durbin said .
Yet Mr. Kelly gave no indication that Mr. Trump planned to back off the demand .
“ I think it goes without saying that the president has been pretty straightforward about his desire and the need for a border wall , ” Mr. Kelly said . “ So I would suspect , he ’ ll do the right thing for sure , but I would suspect he will be insistent on the funding . ”