Do you believe the Obama administration has secured our border with Mexico ? Vote Now
More than 30,000 children who 've poured over the U.S.-Mexico border as part of an unprecedented flood of migrants have been released to sponsors in every state – with Texas receiving 13 percent of them , the highest in the nation , federal data show.According to the Department of Health and Human Services , more than 1,000 children were released in each of 10 states , with Texas receiving 4,280 . New York , Florida and California , each got more than 3,000 released children . Nine states have received 10 or fewer children.Vermont received just three , Montana , just one child.The children , who are awaiting processing of their immigration cases , get vaccinations and medical screenings before they move in with sponsors , who are often relatives , and get background checks , The Washington Post reported Friday.But the transfers have triggered criticism from some governors , including Republican Govs . Dave Heineman of Nebraska , Rick Scott of Florida , and Phil Bryant of Mississippi . `` Like many governors , my office must monitor rumors about the transport and housing of illegal immigrants because your administration apparently prefers to conduct these acts under cloak of secrecy , '' Bryant wrote to President Barack Obama.Republican Maine Gov . Paul LePage only found out about the release of eight children to his state on Tuesday , the Portland Press Herald reported , which triggered an angry statement criticizing the Obama administration for failing to give the state advance notice and demanding Obama `` not look to Maine to harbor illegal immigrants . `` `` The president has failed to enforce our border laws , '' LePage said in the statement . `` Now states like Texas are facing a crisis . The failure of Congress and the President to address our border issues should not result in more of a financial burden on Maine people . We can not become a state that encourages illegal immigration . We simply can not afford it . `` The Post notes that from 2003 to 2011 , the federal government processed an average of between 7,000 and 8,000 placements for illegal immigrant children every year . This year , it expects 60,000.And like every year , The Post reports , HHS says Guatemala is the top source for unaccompanied children , at 37 percent ; 30 percent of the children are from Honduras ; and 26 percent from El Salvador .