Staff at a U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services field office in California were regularly pressured by senior officials to fast-track visa applications from wealthy and well-connected foreign investors , causing security concerns so severe that the program was moved to Washington this year .
Documents obtained by The ███ and whistleblower accounts from inside the CIS Laguna Niguel field office show that staffers , who said they were acting under orders from senior officials , often rushed or skipped altogether economic reviews of applicants to the EB-5 visa program , which doles out coveted green cards to foreign investors who sink $ 500,000 or more into a U.S.-based business .
Emails from the Laguna Niguel office show that the EB-5 vetting process was a daily struggle for government analysts charged with , among other tasks , assessing the economic viability of applicants ’ investment plans . The internal documents detail repeated violations of agency procedures that allowed foreign applicants to bypass proper economic review .
Economic reviews of EB-5 applicants and their projects are needed , immigration analysts say , because of the security risks posed by investors who have not been screened for links to foreign intelligence services , terrorist groups or organized crime ; or whose funds come from , or flow to , unvetted sources .
The violations came to public attention over the summer when Sen. Chuck Grassley , Iowa Republican and the ranking member of the Judiciary Committee , revealed that CIS Director Alejandro Mayorkas had become personally involved in the processing of an EB-5 application filed by Democratic heavy-hitter Terry McAuliffe , now Virginia ’ s governor-elect , related to electric car company GreenTech Automotive .
Mr. Mayorkas has denied any wrongdoing , saying he got involved in Mr. McAuliffe ’ s EB-5 application because it raised an important issue about a point of law in the program .
Nonetheless , the program is the subject of an audit by the inspector general for the Department of Homeland Security , of which CIS is part .
Mr. Mayorkas , who is President Obama ’ s nominee for deputy secretary of the troubled department , also faces a criminal probe by the inspector general , according to documents released by Mr. Grassley .
The FBI and the Securities Exchange Commission are investigating a suspected Ponzi scheme in Texas involving an EB-5 applicant , and the FBI also is looking into foreign business executives who bought into the program , particularly Chinese nationals , who constitute the majority of the program ’ s investors .
Suspicions of foreign intelligence links of a Chinese investor was one of the factors holding up Mr. McAuliffe ’ s EB-5 application before Mr. Mayorkas intervened . But that was far from the only time when a case that raised national security red flags was pushed through at the behest of senior officials , according to a federal whistleblower complaint filed by an analyst on the program .
A May 3 , 2012 , memo that the whistleblower sent to David Garner , chief performance and quality officer for the CIS in Washington , warned of irregularities in processing an EB-5 application filed by an investor in CMB Exports LLC — a firm set up to bundle EB-5 money for an eligible project .
CMB was a “ Solyndra-style project with a loan guarantee from the Department of Energy , ” the analyst wrote .
The memo alleges that in April 2012 a CIS manager who now serves as special assistant to the director of the Laguna Niguel office took steps to “ circumvent the established review process as a means to expedite ” the CMB application . Those steps , the memo states , included bypassing the analyst ’ s required review and ignoring protocols regulating contact between adjudicators and the contract economists reviewing applications .
A multimillion-dollar contract between the Department of Homeland Security and ICF Inc. provided for the economists to be available , on-site , to support the CIS office of fraud detection and national security . That office was a key part of the plan to tighten procedures for granting immigration benefits .
An April 4 , 2012 , email stated that the manager should convey information from EB-5 applicants to the analyst , “ who will then determine whether or not a full evaluation by one of the contract economists will be required . ”
But before the analyst could make that determination regarding CMB Exports , the manager intervened . “ Let me know who has this file , ” the manager wrote in an April 26 , 2012 , email . “ We received an expedite inquiry on this and we need to move the case. ” The email chain does not specify who issued the expedite order .
The analyst , whose name The Times is withholding because he fears that being identified might harm his future employment prospects , said contract economists under his supervision had noted “ potential red flags ” with the application .
The analyst said in an email at the time that he found the application “ suspicious ” and called for additional review of the foreign investors with assistance from “ national security agencies . ”
But the emails show that , far from being subject to additional review , the CMB application was routed directly to the manager for expedited adjudication after she instructed a contract economist that the analyst ’ s involvement in the process “ was not necessary . ”
The manager ’ s actions “ highlight that [ the office ’ s ] chain of command pays lip service to the notion of rigor and due diligence , ” while fast-tracking the process for the “ benefit of external political stakeholders acting on behalf of wealthy and politically connected EB-5 applicants under review , ” according to the analyst , who has conducted internal audits for several other Cabinet-level federal agencies and Fortune 500 companies .
The analyst told The Times that EB-5 economic reviews of applicants were routinely rushed through the process in four to five days during the months he worked there . Often , he said , the application would arrive , as did the one from Mr. McAuliffe ’ s car company , on a fast track with instructions from the manager that Mr. Mayorkas “ needs this fast . ”
Sometimes , the analyst said , the manager would invoke Donald Neufeld , associate director of field operations , or Barbara Velarde , the No . 2 official in the CIS service centers operation , both of whom are based in Washington .
In December , Mr. Mayorkas announced he would be transferring the program from Laguna Niguel to Washington . Spokesman Christopher Bentley said the move was “ a direct reflection of CIS ‘ continued prioritization of the program ’ s integrity , ” and the agency ’ s new focus on fraud detection and prevention .
“ In recent years , the EB-5 program has grown steadily in both volume and complexity , ” Mr. Bentley said , adding the office in Washington was “ staffed primarily with officers who have economic , business , and legal backgrounds and expertise .
The move , completed in May , also made it easier to tap the skills of federal police and intelligence agencies , allowing CIS officials “ to work directly and at a high level with our law enforcement and security partners across the federal government . ”