A few days old , but worth flagging anyway . As conservative debate over the 'Gang of Eight ' proposal begins in earnest , Democrats are reportedly pleasantly surprised by the contents of the legislation :
The Senate ’ s Gang of Eight delivered an immigration overhaul bill this week that was far more generous to their constituencies than Democrats and Hispanic activists expected . The pre-bill marketing campaign — driven by leaks that seemed to come from Republican negotiators — focused on stringent new border-control measures and a long , difficult path to citizenship . The goal was to minimize conservative opposition by creating a first impression of the bill as a tough solution to the country ’ s illegal immigration problem . But when Democrats got a look at the 844-page measure , they discovered that their negotiators extracted more concessions than they thought possible . Those include an expansive version of the DREAM Act and subtle but meaningful tradeoffs on all the major pieces of the system , from family reunification to legalization and border security . Democrats are reluctant to sound too positive , fearing that would scare away Republicans . Their official response to the bill has been muted , with one press release after another calling it a starting point that must be improved . Yet that description , while an accurate reflection of their political strategy heading into the debate , understates the extent to which Democrats believe their side made off with more policy victories than it could ’ ve predicted .
Why are liberals quietly celebrating ? Policy specifics . GOP negotiators extracted some concessions , but Democrats engineered a plan that offers a generous and immediate amnesty * [ see update ] to millions :
Republicans succeeded in making the path to legalization contingent upon the government meeting border security benchmarks , prohibiting undocumented immigrants from accessing federal benefits even as they pay taxes , blocking a provision to allow foreign spouses of same-sex couples to apply for visas , and creating a temporary worker program . But in return , Democrats got what Mary Giovagnoli , a former Kennedy immigration aide and director of the Immigration Policy Center , called an “ extremely generous legalization program. ” Advocates don ’ t like the 10-year waiting period for legal permanent status or the provision that prevents immigrants who entered the country after Dec. 31 , 2011 , from being eligible for legalization . Democratic negotiators sought a cut-off date of at least Dec. 31 , 2012 . But the $ 2,000 in fines are much lower than the 2006 and 2007 bills . The employment requirements are more flexible than expected . And border-security requirements aren ’ t as arbitrary as immigrant advocates expected , allaying fears that they could be used to block the path to citizenship .
Immigrants who have already been deported may apply for legal status from the outside the U.S. if their spouses or children are citizens or green-card holders — a significant concession to advocates upset about hundreds of thousands of deportations on President Barack Obama ’ s watch . Immigrants barred from gaining the provisional legal status because of a criminal record from long-ago offenses can seek a waiver . The bill contains a far more expansive version of the DREAM Act than Congress has ever considered . Undocumented immigrants who were brought to the country as children would have to wait only five years to receive a green card , and they could immediately apply for citizenship . By contrast , a 2010 bill that nearly passed the Senate included a 16-year path to citizenship and barred anyone older than 30 from applying . There is no age cap in the Gang of Eight bill .
Placing my cards on the table : I 'm in favor of immigration reform , and I want to trust Marco Rubio and others on these issues . But implementing bad policy could be worse than doing nothing , and I 'm generally concerned that this package will prove to be unbalanced , ineffectual , and unenforceable . This assessment stems from questions about the border enforcement `` triggers '' and additional requirements , some of which seem hopelessly toothless . The Examiner 's Byron York combed through the bill itself and discovered that several of the toughest-sounding measures are n't even in the legislative language :
It sounded tough , intended to convince skeptical conservatives that reform would be based on stringent border security . But as it turns out , the structure Gang sources described is simply not in the bill . The bill requires that the head of the Government Accountability Office then review the report to determine whether the Commission ’ s recommendations are likely to work and what they will cost . And then — the process stops . “ The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date on which the report is submitted , ” says the bill . There is nothing about the Commission going from “ being an advisory panel to a policy-making one. ” The strict trigger that Gang sources advertised as being in the bill just isn ’ t there . Finally , even after the bill was released , a leading Gang member , Republican Sen. Marco Rubio , stressed that the Commission would not be a Washington-centric panel , the kind that are so common and so ineffective that they are the butt of jokes ... The bill specifies that the Commission will have ten members . Two will be appointed by the president . One will be chosen by the Majority Leader of the Senate , and another by the Minority Leader . ( Formally , both will be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate . ) Another one will be chosen by the Speaker of the House and one by the House Minority Leader . And the other four , one from each border state — California , Arizona , New Mexico , and Texas — will either be the governor of the state or someone the governor designates . So that is six Washington-based appointments and four border state appointments , which may or may not be the border state governors .
Not a single one of these drawbacks is political in nature , although I harbor worries on that front , too . The fact that the Left is so pleased with this bill raises red flags in the first place , and I thought Rush asked pertinent questions in his discussion with Rubio last week . Many conservatives are also put off by the increasingly negative and judgmental tone being adopted by Republican 'gang ' supporters . People who oppose amnesty are n't ipso facto racists . Hell , many of us are willing to accept some amnesty path so long as the feds finally get serious about protecting the border and American sovereignty . At the moment , they are not . It 's that simple . Rubio 's right that the status quo is effectively tantamount to a continuous amnesty , and that something must be done ; the current system is unfair to US citizens , legal immigrants , and illegal immigrants alike . But bullying and preening is n't the way to win over conservative hearts and minds . The bipartisan proposal as currently constituted is , on balance , unacceptable . There are some positive elements , and negotiators on both sides should be commended for attempting to tackle a politically risky problem . Up next is the Senate amendment process , which will be crucial . Unless Republicans can secure more robust and meaningful border enforcement mechanisms , the underlying bill may be in real trouble . Republicans have 45 Senators and a House majority to significantly improve this bill . Republican backers , to their credit , have pledged support for a lengthy and thorough amendment process . Republicans should n't use their numbers to mindlessly obstruct any progress , but they should flex their muscles to tug the law in a more productive direction .
* UPDATE * - Rubio Press Secretary Alex Conant emails to correct my oversimplification on this point :
Nobody receives temporary legal status until the first 2 triggers are met & we begin securing the border – probably in 6 months . After that , illegals do not get permanent status for 10 years – and only then if we ’ ve secured our borders & implemented the toughest immigration enforcement in US history .
My wording was imprecise . `` Immediate amnesty '' is n't a fair characterization because , as Conant notes , two triggers must be met before illegal immigrants can begin applying for legal status . As I 've written previously , though , the first two layers are n't particularly onerous ; millions become eligible for legal status after two plans are in place . That 's not enforcement . It 's a plan for enforcement . We are working on a sit-down interview with Sen. Rubio to address some of conservative concerns about his bill .