In the U.S. , farmers and farm workers alike say the current system to import temporary workers , especially in agriculture , is slow and fraught with abuses .
But the shape of a new guest-worker program is still being hashed out . Some say the U.S. should import temporary workers the same way Canada does . For nearly four decades , the governments of Canada and Mexico have cooperated to fill agriculture jobs that Canadian citizens wo n't do , and that Mexicans are clamoring to get .
On a recent day , the line outside the state labor office in downtown Puebla , Mexico , is long . About 15 men , many of whom have traveled several hours from rural towns to get here , listen for their names to be called .
Juan Carlos Corona is called into the office . A state worker enters his name and file number into the computer . She prints out his latest application , staples photos of Corona to his file , and tells him to come back in two months for a medical exam .
If everything checks out , Corona will get his visa , a plane ticket to Canada and six months of full-time work . This would be the third year he 's worked legally in Canada 's broccoli fields . Before that , he says he would sneak into the U.S. to find work .
`` It was really tough . We would have to hike over mountains , cross at night in the cold . It would take 10 days and cost thousands of dollars , '' Corona says . `` This way I take a comfortable plane ride , and I 'm there in four hours . I really like this program . ''
In Canada , Corona works 14 hours a day , six days a week . His daily pay is about $ 120 .
At home , he says , he makes 120 pesos a day — or about $ 10 .
Mexico has sent workers to Canada for nearly four decades . Bianca Garcia , who administers the program for the state of Puebla , says it 's a win-win for both countries .
She says Mexican workers are poor , with few job prospects at home . And in Canada , farmers need workers . Mexico sends about 17,000 workers a year to Canada . Garcia says every year she turns away applicants .
Those who do get a chance to go almost always come back home . The Mexican government closely screens applicants — mostly men between the ages of 22 and 40 , with small children at home .
Farmers have advocated for such a guest-worker program for years in the U.S .
Manuel Cunha , who heads a growers group in California , says the current U.S. guest-worker program , known as H2-A , does n't work — it 's too bureaucratic and too costly , and farmers ca n't get workers fast enough .
`` That 's why the H2-A program , over the past 30 years , 40 years , has not been a solution for agriculture when we run a shortage of labor , '' Cunha says .
He says many aspects of the Canadian program could be a model for U.S. lawmakers now crafting a new guest-worker program .
Farmworker advocates are n't as convinced . Erik Nicholson , a vice president of the United Farm Workers of America , says that in Canada , Mexican guest workers are tied to one employer . If the worker complains , the employer just sends him back home .
`` We want workers that are able to work wherever they can get the best return on their day 's labor , that they are recruited fairly and will not be put into debt peonage and [ have ] to pay thousands of dollars — that they have the required skills and training to produce a quality product in a safe and just way , '' Nicholson says .
At the Puebla state employment office , Marcelo Ramirez Garcia says he 's anxious to get all his paperwork done and return to Canada . This will be his 23rd trip . He is 60 years old .
He says it 's hard to leave his family for such long stretches of time , but he 's glad he 's been able to give them a better life in Mexico — something he could n't have done without the work in Canada .