House Republicans will meet this week to plan their immigration strategy , which seems designed to push the issue to the right , but the Senate bill already faces a backlash on the left , where advocacy groups say the added border security is testing the limits of enforcement .
Many immigrant rights groups watched in despair as senators voted last month to add 20,000 Border Patrol agents and hundreds of miles of fencing in the Southwest .
As senators were voting , volunteers from the Reform Immigration for Texas Alliance were getting arrested for demonstrating outside Democratic Party offices in Dallas and Austin to protest what appeared to be a major reversal by Senate Democrats , who had said an earlier bill would provide enough border security .
“ Our response was , ‘ Look , we are not celebrating the bill , ’ ” said Adriana Cadena , statewide coordinator for the Texas Alliance . She said her group hasn ’ t taken an official position on the legislation as a whole and sees good parts of it , including quick citizenship for Dream Act youths and agriculture workers , but members also wanted to register their disapproval of the “ immense militarization and criminalization ” in the final Senate bill .
Most immigrant rights groups remain on board . They say they are wary of the direction of the debate but that the additional border security provision hasn ’ t spoiled the entire bill .
“ It was absolutely a difficult decision , ” said Ruthie Epstein , a legislative policy analyst at the American Civil Liberties Union . “ Nevertheless , we did ultimately decide , reluctantly , to support the bill moving forward because the bill retains its core commitment to providing a fair if difficult path to citizenship . ”
The Senate bill cleared on a 68-32 vote with 14 Republicans joining all of the members of the Democratic caucus in backing it . That vote signaled that the core of the deal — to offer quick legal status and work permits to illegal immigrants but to withhold full citizenship rights until the border is considered secure — is holding .
Analysts on all sides of the issue have decried the Senate ’ s border surge , saying the money is unlikely to produce much of a return on the dollar .
Ms. Epstein and other opponents said building up the border with that many agents could cause a spike in human rights abuses . During a surge under the George W. Bush administration , the Department of Homeland Security struggled to hire and train Border Patrol agents .
In Congress , action has shifted to the House , where Republicans hold a majority . They will meet Wednesday to hash out their strategy .
Several key differences have emerged — and none more critical than the approaches to a pathway to citizenship . Most Senate Republicans , including those who voted against the bill , agreed that a pathway is needed but fought over what conditions to attach to it .
That view is not universal among House Republicans , many of whom say that granting illegal immigrants citizenship is an amnesty for breaking the law .
Beyond that fight , House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican , has called the security provision in the Senate bill “ laughable. ” He has signaled that whatever the House does , it will go beyond the border buildup in the Senate legislation .
It ’ s not clear how much leverage immigrant rights groups will have in the House .
With House Republicans under pressure to strengthen the bill , many immigrant rights groups say the Senate bill is their high-water mark and they now will be playing chiefly defense . It ’ s one reason so many groups were upset that the Senate added border security rather than waiting to fight the issue with the House .
But some groups argue , at least publicly , that the House bill won ’ t necessarily be stronger than the Senate version .
According to some reports , a bipartisan group of seven House lawmakers negotiating a deal may even be looking at a shorter path to citizenship than the one in the Senate agreement .
Rep. Raul R. Labrador , an Idaho Republican who used to be part of that bipartisan group of negotiators , said there is little doubt that the House bill will focus more on security than the Senate version .
“ My concern with the Senate bill is that they put the legalization of 11 million people ahead of security . The legalization happens first , and then the security happens second , ” he told NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” program Sunday .
He said he doesn ’ t want a repeat of what he considers mistakes of implementing the president ’ s health care law by giving the administration a large amount of power .
Mr. Labrador said it would be a mistake to turn over border security decisions to the Obama administration .
Rep. Michael T. McCaul , Texas Republican and chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee , said on CBS ’ “ Face the Nation ” program that the House also wants to avoid another part of the health care debate , when the House took up and passed the Senate ’ s bill in its entirety , unchanged .
Some Senate Democrats have predicted that the House will do that with the Senate immigration bill , but Mr. McCaul said that won ’ t happen .
Earlier this year , he cleared a tough border security bill through his committee on a unanimous bipartisan vote , and he derided the Senate ’ s plan to add agents and fencing as throwing money at the problem .
“ What the Senate just passed was , again , a bunch of , you know , candy thrown down there , a bunch of assets thrown down there to gain votes but without a methodical , smart border approach , ” he said . “ We want a smart border . We also want a smart immigration plan , something that makes sense . ”
Mr. McCaul said his own border security bill could be on the House floor later this month or in September .
Ms. Cadena from the Texas Alliance said she hasn ’ t given up hope that the House could ease some of the border provisions — particularly if groups pressure representatives at the local level .
“ I think that people have pretty much given up that what we got in the Senate is the best we ’ re going to get , from now on it ’ s only going to get worse . There might be some truth to that , but those of us who are in the field out in Texas or other parts of the country , it ’ s too soon to make that determination , ” she said .
“ At the end of the day , all politics is local . We ’ re trying to influence some of these members who may be in swing districts or may be in significant Latino population . ”