“ Like the vast majority of American Jews , J Street is outraged by the Trump administration ’ s disgraceful , inhumane treatment of migrants and refugees — and supportive of members of Congress like Representative Ocasio-Cortez who are strongly challenging the president ’ s hateful policies , ” the group said in a statement .
“ The legacy of the Holocaust absolutely compels us to act in defense of vulnerable and targeted minorities — and to stop their mistreatment before it grows even worse , ” the statement continued . “ Instead of policing terminology , we should be doing everything we can to shut down these camps and to aid the families who are imprisoned in them . ”
But at least one Democrat , Representative Josh Gottheimer of New Jersey , who lost family members in the Holocaust , criticized Ms. Ocasio-Cortez ’ s remarks .
“ As an American , I ’ m deeply concerned about the treatment of children at our borders , ” Mr. Gottheimer said in a text . “ But , make no mistake , the comparison is cruel and disrespectful to the six million who were murdered in the Holocaust , including members of my own family . Concentration camps were places where Jews and others were enslaved , tortured , and then sent to gas chambers to be murdered . ”
The comments also set off intense debate over the meaning of the words “ concentration camp ” and whether the term could be appropriately used to describe anything other than Nazi death camps .
Politicians and public officials generally regard invoking Nazi comparisons as the third rail of politics ; it is done at one ’ s own peril . Sean Spicer , who served as Mr. Trump ’ s first White House press secretary , was excoriated when he suggested that President Bashar al-Assad of Syria was guilty of acts worse than Hitler and referred to Nazi death camps as “ Holocaust centers . ”
But Ms. Ocasio-Cortez , 29 , is typically intentional about her word choice , as she herself made clear when she addressed her Instagram followers on Monday evening in one of her regular unscripted videos .