House Republicans are working to hold defections on legislation to block President Donald Trump ’ s emergency declaration to potentially under a dozen on Tuesday .
The White House and GOP leaders have launched a last-minute push to limit the losses on a House vote to stop Trump from circumventing Congress to build a border wall , in a bid to avoid a humiliating defeat for the president , according to multiple Republican sources .
So far , just one Republican — libertarian Rep. Justin Amash ( R-Mich. ) — has backed a Democratic measure to overturn Trump ’ s national emergency declaration .
There ’ s little doubt that the resolution will easily pass the House . Instead , the question is whether at least four GOP senators will create a bipartisan majority and help deliver the biggest rebuke of the president since Democrats regained the House last fall .
The House ’ s vote on Tuesday could help set the tone in the Senate by offering some political cover to Republican senators who have publicly fretted about Trump ’ s move to secure billions of dollars without Congress ’ s approval .
House Democrats believe they could win support from between five to 10 Republicans in Tuesday ’ s much-anticipated floor vote , according to two sources — far less than the dozens of House Republicans who have voiced skepticism of the idea at some point in recent months .
In an attempt to drum up GOP supporters , Democrats have circulated a spreadsheet of hundreds of military construction projects that the White House could potentially take money from for its border project . The document shows billions of dollars are at stake in red states from Alaska to Georgia to Texas .
Pressure has been building . Pentagon officials visited Capitol Hill on Friday to brief top defense spending leaders of both parties on where the administration could divert $ 3.6 billion from military projects to the border .
So far , Amash is the only House Republican to publicly declare support for the resolution , though dozens of others — including libertarians , defense hawks and appropriators — have been wary of Trump ’ s tactics .
That GOP skepticism , though , may not translate into votes for the Democratic measure , particularly because Trump has vowed to veto it . And House Republican leaders are confident across the board that Democrats will fall far short of the more than 50 Republican votes they 'd need for an override .
Rep. Mike Turner ( R-Ohio ) , along with four other House Republicans , sent a letter to Trump earlier this month urging Trump to look elsewhere for the money .
Turner — a defense hawk whose state could lose as much as $ 90 million in military construction funds — has said Trump ’ s move would be a `` dangerous precedent . '' Still , he hasn ’ t specifically said if he would support the Democratic resolution .
Rep. Roger Williams ( R-Texas ) said he initially feared that Trump 's move could take money from Fort Hood , which is in his district . But last week , he got a personal assurance from Pentagon officials that no existing funding would be used .
`` That 's a big deal to me , '' Williams said Monday night , confirming that he would vote against the resolution .
Trump began applying public pressure to his own party Monday , warning Republicans not to fall into the Democratic “ trap . ”
“ I hope our great Republican Senators don ’ t get led down the path of weak and ineffective Border Security , ” Trump tweeted .
The White House legislative affairs team has also been making the case privately to Republican lawmakers over the weekend and on Monday , according to a White House official .
Officials have been doing outreach to provide “ as much information as possible , ” and plan to take a more targeted approach after they learn which GOP members are considering voting for the measure .
Separately , House Minority Whip Steve Scalise sent talking points to the GOP caucus on Monday that say there are already 31 national emergencies in effect , and that Trump is specifically working to address a “ humanitarian and security crisis . ”
“ Instead of working with the President to secure the border and protect the public , Democrats choose to continue to play politics , ” the message from the GOP whip office reads .
Scalise ( R-La . ) and his whip team will begin formally counting votes Monday night .
The White House is eyeing a total of $ 8 billion in border cash , which would also include $ 2.5 billion from a Pentagon drug interdiction program as well as $ 600 million from a Treasury Department forfeiture fund .
Since Trump 's announcement earlier this month , groups of former national security officials and former GOP members of Congress have also expressed opposition to the move .