Migrants from Central America run towards the Rio Bravo river to cross into the United States from Ciudad Juarez , Mexico , June 12 , 2019 . ( Jose Luis Gonzalez/Reuters )
Many people benefit from the lawbreaking : The Mexican and Central American governments , the Democratic party , employers , ethnic activists , rich progressives , and the illegal border crossers themselves .
Almost every party invested in open borders proves utterly selfish , without regard for the legitimate interests of others or of the law itself .
The immigrant is the pawn of Latin American governments who view him as inanimate capital , someone who represents thousands of dollars in future foreign-exchange remittances , as well as one less mouth to feed at home — if he crosses the border , legality be damned . If that sounds a cruel or cynical appraisal , then why would the Mexican government in 2005 print a comic booklet ( “ Guide for the Mexican Migrant ” ) with instructions to its citizens on how best to cross into the United States — urging them to break American law and assuming that they could not read ?
Yet for all the savagery dealt out to the immigrant — the callousness of his government , the shakedowns of the coyotes and cartels , the exploitation of his labor by new American employers — the immigrant himself is not entirely innocent . He knows — or does not care to know — that by entering the U.S. , he has taken a slot from a would-be legal immigrant , one , unlike himself , who played by the rules and waited years in line for his chance to become an American .
He knowingly violates U.S. immigration law . And when the first act of an immigrant is to enter the U.S. illegally , the second to reside there unlawfully , and the third so often to adopt false identities , he undermines American law on the expectation that he will receive exemptions not accorded to U.S. citizens , much less to other legal immigrants . In terms of violations of federal law , and crimes such as hit-and-run accidents and identity theft , the illegal immigrant is overrepresented in the criminal-justice system , and indeed in federal penitentiaries .
Certainly , no Latin American government would allow foreigners to enter , reside , and work in their own country in the manner that they expect their own citizens to do so in America . Historically , the Mexican constitution , to take one example , discriminates in racial terms against both the legal and illegal immigrants , in medieval terms of ethnic essence .
Some $ 30 billion in remittances are sent back by mostly illegal aliens to Central American governments and roughly another $ 30 billion to Mexico . But the full implications of that exploitation are rarely appreciated . Most impoverished illegal aliens who send such staggering sums back not only entered the United States illegally and live here illegally , but they often enjoy some sort of local , state , or federal subsidy . They work at entry-level jobs with the understanding that they are to scrimp and save , with the assistance of the American taxpayer , whose laws they have shredded , so that they can send cash to their relatives and friends back home .
In other words , the remitters are like modern indentured servants , helots in hock to their governments that either will not or can not help their families and are excused from doing so thanks to such massive remittances .
Remittances also explain the hostility of our southern neighbors , who will do almost anything to prevent their cessation .
In sum , they promote illegal immigration to earn such foreign exchange , to create an expatriate community in the United States that will romanticize a Guatemala or Oaxaca — all the more so , the longer and farther they are away from it . Few of the impoverished in Mexico paste a Mexican-flag sticker on their window shield ; many do so upon arrival in the United States . Illegal immigration is a safety valve , by which dissidents are thanked for marching north rather than on their own nations ’ capitals .
Latin American governments really do not care that much that their poor are raped while crossing the Mexican desert , or sold off by the drug cartels , or that they drown in the Rio Grande , but they suddenly weep when they reach American detention centers — a cynicism that literally cost hundreds their lives .
If thousands of the Mexican or Central American affluent were fleeing their homelands and taking their money and skills with them , their governments would probably be barring their passage .
America is increasingly becoming not so much a nonwhite nation as an assimilated , integrated , and intermarried country . Race , skin color , and appearance , if you will , are becoming irrelevant . The construct of “ Latino ” — Mexican-American ? Portuguese ? Spanish ? Brazilian ? — is becoming immaterial as diverse immigrants soon can not speak Spanish , lose all knowledge of Latin America , and become indistinguishable in America from the descendants of southern Europeans , Armenians , or any other Mediterranean immigrant group .
In other words , a Lopez or Martinez was rapidly becoming as relevant or irrelevant in terms of grievance politics , or perceived class , as a Pelosi , Scalise , De Niro , or Pacino . If Pelosi was named “ Ocasio-Cortez ” and AOC “ Pelosi , ” then no one would know , or much care , from their respective superficial appearance , who was of Puerto Rican background and who of Italian ancestry .
Such a melting-pot future terrifies the ethnic activists in politics , academia , and the media who count on replenishing the numbers of unassimilated “ Latinos , ” in order to announce themselves the champions of collective grievance and disparity and thereby find careerist advantage . When 1 million of some of the most impoverished people on the planet arrive without legality , a high-school diploma , capital , or English , then they are likely to remain poor for a generation . And their poverty then offers supposed proof that America is a nativist or racist society for allowing such asymmetry to occur — a social-justice crime remedied best the by Latino caucus , the Chicano-studies department , the La Raza lawyers association , or the former National Council of La Raza . Yet , curb illegal immigration , and the entire Latino race industry goes the way of the Greek- , Armenian- , or Portuguese-American communities that have all found parity once massive immigration of their impoverished countrymen ceased and the formidable powers of the melting pot were uninterrupted .
If Latino immigrants were of the conservative upper-middle class , as refugees fleeing socialist tyranny , arriving with English fluency , legality , and capital , then the current Latino ethnic industry would oppose open borders and its activists perhaps would go to the border to turn them away .
Democrats once were exclusionists — largely because they feared that illegal immigration eroded unionization and overtaxed the social-service resources of their poor citizen constituents . Cesar Chavez , for example , sent his thugs to the border to club illegal aliens and drive them back into Mexico , as if they were future strike breakers . Until recently , Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton called for strict border enforcement , worried that the wages of illegal workers were driving down those of inner-city or barrio American youth . What changed ?
Numbers . Once the pool of illegal aliens reached a likely 20 million , and once their second-generation citizen offspring won anchor-baby legality and registered to vote , a huge new progressive constituency rose in the American Southwest — one that was targeted by Democrats , who alternately promised permanent government subsidies and sowed fears with constant charges that right-wing Republicans were abject racists , nativists , and xenophobes .
Due to massive influxes of immigrants , and the flight of middle-class citizens , the California of Ronald Reagan , George Deukmejian , and Pete Wilson long ago ceased to exist . Indeed , there are currently no statewide Republican office-holders in California , which has liberal supermajorities in both state legislatures and a mere seven Republicans out of 53 congressional representatives .
Nevada , New Mexico , and Colorado are becoming Californized . Soon open borders will do the same to Arizona and Texas . No wonder that the Democratic party has been willing to do almost anything to become the enabler of open borders , whether that is setting up over 500 sanctuary-city jurisdictions , suing to block border enforcement in the courts , or extending in-state tuition , free medical care , and driver ’ s licenses to those who entered and reside in America illegally .
If most immigrants were right-wing , middle-class , Latino anti-Communists fleeing Venezuela or Cuba , or Eastern European rightists sick of the EU , or angry French and Germans who were tired of their failed socialist governments , the Democratic party would be the party of closed borders and the enemy of legal , meritocratic , diverse , and measured immigration .
Employers over the past 50 years learned fundamental truths about illegal immigrants . The impoverished young male immigrant , arriving without English , money , education , and legality , will take almost any job to survive , and so he will work all the harder once he ’ s employed . For 20 years or so , young immigrant workers remain relatively healthy . But once physical labor takes its toll on the middle-aged immigrant worker , the state always was expected to step in to assume the health care , housing , and sustenance cost of the injured , ill , and aging worker — thereby empowering the employer ’ s revolving-door use of a new generation of young workers .
Illegality — at least until recently , with the advent of sanctuary jurisdictions — was seen as convenient , ensuring asymmetry between the employee and the employer , who could always exercise the threat of deportation for any perceived shortcoming in his alien work force .
Note that those who hire illegal aliens claim that no Americans will do such work , at least at the wages they are willing to , or can , pay . That is the mea culpa that employers voice when accused of lacking empathy for out-of-work Americans .
If employers were fined for hiring illegal aliens , or held financially responsible for their immigrant workers ’ health care and retirements , or if they found that such workers were not very industrious and made poor entry-level laborers , then both the Wall Street Journal and the Chamber of Commerce would be apt to favor strict enforcement of immigration laws .
Wealthy progressives favor open borders and illegal immigration for a variety of reasons . The more immigrants , the cheaper , more available , and more industrious are nannies , housekeepers , caregivers , and gardeners — the silent army that fuels the contemporary , two-high-income , powerhouse household .
Championing the immigrant poor , without living among them and without schooling one ’ s children with them or socializing among them , is the affluent progressive ’ s brand . And to the degree that the paradox causes any guilt , the progressive virtue-signals his loud outrage at border detentions , at separations between parents in court and children in custody , and at the contrast between the burly ICE officers and vulnerable border crossers . In medieval fashion , the farther the liberal advocate of open borders is from the objects of his moral concern , the louder and more empathetic he becomes . Most progressives also enjoy a twofer : inexpensive immigrant “ help ” and thereby enough brief exposure to the Other to authenticate their 8-to-5 caring .
If border crossers were temporarily housed in vacant summer dorms at Stanford , Harvard , or Yale , or were accorded affordable-housing tracts for immigrant communities in the vast open spaces of Portola Valley and the Boulder suburbs , or if immigrant children were sent en masse to language-immersion programs at St. Paul ’ s , Sidwell Friends , or the Menlo School , then the progressive social-justice warrior would probably go mute .
They have no agenda other than assuming that immigrants will obey the same laws that they do .
Something to Consider If you enjoyed this article , we have a proposition for you : Join NRPLUS . Members get all of our content ( including the magazine ) , no paywalls or content meters , an advertising-minimal experience , and unique access to our writers and editors ( conference calls , social-media groups , etc. ) . And importantly , NRPLUS members help keep NR going . Consider it ? If you enjoyed this article , and were stimulated by its contents , we have a proposition for you : Join NRPLUS . LEARN MORE