“ I think that if you look at what we ’ ve asked over the years , including , of course , the citizenship question famously asked many , many times through our history , we ask a lot of other information as well , '' Ken Cuccinelli said . | Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP Photo employment & immigration Trump 'determined ' to add citizenship question to census , top immigration official says
The acting director of U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , Ken Cuccinelli , expressed confidence Sunday that the administration would succeed in appending a citizenship question to the 2020 census , insisting President Donald Trump is determined to have the query added to the document .
“ I think the president has expressed determination , ” Cuccinelli told “ Fox News Sunday . ”
“ He has noted that the Supreme Court did n't say , ‘ This ca n't be asked. ’ They said that they did n't appreciate the process by which it came forward the first time , ” Cuccinelli said . “ So the president is determined to fix that and to have it roll forward in the 2020 census . ”
The Supreme Court ruled last month that the administration ’ s justification for tacking a citizenship question onto the census was inadequate , and Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross announced Tuesday that the administration would be scrapping its plans to include the question on the decennial survey ’ s printed version . The Constitution requires the nation ’ s population be counted every 10 years .
But Trump tweeted Wednesday that officials “ are absolutely moving forward ” and told reporters outside the White House on Friday that despite the Supreme Court ruling , he is considering implementing an executive order to add the question . Justice Department lawyers have confirmed in recent days that DOJ and the Commerce Department are still considering a legal path forward .
Playbook PM Sign up for our must-read newsletter on what 's driving the afternoon in Washington . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply .
Cuccinelli , Virginia ’ s former attorney general , claimed Sunday he had no constitutional qualms with the addition of the question .
“ I don ’ t have a problem with that at all , ” he said . “ I think that if you look at what we ’ ve asked over the years , including , of course , the citizenship question famously asked many , many times through our history , we ask a lot of other information as well . ''
Besides counting the population , Cuccinelli said , “ We find out a lot of other information that ’ s useful for governance . ”