Behind the scenes , Rubio has been courting conservative leaders . What Marco Rubio is thinking
Immigration reform is alive and kicking because Sen. Marco Rubio was there at conception . It will likely die if Rubio bolts in the end .
The possibility that Rubio could walk away , more than any other dynamic , is shaping the final details of new immigration laws , participants tell us .
Without Rubio , GOP leaders — and many Democrats — worry any bipartisan deal will be impossible to sell to conservatives .
This reality has been driving the closed-door action on immigration during the week since the Senate left town . It was Rubio ’ s reservations about the details of a temporary-worker program — which he insists is needed to help business and take pressure off the border — that nearly sank the package last week . And it was fear of his rejection that helped bring labor and business groups together on a Good Friday agreement that appears to have put the immigration deal on track for an announcement when the Senate returns next week .
Rubio brought an immigration lawyer from Florida onto his Senate staff just to deal with the fine print , and Rubio ’ s staff helped broker last week ’ s agreement on a visa program for future low-skilled workers .
Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , the ringleader of the gang , told us in an interview that he and Rubio talk frequently about the details on their cellphones , often more than once a day . Schumer has not become chummy with Rubio , but has been impressed by his mastery of the nuances of the policy . “ He ’ s very fact-based , and he ’ s gotten his way a good percentage of the time , ” Schumer said . “ He ’ s persuaded people to his point of view a good part of the time . He comes prepared with facts , and if he doesn ’ t know something , he ’ ll ask the staff in the room . He ’ s not afraid to admit what he doesn ’ t know . ”
Three people who have discussed the matter with Rubio say the Florida senator is more willing than people think to pull the plug if it looks like conservative resistance is too strong . In particular , Rubio ’ s inner circle is concerned about the high-profile roles of Sens . John McCain and Lindsey Graham , both of whom are Republicans that many conservatives distrust .
“ John and Lindsey will have to understand this is something bigger than themselves , ” said a senior Republican strategist . “ They could be the ones that end up sinking this thing , because the right wing hated the last one so much . ”
The view of McCain supporters is that he has been the prime GOP advocate for immigration reform , and there will be no deal without him . McCain got a very good reception when he went over to the House side last month to talk to conservative members on immigration , and they ’ ve even asked him to come back .