“ You work so hard , you want to use your money in a smart way , ” said Aris Ramirez , a community health worker in Brownsville , explaining the thinking . “ So when they hear ‘ twice the fries for an extra 49 cents , ’ people think , ‘ That ’ s economical . ’ ”
For Ms. Angeles , the excitement of big food eventually wore off , and the frantic pace of the modern American workplace took over . She found herself eating hamburgers more because they were convenient and she was busy in her 78-hour-a-week job as a housekeeper . What is more , she lost control over her daughter ’ s diet because , as a single mother , she was rarely with her at mealtimes .
Robert O. Valdez , a professor of family and community medicine and economics at the University of New Mexico , said , “ All the things we tell people to do from a clinical perspective today — a lot of fiber and less meat — were exactly the lifestyle habits that immigrants were normally keeping . ”
As early as the 1970s , researchers found that immigrants lived several years longer than American-born whites even though they tended to have less education and lower income , factors usually associated with worse health . That gap has grown since 1980 . Less clear , however , was what happened to immigrants and their American-born offspring after a lifetime in the United States .
Evidence is mounting that the second generation does worse . Elizabeth Arias , a demographer at the National Center for Health Statistics , has made exploratory estimates based on data from 2007 to 2009 , which show that Hispanic immigrants live 2.9 years longer than American-born Hispanics . The finding , which has not yet been published , is similar to those in earlier studies .
Still , the data does not break down by generation . Ms. Arias cautioned that subsequent generations — for example , grandchildren and great-grandchildren — may indeed improve as they rise in socioeconomic status , which in the United States is strongly correlated with better health .
Other research suggests that some of the difference has to do with variation among American-born Hispanics , most of whom still do better than the rest of the American population . Puerto Ricans born in the continental United States , for example , have some of the shortest life spans and even do worse than whites born in the United States , according to research by Professor Hummer , dragging down the numbers for American-born Hispanics . But Mexican immigrant men live about two years longer than Mexican-American men , according to the estimates by Ms. Arias .