Democrats and immigrant-rights advocates on Wednesday mounted a forceful effort to save immigration , arguing that House Majority Leader Eric Cantor ’ s stunning loss in a GOP primary on Tuesday shouldn ’ t be seen as a statement on the congressman ’ s support for legalizing illegal immigrants .
While Mr. Cantor ’ s opponent , David Brat , a college professor , ran heavily on the immigration issue en route to a 56-44 victory , arguing Mr. Cantor was too soft on enforcement , Democrats said they saw the race the other way .
“ Eric Cantor did not lose his primary yesterday because of immigration . He lost it because he had lost touch with the people in his district , ” Sen. Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat , said on the Senate floor .
He rather than run away from legalization of illegal immigrants , Republicans should embrace it , which Democrats said would help Republicans pivot from tea party supporters and instead go after Hispanic voters and others outside of the traditional GOP base .
“ They can choose to address the immigration issue head-on and get it resolved — and give the Republican nominee in 2016 a fighting chance in his or her run for the White House — or they go back to the bunker , sharpen their anti-Obama knives and never get to the White House in the next generation , possibly two , ” said Rep. Luis V. Gutierrez , Illinois Democrat .
As they saw chances for passage of a final immigration bill slipping away this year , Democrats struck an increasingly desperate note , pleading with House GOP leaders not to move away from the issue just because of Mr. Cantor ’ s loss .
Mr. Schumer pointed to a separate primary win Tuesday night by Sen. Lindsey Graham , a South Carolina Republican who had been a chief author of the Senate immigration bill that legalized most illegal immigrants .
Mr. Graham did not back down from his support for that bill and easily won his primary , seeing off a handful of challengers .
Mr. Cantor , meanwhile , held a more complex position on immigration . He told voters he led the opposition to the Senate bill , but stood by his support for legalizing young illegal immigrants , known as Dreamers . He also had embraced the House GOP leadership ’ s immigration principles , which were viewed by many as offering some sort of legal status to most illegal immigrants — though it fell short of full citizenship .
A Democratic polling firm , Public Policy Polling , surveyed voters in Mr. Cantor ’ s Virginia district on Tuesday and found most of them supported granting a path to citizenship to illegal immigrants if it was combined with stiff new enforcement and requirements that the immigrants learn English , crack down on employers , and meet a “ long list of requirements ” over a decade .
Republicans , though , seemed to reject Democrats ’ advice on how to see the race — and none more so than Mr. Brat .
“ Amnesty at the end was a clear differentiator between myself and Eric Cantor , ” he told MSNBC on Wednesday .