But the mass transfers are raising alarm among immigrant advocates , who were already concerned about the lengthy periods of time migrant children are spending in federal custody .
The roughly 100 shelters that have , until now , been the main location for housing detained migrant children are licensed and monitored by state child welfare authorities , who impose requirements on safety and education as well as staff hiring and training .
The tent city in Tornillo , on the other hand , is unregulated , except for guidelines created by the Department of Health and Human Services . For example , schooling is not required there , as it is in regular migrant children shelters .
Mark Greenberg , who oversaw the care of migrant children under President Barack Obama , helped to craft the emergency shelter guidelines . He said the agency tried “ to the greatest extent possible ” to ensure that conditions in facilities like the one at Tornillo would mirror those in regular shelters , “ but there are some ways in which that ’ s difficult or impossible to do . ”
Several shelter workers , who spoke on condition of anonymity for fear of being fired , described what they said has become standard practice for moving the children : In order to avoid escape attempts , the moves are carried out late at night because children will be less likely to try to run away . For the same reason , children are generally given little advance warning that they will be moved .
At one shelter in the Midwest whose occupants were among those recently transferred to Tornillo , about two dozen children were given just a few hours ’ notice last week before they were loaded onto buses — any longer than that , according to one of the shelter workers , and the children may have panicked or tried to flee .
The children wore belts etched in pen with phone numbers for their emergency contacts . One young boy asked the shelter worker if he would be taken care of in Texas . The shelter worker replied that he would , and told him that by moving , he was making space for other children like him who were stuck at the border and needed a place to live .