FILE - In this April 5 , 2019 file photo , President Donald Trump participates in a roundtable on immigration and border security at the U.S. Border Patrol Calexico Station in Calexico , Calif. A federal judge on Friday , May 17 , 2019 , in California will consider a challenge to President Donald Trump 's plan to tap billions of dollars from the Defense and Treasury departments to build his prized border wall with Mexico . Twenty states brought one lawsuit ; the Sierra Club and Southern Border Communities Coalition , represented by the American Civil Liberties Union , brought the other . ( AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin , File )
FILE - In this April 5 , 2019 file photo , President Donald Trump participates in a roundtable on immigration and border security at the U.S. Border Patrol Calexico Station in Calexico , Calif. A federal judge on Friday , May 17 , 2019 , in California will consider a challenge to President Donald Trump 's plan to tap billions of dollars from the Defense and Treasury departments to build his prized border wall with Mexico . Twenty states brought one lawsuit ; the Sierra Club and Southern Border Communities Coalition , represented by the American Civil Liberties Union , brought the other . ( AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin , File )
RICHMOND , Va. ( AP ) — A federal appeals court ruled Friday the Trump administration acted in an “ arbitrary and capricious ” manner when it sought to end an Obama-era program that shields young immigrants from deportation .
A three-judge panel of the 4th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals ruled 2 to 1 that the Trump administration violated federal law when it tried to end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program without adequately explaining why . The ruling overturns a lower court ruling a judge in Maryland made last year , which Trump had previously praised via Twitter .
Friday ’ s ruling will not have any immediate effect as other federal courts have already ordered that DACA be kept in place .
The 4th Circuit ruling said the Department of Homeland Security did not “ adequately account ” for how ending DACA program would affect the hundreds of thousands of young people who “ structured their lives ” around the program .
“ We recognize the struggle is not over and there are more battles to fight in the Supreme Court on this road to justice , but our families are emboldened by knowing that they are on the right side of history , ” said Gustavo Torres , executive director of Casa de Maryland , the lead plaintiff in the case .
Trump and his Justice Department have argued that the Obama administration acted unlawfully when it implemented DACA . The Justice Department declined to comment .
Preserving DACA is a top Democratic priority , but discussions between Trump and Democrats on the issue have gone nowhere .
Trump ’ s latest immigration plan , unveiled Thursday , does not address what to do about the hundreds of thousands of young immigrants brought to the U.S. as children . White House press secretary Sarah Sanders told reporters that “ every single time that we have put forward or anyone else has put forward any type of immigration plan that has included DACA it ’ s failed . ”
DACA ’ s fate could be decided by the Supreme Court , which is weighing the Trump administration ’ s appeals of other federal court rulings .
If the high court decides it wants to hear the appeals , arguments would not take place before the fall . That means a decision is not expected until 2020 , which could come in the thick of next year ’ s presidential contest .