Former Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York will be in Washington next Friday , along with members of the United States Chamber of Commerce and several prominent Republicans , to pressure Republican lawmakers to take up an overhaul of the nation ’ s immigration laws before the end of the current Congress .
The immigration summit , which will be Mr. Bloomberg ’ s first major public policy event since stepping down as mayor , is pegged to President Obama ’ s coming State of the Union address , in which he is likely to address problems with the country ’ s immigration system . The event ’ s organizers also hope to capitalize on momentum in the Republican-controlled House , where Speaker John A. Boehner and his leadership team are preparing to release a policy blueprint that is likely to include at least some path to legal status for the 11 million undocumented immigrants already in the country .
Other participants include Carlos Gutierrez , who was secretary of commerce under President George W. Bush and a founder of Republicans for Immigration Reform , a “ super PAC ” ; Gov . Rick Snyder , Republican of Michigan ; and Randy Johnson , senior vice president at the Chamber of Commerce .
The leaders plan to focus on the economic case for immigration reform , which they hope will be a compelling argument for Republican lawmakers — many of whom consider any overhaul that includes a path to legal status to be amnesty — to take home to their districts .
“ If there was ever a notion that immigration reform was a progressive cause , that notion is clearly no longer true , because you see Republicans of all stripes understanding that immigration reform is essential to the country ’ s prosperity , to economic prosperity and certainly to the political prosperity of any national party , ” said John Feinblatt , the chairman of the Partnership for a New American Economy , the immigration group that was founded by Mr. Bloomberg .
He added that Mr. Bloomberg ’ s willingness to use his first postmayoral trip to Washington to push for an immigration overhaul “ is a clear signal of his passion for the issue and his intention to accelerate his support . ”
“ Our nation must do a better job of extending opportunity to all , and immigration reform is essential to that effort , ” said Thomas J. Donohue , president and chief executive of the Chamber . “ It will add jobs , talent , innovation , investment and dynamism to our economy . We need to enact legislation that transforms our broken immigration system into one that drives stronger job creation and economic growth . ”
At his annual State of American Business address this month , Mr. Donohue said changes to the nation ’ s immigration laws were an important part of expanding jobs and careers that will exist in the 21st century . “ Why ? Because throughout history immigrants have brought innovation , ideas and investments to American enterprise , and in terms of demographics , we need immigration , ” he said .
An overhaul of the nation ’ s immigration laws passed the Senate with bipartisan support in June but stalled in the House , where many Republicans fear a primary fight from their more conservative base .
But an increasing number of prominent Republicans are coming forward to push for a bipartisan and comprehensive approach to the nation ’ s immigration laws . In Mr. Snyder ’ s State of the State address on Thursday , the governor said an open-arms immigration policy was “ how we made our country great . ”
“ We need to encourage immigration in our state , ” Mr. Snyder said . “ We need to focus on legal immigration to make sure Michigan is the most welcoming place . ”