As Ice ’ s chokehold on undocumented immigrants tightens , many have resolved to lay low in hopes that they don ’ t get a visit that could upend their lives
Just after 8am on the first of March , Lucia Gomez sat snarled in traffic on her way to her office when she received a call from an undocumented worker – an elderly member of the labor union where she works as an organizer . Two officers from Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( Ice ) were knocking at the door of the man ’ s apartment building in Union City , New Jersey . Should he let them in ? Was it unlawful to not let them in ? If he didn ’ t open the door , would they find a way to arrest and deport him anyway ?
The man , who makes a living hauling asbestos waste , had been walking home with groceries for breakfast when the Ice officials had intercepted him . They asked for his name , which he gave , and his identity papers , which he said he needed to gather from his apartment . He ’ d be right back , he told them .
Instead , dashing inside , he locked the door and waited , frozen in fear . Twenty-two years since he left his home for the US , he was careful to renew his drivers ’ license each year and had long since received certification to handle hazardous waste that he was still carting in his late 60s . But he lacked legal residence papers .
Calculating a half-hour drive at least to the man ’ s home , Gomez phoned an immigration attorney , then another , and a third . No one picked up . She sent them texts . Nothing . It was early . People were probably commuting to work . Perhaps they were out of range . Her heart racing , she burst into tears . “ My level of anxiety was through the roof , ” Gomez said .
Tough-minded and raspy-voiced , Gomez had worked for years as an immigration advocate before joining Local 78 , a union that represents asbestos , lead and hazardous waste handlers in New York and New Jersey . Still , she said , she was at a loss about how best to counsel her union member – unclear on his rights , his obligations , and the rapidly vanishing options for undocumented or ambiguously documented people in Trump ’ s America .
Mayors resist Trump 's immigration policies : ‘ We can not submit to a bully ’ Read more
Among the expanded powers that Trump ’ s executive orders and accompanying memos have given law enforcement since his inauguration , undocumented immigrants can be arrested and deported on mere suspicion of a broad array of offenses . According to immigrant advocates , that might include selling DVDs on the street , lingering in a park by nightfall or walking through an open gate in the subway .
Under the Obama administration , immigration authorities prioritized those convicted of committing serious crimes , such as murder or sexual assault . Trump ’ s new policies have begun to implement his campaign pledge to deport millions of undocumented immigrants and come atop a months-long barrage of statements in which the president and key members of his administration had demonized immigrants as drug dealers and rapists , pouring over the border unchecked and by the thousands to steal jobs from Americans .
Last Thursday , advocates gathered in front of the Ice offices in Manhattan in support of a man who was inside for a mandatory check-in with immigration officials , concerned that he would only re-emerge on a bus bound for a deportation center then shortly be deported to Trinidad . In a similar incident in Phoenix last month , a woman who would have been considered low priority under the Obama administration went in her for annual check-in with immigration authorities and was instead placed in detention and deported back to Mexico .
If keeping heads down and working hard has long been part and parcel of a life in the shadows , the uncertainty and anxiety across New York and the country has surged , rippling from undocumented immigrants to relatives , friends , co-workers and whole neighborhoods .
Unfortunately , racism is part of the DNA of American history . But so are incredibly victorious civil rights Angela Fernandez
In anticipation of crackdowns , people say they have stopped driving , stopped shopping , stopped sending remittances to countries of origin . Small businesses fret about closures from fewer customers . Families are forgoing medical care , afraid to have their identities examined in hospital emergency rooms . Children wonder aloud if they ’ ll come home from school to find their parents gone .
Some of the fears have been amplified by rumors of Ice checkpoints thrown up at street crossings that spread virally in text messages or on social media . To dampen the potential hysteria , immigrants ’ advocates are counseling that any reports of sightings be immediately verified and photographed . But other fears are justified by mounting evidence of raids and deportations across the country .
On the way to the apartment of the man – who requested anonymity because of the sensitivity of his case – Gomez heard back from one of the immigration attorneys she had phoned – Angela Fernandez of the Northern Manhattan Coalition for Immigration Rights . No need to open the door ; warrants can be slipped underneath , she said . Failing that , the man could and should stay silent .
By the time Gomez arrived at the man ’ s apartment , the Ice officers were gone . Why they were prowling , who they were after and whether they would return remained a mystery . With the man ’ s help and a few strategic calls , Gomez began to piece together the semblance of an explanation .
A call to Union City officials and the local police department turned up a drug charge for someone – no one could specify who – in the man ’ s building , which contained several apartment units . The man ’ s son , now 27 and undocumented like his father , had been convicted some years earlier for driving under the influence . He had subsequently failed to complete the community service that a judge had prescribed . Had the DUI charge triggered a “ drug charge ” suspicion sufficient to send the Ice office sniffing ? If so , did that mean police and Ice officers were collaborating , an old concern that immigrant advocates have fought hard against ?
As Gomez sat talking with the son and his father in his living room , a traffic officer in the street began towing away his daughter ’ s car . Unlike her brother , the young woman had received legal protection under the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrival ( Daca ) program , which since 2012 provides temporary protection to many undocumented immigrants who arrived in the US as children . Gomez rushed outside . According to the traffic policeman , the woman ’ s vehicle permit had expired on 1 February . She owed a $ 140 fine . Could that have been the minor infraction that had apparently set off a chain reaction through law enforcement sufficient to spur Ice into action ?
The possibility wasn ’ t inconceivable . In nearby Staten Island , in early February , Ice officers loitered outside a courthouse and arrested an undocumented immigrant from Mexico who emerged from a hearing , charged with driving under the influence . The man awaits trial on 14 April and near-certain deportation in a jail cell in Hudson County correctional facility , along with convicted criminals , according to Gonzalo Mercado , who works for the immigrant advocacy organization La Colmena . Mercado spoke with the man ’ s wife and daughter , who say that he hopes not to be deported back to the violent parts of Mexico . Instead he told his wife that he was bidding on Canada .
The chilling effect carries a whiff of life in a police state , under authoritarian or semi-authoritarian rule , where security forces strike unpredictably , rarely with just cause , and most often with inhuman efficiency .
The presence of men in uniform doesn ’ t reassure . It intimidates , inviting the likelihood of a shakedown or an arbitrary arrest . Nightfall brings heightened anxieties about the knock on the door , and the disappearance to detention centers where terms of release are discretionary and capricious . By day , people glance over shoulders , careful about what they say or who might be listening . Laws , when applied , turn on technicalities whose mutability and application serve the whims of the state .
But law enforcement is only one pillar of an autocracy ’ s machine . A system ’ s longevity often depends less on foolproof organizational rigor than its capacity to keep fear alive through the bogeyman of uncertainty . People , of their own volition , shrink – from self-expression , from public life , from standing up for their or others ’ rights .
For supporters of Trump , the new policies are a necessary assertion of law and order . But in New York , a region of immigrants whose streets are a carnival of pluralism , the hardline anti-immigrant approach of the Trump administration feels , to many , like a dystopian aberration .
“ It flies in the face of our historical progress , ” said Fernandez . “ Unfortunately , racism is part of the DNA of American history . But so are incredibly victorious civil rights and social justice struggles that , when they were won , they led the way for other countries . ”
On a recent morning at a parking lot in Brooklyn beside a Home Depot , clusters of day laborers waited for construction jobs . Among them stood Carlos , who knew the price of living as an undocumented immigrant . In 2008 , his eldest son , then 18 years old and a senior in high school , was arrested by Ice officials , sent to a detention center in Texas , and deported back to Honduras . Three years later , he was dead , killed by members of a narco-trafficking ring in the climate of insecurity that Carlos had sought to shield his family from when he ’ d left for the States years earlier .
“ That is half of me , ” he said , a finger stabbing at his heart , his dark eyes misting .
' A gift to human traffickers ' : report warns of dangers of Trump immigration policy Read more
But even for Carlos , whose temporary work visa expired in 2002 , the surge of anti-immigrant rhetoric and likelihood of security crackdowns in Trump ’ s America are unprecedented . He appreciated President Obama ’ s immigration policies , he said . There was a logic to them . His son might even have avoided deportation if the Ice raid had come after Daca ’ s implementation .
The policies of the Trump administration , by contrast , were akin to smashing a leg out from under a table , destroying the fabric of New York work and family life .
“ You know what ? If I get $ 600 in my pocket , maybe $ 50 I send to my country . But the rest stay here . Because we got to pay rent , we got to pay bill . We got to pay cellular , we got to buy food , toy for children , everything . Money stay here , ” Carlos said .
As for life as a day laborer , Carlos could not remember a February that had been so bereft of work . He opened wide his empty wallet . All last year , he said , he could count on carrying $ 400 ( he pays for everything in cash ) , thanks to a healthy run of jobs – mixing and laying cement , tiling , loading truck . But the weeks since Trump ’ s inauguration have run dry . Perhaps it was a function of a winter halt in construction , although the climate this year has been relatively mild .
More likely , day laborers agreed , Trump ’ s policies had brought a new season of fear , including among contractors – rightly or not – that hiring an undocumented worker could result in fines of up to $ 10,000 for repeat offenders . For law enforcement , day laborer sites are among the most traceable and easy to raid .
“ The problem right now , people don ’ t go buy clothes . People don ’ t go buy shoes . People don ’ t buy nothing to send back , ” he said . “ Because we don ’ t know . We don ’ t know what happen tomorrow. ” A friend recently sold his deli for $ 30,000 , which about half what he paid for it . Better to take the loss , the friend told him , than lose everything .
“ When children see police they say : ‘ Papa , papa ! Police is there , let ’ s go ! ’ They move from here , they see police , they think police catch them . ”
Oscar , another undocumented immigrant , agreed . “ We are scared . We are scared . We watch all the time the news , ” he said , a pencil tucked behind one ear , a measuring tape fixed to a hip . Since Trump ’ s policies were announced , he has stopped driving , for fear of being caught without papers . He would , in the unlikely event of being given a choice , ask for deportation to Mexico this time . But leaving isn ’ t actually an option . Here in the US , he has a son , 10 , a daughter , seven , and a newborn .
“ They are afraid , ” he said . “ In the morning , they say : ‘ OK , you go work ? I ’ m going to see you tonight . ’ ”
After the election , non-immigrant residents in Staten Island , the only New York borough that voted Trump , reached out to La Colmena , the immigrant advocacy organization , to ask how they might help . Since then , the group has assembled undocumented immigrants alongside non-immigrants for sessions that include legal guidance and efforts to build community through activities , such as cooking and Spanish classes .
“ The fact that we have these non-immigrants at these meetings , that gives a sense of relief for a lot of people , ” said Gonzalo Mercado , the organization ’ s director . “ Especially in Staten Island that not everyone is a Trump supporter . ”
Immigrant advocates are careful to weigh preparation for impending crackdowns against the need to keep panic at bay .
“ That ’ s what Trump wants to do , ” said Mercado . “ He ’ s campaigning on fear . So we have to turn that rhetoric around – focusing on community , focusing on solidarity . ”