In a fiery speech to hundreds of law enforcement officers , the acting director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement excoriated the political enablers of illegal immigration on Wednesday , saying he ’ ll “ never back down ” from safeguarding the border .
Speaking at the Border Security Expo in San Antonio , Thomas Homan singled out sanctuary cities and the ongoing congressional debate over so-called “ Dreamers . ”
“ If we get a clean DACA bill , shame on all of us , ” Homan said , referring to the Obama administration ’ s contentious Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . `` You can ’ t address DACA and reward people that brought children here illegally and not address underlying reasons of DACA . ”
Homan , who said that he “ 100 percent support [ s ] the wall , ” added that he is “ sick and tired of the vilification of the men and women of ICE and the Border Patrol , ” according to multiple accounts of his speech .
“ If you violate the laws of this country , if you enter illegally , which is a crime , it ’ s not going to be OK anymore , ” Horman said .
Sanctuary cities , Homan charged , endanger federal officers because they often force agents to make arrests in homes and workplaces – rather than controlled environments , like state jails .
“ If you violate the laws of this country , if you enter illegally , which is a crime , it ’ s not going to be OK anymore . '' — Acting ICE Director Thomas Homan
`` They [ sanctuary cities ] bankroll the very criminal organizations that have killed Border Patrol agents and killed special agents in ICE , '' Homan said , according to an account of his speech in the Washington Examiner .
`` It irritates me that a politician who has never held a badge and a gun , who doesn ’ t understand what we do every day , makes a decision of putting their own political careers ahead of the health and safety of a law enforcement officer , '' he said . `` A shame ! ''
The approximately 40-minute speech came on the same day that ICE formalized a policy to send deportation agents to federal , state and local courthouses to make arrests .
The two-page directive said ICE will enter courthouses only for specific targets , such as convicted criminals , gang members , public safety threats and immigrants who have been previously deported or ordered to leave .
Family , friends and witnesses wo n't be picked up for deportation but ICE leaves a caveat for `` special circumstances . ''
The policy , signed by Homan , says immigration agents should generally avoid arrests in non-criminal areas of the court , like family court and small claims , unless it supervisor approves .
ICE — in a not-so-subtle jab at sanctuary cities— said `` increasing unwillingness of some jurisdictions to cooperate with ICE in the safe and orderly transfer of targeted aliens inside their prisons and jails has necessitated additional at-large arrests . ''