Pro-democracy demonstrators march during a protest to mark the first anniversary of a mass rally against the now-withdrawn extradition bill in Hong Kong , China , June 9 , 2020 . ( Tyrone Siu/Reuters )
NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE T he Chinese Communist Party sent invisible tanks rolling into Hong Kong when it promulgated a new national-security law Tuesday . City residents and international observers alike described the law , which violates the 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration and Hong Kong ’ s Basic Law , as draconian , authoritarian , and unjust , effectively eliminating the city ’ s autonomy from the mainland .
But the battle is not lost yet . Joshua Wong and other pro-democracy leaders are still tweeting , despite reports that Hong Konger social-media users are deleting their accounts , fearing prosecution for political statements . And many are still marching . Despite moves by the city police force to arrest protesters and suppress certain expressions of political speech , pro-democracy demonstrators took to the streets Wednesday , the 23rd anniversary of the handover from the United Kingdom .
As it became clear that the new security law was on the way , the United States took steps to roll back the special status that it granted Hong Kong — a status according to which the U.S. ’ s treatment of Hong Kong differed from its treatment of the mainland . Just ahead of the security law ’ s promulgation last week , the U.S. government announced an end to the export of U.S.-origin defense equipment to Hong Kong , suggesting that more is to come . And both houses of Congress passed legislation to sanction Chinese officials who degrade Hong Kong ’ s autonomy and to also penalize any banks that do business with these officials . When it is signed by the president , the Hong Kong Autonomy Act will be the strongest response to Beijing ’ s crackdown to date . That said , the U.S. response to Beijing ’ s crackdown is still being shaped . It will need to balance support for the demonstrators ’ efforts to save the city with the attempt to punish Beijing severely . In addition to reevaluating the city ’ s status under U.S. law and imposing sanctions , this calls for taking in the Hong Kong residents who choose to flee .
For weeks , commentators have called on the United States to do this , recalling that refugees fleeing totalitarian regimes have long been welcomed in the United States . Interestingly , these calls have not yet sparked opposition from proponents of stricter immigration policies . Perhaps this is because we see an emerging bipartisan consensus that the CCP is a grave threat to human freedom . U.S. action would follow steps taken by the United Kingdom , which Wednesday offered an eventual path to citizenship for up to 3 million Hong Kong residents , as well as measures taken by Taiwan , which last week opened a new office to process the influx of refugee applications caused by the national-security law . Meanwhile , Australia and Japan are considering their own approaches to admitting Hong Kongers .
So what should an American version of these policies look like ? One option would be for the Trump administration to make it easier for Hong Kong residents to immigrate to the United States . Secretary of State Mike Pompeo indicated a few weeks ago that he was looking into this , but the president has yet to say anything about it . More likely , action will initially come from Congress , where two versions of Hong Kong immigration legislation were introduced Tuesday afternoon . Each of the bills targets a different part of the city ’ s population to facilitate the immigration of its residents to the United States .
The Hong Kong Safe Harbor Act is the first of the two bipartisan proposals . It makes Hong Kong residents with a well-founded fear of political persecution eligible for Priority 2 refugee status , which would let them bypass the U.N. refugee system and non-governmental organizations responsible for vetting Priority 1 refugee claims . Although the original idea , which came from a Heritage Foundation report last August , was to designate all Hong Kong residents as eligible for P-2 status , the bill as written would apply to the more than 3 million people who have participated in pro-democracy protests since last summer . And notably , the legislation would also make it easier for pro-democracy leaders , journalists , and first responders to seek asylum in the United States .
Meanwhile , the Hong Kong People ’ s Freedom and Choice Act , the second bill , extends eligibility for temporary protected status to residents of Hong Kong and offers up to 50,000 special visas to highly skilled workers from the city . Crucially , it also speeds up the process for refugees from the city to apply for legal residency in the United States — a provision inspired by the legislation enacted to protect fleeing Chinese students after the Tiananmen Square massacre . These proposals were drafted to avoid overlap , and they would advance the dual goals of taking in Hong Kong residents who choose to flee Beijing ’ s rule while also increasing the number of highly skilled immigrants in the American workforce . Taken together , these bills would be a solid first step , but the American response to Beijing ’ s assault on Hong Kong can do more in this regard .
David Bier , an immigration analyst at the Cato Institute , calls the Hong Kong Safe Harbor Act “ an important way to support the protests. ” However , he tells ███ that a better solution would be to simply waive visa requirements for Hong Kong residents — as the United States did for Cuban refugees before offering them permanent residency . Absent similar legislation waiving the visa requirement for fleeing Hong Kongers , the process might take too long .
And the people of Hong Kong don ’ t have much time to spare . This week , Nathan Law , a prominent pro-democracy student leader , announced his departure from Hong Kong . He ’ s going to continue his work in exile . Many of his peers will choose to stay and fight , but they should also be afforded the opportunity to leave when it becomes necessary . Already , city authorities are threatening to arrest residents who use certain slogans or banners . During the first protests in the wake of the national-security law Wednesday , the city ’ s police force made more than 300 arrests , ten of them under the new law . In a sign of the law ’ s far-reaching consequences under a government that will wield it with authoritarian abandon , a 19-year-old demonstrator was arrested for having a sticker on his phone that said “ Free Hong Kong , Revolution Now. ” Beijing says that individuals arrested by the new outpost it established in Hong Kong will be tried on the mainland .
For years , Hong Kongers have lived under the threat of a CCP crackdown . With the enactment of the national-security law , it has finally arrived . Watching their cherished freedoms erode , they have learned to appreciate democracy ’ s blessings perhaps more than many Westerners do . So what better way to support these highly-skilled democrats than to take them in ? There ’ s only one : offering an expeditious path to permanent residency , then citizenship .