The technology industry “ understands there ’ s probably not a tremendous amount of resistance to their part of the bill , ” Mr. Rubio said in an interview last week , saying he welcomed the industry support . “ But their future and getting the reform passed is tied to the overall bill . ”
The bill has a good chance of winning passage in the Senate . The hardest sell will come in the House , where many conservative Republicans see the deal as too generous to immigrants who came to this nation illegally .
Rob Jesmer , a former top Republican Senate strategist who helps run the new Zuckerberg-backed nonprofit group that sponsored the Rubio ad , insisted that his organization ’ s push is based on the personal convictions of the executives who donated to the cause and who believe immigration laws need to be changed . Those convictions just happen to line up with what their corporations are lobbying for as well , he said .
“ It will give a lot of people who are educated in this country who are already here a chance to remain in the United States , ” Mr. Jesmer said , “ and encourage entrepreneurs from all over the world to come to the United States and create jobs . ”
The profound transition under way inside Silicon Valley companies is illustrated by their lobbying disclosure reports filed in Congress . Facebook ’ s lobbying budget swelled from $ 351,000 in 2010 to $ 2.45 million in the first three months of this year , while Google spent a record $ 18 million last year .
That boom in spending translates into hiring of top talent in the art of Washington deal-making . These companies have hired people like Joel D. Kaplan , a onetime deputy chief of staff in the Bush administration who now works for Facebook ; Susan Molinari , a former House Republican from New York who is now a Google lobbyist ; and outside lobbyists like Steven Elmendorf , a former chief of staff to Richard A. Gephardt , a former House majority leader , who works for Facebook .
The immigration fight , which has unified technology companies perhaps more than any other issue , has brought the lobbying effort to new heights . The industry sees it as a fix to a stubborn problem : job vacancies , particularly for engineers .