Remember when the Obama administration boasted of deporting a record number of illegal immigrants ? “ When the secretary tells you that the numbers are at an all-time high , that ’ s straight , on the merits , no cooking of the books , ” the president ’ s then head of Immigration and Customs Enforcement crowed in October 2010 .
Earlier that year , the Washington Post reported on a memo suggesting that ICE had set a goal of 400,000 deportations . The document exhorted agents to “ Keep up the good work on criminal alien removals ” but complained “ non-criminal removals are falling short of our goal . ”
The memorandum went on to state “ the other Agency critical goal of achieving 400,000 removals and returns overall , ” later warning they were “ well under the Agency ’ s goal of 400,000″ at that time .
Under increasing pressure from activists frustrated with the president on immigration , record deportations have gone the way of if you like your health plan , you can keep it . The administration is turning the page , just like the Associated Press did with the phrase “ illegal immigrant ” in its style guide .
“ It ’ s not smart , ” President Obama said of immigration enforcement Tuesday . “ It doesn ’ t make sense . ”
Interrupted by a heckler shouting “ Stop the deportations , ” Vice President Joe Biden replied , “ We ’ ll do that too , kid . ”
Nobody wants deportation to be the face of American immigration policy . The alternative to mass legalization programs — which some describe as comprehensive immigration reform , others as amnesty — isn ’ t mass deportations .
But some of the rhetoric from activists protesting the Obama administration ’ s illegal alien removals comes awfully close to suggesting deportation is an illegitimate policy tool altogether . Some will concede that criminal aliens should be removed from the country — even as they appear to be protesting their removal — but nobody should be kicked out merely for being here illegally .
One group says there should be not one more deportation , full stop : “ Together we say : not one more family destroyed , not one more day without equality , not one more indifferent reaction to suffering , not one more deportation . ”
This is crazy . A much stronger case can be made that the United States incarcerates too many people , so sentencing laws should be reformed and vices should be decriminalized . Imprisonment breaks up families and causes suffering . But no serious person would argue that not one more person should be incarcerated until all these problems are solved .
Barbara Jordan , a heroine of the 1960s civil rights movement who became the first black woman elected to Congress from the South , chaired Bill Clinton ’ s commission to reform immigration in the 1990s . Jordan understood something about immigration and deportation that many contemporary liberals do not .
“ Credibility in immigration policy can be summed up in one sentence : those who should get in , get in ; those who should be kept out , are kept out ; and those who should not be here will be required to leave , ” the Texas Democrat said . “ The top priorities for detention and removal , of course , are criminal aliens . But for the system to be credible , people actually have to be deported at the end of the process . ”
Sometimes , when you have over 11 million illegal immigrants already in the U.S. and more than 100 million people worldwide who say they would like to move here , that means people are deported simply for being here illegally .
In 2013 , 59 percent of deportees were convicted of a crime , and a third were felons , according to the Pew Hispanic Center . Add in repeat immigration violators , illegal border crossings and immigration fugitives , and you get 98 percent of the people deported last year .
None of them should have been deported ? To answer in the affirmative is to argue against borders and sovereignty , as well as law and order .
Obama has gotten more heat on the left for being “ deporter-in-chief ” than for essentially adopting Romneycare as his health plan rather than the public option or single payer , launching a war without congressional approval , or raising millions from the Wall Street fat cats he bailed out .
How much of it is deserved is open to debate . The Washington Post reported on the unconventional methods the administration employed to achieve its deportation record , including counting some 19,000 immigrants who had left the previous fiscal year . The Center for Immigration Studies pointed out that they arrived at these numbers as interior enforcement was declining .
“ In 2012 , the year the Obama administration claimed to break enforcement records , more than one-half of removals attributed to ICE were the result of Border Patrol arrests that would never have been counted as a removal in prior years , ” writes CIS ’ Jessica Vaughan .
Obama ’ s attempt at defining deportations down notwithstanding , he came to the same conclusion George W. Bush finally did in his second term : they would never have any credibility on an amnesty for enforcement exchange if they didn ’ t at least somewhat step up immigration enforcement . So they did .
Now the Obama administration can abandon that stepped up enforcement and , as Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer put it to The New York Times , “ greatly curtail deportations ” if congressional Republicans won ’ t pass an immigration bill .
W. James Antle III is the editor of ███ News Foundation and author of the book Devouring Freedom : Can Big Government Ever Be Stopped ? Follow him on Twitter .