WASHINGTON—House Republican leadership indicated on Wednesday they had White House support on their plan to put two immigration bills forward , but it was unclear if that would be enough for a bill to pass in Congress .
In a deal struck with centrists and conservative members of the conference , House Speaker Paul Ryan said he would hold votes next week on legislation that will protect young immigrants brought to the U.S. as minors and living in the U.S. without authorization , as well as increase funding for border security .
The deal staved off an uprising from centrist Republicans who were aiming to force votes on a series of immigration measures . Party leaders had ratcheted up negotiations to avert a vote on bills supported mostly by Democrats , which they fear will infuriate their base of loyal GOP voters .
“ This represents a consensus between our members so that we can move forward on the immigration issue , ” Mr. Ryan said Wednesday . “ Now what we have is an actual chance at making law and solving this problem . ”
Under the new agreement , Republican leaders would set up votes on both a conservative measure offered previously by Reps. Bob Goodlatte ( R. , Va. ) and Michael McCaul ( R. , Texas ) , and a compromise bill that was the subject of weeks of negotiations . The options being considered as part of a compromise include the creation of a new merit-based green card program that would reward immigrants for meeting certain benchmarks to allow them to eventually become citizens .
President Donald Trump ended the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA , program and has repeatedly called on Congress to replace it with legislation .
“ It will be a merit-based system and we ’ ll release what those merits are , ” said Rep. Jeff Denham ( R. , Calif. ) , who was part of the negotiations . “ But certainly those that came out of the shadows and did what the government asked them to do , their time in the DACA program will count toward this as well . ”
But even members who were part of the negotiations were reluctant to commit their support for the deal on Wednesday . Florida Rep. Carlos Curbelo , one of the centrist Republicans involved in negotiations , said he was waiting to see the legislative text to decide whether to support it .
North Carolina Rep. Mark Meadows , who leads the conservative House Freedom Caucus , said he was withholding support because the details in the bill could change .
“ The concrete has been poured in the forms , it is yet to set , ” he said , using a construction analogy . “ You can still make handprints in it , you can write your name in it , but it ’ s far from set . ”
White House senior adviser Stephen Miller , speaking at a lunch meeting of House Republicans on Wednesday , indicated Mr. Trump would support for the legislation , but didn ’ t get into details .
Should a bill pass the House , it could face difficulties in the Senate . A bill reflecting the president ’ s priorities failed in the Senate in February in a 39-60 vote , with 14 Republicans opposed . Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R. , Ky. ) has said he has no desire to spend time on bills that are bound to fail .
Mr. Trump has said legal protections for hundreds of thousands of so-called Dreamers , young people brought to the U.S. illegally by their parents , must be paired with tighter border security , including funding for a wall along the Mexican border . He also wants curbs to the family-based migration system and an end to the diversity visa lottery , which admits 50,000 people chosen at random from underrepresented countries .
The border security provisions in the compromise bill are the same as those in the bill from Mssrs . McCaul and Goodlatte , according to Mr. Curbelo ( R. , Fla. ) , who was also part of the negotiations . The compromise legislation eliminates the diversity visa lottery system and changes family-based immigration , though Mr. Denham said those specifics were not ironed out .
Excluded from the bill are provisions overhauling the guest-worker program and a federal e-verify program . Leadership said those will be addressed in July , according to lawmakers in the meeting .
Democrats indicated opposition to the plan on Wednesday . Though House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said she hadn ’ t been briefed on the legislation , she said she would likely ask Democrats to vote against the Republican compromise bill based on “ what we ’ ve heard of it . ”