President Obama on Tuesday praised a bipartisan Senate effort to overhaul the US immigration system and said he ’ d wait for Congress to take the lead on this issue .
“ At this moment , it looks like there is a genuine desire to get this done soon , and that ’ s very encouraging , ” Mr. Obama said in what officials billed as a major speech on the subject in Las Vegas .
But the president indicated that his patience is provisional . He laid out principles he said should be reflected in any comprehensive immigration-reform legislation , and he said that if lawmakers get bogged down bickering , he ’ ll act .
“ If Congress is unable to move forward in a timely fashion , I will send up a bill based on my proposal and insist they vote on it right away , ” Obama said .
Obama seemed to be trying to accomplish the difficult feat of appearing to exert presidential leadership while letting a rare moment of bipartisanship bloom . He probably knows that if he demands certain details right now , he ’ ll polarize the situation and make it harder for lawmakers to come together .
House Speaker John Boehner ’ s response to the speech hinted at how that dynamic might play out .
“ There are a lot of ideas about how best to fix our broken immigration system , ” said Boehner spokesman Brendan Buck . “ Any solution should be a bipartisan one , and we hope the president is careful not to drag the debate to the left and ultimately disrupt the difficult work that is ahead in the House and Senate . ”
Given that response , it ’ s difficult to see how a White House-drafted bill would make any progress in the GOP-dominated House , should the current congressional effort languish .
As with the bipartisan Senate approach announced Monday , Obama says he wants immigration reform to reflect strengthened border security , a path to citizenship for many of the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants currently in the US , and a crackdown on employers who hire undocumented workers .
Unlike the Senate effort , Obama would not condition the citizenship process on further security efforts . He would move immediately to allow undocumented workers to register , pass a background check , pay taxes and a fine , and then qualify for a probationary legal status .
“ Individuals must wait until the existing legal immigration backlogs are cleared before getting in line to apply for lawful permanent residency ( i.e . a ‘ green card ’ ) , and ultimately United States citizenship , ” according to a White House fact sheet .
This might take some time for the individuals involved , Obama said on Tuesday .
“ It won ’ t be a quick process , but it will be a fair process , and it will lift these individuals out of the shadows , ” he said in Las Vegas .
According to the White House , the administration is proposing mandatory , phased-in electronic employment verification . For most employers , use of the current E-Verify immigration-status system is largely voluntary .
Obama is also pushing use of fraud- and tamper-resistant Social Security cards and other documents to prove immigration status . In the past , proposals for a national identity card have proved controversial in Congress , to say the least .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Unlike the Senate effort , Obama ’ s plan would treat same-sex immigrant couples the same as heterosexual couples for the purpose of family reunification . It would also create a “ start-up visa , ” allowing entrepreneurs with established financing to locate in the US .
“ If you succeed , you ’ ll create American businesses , and American jobs , ” said Obama .