WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - President Donald Trump ’ s strategy for the U.S.-Mexico border includes mobilizing the National Guard , the White House said on Tuesday , after Trump had earlier spoken publicly to reporters about “ guarding our border with the military ” to stop illegal immigrants .
U.S. President Donald Trump arrives for the Easter service at Bethesda-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church in Palm Beach , Florida , U.S. , April 1 , 2018 . ███/Yuri Gripas
The White House statement was released after Trump met with Defense Secretary James Mattis , Attorney General Jeff Sessions and other officials on border issues . It gave no details on whether or when Trump ’ s strategy might be implemented .
The National Guard , part of the U.S. military ’ s reserve forces , has been used in recent years for surveillance and intelligence on the border , but not direct law enforcement .
The president ’ s earlier remarks sharpened his recurring anti-immigration rhetoric . He said he wanted to deploy U.S. military forces until his long-promised border wall is built .
“ Until we can have a wall and proper security we ’ re going to be guarding our border with the military , ” Trump told reporters at the White House , lamenting what he called “ horrible ” U.S. laws that left the southern border poorly protected .
Trump railed against a “ caravan ” of Central American migrants traveling from the Mexico-Guatemala border in the last 10 days toward the United States , journeys that have occurred annually since 2010 in an effort to draw attention to the plight of people fleeing violence in their countries .
On Tuesday night , Mexican Foreign Minister Luis Videgaray said on Twitter that the caravan “ dispersed gradually and at the decision of its participants. ” Mexican officials say privately that they believe Trump has exaggerated the caravan ’ s importance to renew pressure on Mexico over the renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement .
After 14 months in office , Trump still hammers regularly on an anti-immigration theme that helped to energize conservative Republican voters who helped him win the presidency in the 2016 election . Trump took a hard line on illegal immigration during the campaign and has also sought to curtail legal immigration .
His efforts have thus far failed to produce a comprehensive overhaul of America ’ s immigration laws or full funding for his border wall in the Republican-led Congress . No major legislation was expected before November ’ s congressional elections .
His latest comments immediately raised questions in Congress and among legal experts about troop deployments on U.S. soil .
The Posse Comitatus Act , a federal law on the books since the 1870s , restricts using the U.S. Army and other main branches of the military for civilian law enforcement on U.S. soil , unless specifically authorized by Congress .
But the military can provide support services to law enforcement and has done so on occasion since the 1980s .
Under Republican President George W. Bush , the National Guard between 2006 and 2008 provided border-related intelligence analysis , but had no direct law enforcement role .
In 2010 , President Barack Obama sent National Guard troops to the U.S.-Mexican border to provide intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance support to U.S. Border Patrol agents .
Some specific statutes authorize the president to deploy troops within the United States for riot control or relief efforts after natural disasters .
“ The details really matter here , ” said Stephen Vladeck , a professor at the University of Texas School of Law .
“ The real question is going to be if the president is serious about this , what kind of legal arguments do we get out of the White House and the Pentagon for such a deployment . ”
A senior Republican aide in the U.S. House of Representatives said key lawmakers had not been briefed on the White House plan . The aide said there was no indication that a specific plan had even been formulated yet .
Geronimo Gutierrez , Mexico ’ s ambassador in Washington , said he had spoken to U.S . Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen about Trump ’ s remarks on the border and that Mexico had formally asked the U.S. government to clarify them .
“ It ’ s certainly not something that the Mexican government welcomes , ” Gutierrez told CNN .
Nielsen , who took part in the meeting with Trump , said in a Twitter message late on Tuesday that she had been told by Mexican officials “ the caravan is dissipating . ”
In southern Mexico , officials screened the dwindling number of hundreds of largely Central American migrants on Tuesday .
At a campaign rally , Mexican leftist Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador , who is leading most polls by double digits before the July 1 presidential election , said that if the U.S. government militarizes the border , thousands of his supporters would protest by forming a “ big human chain of Mexicans for peace . ”
Some members of Congress said they were uncomfortable with the idea of using the military at the border .
Democratic Senator Brian Schatz said Trump should have to seek approval from Congress for any such troop deployment . “ We should put that new law to a vote in the Senate , ” he said on Twitter . “ I predict fewer than 20 votes . ”
In a Twitter post earlier on Tuesday , Trump said the caravan “ heading to our ‘ Weak Laws ’ Border , had better be stopped before it gets there . Cash cow NAFTA is in play , as is foreign aid to Honduras and the countries that allow this to happen . Congress MUST ACT NOW ! ” Congress is on vacation until next week .