House Speaker John A. Boehner on Wednesday flatly ruled out even entering into negotiations with the Senate on that chamber ’ s immigration bill , signaling that the issue is dead for this year — and setting up major hurdles for any action before the midterm elections .
Emerging from a meeting with fellow Republicans , Mr. Boehner said he won ’ t be bound by President Obama ’ s timeline on action this year , and firmly rejected the Senate ’ s approach , which would legalize most illegal immigrants and rewrite the legal immigration system .
“ We ’ ve made it clear that we ’ re going to move on a common-sense , step-by-step approach in terms of how we deal with immigration , ” Mr. Boehner , Ohio Republican , told reporters after the meeting . “ The idea that we ’ re going to take up a 1,300-page bill that no one had ever read , which is what the Senate did , is not going to happen in the House . And frankly , I ’ ll make clear we have no intention of ever going to conference on the Senate bill . ”
The remarks marked an about-face for Mr. Boehner , who immediately after Mr. Obama ’ s re-election a year ago said he expected to work with the president on the issue , and even used the word “ comprehensive ” — a term that , in the immigration debate , has come to mean the broad legalization approach that Mr. Obama and Democrats want .
Immigrant rights supporters said they weren ’ t ready to give up hope for action and think political pressure will force House Republicans to act sometime next year .
“ I believe the House will come to its senses and realize that we have to fix our immigration system in a bipartisan way , ” said Sen. Charles E. Schumer , the New York Democrat who wrote the Senate bill .
That Senate bill called for quick legal status for most illegal immigrants , though it withheld a full pathway to citizenship until after the Homeland Security Department invested in more Border Patrol agents , doubled the length of pedestrian fencing along the U.S.-Mexico border , and purchased more equipment and technology . The Senate bill also would revamp the legal immigration system to let in more foreigners based on job skills or deep family ties .
House Republicans rejected that broad approach and said they would write a series of bills dealing with immigration in pieces . House committees have cleared bills dealing with border security , interior enforcement and guest-worker programs , and leaders were working on a bill that would have legalized young illegal immigrants .
Congressional Democrats and Mr. Obama had held out hope that the House would pass some of those bills , then go to a conference committee to hammer out a final deal with the Senate . That final deal , Mr. Obama said , would have to include citizenship rights for most illegal immigrants .
Indeed , Mr. Boehner appeared to be taking a step back . He said he asked House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte , Virginia Republican , to develop a broad set of principles for addressing immigration .
White House press secretary Jay Carney said it seemed “ a little bit late in the game ” and noted that Mr. Obama already has laid out principles that the House should follow .
Immigrant rights advocates said Republicans were risking their political lives .
“ Should they slow-walk it until they get to ‘ no ’ this year and in this Congress , Boehner will go down in history as the man that sealed his party ’ s fate with the fastest-growing groups of voters in America , ” said Frank Sharry , executive director of America ’ s Voice , a lobby group .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , sent a tweet telling Mr. Boehner it should be easy to take up immigration .
She pointed to the bill she and fellow House Democrats introduced that would take the Senate ’ s legalization program , strip out the specific , tough border security measures and replace them with a call for Homeland Security to devise a security plan .
Mrs. Pelosi said she believes the House has enough votes to pass her bill .
Immediately after Mr. Obama won re-election last year , Mr. Boehner announced that immigration would be a key area of agreement between the president and House Republicans .
Pundits also urged Republican lawmakers to work with Mr. Obama . Columnist Charles Krauthammer said Republicans should unapologetically embrace “ amnesty , ” while prominent talk show host Sean Hannity said he supported a pathway to citizenship .
But the backlash from rank-and-file House Republicans was swift , and Mr. Boehner and his lieutenants have spent most of the past year trying to figure out a way forward that won ’ t cost him the support of his conference .
Even Sen. Marco Rubio , a Florida Republican who helped craft the Senate bill , later abandoned it , telling his House colleagues to follow their own path and not to enter into negotiations with the Senate .