The legislation is being developed as members in both chambers of Congress are drafting their own immigration bills .
WASHINGTON — A draft of a White House immigration proposal obtained by ███ would allow illegal immigrants to become legal permanent residents within eight years .
The plan also would provide for more security funding and require business owners to check the immigration status of new hires within four years . In addition , the nation 's 11 million illegal immigrants could apply for a newly created `` Lawful Prospective Immigrant '' visa , under the draft bill being written by the White House .
If approved , they could then apply for the same provisional legal status for their spouse or children living outside the country , according to the draft .
The bill is being developed as members in both chambers of Congress are drafting their own immigration bills . In the House , a bipartisan group of representatives has been negotiating an immigration proposal for years and are writing their own bill . Last month , four Republican senators joined with four Democratic senators to announce their agreement on the general outlines of an immigration plan .
One of those senators , Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , said Obama 's bill repeats the failures of past legislation and would be `` dead on arrival '' in Congress .
`` It fails to follow through on previously broken promises to secure our borders , ( and ) creates a special pathway that puts those who broke our immigration laws at an advantage over those who chose to do things the right way and come here legally , '' Rubio said . `` It would actually make our immigration problems worse . ''
The draft was obtained from an Obama administration official who said it was being distributed to various agencies . The official requested anonymity because he was not authorized to release the proposal publicly .
The bill mirrors many provisions of the bipartisan 2007 bill that was spearheaded by the late Sen. Ted Kennedy , D-Mass. , and Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz. , and ultimately failed .
In his first term , Obama often deferred to Congress on drafting and advancing major legislation , including the Affordable Care Act . He has openly supported the efforts in Congress to take the lead on immigration legislation , and just this week met with Democratic senators to discuss their proposals .
But two weeks ago in Las Vegas , while outlining his immigration plans , Obama made clear that he would not wait too long for Congress to get moving .
`` If Congress is unable to move forward in a timely fashion , I will send up a bill based on my proposal and insist that they vote on it right away , '' he said .
White House spokesman Clark Stevens said Saturday that the administration continues to support the bipartisan efforts ongoing in Congress .
`` The president has made clear the principles upon which he believes any common-sense immigration reform effort should be based , '' Stevens said . `` We continue to work in support of a bipartisan effort , and while the president has made clear he will move forward if Congress fails to act , progress continues to be made and the administration has not prepared a final bill to submit . ''
According to the White House draft , people would need to pass a criminal background check , submit biometric information and pay fees to qualify for the new visa . If approved , they would be allowed to legally reside in the U.S. for four years , work and leave the country for short periods of time . After the four years , they could then reapply for an extension .
Illegal immigrants would be disqualified from the program if they were convicted of a crime that led to a prison term of at least one year , three or more different crimes that resulted in a total of 90 days in jail , or if they committed any offense abroad that `` if committed in the United States would render the alien inadmissible or removable from the United States . ''
People currently in federal custody or facing deportation proceedings also could be allowed to apply for the Lawful Prospective Immigrant visa . Application forms and instructions would be provided in `` the most common languages spoken by persons in the United States , '' but the application and all supporting evidence submitted to the federal government would have to be in English .
They would also be given a new identification card to show as proof of their legal status in the country .
The immigrants could then apply for legal permanent residence , commonly known as a green card , within eight years if they learn English and `` the history and government of the United States '' and pay back taxes . That would then clear the path for them to apply for U.S. citizenship .
To combat fraud , the draft proposes a new Social Security card be developed that is `` fraud-resistant , tamper-resistant and wear-resistant . '' The Social Security Administration would be required to issue the new cards within two years .
A major requirement for many Republicans is enhanced border security . The bill calls for an unspecified increase in the Border Patrol , allows the Department of Homeland Security to expand technological improvements along the border and adds 140 new immigration judges to process the heavy flow of people who violate immigration laws .
It also orders U.S. Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) to study whether a land-border crossing fee should be implemented to help offset border security costs . The draft also proposes raising many inspection fees that border-crossers already pay .
The draft bill proposes a new plan to allow Homeland Security to `` accept donations '' from citizens , businesses and local and state governments to improve ports of entry and security features along the border . And it would require CBP to begin collecting statistics on deaths along the border and report them quarterly .
The draft also expands the E-Verify program that checks the immigration status of people seeking new jobs . Businesses with more than 1,000 employees must begin using the system within two years , businesses with more than 250 employees within three years and all businesses within four years .
Homeland Security , working with the U.S. departments of Labor and Agriculture , the attorney general and other agencies , would engage in a $ 40 million-a-year program to educate business owners and workers about the program .
Homeland Security also would be required to submit a report within 18 months showing how the worker verification system is working , and specifically explain how it is affecting the nation 's agriculture industry , which relies heavily on illegal immigrant workers .
The draft obtained by ███ does not include sections that would alter the nation 's legal immigration system to adjust the future flow of legal immigrants , which is expected to be a critical component of any immigration overhaul .