The Zuckerberg-backed political advocacy organization is called FWD.us . Zuckerberg group lines up pieces
SAN FRANCISCO — After weeks of anticipation and a shaky start , the new political advocacy group backed by Mark Zuckerberg launched Thursday with a list of top Silicon Valley CEOs and a notable team of strategists .
The group is called FWD.us , as in Forward U.S. , and its initial push will be on the immigration front . Other than Zuckerberg , its 11 founders include Reid Hoffman , co-founder of LinkedIn , and John Doerr , the venture capitalist who has backed Google and Amazon.com . Marissa Mayer , Yahoo ’ s chief executive , and Eric Schmidt , Google ’ s executive chairman , are among FWD.us ’ s major contributors .
And the organization comes armed with a recognizable list of political players from both sides of the aisle : Rob Jesmer , a former executive director of the National Republican Senatorial Committee ; Bush White House veterans Dan Senor , who also served as Rep. Paul Ryan ’ s chief adviser during his vice presidential run , and Facebook executive Joel Kaplan ; Joe Lockhart , former White House press secretary for President Bill Clinton ; Jef Pollock , the Democratic pollster ; and Alida Garcia , former Latino vote deputy director for the Obama 2012 campaign . She will be the group ’ s director of coalitions and policy .
Zuckerberg wrote in an op-ed in The Washington Post on Thursday that he met a middle school student recently who is an undocumented immigrant and who is unsure if he will be able to go to college given his immigration status .
“ We have a strange immigration policy for a nation of immigrants , ” he wrote . “ And it ’ s a policy unfit for today ’ s world . ”
What exactly the group will do is undetermined at this point , but ads , campaign support , public communications and grass-roots organizing are all in the mix , said someone familiar with the organization . On its website , FWD.us , the group has posted testimonials from its members .
Last week , the group ’ s co-founder and president , Joe Green , issued an apology after a leaked prospectus listed as members the names of executives who had not committed to the effort , such as Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates , ███ reported .
Now the group is hoping to move past that misstep , which included what struck some as an Orwellian-sounding name , “ Human Capital , ” and an assessment that the group ’ s members control “ massive distribution channels. ” Green said he regretted some of the document ’ s phrases .
With its official unveiling , FWD.us will place its initial focus on the passage of comprehensive immigration reform . Tech companies want to increase the number of H-1B temporary visas for high-skilled foreign workers as well as lessen the wait times for green cards for their workers .