“ Everyone has a common agreement there ’ s a major problem in our immigration system , but it ’ s going to take leadership , from the president and from the Senate , ” said Representative James Lankford , Republican of Oklahoma , who is running for an open Senate seat in his home state . “ The conversation kept circling around to , ‘ How can we possibly trust this president ? ’ ”
Still , the conservative groups , sensing an opening , clearly provided the arguments that prevailed . Heritage Foundation figures like Robert Rector provided intellectual heft for Republicans looking for arguments to oppose their leaders . As House members gathered in Cambridge , Md. , to hash over the issue , Heritage posted on its Foundry blog the argument that would ultimately win the day .
Derrick Morgan , the think tank ’ s vice president for domestic and economic policy , was succinct and directive : “ During their retreat , Republicans in Congress are considering what they should do . Congress should not trust the president as a partner to push an unpopular amnesty . ”
For good measure , Heritage posted a video featuring Mr. Morgan making that case — and opening with a call for action on immigration from Mr. Obama , a messenger most conservatives reflexively resist . Invitations had already been delivered for what Heritage Action was billing as an alternative policy retreat , to give lawmakers opposing their own leadership new objectives to embrace .
And in the days that followed the retreat , such efforts continued . On Wednesday , just a day before Mr. Boehner all but pulled the plug , Representative Steve King , Republican of Iowa , one of the most committed opponents of immigration legislation , huddled with a small group of conservative members and the pollster Scott Rasmussen . Mr. King said that Mr. Rasmussen ’ s message was pointed : “ I can ’ t think of a stupider thing for your conference to take up , ” he said . ( One week earlier at a similar gathering , Mr. King added , the guest speaker had been Sean Hannity of Fox News , who had sounded a similar alarm . )
That same day , Mr. Bozell ’ s organization , ForAmerica , took to Facebook to urge its members to call Mr. Boehner with a simple but urgent message . “ Border security should be stressed and should be the priority first and foremost , ” said David Bozell , the group ’ s executive director and the son of L. Brent Bozell . “ And until that is accomplished , we really don ’ t trust any branch of the government to put together a package. ” The younger Mr. Bozell said that the organization made over 5,500 calls . “ We certainly think there was an impact there , ” he said .
Behind the scenes , Representative Trey Gowdy , Republican of South Carolina and chairman of the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration , began talking about the importance of dealing with the nation ’ s immigration problem — but not until 2015 , a critical shift in strategy .