Back in June in Sandusky , Ohio , about 65 miles west of my home here in Cleveland , there was a huge federal raid involving about 200 agents on Corso ’ s Flower and Garden Center . The combined ICE-led operation rounded up 114 undocumented immigrants workers ; some of whom had been here on and off for decades .
The raid lay bare the essential dilemma facing those attempting to enforce our immigration policy . It took a gigantic federal operation to round up and hold for deportation people who were working hard and attempting to do the right thing . No matter how you slice it , our massive , legitimate , law-enforcement operation punished good people trying to work and provide for their families .
Bear the Corso raid in mind when you try to wrap your mind around the current crisis involving the Caravan of Migrants doggedly heading our way from Guatemala and Honduras , trudging through Mexico and causing great consternation and angry condemnation in Washington , D.C .
It would be easy to support the deployment of the U.S. military and other draconian “ solutions ” to the migrant crisis generally , and the caravan specifically , if the marchers were gang bangers or ISIS recruits . Manifestly most are not , ( unless ISIS or MS-13 is recruiting crying , hungry three-year olds ) . Even the most hardened anti-immigrant pundit can not justify actions taken to stop the caravan by saying it is mostly about national security . It is not .
It is , in my opinion , fear of our nation being over-run by poor , hungry , brown people in sufficient numbers to change our basic national character , which motivates most critics of this caravan and , more broadly , illegal immigration .
What would the Army do against a caravan of civilians , many of them women and children , anyway ? Shoot them ?
The president senses that most Americans are responding very negatively to the caravan , and even see it as an existential threat to the nation . He has even stated that he will , if necessary , use our military to stop the caravan from crossing over the southern border . In doing so he ignores the principle known as Posse Comitatus , which by law , prevents the military from enforcing civilian laws .
What would the Army do against a caravan of civilians , many of them women and children , anyway ? Shoot them ?
The Republicans see this caravan as the perfect issue to rally the base and insure a big , robust turnout for the mid-term elections now two weeks away . Democrats would like to pretend that the caravan is just a giant day-care center filled with needy children that the heartless president doesn ’ t care about .
This crisis calls for reason , patience , compassion and an immediate parlay among the affected nations in Central America , Mexico and the United States . In exchange for leniency and a path to citizenship for long-time undocumented residents already in this country -- who were brought to the U.S. as children by their parents -- pro-immigration advocates , like me , should announce our support for President Trump ’ s border wall . It will help restore order along the southern border , and mitigate the hysteria currently gripping the national immigration debate and tainting the mid-term elections .
But neither building the president ’ s border wall , nor compassion for the DREAMERS already here , will fully solve the crisis of immigration . We are the world ’ s richest country . We are located adjacent to some of the world ’ s poorest and most violent countries . As long as that imbalance exists , they will want to come here .
And neither the Army nor the wall will stop them all .