( CNN ) - Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Florida , is laying out elements of his proposal to reform the immigration system , which he pitches as much-needed modernization for the outdated system .
Rubio , who was elected in 2010 to his first U.S. Senate term , told The Wall Street Journal in an interview published Saturday that his plan would include a permanent residency provision and a route to citizenship for those undocumented immigrants currently in the United States , but he stressed that the plan was “ not blanket amnesty or a special pathway to citizenship . ”
The crux of his plan is to meet the country ’ s economic needs , including expanding the skilled workforce and supporting agriculture , which has relied on undocumented immigrants .
“ I do n't think that in the 21st century we can continue to have an immigration system where only 6.5 % of people who come here , come here based on labor and skill , ” he said in the interview . “ We have to move toward merit and skill-based immigration . ''
Rubio has previously spoken out in favor of immigration reform and said last summer he was drafting a GOP alternative to the DREAM Act proposals , which would provide some form of legal status to young people who were brought into the U.S. illegally but who seek higher education or military service .
He put his plans on hold in June as President Barack Obama announced he would suspend deportations on many of these young adults . Critics dismissed it as a political move in an election year .
In a December interview on NBC , Obama said he would work on immigration in the first year of his second term .
“ I 've said that fixing our broken immigration system is a top priority . I will introduce legislation in the first year to get that done , ” he said . “ We can do it in a comprehensive way that the American people support . That 's something we should get done . ”
Rubio ’ s proposal comes ahead of specifics from the president , whom he says has “ not done a thing ” on the issue . Perhaps , he said , Obama would work with him on this issue because “ maybe he 's interested in his legacy . ”
He supports increasing the caps for immigrants in both skilled and labor roles and allowing undocumented immigrants to “ earn ” a form of legal status . He also supports an e-verify database system which employers would be required to use to determine whether a potential hire is legally employable .
`` Here 's how I envision it , '' he told the Journal . `` They would have to come forward . They would have to undergo a background check . … They would have to pay a fine , pay back taxes , maybe even do community service . They would have to prove they 've been here for an extended period of time . They understand some English and are assimilated . Then most of them would get legal status and be allowed to stay in this country . ''
The system would not only crack down on illegal immigration , but he says it would also benefit undocumented workers . `` When someone is [ undocumented ] they 're vulnerable to being exploited . ''
Besides being a solution to the immigration issue , Rubio says it is politically beneficial to his party . Obama won an overwhelming percentage of Latino and other minority voters .
`` The immigration issue is a gateway issue for Hispanics , no doubt about it , ” he said . “ No matter what your stance is on a number of other issues , if people somehow come to believe that you do n't like them or want them here , it 's difficult to get them to listen to anything else . ''