The Senate Judiciary Committee will vote on the amendments over the course of several hearings .
`` We % u2019re off to a good start , '' Sen. Charles Schumer says
Sen. Chuck Grassley stills says legalization first is a problem
WASHINGTON — Senators who back a sweeping immigration law said Thursday they were heartened by the first big test of the proposal in which members of both parties were allowed to make changes to the bill .
The Democratic-led Senate Judiciary Committee adopted eight amendments offered by Republicans and 13 from Democrats . Sen. Charles Schumer , D-N.Y. , said some of the Republican amendments have helped strengthen the bill and should encourage more GOP members of Congress to consider voting for it .
`` We all know this is going to be a long , hard road but we 're off to a good start , '' Schumer said . `` I think our arguments are holding firm . ''
But Republican critics said the bill still ignores important demands on border security that will make it difficult to pass the Senate and especially the Republican-controlled House of Representatives .
Sen. Ted Cruz , R-Texas , saw the committee vote down one of his amendments that would have tripled the size of the Border Patrol and quadrupled the number of drones and sensors used to patrol the southwest border with Mexico .
`` The American people want Congress to be serious about border security , '' Cruz said . `` That is true among Republicans and Democrats . It is true in red states and blue states . And it is with regret that the committee has consistently rejected any attempts to put real teeth in this bill to secure the border . ''
Sen. Chuck Grassley , R-Iowa , and the ranking member on the committee , echoed the concerns of many Republicans worried that the bill allows the nation 's estimted 11 million unauthorized immigrants to get legal status before the nation 's borders are secured .
`` No one can dispute that this bill is legalization first and security second , '' Grassley said .
Cruz 's measure was one of seven GOP amendments that was voted down , compared to Democrats who did not have any of their amendments struck down .
That prompted Dan Stein , president of the Federation of American Immigration Reform , a group that opposes the bill , to call the hearing `` a complete sham of a process . '' Marielena Hincapié , executive director of the National Immigration Law Center , a group that supports the bill , said the senators fought off any `` poison pills '' that could doom the prospects of the bill .
The committee was focusing on the border security sections of the 867-bill during Thursday 's hearing – the first of several hearings when senators are expected to vote on more than 300 amendments that have been filed .
One of the biggest changes to the bill was an amendment filed by Grassley that ensures that the Department of Homeland Security focus on securing the entire southwestern border . According to the bill , Homeland Security must monitor 100 % of the border , and intercept 90 % of people crossing , only in sectors deemed `` high risk . '' That 's defined as sectors where 30,000 people were apprehended in the previous year , and in 2012 would have included three of the nine border sectors .
Grassley 's amendment requires the department to reach those goals in all border sectors .
The committee voted down a separate Grassley amendment that would have required that Homeland Security certify the entire border as secured before the nation 's unauthorized immigrants can be granted temporary legal status .
The bill as written only requires that Homeland Security create and submit a plan to secure the entire border before those immigrants can apply to become `` Registered Provisional Immigrants , '' which would allow them to legally reside and work in the country .
The committee is now finished with the border security portion of the bill . They must still vote on portions that deal with legalizing the nation 's 11 million unauthorized immigrants , enforcing immigration at work-sites and revamping the legal immigration system . The next hearing is scheduled for Tuesday , and there are still several ways in which any momentum on the bill may be disrupted :
The committee is set to resume hearing amendments after the lunch break and will continue throughout the day , and there still exists several ways in which any momentum on the bill may be disrupted :
Sen. Patrick Leahy , D-Vt. , filed amendments to extend immigration rights and benefits to the spouses and families of LGBT couples who are in a `` long-term committed relationship . '' Immigration activists lobbied the Gang of Eight to include such provisions in their bill , but members held off . And while the idea has support from Democrats on the Judiciary committee , Republicans have warned that including the topic on an already-controversial bill could ruin any chances it has at clearing both chambers . Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , has said simply that adding LGBT immigration rights would `` kill the bill . ''
Many Republicans say the bill does n't do enough to fully secure the country 's border . The last time Congress passed a comprehensive immigration bill in 1986 , up to 3 million unauthorized immigrants were allowed to apply to become U.S. citizens . But the promise of border security did n't happen , leading to another wave of illegal immigration and more than 11 million unauthorized immigrants living in the country today . Republican senators , including Rep. Chuck Grassley , R-Iowa , have filed several amendments to require the border be certified as secure before people can get green cards and U.S. citizenship . Democrats believe the 13-year path to citizenship is already long enough and worry about putting many more barriers in front of them .
Most of the nation 's 11 million unauthorized immigrants who arrived in the U.S. before Dec. 31 , 2011 , would be able to apply for a green card within 10 years , and U.S. citizenship within 13 years , after they have passed criminal background checks , paid taxes , learned English and civics and paid at least $ 2,000 in fees . But immigration activist groups , and some Democrats , feel that 's too difficult a process . Sen. Richard Blumenthal , D-Conn. , filed an amendment to move that cutoff date back to April 17 , 2013 , so recent arrivals are n't left out , and another one to allow young unauthorized immigrants to get a faster path . Adoption of those amendments could rankle Republicans and undermine the bill .
The current Senate bill allows most of the nation 's 11 million unauthorized immigrants to apply for temporary legal status and , eventually , full U.S. citizenship . But some Republicans , including Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Ala. , are trying to amend the bill to place some limits . Sessions , for example , has filed an amendment to bar anybody who could qualify for Medicare , Obamacare and other welfare programs from qualifying to get their green card . If the amendments prevent too many people from getting legal status , the bill could quickly lose the support of activist groups , Democrats in Congress and the Obama administration .
Many of the lawmakers on both sides of the aisle have filed amendments to change the focus of the nation 's future legal immigration system . Some lawmakers , such as Sen. Orrin Hatch , R-Utah , want to make it easier for companies to hire foreign , high-skilled workers . The bill already increases the number of visas and green cards granted to people with advanced degrees , but Hatch and others believe it places too many barriers in front of U.S. businesses . Adding such provisions could upset some Republicans who are worried the bill already puts U.S. workers in jeopardy . The shift away from a family-based immigration system also worries some in Congress . Sen. Mazie Hirono , D-Hawaii , filed an amendment to allow U.S. citizens the ability to petition for their siblings – a part of U.S. immigration law that is repealed by the Gang of Eight bill .