CLOSE Republican lawmakers and President Donald Trump searched anxiously Tuesday evening for a way to end the administration 's policy of separating families after illegal border crossings while Democratic Congress members protested the meeting . ( June 19 ) AP
The controversy surrounding family separations at the U.S. southern border has prompted outrage , opinions and finger-pointing . It has also raised a number of questions , including from our readers .
“ Are there really children being separated from their parents at the border and being kept in cages ? ” one reader asked .
In April , Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a “ zero-tolerance policy ” regarding illegal immigration at the Southwest border . That was followed by a reported May directive by Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen instructing her department to refer all unauthorized immigrants who cross the U.S. border to federal prosecutors for criminal prosecution . Such prosecution has resulted in the separation of parents and children who were apprehended illegally entering the country .
As we ’ ve explained before , parents are sent to federal court under the custody of the U.S . Marshals Service and then placed in a detention center , according to Homeland Security . In turn , their children — minors who can not be housed in detention centers for adults — are transferred to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for placement in a juvenile facility or foster care if they can ’ t be placed with another adult relative in the U.S. Those children , as well as those who cross without adults , are considered “ unaccompanied ” and become the responsibility of HHS ’ Office of Refugee Resettlement .
White House Chief of Staff John Kelly told NPR last month that family separation “ could be a tough deterrent ” for others considering immigrating illegally .
The criminal prosecution and subsequent separations do not apply to those who seek asylum at a legal port of entry , administration officials have said . But Nielsen has acknowledged “ limited resources ” at the border that have resulted in the U.S. telling some who arrive at the ports that they have to “ come back. ” Some immigrant advocates told The Arizona Republic that the backlog could exacerbate illegal crossings .
Since the implementation of the zero-tolerance policy , between April 19 and the end of May , 1,995 minors were separated from adults at the border , the Department of Homeland Security confirmed to FactCheck.org .
And , as of June 15 , there were 11,517 minors in the “ Unaccompanied Children ’ s Program , ” according to the Department of Health and Human Services ’ Administration for Children and Families . ( That figure doesn ’ t distinguish between those who crossed the border with their parents and those who did so alone . )
Health and Human Services uses about 100 shelters in 14 states . In congressional testimony in May , Steven Wagner , acting assistant secretary for the Administration for Children and Families , told a Senate subcommittee that children have spent an average of 57 days in custody during fiscal year 2018 . After that , minors are placed with a sponsor , who could be a parent , another relative or a non-family member .
The government has rejected the idea that it uses “ cages ” in its facilities . But that ’ s the term used by activists and others who oppose the administration ’ s immigration policy . Also , news organizations have used that term , including the Associated Press , which used the word to refer to the fencing enclosures at one Texas facility .
We have included pictures of that facility with this story , so readers can make their own determinations on what to call the enclosures .
The issue was highlighted earlier this month when Democratic Sen. Jeff Merkley of Oregon visited the central processing facility in McAllen , Texas , where those trying to enter the United States are separated . “ Unaccompanied ” minors , except in select cases , are to be transferred from the processing facility to a juvenile facility or other care under Health and Human Services within 72 hours .
“ Yesterday morning at the McAllen Border Station , at the processing center , they have big cages made out of fencing and wire and nets stretched across the top of them so people can ’ t climb out of them , ” he told CNN on June 4 . “ Every time I probed yesterday on the circumstances ( of why they were held this way ) the response was just basically a generic , ‘ That is what ’ s required for security , this is what is required for control . ' ” ( Merkley also likened the enclosures to a “ dog kennel . ” )
The Department of Justice disputed Merkley ’ s characterization of the structures .
“ Before being transferred to HHS custody , DHS houses unaccompanied minors in short-term facilities , ” it said in a June 4 statement . “ These short-term facilities do not employ the use of ‘ cages ’ to house UACs , but portions of the facility makes use of barriers in order to separate minors of different genders and age groups . This is for the safety and security of all minors in the custody of the United States government . ”
Much of the media coverage of Merkley focused on his attempt to visit a shelter in Brownsville , Texas , that houses immigrant children after they ’ re processed . He was rebuffed ( though in recent days he did visit the facility ) .
News outlets got a glimpse of life inside that shelter , called Casa Padre , during a tour last week . There were no reports of cages being used .
NBC News described the conditions at the nonprofit shelter as “ more like incarceration than temporary shelter. ” The report detailed “ dorm-style rooms ” that were designed to sleep four but accommodate five because of overcrowding .
The former Walmart houses almost 1,500 boys , ages 10 to 17 , for an average of 52 days . According to The New York Times , whose reporter visited the shelter , it offers classroom instruction , recreational activities and other services . The minors are allowed outside two hours per day .
So what about that image of a young boy in a cage ?
The photo in question depicts a boy in distress as he looks out of a cage he is grasping with his hands . It has been turned into a meme that asks , “ Are you Trump fans really OK with this ? ”
Journalist and activist Jose Antonio Vargas included the photo in a June 11 tweet that said : “ This is what happens when a government believes people are ‘ illegal. ’ Kids in cages. ” ( Vargas openly discusses his own status as an immigrant living in the country illegally . )
In a subsequent tweet , Vargas acknowledged he wasn ’ t sure where the photo originated , but many others also shared the image , including the actor Ron Perlman .
This is what happens when a government believes people are “ illegal . ”
Kids in cages . pic.twitter.com/OAnvr9cl3P — Jose Antonio Vargas ( @ joseiswriting ) June 12 , 2018
But the image was actually taken during a June 10 rally in Dallas , Texas .
Leroy Pena , the prime minister of the Dallas-Fort Worth chapter of the Brown Berets of Cemanahuac , said he took the photo during the demonstration . The pro-Mexican-American group ’ s rally was meant to call attention to the conditions where young immigrants are kept , he said . Pena added that the young boy in the photograph , the son of a friend , had wandered into the cage where older children were demonstrating and became upset when he saw his mother on the other side of the structure . The child was promptly taken out of the cage , he said .
“ I posted it to my personal page — I wasn ’ t trying to deceive anybody , ” Pena told FactCheck.org in an interview . “ I think people just started sharing the picture without the narrative that I added . It wasn ’ t done intentionally but … it brought a lot of attention with what ’ s really going on . ”
Debra Mendoza , national prime minister of the Brown Berets of Cemanahuac , confirmed Pena ’ s account to us . She decried photos of facilities using fencing similar to “ cages , ” and said the structures were reminiscent of a “ jail . ”
Mendoza also mentioned the recently resurfaced images from a 2014 Arizona Republic report on an immigrant holding facility for juveniles in Nogales , Arizona . Those 2014 pictures , taken by the Associated Press , were shared by some online as if they were current — including by Jon Favreau , a former speechwriter for President Barack Obama .
The 2014 story was about the surge in children from Central America — largely from Honduras , El Salvador and Guatemala — trying to cross the border illegally on their own .
Democrats mistakenly tweet 2014 pictures from Obama ’ s term showing children from the Border in steel cages . They thought it was recent pictures in order to make us look bad , but backfires . Dems must agree to Wall and new Border Protection for good of country ... Bipartisan Bill ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) May 29 , 2018
Is the government using military camps to hold the minors ?
Health and Human Services is indeed eyeing several military bases “ for potential use as temporary shelters for unaccompanied alien children at some point in the future , ” the Administration for Children and Families confirmed for us . On June 13 , McClatchy reported that Fort Bliss in Texas could be used as a “ tent city to hold between 1,000 and 5,000 children . ”
In addition to Fort Bliss , officials are evaluating Dyess Air Force Base and Goodfellow Air Force Base , which are also in Texas .
If that happens , it wouldn ’ t be the first time military bases were used to accommodate immigrants . Under the Obama administration , bases served as such facilities , including in 2014 during the influx of unaccompanied children illegally entering the country .
In his testimony last month , Wagner said the last “ temporary ” facility at a Department of Defense site closed in February 2017 .
More : These are the Texas shelters where immigrant children separated from parents can end up
More : Reunification : How separated immigrant children are reunited with their parents
More : Immigrant children : Here 's what 's happening with kids at the border , policywise
More : Meghan McCain asks 'Where is Ivanka ' in debate over 'zero tolerance ' immigration policy
More : Attorney General Jeff Sessions : the Trump administration 's architect of 'zero tolerance '