After six years of claiming he did n't have the authority to unilaterally change the nation 's immigration laws without Congress , President Obama laid out a plan Thursday night doing exactly that through executive action .
`` There are actions I have the legal authority to take as President ... that will help make our immigration system more fair and just , '' Obama said . `` Today , our immigration system is broken , and everybody knows it . ''
Here is a fact sheet released by the White House earlier this evening detailing Obama 's executive action . It includes fast tracking Green Cards , which make individuals eligible for a slew of government welfare programs , and issues five million work permits to illegal immigrants living inside the United States .
President Obama repeatedly berated Republicans for a lack of progress on immigration reform in the House over the past two years while ignoring the previous four when Democrats had total control over the Senate .
`` For a year and a half now , Republican leaders in the House have refused to allow that simple vote , '' Obama said , urging the GOP to bring up legislation in the new Congress .
Republicans have been pushing back against Obama 's planned action all week and have already issued responses to the President 's announcement tonight .
“ President Obama ’ s executive amnesty violates the laws Congress has passed in order to create and implement laws Congress has refused to pass . The President is providing an estimated 5 million illegal immigrants with social security numbers , photo IDs and work permits—allowing them to now take jobs directly from struggling Americans during a time of record immigration , low wages , and high joblessness . This amnesty plan was rejected by the American people ’ s Congress . By refusing to carry out the laws of the United States in order to make his own , the President is endangering our entire Constitutional order , '' Alabama Republican Senator Jeff Sessions said in a statement . `` The President ’ s plan will apparently also allow many illegal immigrants to receive green cards and become legal permanent residents—meaning they can access almost all U.S. welfare programs , have lifetime work authorization , obtain citizenship , and sponsor foreign relatives to join them in the U.S. Law enforcement has warned this unprecedented amnesty will unleash a ‘ tidal wave ’ of new illegal immigration flooding into American neighborhoods at taxpayers ’ expense ''
Iowa Senator Chuck Grassley , who will lead the Judiciary Committee in the new Congress , says Obama 's plan is an affront to the constitution and outside of the law .
“ The President ’ s executive actions on immigration are the wrong way forward and disrespectful of the law . Such broad , massive legalization is an affront to the Constitution . The President himself has said that he doesn ’ t have authority , or that he doesn ’ t prefer this course of action , but yet continues to take this route , '' Grassley said . “ The President is missing a big opportunity to enact real reform , and instead he ’ s poisoning the well for future action . Nobody thinks the status quo is okay . But , the President ’ s actions are only a Band-aid for a real problem ; in fact , he ’ s making it worse . How does Congress move forward when the President has made it clear with tonight ’ s announcement that he doesn ’ t want to work with the elected officials in the legislative branch where reform has to happen ? Unfortunately , if the American people have learned anything about this President , it ’ s that he has never worked well with Congress-even those in his own party . His disdain for a co-equal branch of government is very evident . It shows in executive actions like this , in regulations that the American people are solidly against , and in his and his Cabinet ’ s responses to Congress ’ constitutional responsibility of oversight . ''
Moving forward , Republicans have vowed to fight Obama 's executive action through defunding and the withholding of presidential nominations .
Republican Texas Congressman Michael McCaul , who will serve as the new chairman for the House Homeland Security , warns Obama 's action is a threat to American democracy and vows to use his new position to stop the `` unconstitutional action . ''
“ The president ’ s decision to bypass Congress and grant amnesty to millions of unlawful immigrants is unconstitutional and a threat to our democracy . There is no doubt our immigration system is broken and needs to be fixed , but this does not mean the president has the authority to act without Congress , '' McCaul released in statement . “ History has proven that unilateral action on immigration simply perpetuates a cycle of illegal entry into this country . This was true under the 1986 amnesty and it has been true under DACA , which enticed 60,000 unaccompanied children to make the perilous journey across our border this summer . We will see a wave of illegal immigration because of the president ’ s actions , and in no way is the Department of Homeland Security prepared to handle such a surge . Furthermore , the president knows any immigration reforms will be ineffective as long as our border remains insecure . As chairman of the Committee on Homeland Security , I will use every tool at my disposal to stop the president ’ s unconstitutional actions from being implemented . ”