WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - The Trump administration is making it more difficult for skilled foreigners to work in the United States , challenging visa applications more often than at nearly any point in the Obama era , according to data reviewed by ███ .
The more intense scrutiny of the applications for H-1B visas comes after President Donald Trump called for changes to the visa program so that it benefits the highest-paid workers , though he has not enacted any such reforms .
Data provided by U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services shows that between Jan. 1 and Aug. 31 , the agency issued 85,000 challenges , or “ requests for evidence ” ( RFEs ) , to H-1B visa petitions - a 45 percent increase over the same period last year . The total number of H-1B petitions rose by less than 3 percent in the same period .
The challenges , which can slow down the issuance of visas by months , were issued at a greater rate in 2017 than at any time in the Obama administration except for one year , 2009 , according to the USCIS data , which has not been previously reported .
The trend is likely to cheer supporters of Trump ’ s hardline stance on immigration . They say visas for skilled foreigners undercut American workers by replacing them with low-paid employees shipped in from abroad . But major tech companies , universities and hospitals contend the visas allow them to fill highly specialized jobs for which there are sometimes few qualified Americans .
H-1B visas allow foreign workers , generally with bachelor 's degrees or higher , to work for three years at a time , often in the technology , healthcare and education sectors . Microsoft ( MSFT.O ) , Amazon ( AMZN.O ) , Google ( GOOGL.O ) , Apple ( AAPL.O ) , Intel ( INTC.O ) , Oracle ( ORCL.N ) and Facebook ( FB.O ) were heavy users of H-1B visas in 2016 , according to USCIS data .
The USCIS inquiries typically challenge the basis of the original petitions and assert that the employers do not qualify for the visas . Employers and their lawyers must then provide further evidence to prove their need and eligibility for the visas .
To be sure , the Obama administration also issued a large number of H-1B challenges – nearly 59,000 - from January through August 2016 , and a similar number in 2015 .
Immigration attorneys have for years complained about redundant and burdensome challenges to high-skilled employment visas . But they say they are seeing a new trend in the Trump era .
In addition to querying applications more often , the Trump administration is targeting entry-level jobs offered to skilled foreigners . The lawyers say this violates the law governing H-1Bs , because it allows for visa holders to take entry-level jobs .
Several attorneys said they view the increase in challenges and focus on entry-level jobs as a stealth campaign by the administration against the H-1B program in the absence of public regulatory changes or changes passed by Congress , which could be debated and decided in the open .
“ One way to have an immigration policy that ’ s consistent with the policy that ’ s been articulated by the Trump administration is to put more scrutiny on H-1B cases , ” said Cyrus Mehta , a New York-based immigration attorney .
USCIS spokesman Robert C. Langston did not directly address the new trend identified by lawyers or the sharp spike in RFEs this year . In an email , he said the agency is applying “ currently existing policy that interprets existing statutory and regulatory requirements to evaluate petitions . ”
Partners HealthCare is a healthcare system that includes Massachusetts General Hospital and Brigham and Women ’ s Hospital , two prestigious teaching hospitals for Harvard Medical School . It has received more than 50 RFEs from USCIS so far this year , compared to fewer than 15 all of last year in response to a similar number of H-1B petitions , said Anthony Pawelski , an immigration attorney who handles H-1B applications for Partners .
USCIS questioned the hospitals ’ connection to the university even though their applications included proof of their non-profit status , a 1948 agreement between Harvard Medical School and the hospitals and even text from the hospitals ’ website referencing a 200-year history with the university , Pawelski said .
“ They ’ re doing anything they can to delay the processing and adjudications and in their mind close any perceived loopholes , ” he said .
It is still unclear how the increase in challenges will affect the number of visas issued this year . In the 2016 fiscal year , USCIS approved 87 percent of H1-B petitions . By June 30 of this year , the agency had approved 59 percent of H-1B petitions , although that number is incomplete because it does not take into account the last three months of the 2017 fiscal year , when a large portion of H-1B applications are processed .
Both Democratic and Republican lawmakers have criticized H-1B visas , because the biggest beneficiaries are outsourcing firms , which critics say use the program to fill lower-level information technology jobs and replace American workers . Members of both parties have introduced legislation this year to reform the visa ’ s use .
In an April executive order , Trump directed a review of the H1-B program , aimed at ensuring the visas “ are awarded to the most-skilled or highest-paid ” applicants . The order itself did not implement changes but directed agencies to suggest reforms .
“ What the Trump administration has done for the first time in a very long time is take seriously the fact that companies are misusing the H-1B system , ” said Russell Harrison , director of government relations at IEEE-USA , the American branch of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers .
The group opposes the H-1B program but supports giving more high-skilled foreigners employment-based permanent residence .
Many of the government challenges for visas for entry-level jobs either say that the salary should be higher because the job is too complex or that the job does not count as a “ specialty ” occupation , as required by the H-1B program , according to a review of hundreds of RFEs by the American Immigration Lawyers Association provided to ███ .
Entry-level jobs are positions for fresh university graduates with little or no work experience . Such jobs can pay “ Level 1 ” wages , the lowest of four tiers .
“ An RFE may be justified if the wage level is not appropriate for the position , ” said Langston , the USCIS spokesman .
The USCIS data did not specify what positions the RFEs challenged or the reasons for the challenges .
Lawyers question the implicit argument advanced by USCIS in the challenges - that specialty jobs can not be entry-level . They point to young doctors and engineers , for instance , who may not have work experience but have spent years learning technical skills .
Though the challenges can come across all industries , the AILA review showed software developers and computer systems analysts were challenged more often than other jobs .
Silicon Valley tech giants either declined to comment or did not respond to requests for comment on whether they had been receiving more RFEs .
The requests can increase legal fees associated with each H-1B visa by as much as half , attorneys said . Government fees for H-1B visas can run upwards of $ 2,500 , and standard fees paid to lawyers per application can easily reach $ 2,000 or more .
The increased costs and hassle could discourage employers from hiring such foreign workers especially at junior levels , immigration lawyers said .
Jeffrey Gorsky , an attorney with Berry Appelman & Leiden LLP , one of the largest corporate immigration firms in the country , said one of the firm ’ s clients , a mid-sized tech company , was hit with six RFEs from USCIS in a single day this year .
Between late 2015 and the end of 2016 , the company received just one RFE on an H-1B visa petition , he said .