WASHINGTON—President Trump said Thursday that the White House and congressional negotiators were no closer to an immigration deal , five days after he agreed to end the partial government shutdown , and reiterated he is willing to act alone to build a wall on the southern border .
“ I ’ m not waiting for this committee , ” Mr. Trump said , referring to a bipartisan group of legislators from the House and Senate who are working to hash out an agreement that would prevent another shutdown Feb 15 .
Asked if he was closer or further from a deal since he agreed to end the shutdown on Jan. 25 , Mr. Trump said he “ would say we ’ re the same. ” He said the biggest barrier was Democrats who oppose the wall .
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D. , Calif. ) , meanwhile , reiterated that Democrats wouldn ’ t support funding for a concrete border wall as part of the negotiations , but indicated some openness to other forms of physical barriers .
“ There ’ s not going to be any wall money in the legislation , ” Mrs. Pelosi told reporters . But she didn ’ t rule out certain other physical barriers , citing “ Normandy fencing , ” which has crisscrossed posts .
“ Is there a place where enhanced fencing , Normandy fencing , would work ? Let them have that discussion , ” she said , referring to the bipartisan group of 17 lawmakers . House Democratic leaders said this week they could support “ enhanced fencing ” where experts say it is needed .
“ If there ’ s no wall , it doesn ’ t work . She ’ s just playing games , ” Mr. Trump said of Ms. Pelosi . He said the House speaker would be “ begging for a wall ” if an existing barricade was removed that separated the Mexican border city of Tijuana from California , Mrs. Pelosi ’ s home state .
“ She will say ‘ Mr . President , please , please give us a wall , ’ ” Mr. Trump said .
Meanwhile , senior Republicans on the group shrugged off Mr. Trump ’ s comments in a tweet earlier Thursday that they were “ wasting their time , ” given his assertion that Democrats wouldn ’ t agree to wall funding .
“ I haven ’ t given up on that yet . I ’ m not exuberant about it , but I ’ m still hopeful , ” Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Richard Shelby ( R. , Ala. ) said about the group ’ s prospects .
Mr. Trump said he wouldn ’ t have done anything differently if Republicans hadn ’ t lost the House majority in November elections . Instead , he said the shutdown helped educate Americans to the need for a border wall .
“ We ’ ve set the stage for what ’ s going to happen , ” Mr. Trump said .
Mr. Trump has considered acting on the wall without Congress by declaring a national emergency and using executive powers to authorize spending money on construction . That plan would almost certainly face immediate challenges in court .
The president said Thursday he would wait until the self-imposed deadline of Feb. 15 to decide on whether to declare a national emergency .
The revived prospect has stirred consternation in some right-leaning circles . Some Republicans , such as Sen. Mike Lee of Utah , take a skeptical approach to the use of executive authority and would be likely to demand specific statutory justifications for any action on the southern border .
The Federalist Society , the network of conservative lawyers that has played a prominent role in Mr. Trump ’ s nominations to the Supreme Court , hosted a debate Thursday about the issue , and the likelihood such a declaration could set a precedent that could backfire for conservatives in the future .
“ Would a future President Kamala Harris say global warming is a national emergency ? ” asked David French , a conservative commentator and one of the speakers in the debate , referring to the California senator who is seeking the Democratic presidential nomination . Another area of concern for some on the right is the prospect of the Democratic-controlled House establishing more opportunities to sue the administration over its use of executive power .
Aides to lawmakers on the bipartisan committee are expected to meet Friday and over the weekend , with the goal of cutting a deal next week . Mr. Shelby said Democrats ’ comments indicating a potential willingness to fund physical barriers left him “ hopeful . ”
Mr. Shelby said it wasn ’ t entirely clear to him what level of wall funding Mr. Trump would require to sign off on the agreement .
“ That ’ s the central question here , ” he said . When asked why the president hadn ’ t told him , Mr. Shelby said “ maybe he hasn ’ t decided yet . ”
House Democrats on Thursday morning released a proposal detailing how they would fund the entire Homeland Security Department , which oversees the border .