But as we await an actual Republican bill , or bills , there remain serious pitfalls to watch out for :
WHAT ABOUT CITIZENSHIP ? Any legalization plan has to include the real possibility of immigrants ’ becoming Americans . The principles rule out a “ special ” path to citizenship but do not reject outright the possibility of eventual naturalization for the 11 million . The details matter , and we haven ’ t seen them yet . Republicans need to remember : Maybe some European or Asian societies are happy to rely on imported laborers with no right to vote , no representation or hope of equality , but that ’ s not the American way , and must never be .
NEW ENFORCEMENT AND TOO FEW VISAS The Republicans are demanding “ significant fines ” and other punishments for the undocumented , and the meeting of enforcement benchmarks as a condition for legalization , along with mandatory national expansion of the E-Verify hiring database and a new entry-exit visa system . New layers of enforcement , onerous to the point of spiteful , can not be allowed to prevent immigrants from leaving the shadows . Increased powers for states and localities to enforce immigration laws — an invitation to racial profiling and other abuses — have no place in any bill . And reforms to legal immigration — with visas for farmworkers , high-skilled workers and others — must be expansive enough to ease crushing backlogs that discourage millions overseas .
THE DEPORTER IN CHIEF As we wait for a bill , which could come in months or years or never , deportations continue . The Obama administration has expelled nearly two million people , breaking up thousands of the families President Obama has repeatedly promised to protect . If Congress fails , will he protect them through his own administrative action , as he already has by deferring deportations for a relative handful of unauthorized youths ?
THE TEMPTATION TO DESPAIR We are a long way from the hopeful days when John McCain and Edward Kennedy embarked on big bipartisan Senate legislation that was eventually killed by a Republican filibuster . Reform has died several deaths since then , and millions have suffered . Now Republicans , the party of self-deportation and Arizona-style laws , may be edging closer to saying yes to legal status for millions of the undocumented . Who knows if they ’ re serious , or if any bills will get past the party ’ s “ hell no ” caucus . It will be clear soon enough whether this is the first step back toward the rational , humane reform that should have passed years ago .