On Tuesday , Attorney General Jeff Sessions is expected to announce that six months from now , the Trump administration will end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which currently protects nearly 800,000 unauthorized immigrants from deportation and allows them to work legally in the US .
But if that ’ s all Sessions says about the future of DACA , he won ’ t actually answer the most urgent questions about the fate of the program . It won ’ t provide the answers 800,000 people need in order to make decisions about their lives .
According to reports from Politico and other news outlets , Trump has all but decided to end DACA , in order to meet a deadline set by a group of state attorneys general who threatened to sue the administration if it continued the program . But the White House will apparently wait six months before taking action .
During the delay , theoretically , Congress could pass a bill that would grant either continued protections or full legal status to DACA-protected immigrants : unauthorized immigrants who entered the US before 2007 as children or young teens , and who meet educational and background check requirements .
Except that it still isn ’ t clear what “ action ” the administration is threatening to take after those six months .
DACA isn ’ t an indefinite grant of protection — recipients have to apply to renew it every two years . Which means there ’ s more than one way to end DACA , depending on what Trump decides to do about DACA renewals .
The most generous version of a six-month delay could allow nearly half of those who currently have DACA to keep their protections as late as spring 2020 . The most draconian version could strip 800,000 people of work permits at once on March 5 , 2018 .
There are two big and so far unanswered questions about Trump ’ s decision :
At the end of the six-month period , is the Trump administration going to revoke 800,000 existing DACA protections at once , or is it going to “ sunset ” the program by simply preventing people from renewing their protections when their current two-year window of protection expires ? Will people be allowed to renew their DACA protections during that six-month period ?
It doesn ’ t appear that even the White House knows what exactly it wants to do with DACA renewals ; Glenn Thrush and Maggie Haberman of the New York Times reported Sunday that it was one of the “ key details … still being worked out. ” It ’ s not clear whether those details have been worked out in advance of Sessions ’ s announcement Tuesday . Nor is it certain that Sessions , whose Department of Justice isn ’ t actually responsible for administering DACA — and who isn ’ t taking questions after his Tuesday announcement — will explain what the decision means for DACA recipients .
Without that explanation , the six-month “ delay ” won ’ t be much comfort at all — it will just force them to spend six months ( or longer ) in psychological and economic limbo , even before having to deal on a daily basis with the manifest threat of deportation .
Is the Trump administration simply delaying mass chaos by six months ?
Here ’ s the simplest , bluntest way the administration could end DACA : It could simply declare , on a certain day , that every work permit granted under the program was null and void , and that no one who ’ d been granted “ deferred action ” could use it to fight their deportations .
This option would cause chaos — whether or not it was announced six months in advance .
It would mean that hundreds of thousands of people who ’ d gone to work legally would suddenly become “ illegal workers ” in the office . It would raise questions about the validity of driver ’ s licenses issued under DACA — with licenses that were valid when an immigrant started the engine possibly invalidated while the car was on the road . It would open the federal government up to a mess of lawsuits from employers , who ’ d suddenly be opened up to legal liability . It would make the Trump administration ’ s attempt to implement its first travel ban in January look like a model of good government .
As of last week , it seemed unlikely that the administration was going to do this : As of Thursday , the rumor was that the Trump administration would simply stop granting new DACA protections , or renewing existing protections after the two-year window , effectively sunsetting the program . But that proposal appears to have been superseded by the idea of a “ six-month delay . ”
Indeed , the New York Times ’ implication that the administration is trying to figure out whether or not to allow existing DACA recipients to renew during the six-month window indicates that there could be an even more draconian scenario in play : For the next six months , people who needed to renew their DACA status slowly lose their work permits , and then the remainder lose their work permits when the program officially ends in March .
Depending on what happens with DACA renewals , a six-month delay could be a new lease on life — or utterly meaningless
If the Trump administration is planning to end DACA more gradually , by simply preventing existing DACA recipients from renewing , then a six-month delay should mean that people whose DACA protections would expire in the next six months should be allowed to renew . Otherwise , the six-month “ delay ” doesn ’ t actually mean anything at all : Nothing would change for DACA recipients between Tuesday and the day after the six-month period ends .
But if the administration does allow people to renew during the six-month delay , and then simply lets those renewals expire after two years , things look very different .
If the administration stopped approving applications in March 2018 , DACA recipients would still start losing their protections soon after . But for the more than 225,000 people whose DACA protections will expire in the next six months , the delay would mean an additional two years — the last DACA recipients wouldn ’ t lose their protections and work permits until mid-2020 .
It ’ s possible that even people whose DACA wasn ’ t going to expire before March 2018 would be able to renew it during that time . Currently , the federal government allows DACA recipients to apply for renewal early — it just warns them that they might end up not getting two full years of renewed protections , if their renewal gets approved before their current DACA protections expire . That wouldn ’ t be a concern if the alternative were not getting DACA approved at all .
An extremely generous six-month delay could actually allow nearly half of current DACA recipients — or more — to submit their applications during that period , and stop the first people from losing their DACA protections until September or October 2018 :
It ’ s unlikely that the Trump administration , which has taken steps to make the legal immigration process harder and more complicated , is going to take a generous attitude toward renewing DACA protections when the program is already doomed . But the vast range of possibilities indicates just how important it is , to DACA recipients themselves , that the White House give them more information beyond “ DACA will end after six months . ”
The difference between any of these scenarios is a few hundred thousand people either knowing they have two years to remain in the US safely , work legally , and continue building the lives they ’ ve laid the foundation for over the past half-decade , or worrying that they are on the precipice of losing so much of what they ’ ve worked to build .
It isn ’ t speculating to say that an overly vague announcement that doesn ’ t answer the renewal question is going to plunge many immigrants into a state of panic .
On Sunday night , when Politico first reported Trump ’ s plans to end DACA after a six-month delay , many immigration advocacy groups stressed to their members that the decision wasn ’ t final , and that they could still fight for a better outcome over the next two days .
Other analysts raised questions about what the six-month delay really meant . But many immigrants themselves , including DACA recipients , were already plunged into uncertainty by the mere prospect of losing their protections — on whatever timetable , and at whatever pace :
What it feels like to be a Dreamer at this particular point in time .
A 101 guide — Juan Escalante ( @ JuanSaaa ) September 4 , 2017
1 . The thought that you would be STRIPPED off your DACA status is not just traumatizing , it 's dehumanizing and exhausting . — Juan Escalante ( @ JuanSaaa ) September 4 , 2017
1b . Many of us have witnessed Dreamers being arrested/deported , while simoultaneously FEARING for the safety of our undocumented parents — Juan Escalante ( @ JuanSaaa ) September 4 , 2017
1d . And the issue lies that you do n't want to open up to others who may not relate OR appear that youre complaining way too much — Juan Escalante ( @ JuanSaaa ) September 4 , 2017
1f . So we keep going and going and going until we ca n't no more . Exhaustion , anxiety , or depression eventually get us . Burnout is real . — Juan Escalante ( @ JuanSaaa ) September 4 , 2017
At the same time , many DACA recipients are trying hard to maintain hope that they ’ ll be able to stay in the US — after all , it takes a lot to get someone to give up on the only life they can remember .
One DACA recipient who reached out to me on Sunday night is still waiting for the renewal he applied for months ago . If he doesn ’ t hear back from the government by September 16 , he ’ ll lose his current work permit — and the paycheck he was counting on to save up for college . And he ’ ll lose any assurance that he won ’ t be picked up and deported by ICE agents at any time .
“ Currently I feel fine , ” he told me last night , despite all that . “ I 've lived here basically my entire life , so yeah it 's weird and saddening that this is happening . But yeah , I 'm hopeful . ”
But that hope has an expiration date . And that date is less than two weeks away .
Trump doesn ’ t have six months to make a decision about that DACA recipient ’ s fate , or the fates of hundreds of thousands of people in similar situations . And if Sessions goes to a podium Tuesday and makes an announcement that doesn ’ t include “ details , ” he and the president will have told those DACA recipients only one thing : that they ’ re not safe , after all .