'The fact that they ’ re for something , I think , is progress , ' Obama says about Republicans . Obama : GOP immigration 'progress '
The president remains optimistic about immigration reform and the “ progress ” with the Republican Party , but he would not confirm whether he would veto a bill that did not include a pathway to citizenship .
“ I ’ m not going to prejudge what gets to my desk , ” President Barack Obama told CNN ’ s Jake Tapper in an interview that aired in part Friday on “ New Day , ” with clips airing Thursday and Friday on “ The Lead . ”
The president also said he believes “ we have a good chance ” of getting immigration reform , but said more can be done if Congress can break through some of the gridlock .
He reiterated that he supported the Senate bill , which included a “ very long ” process to earning citizenship .
Obama said he was encouraged by both Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) and other House Republicans , naming Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan , who he said “ really do want to get a serious immigration reform bill done . ”
“ They ’ ve been willing to say what they ’ re against , not so much what they ’ re for , ” the president said of the House Republican Caucus .
“ The fact that they ’ re for something , I think , is progress , ” he added .
He praised Boehner and others who he said “ seem to recognize ” that coming to some agreement on those who were born in the country , but don ’ t have the right papers , are not punished would make the country stronger .
The president also said that immigration reform needs to be a “ serious conversation ” that also includes those who stand to be directly affected by it , adding that the top concern for many families is deportation .
With the growing concern of the security and possible threats at the upcoming Winter Olympics in Sochi , the president did not discourage people from traveling to the games , but acknowledged the risks .
“ If you want to go to the Olympics , you should go to the Olympics , ” the president said , adding that there are always risks involved with events like these , citing the Boston Marathon bombing last April . He also said it is important for those traveling to get in contact with the State Department and be aware of any safety measures to take .
He said he will always feel better when this type of event is held in the U.S. because “ we have full control over what happens , ” but he added they have “ good sense ” of the security to protect both visitors and athletes and that Russian authorities “ understand the stakes . ”
The president also weighed in on another major sporting event : the Super Bowl .
He praised the Seattle Seahawks ’ Richard Sherman , calling him a smart guy and a great cornerback and expects he will get a lot more endorsements and jersey sales following his recent headline-making postgame interview .
“ My sense is he ’ s taking a page out of Muhammad Ali ’ s playbook which is , I think he ’ s said explicitly , this is a good way to get attention , ” the president said .
The Super Bowl , he said , will be a great game and while he added that the Denver Broncos ’ Peyton Manning might have had the best season ever for a quarterback , the president wouldn ’ t make a prediction .
“ I ’ m not going to pick because I don ’ t want to offend any of the great cities participating , ” Obama said .
“ I love the state of Washington and I love the state of Colorado , ” he said .