President Barack Obama pressed for swift action on a sweeping immigration bill Wednesday , saying last-minute obstacles are `` resolvable '' and predicting Congress could pass historic legislation by the end of the summer .
In back-to-back interviews with Spanish-language television networks , Obama repeatedly voiced confidence in a bipartisan Senate group that appears to be on the cusp of unveiling a draft bill . And he said that while he is still prepared to step in with his own bill if talks break down , he does n't expect that step to be necessary .
`` If we have a bill introduced at the beginning of next month as these senators indicate it will be , then I 'm confident that we can get it done certainly before the end of the summer , '' Obama told Telemundo .
While overhauling the nation 's patchwork immigration laws is a top second term priority for the president , he has ceded the negotiations almost entirely to Congress . He and his advisers have calculated that a bill crafted by Capitol Hill stands a better chance of winning Republican support than one overtly influenced by the president .
In his interviews Wednesday , Obama tried to stay out of the prickly policy issues that remain unfinished in the Senate talks , though he said a split between business and labor on wages for new low-skilled workers was unlikely to `` doom '' the legislation .
More On This ... Woman tries to hop border fence with four senators watching
The president also spoke Wednesday with Univision . His interviews followed a citizenship ceremony conducted Monday at the White House where he pressed Congress to `` finish the job '' on immigration , an issue that has vexed Washington for years .
The president made little progress in overhauling the nation 's fractured immigration laws in his first term , but he redoubled his efforts after winning re-election . The November contest also spurred some Republicans to drop their opposition to immigration reform , given that Hispanics overwhelmingly backed Obama .
In an effort to keep Republicans at the negotiation table , Obama has stayed relatively quiet on immigration over the last month . He rolled out his immigration principles during a January rally in Las Vegas and made an impassioned call for overhauling the nation 's laws during his early February State of the Union address , then purposely handed off the effort to lawmakers .
The president has , however , privately called members of the Senate working group , and the administration is providing technical support to the lawmakers . The Gang of Eight is expected to unveil its draft bill when Congress returns from a two-week recess the week of April 8 .
Obama and the Senate group are in agreement on some core principles , including a pathway to citizenship for most of the 11 million illegal immigrants already in the country , revamping the legal immigration system and holding businesses to tougher standards on verifying their workers are in the country legally .
But they 're at odds over key issues . The Senate group wants the citizenship pathway to be contingent on securing the border , something Obama opposes . The president has also sidestepped the contentious guest-worker issue , which contributed to derailing immigration talks in 2007 .
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the AFL-CIO have reached significant agreements on a new visa program that would bring up to 200,000 lower-skilled workers to the country each year . But they reached a stalemate Friday over wages for the workers , with the labor union pushing for higher wages than the chamber has agreed to so far .
Since then , talks have resumed and negotiators are `` back on the right track , '' Ana Avendano , a lead AFL-CIO negotiator , said Wednesday .
Avendano declined to offer specifics but said the chamber had moved off what she termed its insistence on `` poverty-level wages '' for the new workers .
`` We 're very hopeful that we 're moving , '' Avendano told reporters after a briefing for congressional staff on temporary-worker programs .
While Obama tries to keep the pressure on lawmakers this week , four members of the Senate immigration group toured Arizona 's border with Mexico to inspect the conditions there . Arizona 's Republican Sens . John McCain and Jeff Flake were joined by Democratic Sens . Chuck Schumer of New York and Michael Bennet of Colorado for the border tour .
The president also announced in his interviews that he planned to visit Mexico , as well as Costa Rica , in early May . The immigration debate in the U.S. is being closely watched by Latin American countries .