New polling data from Gallup shows that an overwhelming majority of Americans do not think handling immigration reform is even close to a top priority for 2014 .
Immigration places well behind other issues like healthcare , jobs , the economy , dissatisfaction with Washington politicians , the debt and deficit , lack of money , ethics and moral issues , poverty , the gap between the rich and the poor , education , foreign aid and others . In fact , only three percent of Americans think the issue is a priority that must be dealt with this year .
“ Americans start the new year with a variety of national concerns on their minds , ” Gallup ’ s Lydia Saad wrote on Wednesday . “ Although none is dominant , the government , at 21 % , leads the list of what Americans consider the most important problem facing the country . The economy closely follows at 18 % , and then unemployment/jobs and healthcare , each at 16 % . No other issue is mentioned by as much as 10 % of the public ; however , the federal budget deficit or debt comes close , at 8 % . ”
In fact , immigration is so low among Americans ’ priorities that Saad did not even mention it in her report on Gallup ’ s findings . It is , however , listed near the bottom of a chart of Americans ’ priorities , slightly above welfare and “ lack of respect for each other ” as issues Americans think need to be dealt with .
Despite the fact that most Americans clearly do not think Congress or President Barack Obama should consider immigration issues a priority in 2014 , House Speaker John Boehner and the rest of House GOP leadership are currently considering them a priority .
Boehner , House Majority Leader Eric Cantor , Judiciary Committee chairman Bob Goodlatte , and Budget Committee chairman Paul Ryan , among others , are currently drafting immigration “ principles ” that will all but certainly recommend granting legal status to large swaths of illegal aliens in America while massively increasing the levels of legal immigration to the country .
In fact , the only way immigration issues would fit into the priorities of voters is if they are viewed through the lens of how economically devastating amnesty and a subsequent massive increase in legal immigration would be to American workers–something that affects jobs and the economy , two top priorities according to Gallup .
A little over a week ago , 16 House Republicans–led by Rep. Mo Brooks ( R-AL ) –stepped forward to write to President Obama about how American workers would be displaced if these immigration reform proposals succeeded .
“ Rapidly expanding unskilled immigration – at a time when factory work and blue collar jobs are disappearing – would represent the final economic blow for millions of workers who have been struggling to gain an economic foothold , ” the members wrote . “ Yet , despite this jobs crisis for American workers , the White House continues to advocate that CEOs and business executives seek lower cost labor . The White House has entertained a parade of high-powered business executives to discuss immigration policy , all while shutting out the concerns of everyday wage-earners who overwhelmingly oppose these measures . You even released an economic report saying that the ‘ hospitality and leisure industry ’ needs ‘ legislation that would legalize workers in the U.S. and facilitate the lawful employment of future foreign-born workers . ' ”