CLOSE Arkansas representative Tom Cotton talks about immigration legislation for the House , and about big issues for the 2014 election .
Freshman Republican Rep. Tom Cotton of Arkansas says immigration bill 'not likely ' to pass House if Democrats insist on legalization for undocumented immigrants before nation 's borders are secured
Will he challenge Democratic Sen. Mark Pryor next year ? Maybe .
`` We 'd have to know that we are n't encouraging the next wave of illegal immigration , '' he says .
WASHINGTON — Arkansas Rep. Tom Cotton is n't swayed by the bipartisan coalition that passed a comprehensive immigration bill in the Senate or the warnings by senior Republicans that the GOP needs to act on the issue to appeal to Latino voters .
And with that , the lanky freshman represents the significant hurdles facing efforts to craft immigration legislation that might possibly be able to pass both the House of Representatives and the Senate .
`` The Senate approach is legalization first and enforcement later , maybe — but probably never , '' Cotton said in an interview with Capital Download , ███ 's weekly newsmaker video series . In views he says are widely shared among House Republicans , he opposes establishing a path to legal status for immigrants here illegally until U.S. borders are more secure and visa laws more strictly enforced .
`` If they insist upon legalization before any of those steps , then it is not likely that we are going to pass real and valuable immigration reform this Congress , '' he says . He notes that Senate Democrats have said that establishing a path to citizenship for some of the estimated 11 million immigrants in the country illegally is essential to a bill .
His opposition to establishing a way to achieve legal status extends to the `` DREAMers , '' the young people who have grown up in the United States after being brought here by their parents .
`` We 'd have to know that we are n't encouraging the next wave of illegal immigration , '' he said . `` If you 're a mom or dad and you see the opportunity that has been provided to someone else 's child who took them to the United States illegally , to become a legal American and maybe a citizen , who would n't take that risk ? ''
Cotton , 36 , has been in office for only six months , but he is part of a new breed of Republicans who have n't hesitated to challenge their own leadership , taking a harder line on some issues and being less willing to cut political deals .
`` I do think that injection of new blood and kind of fresh thinking , as opposed to the old way of thinking , is good for Congress , '' he said . `` I saw that when I was in the Army . It 's always good to get new privates and new lieutenants who are ready to go down-range and fight America 's wars . ''
The freshman and sophomore classes of Republican House members tend to be in the mold of former president Ronald Reagan and former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher , Cotton said . Thatcher `` said she 's not a consensus politician ; she 's a conviction politician . And you have a lot of people who were elected in 2010 and 2012 who truly are conviction politicians . ''
Cotton is an Arkansas native , a graduate of Harvard University and Harvard Law School , and an Army veteran with tours of duty in Iraq and Afghanistan . He 's also a potential challenger next year to Democratic Sen. Mark Pryor . Republican hopes of regaining control of the Senate depend on winning Democratic-held seats in red states such as Arkansas .
`` I do hear from a lot of Arkansans , frankly Democrats and Republicans alike , who encourage me to think about that race , and I 'm grateful for that , '' Cotton said , `` but in the end , it will be prayerful consideration and deliberations with my family '' that determine his decision .