“ A lot has happened in the last few years , and it would be great to be hearing more from them right now , ” said Ms. Morales Rocketto , who is Catholic . “ I would absolutely love to see them have more focus on asylum and refugees , particularly in light of family separation and detention changes in the Trump administration . ”
In the Trump era , Catholics are divided largely on racial lines , posing a challenge to the bishops ’ ministry . Many conservative Catholics support Mr. Trump , largely for his anti-abortion policies and attention to religious freedom . But about half of white Catholics approve of him , compared with about a quarter of nonwhite Catholics , according to the Pew Research Center .
Yet unlike culture war issues such as abortion or gay marriage , immigration has long been a unifying issue for the Catholic bishops , said David Gibson , director of the Center on Religion and Culture at Fordham University .
“ Almost all the bishops can remember quite recently their own immigrant roots ; this is central to the American Catholic identity , ” Mr. Gibson said . Still , he added , “ They are not necessarily in agreement with their own flock . ”
The choice of Archbishop Allen H. Vigneron , 71 , of Detroit , as the next vice president was also closely watched because , as was the case with Archbishop Gomez , the vice president customarily becomes the group ’ s president after a three-year term . The bishops passed over several candidates known as more combative conservatives , including Bishop Thomas Paprocki of Springfield , Ill. , who recently prohibited Illinois lawmakers who support abortion rights from receiving communion .
There is some quiet internal division among the bishops about what their political focus should be . The bishops approved the message that abortion was “ our pre-eminent priority ” despite resistance that arose on the conference floor . Bishop Robert W. McElroy of San Diego argued that Pope Francis does not elevate abortion above other issues , but Archbishop Charles Chaput of Philadelphia received applause for his defense of the language .
“ The bishops still have a consensus about the gravity of the evil of abortion , but I personally don ’ t think that that view in any way contradicts the magisterium of Pope Francis , ” Archbishop Vigneron , the new vice president , said in an interview .