Donald Trump has Democrats in a nearly impossible position on the border .
To deal with a surge of migrants crossing into the United States , the White House is asking Congress for billions of dollars in emergency funds . But House Democrats are in no mood to simply hand over the cash after condemning Trump ’ s anti-immigrant rhetoric and policies over the past two years .
They also don ’ t want to ignore a mounting humanitarian crisis .
“ So you create chaos , and then ask for more money ? ” Rep. Katherine Clark ( D-Mass . ) , vice chair of the House Democratic Caucus , said of the White House ’ s approach .
Still , Democrats are struggling with exactly how to confront the deteriorating situation at the southern border — particularly without legitimizing Trump ’ s harsh immigration stances or bolstering his argument for a massive border wall , which they ’ re trying to block in court .
Progressives like Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez ( D-N.Y. ) are taking a hard line against Trump ’ s request , saying in an interview that “ this administration has not proven itself worthy of one more dollar ” until all families have been reunited . More moderate Democrats argue some funding is needed to assist the thousands of Central American migrants seeking asylum .
The result is likely to be a weeks-long battle within the Democratic Caucus that will expose deep splits on immigration and complicate Washington ’ s next big funding fight . And with Trump gearing up for his reelection campaign , the issue is only going to get hotter .
███ Playbook newsletter Sign up today to receive the # 1-rated newsletter in politics Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
The White House has insisted it needs more money for food , water and medical care to ensure humane treatment for migrants held at U.S. facilities along the border .
But Democrats say the Department of Homeland Security ’ s own policies have undermined their faith , especially as officials have quietly continued separating some families at the border .
“ I wouldn ’ t support any request for funding at this time , ” said Rep. Chuy Garcia ( D-Ill. ) . “ I ’ m not prepared to go there . Can ’ t trust them . ”
Democratic leaders are acutely aware of the optics . They are loath to be seen in any way as validating Trump ’ s long-running declaration that there is a security crisis at the border .
And along with feeding into the president ’ s narrative , the move could undercut Democrats ’ legal effort to halt Trump ’ s national emergency declaration , which he ’ s using to try to divert funds from other parts of the government toward his border wall .
But Democrats say they are horrified by the humanitarian disaster unfolding at the border and recognize that some sort of action is needed .
“ Not that we ’ re trying to validate or not validate [ Trump ’ s claims ] , there are a lot of people there at the border , ” said Rep. Henry Cuellar , a moderate Democrat who represents a district on the Texas-Mexico border .
“ I don ’ t call it a security crisis , I call it a humanitarian crisis , ” he added . “ So the question is how do we get to address that ? ”
Administration officials have reported a growing sense of desperation . The White House ’ s letter to Congress this week warned that the situation is “ unlike anything we ’ ve ever seen . ”
One of the most worrying trends , according to border officials , is the uptick in unaccompanied children . That figure increased nearly 50 percent so far this year , compared to the same time period last year .
And last week , a third child was confirmed to have died in U.S. custody since December .
The lack of a unified response from House Democrats was on full display at the caucus ’ annual retreat in mid-April .
Speaker Nancy Pelosi and other top Democrats faced multiple questions from reporters about the surge in migrants and largely sidestepped them , instead endorsing comprehensive immigration reform and underscoring that Congress had already approved key Homeland Security funding in the deal to end the shutdown earlier this year .
But comprehensive immigration reform isn ’ t going anywhere . Democrats have no immediate plans to bring such a bill to the House floor , and even if passed by the House , it would run into a wall in the GOP-controlled Senate .
Pelosi demurred late last week when asked whether she was supportive of Trump ’ s supplemental request , instead saying it was up to congressional appropriators to reach an agreement .
“ The committee will decide what they want to put forward , ” Pelosi told ███ . “ As I always say , left to their devices , the bipartisan cooperation on the Appropriations Committee will take us to a path . ”
The White House is insisting that Congress approve its $ 4.5 billion request as soon as possible , warning that some agencies — like the Office of Refugee and Resettlement , which has handled the fallout of the family separations policy — could run out of money within a month .
“ They clearly have the will and the desire to dig into every couch cushion , ” Ocasio-Cortez said , referring to Trump ’ s attempts to shuffle money to fund the border wall . “ If they want to starve the refugee office , that ’ s not Congress ’ fault . ”
Democrats on the House spending panel have suggested they are willing to approve some humanitarian aid , though they are skeptical of approving requests for more ICE detention beds , which they say could be used to expand family detention .
Any money that 's approved , many lawmakers also say , should only be provided under certain conditions .
“ The frustrating thing is they ’ re diverting money all over the place and now they want Congress to buy in on Homeland Security changes and policy changes ? ” Rep. Pete Aguilar ( D-Calif. ) said in an interview . “ It ’ s ridiculous . ”