Donald Trump has energized millions of Republican voters this primary season with his tough talk of building a wall along the Mexico border and deporting people who entered the country illegally .
But , that same language could have an unintentional side effect in a general election and energize legal immigrants to become citizens before November so they can vote against Trump .
Jose Lovos moved to the U.S. legally 20 years ago from the war-torn country of El Salvador . These days , he lives in Virginia with his wife and three kids .
Lovos was eligible to become a citizen years ago , but he said he never got around to filling out the paperwork .
`` I was n't very interested before in becoming a citizen because we were n't too worried about anything , '' Lovos said in Spanish outside a hotel in Washington D.C. where he works as a maintenance man . `` But now there 's all this rhetoric about deporting 11 million undocumented people . ''
So on Christmas Day , he and his wife decided it was time to become citizens .
`` We want to help elect a good president for people in this country who do n't have a voice or a vote , '' said Lovos . `` I want to become a citizen to help other people , because other people have done it for me in the past . Citizens are the people who have power to make change . ''
Lovos said the primary reason he 's becoming a citizen now is so that he can vote in November against Trump .
`` I do n't understand why [ Trump ] has to generalize . Candidates ca n't say all immigrants are bad or that we have to deport them all , '' said Lovos .
There are an estimated 8.8 million people like Lovos in the country — legal permanent residents who are eligible to become citizens .
And , in the months after Trump announced his bid for president , citizenship applications were up 14.5 percent compared to the year before , according to data from the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services .
And , from year-to-year applications also fluctuate because of other factors : possible fee increases or organized citizenship drives .
This year , there 's also been an intense push by immigrant groups because of Trump . A coalition called `` Stand Up To Hate '' has held held more than 300 workshops across the country in recent months .
In March , they helped nearly 13,000 people with their citizenship applications .
At one workshop in Miami , Mauricio Lotero , 42 , sat in a college classroom listening to instructions from USCIS officers .
Lotero says he came to the workshop because of presidential politics .
`` If Donald Trump is the president of the United States , maybe the immigrants or my citizenship will be affected in the future , '' he explained .
Lotero says he wants to have a vote in the presidential election .
`` I do n't want Donald Trump as president , so that 's one of the reasons I want to vote , because I want to vote against Donald Trump , '' he said .
It 's hard to say for certain whether the spike in citizenship applications is a correlation or a causation .
But , David Damore , a professor at the University of Nevada , Las Vegas and an analyst with the public opinion research group Latino Decisions , remembers a similar pattern in recent history .
`` We found this in California in some of the work I did with Latino Decisions on the effect of Proposition 187 in the early 1990s , '' said Damore , referring to the ballot initiative in California that sought to eliminate government services — including K-12 schooling — for people living in the state illegally .
The measure passed , but it was never implemented . Still , in the years following the controversial vote , Damore said Latinos were mobilized in new ways .
`` You saw more participation , but you also saw more people who were eligible to naturalize , naturalizing , '' he said .
And , data from USCIS confirm there were record numbers of citizenship applications in 1996 and 1997 .
`` It 's that threat that has been proven to be an important mobilizer among immigrants to get them to naturalize and eventually participate in the political process , '' Damore said .
Citizenship applications are currently higher than normal . The Pew Research Center points out that `` the number of legal permanent residents applying for U.S. citizenship in the four months starting last October is at its highest level in four years ... up 5 percent from the same period before the election . '' But , still the current surge in applications is a fraction of the growth seen in some previous years .
In 2007 , ahead of a proposed fee increase , roughly 1.4 million immigrants applied for citizenship . According to Pew , that 2007 bump was `` an 89 percent increase over the previous year — the single largest annual increase since the government started tracking naturalization applications in 1907 . ''
So , it may be too soon to definitely say what 's happening this presidential cycle . Anecdotal evidence from immigrant groups and attorneys suggest thousands of additional immigrants have applied for citizenship this Spring , but up-to-date citizenship data from USCIS is not yet available .
Even if the current surge is nowhere near as high as the record years , activists point out that Latinos and Asians who become citizens are more likely to play an outsized role in the election because history shows they tend to vote at a higher rate than their counterparts who were born citizens .