President Trump ’ s supporters are apoplectic and lashing out at “ Amnesty Don ” for pursuing a deal with Democratic leaders to protect young immigrants who were brought to the U.S. illegally as children .
Only a week ago , Trump thrilled his base by rescinding an Obama-era order on the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , which allows about 800,000 young people brought into the country illegally to live and work without fear of deportation .
But the president quickly backtracked , reaching an agreement late Wednesday over dinner with Democratic leaders Sen. Charles Schumer Charles ( Chuck ) Ellis SchumerSchumer : Trump 's reported Russian meddling remarks among 'most disturbing things ' yet Senate Democrats say top NRA officials knew about Kremlin ties Office of Director of National Intelligence not planning to release whistleblower complaint MORE ( N.Y. ) and Rep. Nancy Pelosi ( Calif. ) that would extend protection to the so-called Dreamers in exchange for promises to enhance border security .
The trade-off does not appear to secure funding for Trump ’ s promise to build a border wall , which was the cornerstone of his insurgent campaign and a primary reason why grassroots conservatives trusted him over the establishment Republicans in the first place .
The reaction from the right has been swift and merciless . Trump has backtracked on his campaign pledges before , but conservative immigration hawks like Rep. Steve King ( R-Iowa ) warned that this deal with Democrats would do lasting damage .
@ RealDonaldTrump If AP is correct , Trump base is blown up , destroyed , irreparable , and disillusioned beyond repair . No promise is credible . https : //t.co/uJjxk6uX5g — Steve King ( @ SteveKingIA ) September 14 , 2017
Breitbart News , the pro-Trump outlet helmed by Trump ’ s former chief strategist Stephen Bannon , ran a string of scathing headlines about the deal .
“ Dems declare victory as Trump caves on DACA , ” said one . “ Amensty Don trends # 1 in D.C. , ” said another , referring to a nickname the right has given Trump on Twitter .
As Trump boarded Air Force One for a trip to hurricane-ravaged Florida on Thursday morning , a reporter shouted at him to ask if he supports “ amnesty . ”
`` We 're not looking at amnesty , ” Trump said . “ We 're looking at allowing people to stay here . … We 're talking about taking care of people . ''
At this point , who DOES N'T want Trump impeached ? https : //t.co/g1mMhmm8ng — Ann Coulter ( @ AnnCoulter ) September 14 , 2017
But conservatives like Laura Ingraham , who has been considered for White House posts and will take over a primetime Fox News Channel slot soon , were at a loss to explain why Trump , who has fashioned himself as an expert dealmaker , would give away one of his most valuable bargaining chips without securing any meaningful concessions .
When does American working class w/out real wage increase in 15yrs & who send their kids to overcrowded public schools get amnesty ? — Laura Ingraham ( @ IngrahamAngle ) September 14 , 2017
ONLY deal that MIGHT make sense for # DACA is RAISE Act + E-Verify + Wall . Dems ' `` Border security '' pledge is MEANINGLESS . @ realDonaldTrump — Laura Ingraham ( @ IngrahamAngle ) September 14 , 2017
To many on the right , Trump is prioritizing DACA recipients , a prize constituency for Democrats , over his campaign promise to put American workers first .
“ We tried this trade in 1986 , and the result was the 12 million illegal aliens currently in the United States , ” said Rosemary Jenks , the director of government relations for NumbersUSA . “ It did n't work then and it wo n't work now . ”
Trump has long struggled with what to do about DACA recipients , frequently conceding that there is a human element involved in deciding the fates of young people brought into the country illegally who know no other home .
On Thursday , Trump said he couldn ’ t justify moving to “ throw out good , educated and accomplished young people who have jobs , some serving in the military . ”
Does anybody really want to throw out good , educated and accomplished young people who have jobs , some serving in the military ? Really ! ..... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) September 14 , 2017
... They have been in our country for many years through no fault of their own - brought in by parents at young age . Plus BIG border security — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) September 14 , 2017
But defending Dreamers as good people is an emotional hook often used by Democrats advocating for amnesty — something that was not lost on the right .
“ Very odd , ” said Mark Krikorian , the executive director for the Center for Immigration Studies .
“ Instead of shifting the debate to what trade-offs there should be to contain the harmful fallout from such an amnesty , he 's simply echoing Chuck and Nancy 's — and probably Jared [ Kushner ’ s ] — talking points . My expectations for Trump were fairly low … but he has n't met even that low bar . ”
Trump on Thursday also pushed back against criticism he had gone soft on building a border wall , saying that a barrier is already being constructed .
The WALL , which is already under construction in the form of new renovation of old and existing fences and walls , will continue to be built . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) September 14 , 2017
Breitbart shot back with the headline : “ POTUS says ‘ wall ’ is actually just renovation of old fences . ”
As the morning unfolded , the warning shots at Trump rolled in from his most loyal and vocal backers , like Fox News anchor Sean Hannity .
And if @ POTUS does n't keep that promise , and goes for amnesty , it will be the political equivalent or `` read my lips , no new taxes '' https : //t.co/WxBSHYMxv6 — Sean Hannity ( @ seanhannity ) September 14 , 2017