Congress has been debating , among other things , the Obama-era Deferred Action For Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program and what to do with its 800,000 recipients who benefit from this constitutionally questionable executive action . The executive order issued by Obama shielded illegal aliens from deportation as long as they meet the criteria ( i.e . no criminal record ) and paid the $ 495 in application fees . DACA status had to be rented every two years . If accepted , DACA recipients had access to work permits . The program applied to illegal aliens that entered the U.S. as minors . What made immigration activists so jumpy is that these applicants gave very sensitive information about themselves and their whereabouts . They also had to admit they ’ re here illegally . The Daily Beast ’ s Betsy Woodruff reported on this back in September :
In deportation proceedings , the government must prove that the person they want deported is in the U.S. illegally . That can sometimes be tough . DACA recipients – nearly 800,000 of them – gave the Department of Homeland Security information proving they are undocumented so they could get relief from the threat of deportation . They also gave the government information about where they live , work , and go to school . As soon as Donald Trump was elected , immigrants ’ rights activists started asking what his administration would do with that information . In a memo , the Department of Homeland Security answered this question . And its statement – full of wordy legalese – made clear that Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers will be able to use DACA recipients ’ personal information to deport them . “ Information provided to USCIS in DACA requests will not be proactively provided to ICE and CBP for the purpose of immigration enforcement proceedings , unless the requestor meets the criteria for the issuance of a Notice To Appear or a referral to ICE under the criteria set forth in USCIS ’ Notice to Appear guidance , ” said the statement . In other words , USCIS ( United States Citizenship and Immigration Services , the agency which handles DACA ) won ’ t proactively give immigration enforcement officers a list with the names and addresses of all DACA recipients . But if ICE officers ask for it , the agency will provide it .
The Trump administration signaled last month that they wouldn ’ t defend the law , as they didn ’ t see how they could legally . Democrats and members of the media have admitted that DACA is legally questionable , especially concerning separation of powers . Ever since it was enacted , the GOP has rightfully criticized DACA as executive overreach . Around a dozen Republican state attorneys general threatened to sue the Trump administration if they settle the DACA issue . The result was ending of the program with a six-month enforcement delay to afford Congress time to pass DACA-like legislation . It ’ s the only way to remove the constitutional questions surrounding the program , and there is enough GOP support to pass this . There was now a lingering question about enforcement . Senate Republicans , like Tom Cotton from Arkansas , sees this as a possible opportunity to get the RAISE Act passed , which overhauls our green card process to prioritize immigrants with high skills and adds a language provision . Any aspect of border security is anathema to Democrats . While Congress and the media debate this aspect of the immigration issue , the Border Patrol picked up two DACA recipients who were smuggling illegals across the border ( Via DHS ) [ emphasis mine ] :