California Attorney General Xavier Becerra is considering taking action against officials who are fighting the state ’ s sanctuary city laws .
`` State law is state law . It ’ s my job to enforce state law and I will do so . We want to make sure that every jurisdiction , including Orange County , understands what state law requires of the people and the subdivisions of the state of California , '' Becerra said at a news conference .
Becerra was then asked if that meant an arrest or lawsuit against a sheriff who announced her department would skirt state laws and help Immigration and Customs Enforcement by publishing the dates inmates would be released through an online database called “ Who ’ s in Jail . ”
The Sheriff ’ s Department said in a statement Tuesday that its decision “ will enhance communication between the Sheriff ’ s Department and our law enforcement partners to remove dangerous offenders from our community . ”
Fox News host Tucker Carlson spoke with Orange County Sheriff Sandra Hutchins , and said the attorney general 's statement was shocking .
“ You are chief law enforcement officer of the county . The attorney general is threatening to arrest you , ” he said to Hutchins . “ I have never heard of anything like that happening in any state . ”
“ I don ’ t think he understands what the law says , ” she responded . “ What I ’ m doing is entirely within the confines of the law , and I ’ m doing what I think is important for my constituents . It ’ s a public safety issue to me . It ’ s not about immigration at all . It ’ s about individuals who have committed violent crimes . ”
Following the Sheriff Department ’ s statement , the Orange County Board of Supervisors voted 3-0 to join the Department of Justice ’ s lawsuit against California against three of the state ’ s recent immigration laws .
`` This legislation prevents law enforcement from removing criminals from our community and is a threat to public safety , '' Supervisor Shawn Nelson said ahead of the vote .