Tomorrow , the Supreme Court will hear three consolidated cases challenging the Trump administration 's decision to rescind DACA , an Obama administration policy suspending deportation of some 800,000 undocumented immigrants who came to the United States as children . DACA allows such migrants ( often referred to as `` dreamers , '' after the Dream Act , which failed to pass Congress ) to stay in the U.S. as long as they arrived in the country when they were 15 years old or younger , were 30 or younger when the program began in 2012 , have not been convicted of any crimes as of the time they apply for the program , and have either graduated from a U.S. high school , are currently enrolled in school , or have served in the armed forces .
As co-blogger Josh Blackman ( a longtime critic of the legality of DACA ) points out , the Trump administration 's position in these cases relies heavily on the notion that DACA had to be rescinded because it is itself illegal . For political reasons , the president did not want to give the impression that he actually favors deporting the Dreamers ( which would be an extremely unpopular position ) . Thus , he decided to hide behind the theory that his hands are tied by legal considerations . As Josh recognizes with admirable candor , this framing of the issue makes the administration 's policy `` nearly impossible to defend . '' I agree , with one slight modification : If this really is the only justification , I would strike out the `` nearly '' in that sentence .
While the president 's motives for relying on this argument were probably political , I do n't doubt that many conservatives , including some administration officials , sincerely believe that DACA is illegal . But , regardless of the reasons for putting it forward , the claim that DACA is illegal is badly wrong . I summarized the reasons why in a 2017 post from which much of what follows is adapted :
Quite simply , DACA is within the scope of presidential authority because it does not change the law , and does not legalize anything that would otherwise be illegal , without specific authorization from Congress .
Critics attack DACA on the grounds that Obama lacked legal authority to choose not to enforce the law in this case . This critique runs afoul of the reality that the federal government already chooses not to enforce its laws against the vast majority of those who violate them . Current federal criminal law is so expansive that the majority of Americans are probably federal criminals .
That includes whole categories of people who get away with violating federal law because the president and the Justice Department believe that going after them is n't worth the effort , and possibly morally dubious . For example , the feds almost never go after the hundreds of thousands of college students who are guilty of using illegal drugs in their dorms .
John Yoo contends that there is a difference between using `` prosecutorial discretion '' to `` choose priorities and prosecute cases that are the most important '' and `` refusing to enforce laws because of disagreements over policy . '' But that distinction makes little sense . Policy considerations are inevitably among the criteria by which presidents and prosecutors `` choose priorities '' and decide which cases are `` the most important . ''
One ███ the federal government has not launched a crackdown on illegal drug use in college dorms is precisely because they think it would be bad policy , and probably unjust to boot . It did not even do that during the reign of Attorney General Jeff Sessions , the hard-core drug warrior who also initiated the rescission of DACA on the grounds that the program exceeds the bounds of executive discretion .
Yoo and others also argue that prosecutorial discretion does not allow the president to refuse to enforce an `` entire law , '' as opposed to merely doing so in specific cases . But Obama has not in fact refused to enforce the entire relevant law requiring deportation of illegal immigrants . He has simply chosen to do so with respect to people who fit certain specified criteria that the vast majority of undocumented migrants do not meet .