Rep. Luis Gutierrez said the speaker wants to get a deal done this week . House immigration momentum grows
The Republican-led House will take its deepest dive yet into immigration reform this week , rushing to play catchup with the Senate on the chief domestic policy battle this year .
The House bipartisan group , which has labored for four years without releasing anything , is finally on the verge of producing a bill . The House Judiciary Committee is holding its first immigration markup on Tuesday on an enforcement-centered bill that Democrats abhor .
And the all-Democratic Congressional Hispanic Caucus will huddle with Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) on Wednesday , and immigration will undoubtedly be a hot topic .
“ He ’ s the speaker of the House , the leader of the House and of the Republican Conference , ” Rep. Luis Gutierrez ( D-Ill. ) , head of the CHC immigration task force , said in an interview Monday . “ He wants to get comprehensive immigration reform ; we want to get comprehensive immigration reform passed . We should form a pact . Let ’ s cement it this Wednesday . ”
The dual-track approach could signal actual momentum on House immigration reform , which so far has lagged considerably behind efforts on the other side of the Capitol . The Senate is considering the bipartisan Gang of Eight bill on the floor and may vote on it before the July 4th recess .
After several setbacks and one member withdrawing his support in an intractable disagreement over health care , the House group — now composed of three Republicans and four Democrats — appears poised to unveil its bill . That could come as early as Wednesday , although later in the week or early next week is more likely .
Negotiators have to meet again for the finishing touches and to review the language that has come back from the House legislative counsel . And the four Democratic negotiators — Reps. Xavier Becerra and Zoe Lofgren of California , John Yarmuth of Kentucky and Gutierrez — will update all House Democrats at a caucus meeting on Tuesday .
The group ’ s Democratic members also are having smaller briefings with different members throughout the week — meetings with the Congressional Black Caucus and the Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus are on tap for Tuesday , while New Democrats — a center-left coalition — and the Congressional Progressive Caucus are scheduled for Wednesday .
“ Democratic members are seeking input from their caucus on the bipartisan agreement the working group is drafting into legislative language , ” a Democratic aide said . “ It ’ s their hope that once all the i ’ s are dotted and the t ’ s are crossed , they will be able to introduce the measure with support from both sides of the aisle . ”
But the focus will be on the meeting between Boehner and the Congressional Hispanic Caucus . It is believed this will be the first time that a Republican House speaker has met with the group , which is composed of all Democrats .