'Today is a breakthrough day , ' Sen. Chuck Schumer said Thursday . The border deal that almost failed
Sen. Chuck Schumer spent Tuesday privately urging President Barack Obama and the entire Democratic caucus to just be patient — a border security deal they could accept was still within reach .
But after a testy , 45-minute call that night with a lead Republican negotiator of a possible compromise , Schumer could no longer follow his own advice .
The New York Democrat began to lose hope . Rather than deliver immigration reform with the 70-plus-vote show of force that Schumer had hyped so often , Democrats and the Gang of Eight would have to scratch and scrape their way to a filibuster-proof majority .
And yet , less than 24 hours later , they had a deal .
The answer to their problem turned out to be simple : Throw money at it .
The Congressional Budget Office issued a cost analysis late Tuesday predicting that the reform bill would trim the deficit by almost $ 1 trillion over the next two decades . Schumer ’ s top immigration aide suggested senators could funnel some of those savings into border security .
And by Wednesday afternoon , Republican negotiators led by North Dakota Sen. John Hoeven and Tennessee Sen. Bob Corker had dropped their demand to make the path to citizenship for country ’ s 11 million undocumented immigrants contingent upon the government achieving a 90 percent apprehension rate along the border . In return , they secured a staggering $ 30 billion for what is now being called a “ border surge . ”
“ Frankly they ended up having to give more , ” said Hoeven , who had the contentious phone call with Schumer .
The Gang of Eight , the White House and Republican senators still need to resolve differences over restricting immigrant access to government benefits .
But the agreement on border security eases passage next week of the overall bill and renews hopes among the Gang of Eight that it is closing in on an improbable , overwhelmingly bipartisan victory that few would ’ ve predicted only six months ago .
“ Today , ” Schumer said from the Senate floor Thursday , “ is a breakthrough day . ”
Obama has had little role in the Senate debate thus far , intentionally . But at the height of the talks Tuesday , the president weighed in with Schumer from Air Force One while traveling through Europe .
Over a shaky line — they had to be reconnected twice — Obama told Schumer that the 90 percent trigger was unacceptable . Schumer said they were trying to find a different benchmark , and Obama told him to keep working toward an agreement .
The fact that the deal was reached in just hours after both sides were ready to break off talks underscored the political need for passing a bill in the Senate with a strong bipartisan majority . Democrats were eager to quell the growing perception that the bill was weak on the border , in the hopes of pushing the House into action . And Republicans , struggling to right their woes with Hispanic voters , were eager to find a bill that gave them sufficient political cover on the border — while appeasing their business allies hungry for an immigration law .
Money broke the impasse — more money than Democrats , Republicans and veterans of past immigration fights could have ever imagined . The original Gang of Eight bill included $ 6.5 billion for border security , and they thought that was an extraordinary , even unnecessary , investment after years of infrastructure and manpower buildup along the Southwest border .
Now , the government may spend $ 30 billion to double the number of border agents to 40,000 , guarantee the completion of a 700-mile fence along the Southern border , and bulk up the country ’ s arsenal of drones , sensors and other technologies .
It would dump more money and resources on the border than Sen. John Cornyn ( R-Texas ) envisioned under his tough amendment that spurred the Gang of Eight into pursuing an alternative .
“ We have practically militarized the border , ” Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) , a member of the Gang of Eight , said proudly . “ If this amendment holds together and it passes as currently constructed , border security will have been achieved at a level that nobody would have thought possible a month ago . ”
Schumer described the additional agents as a “ virtual human fence . ”
CORRECTION : Corrected by : Emily Howell @ 06/21/2013 10:01 AM CORRECTION : A spokesman for Sen . Rob Portman ( R-Ohio ) said his office did not participate in a meeting convened last week by Sen. Bob Corker ’ s ( R-Tenn. ) office with Republicans interested in working on an alternative to the Cornyn plan . The story was also updated to reflect that the savings from the CBO analysis were estimated at almost $ 1 trillion .