FILE - In this March 6 , 2015 , file photo , U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents enter an apartment complex looking for a specific undocumented immigrant convicted of a felony during an early morning operation in Dallas . The federal government provided Tuesday , Dec. 5 , 2017 , the most complete statistical snapshot of immigration enforcement under President Donald Trump , showing Border Patrol arrests plunged to a 45-year low while arrests by deportation officers soared . ( AP Photo/LM Otero , File )
FILE - In this March 6 , 2015 , file photo , U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents enter an apartment complex looking for a specific undocumented immigrant convicted of a felony during an early morning operation in Dallas . The federal government provided Tuesday , Dec. 5 , 2017 , the most complete statistical snapshot of immigration enforcement under President Donald Trump , showing Border Patrol arrests plunged to a 45-year low while arrests by deportation officers soared . ( AP Photo/LM Otero , File )
WASHINGTON ( AP ) — President Donald Trump ’ s immigration crackdown has produced a spike in detentions by deportation officers across the country during his first months in office . At the same time , arrests along the Mexican border have fallen sharply , apparently as fewer people have tried to sneak into the U.S .
Figures released by the Department of Homeland Security on Tuesday show Trump is delivering on his pledge to more strictly control immigration and suggest that would-be immigrants are getting the message to not even think about crossing the border illegally .
Even as border crossings decline , however , Trump continues to push for his promised wall along the border — a wall that critics say is unnecessary and a waste of cash .
The new numbers , which offer the most complete snapshot yet of immigration enforcement under Trump , show that Border Patrol arrests plunged to a 45-year low in the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30 , with far fewer people being apprehended between official border crossings .
In all , the Border Patrol made 310,531 arrests in fiscal 2016 , down 25 percent from a year earlier and the lowest level since 1971 .
Officials have credited that drop to Trump ’ s harsh anti-immigration rhetoric and policies , including widely publicized arrests of immigrants living in the U.S. illegally .
“ There ’ s a new recognition by would-be immigrants that the U.S. is not hanging up a welcome sign , ” said Michelle Mittelstadt , of the non-partisan Migration Policy Institute think tank . She pointed to Trump ’ s rhetoric , as well as his policies . “ I think there ’ s a sense that the U.S. is less hospitable . ”
But Mittelstadt also stressed that the numbers are part of a larger trend that began well before Trump ’ s inauguration : Mexico ’ s improving economy and more opportunities at home have stemmed the tide of people flowing across the border for work .
“ You ’ ve really had a realignment in migration from Mexico , ” she said , noting that the numbers of Mexicans apprehended in 2017 fell by 34 percent from the previous year .
The decline in border crossings continues a trend that began during the Obama administration , and marks a dramatic drop from 2000 , when more than 1.6 million people were apprehended crossing the southwest border alone .
Overall , U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement said , deportations over the last year dropped about 6 percent from the previous year — a number tied to the sharp decline in border crossings as well as a backlog in the immigration courts that process deportations .
But that number masks a striking uptick in arrests away from the border . Those arrests have sparked fear and anger in immigrant communities , where many worry the government is now targeting them .
ICE said the number of “ interior removals ” — people who are apprehended away from the border — jumped 25 percent this year to 81,603 . And the increase is 37 percent after Trump ’ s inauguration compared to the same period the year before .
“ The president made it clear in his executive orders : There ’ s no population off the table , ” Thomas Homan , ICE ’ s acting director , told reporters in Washington on Tuesday . “ If you ’ re in this country illegally , we ’ re looking for you and we ’ re going to look to apprehend you . ”
In February , former Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly , who now serves as Trump ’ s chief of staff , scrapped the Obama administration ’ s policy of limiting deportations to people who pose a public safety threat , convicted criminals and those who have crossed the border recently , effectively making anyone in the country illegally vulnerable to apprehension .
Trump campaigned as an immigration hard-liner , accusing Mexico of sending rapists and other criminals to the U.S. and promising to build “ a great wall on our southern border. ” As president , he has signed a series of travel bans aimed at curtailing who can enter the country , pushed to overhaul the legal immigration system and tried to crack down on so-called sanctuary cities that refuse to share information about illegal immigrants with federal authorities . He has also pushed for funding for his border wall .
The new numbers , which include the last months of the Obama administration , provide new ammunition to Trump critics who question the need to spend billions of dollars on a border wall if crossings are already dropping . But officials insisted the wall was still needed .
“ Yeah , the traffic is down . That ’ s a good thing , ” said Ronald Vitiello , the acting deputy commissioner of Customs and Border Protection . But , “ to take the 1,000 arrests a day to say that we ’ re finished , it ’ s not stating what the facts are . We ’ re still arresting nearly 1,000 people a day coming across the border , ” he said .
“ The administration can try to twist these numbers into whatever they please , ” he said . “ But the fact remains that after unprecedented investments in border security over the last decade , the border has become harder to cross and fewer people are trying . ”
Despite the overall decline in border arrests , the numbers have increased every month since May and many of those apprehended have been families and unaccompanied children .
The actual number of illegal borders crossings isn ’ t known because many people slip in undetected . Immigration authorities caught just over half of the people who illegally entered the U.S. from Mexico in 2015 , according to a report commissioned by the Department of Homeland Security . That ’ s much lower than the success rate DHS had cited publicly .
South of the Arizona border in the Mexican town of Nogales , many of the deportees who were eating breakfast Monday at a dining room run by a nonprofit group had been picked up in the U.S. far from the border .
“ We are seeing a lot of people now who have long established ties in the United States , ” said Joanna Foote Williams , the Kino Border Initiative ’ s director of education and advocacy , as about 40 men and a few women ate eggs , refried beans and tortillas .
Spagat reported from San Diego . AP writer Anita Snow contributed from Nogales , Mexico . Follow Spagat and Colvin on Twitter at https : //twitter.com/elliotspagat and https : //twitter.com/colvinj