Mexico 's incoming foreign minister has said discussions on how to deal with migrants travelling to the United States are continuing despite reports a deal has been reached .
Marcelo Ebrard denied reaching an agreement which would see asylum seekers waiting in Mexico while their claims were processed in US courts .
Mr Ebrard 's words seem to contradict US President Donald Trump 's latest tweet .
He said migrants would not be allowed entry until their claims were approved .
`` Migrants at the Southern Border will not be allowed into the United States until their claims are individually approved in court , '' Mr Trump wrote , adding : `` No 'releasing ' into the US . All will stay in Mexico . ''
The conflicting statements emerged after the Washington Post reported Mexican officials had agreed to let migrants trying to enter the US stay in Mexico while their asylum claims were heard .
According to the newspaper , the plan was called `` Remain in Mexico '' .
But Mr Ebrard , who will become foreign minister in December after Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador 's administration takes power , said the US had yet to even send `` a specific proposal '' on how to deal with the issue .
Incoming Interior Minister Olga Sanchez Cordero also told news agency Reuters no agreement had been reached - although the Washington Post article initially quoted her as saying it was a `` short term solution '' to deal with the migrant caravan .
Thousands of migrants - including women and children - are currently at the US-Mexico border after travelling more than 4,000km ( 2,500 miles ) from Central America .
They say they are fleeing persecution , poverty and violence in their home countries of Honduras , Guatemala , and El Salvador .
Many are now waiting in temporary shelters in the border city of Tijuana , leading the mayor declare a humanitarian crisis . There are fears as many as 9,000 may be stuck in the city for months .
Meanwhile , Mr Trump has deployed about 5,800 troops to the border and has previously described the migrants as an `` invasion '' .