A massive hunt for the 162 victims of AirAsia Flight 8501 resumed in the Java Sea on Wednesday , with six bodies , including a flight attendant identified by her trademark red uniform , recovered . But wind , strong currents and high surf hampered recovery efforts as distraught family members anxiously waited to identify their loved ones .
Three bodies were retrieved Tuesday , while the others were found after the search resumed Wednesday morning , said Indonesia 's Search and Rescue Agency chief Henry Bambang Soelistyo .
On Tuesday , the number had varied with different officials saying as many as six corpses had been discovered .
He said half of those found were male and half female , including the flight attendant .
The first proof of the jet 's fate emerged Tuesday in an area not far from where it dropped off radar screens . Searchers found the bodies and debris that included a life jacket , an emergency exit door and a suitcase about 10 miles from the plane 's last known coordinates .
On Wednesday , divers were deployed , but heavy rain and clouds grounded helicopters , said Soelistyo .
The airliner 's disappearance halfway through a two-hour flight between Surabaya , Indonesia , and Singapore triggered an international search for the aircraft involving dozens of planes , ships and helicopters . It is still unclear what brought the plane down .
The plane needs to be located and its cockpit voice and flight data recorders , or black boxes , recovered before officials can start determining what caused the crash .
Images of the debris and a bloated body shown on Indonesian television sent a spasm of anguish through the room at the Surabaya airport where relatives awaited news .
The first sign of the jet turned up about 10 miles ( 16 kilometers ) from its last known coordinates . Parts of the interior , including the oxygen tank , were brought to the nearest town , Pangkalan Bun . Another find included a bright blue plastic suitcase , completely unscratched .
`` I know the plane has crashed , but I can not believe my brother and his family are dead , '' said Ifan Joko , who lost seven family members , three of them children , as they traveled to Singapore to ring in the new year . `` We still pray they are alive . ''
The corpses were spotted about 160 kilometers ( 100 miles ) from Central Kalimantan province .
Rescue workers descended on ropes from a hovering helicopter to retrieve bodies . Efforts were hindered by 2-meter ( 6-foot ) waves and strong winds , National Search and Rescue Director SB Supriyadi said .
The first body was later picked up by a navy ship . Officials said as many as six others followed , but they disagreed about the exact number .
Supriyadi was on the aircraft and saw what appeared to be more wreckage under the water , which was clear and a relatively shallow 20 to 30 meters ( 65 to 100 feet ) .
When TV broadcast an image of a half-naked man floating in the water , a shirt partially covering his head , many of the family members screamed and wailed uncontrollably . One middle-aged man collapsed and had to be carried out on a stretcher .
About 125 family members were planning to travel Wednesday to Pangkalan Bun to start identifying their loved ones . Body bags and coffins have been prepared at three hospitals there . Dozens of elite military divers also joined the search .
Malaysia-based AirAsia 's loss comes on top of the still-unsolved disappearance of Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 in March with 239 people aboard , and the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in July over Ukraine , which killed all 298 passengers and crew .
Nearly all the passengers and crew were Indonesians , who are frequent visitors to Singapore , particularly on holidays .
Haidar Fauzie , 60 , said his youngest child and only daughter , Khairunnisa Haidar , was a flight attendant who had worked with AirAsia for two years .
On learning about the crash , he struggled to console his grieving wife . They last saw their child six weeks ago , when she returned home on holiday .
`` From the start , we already knew the risks associated with being a stewardess , '' Fauzie said . `` She is beautiful and smart . It has always been her dream to fly . We could n't have stopped her . ''
AirAsia group CEO Tony Fernandes , the airline 's founder and public face and a constant presence in Indonesia since the tragedy started unfolding , said he planned to travel to the recovery site on Wednesday .
`` I have apologized profusely for what they are going through , '' he said of his contact with relatives . `` I am the leader of this company , and I have to take responsibility . That is why I 'm here . I 'm not running away from my obligations . ''
The jet 's last communication indicated the pilots were worried about bad weather . They sought permission to climb above threatening clouds but were denied because of heavy air traffic . Four minutes later , the jet disappeared from the radar without issuing a distress signal .
Several countries rushed to Indonesia to help with search and recovery efforts .
The United States said it was sending the USS Sampson destroyer , joining at least 30 ships , 15 aircraft and seven helicopters in the search for the jet .
A Chinese frigate was on the way . Singapore said it was sending two underwater beacon detectors to try to pick up pings from the plane 's all-important cockpit voice and flight-data recorders . Malaysia , Australia and Thailand are also involved in the search .