A little girl who became the public face of US migrant family separations was not taken away from her mother at the US border , says her father .
A photograph of the Honduran toddler sobbing in a pink jacket was snapped at the scene of a border detention .
But thousands of other child migrants have been taken from parents in the US .
The Pulitzer prize-winner told the BBC that the mother had been breastfeeding her child after crossing the Rio Grande in a raft in the moments before they were detained .
Mr Moore said they were taken away together by border patrol .
The photo stoked outrage over the Trump administration 's child migrant separations policy , rolled out in April , of removing young undocumented people from their mothers and fathers as they are detained for crossing the US-Mexico border .
The photo helped secure $ 17m ( £13m ) in donations from hundreds of thousands of people on a Facebook fundraiser for the Refugee and Immigrant Center for Education and Legal Services , a Texas-based non-profit organisation .
`` My daughter has become a symbol of the separation of children at the US border , '' Denis Valera told Reuters news agency .
`` Seeing what was happening to her in that moment breaks anyone 's heart , '' he added .
Mr Valera said his daughter and her mother , Sandra Sanchez , have been detained together in the border town of McAllen as Ms Sanchez sought asylum .
Honduran Deputy Foreign Minister Nelly Jerez verified Mr Valera 's version of events to Reuters .
Carlos Ruiz , the Border Patrol agent who stopped Ms Sanchez and her daughter , said the mother was asked to set the child down so she could be searched .
`` The kid immediately started crying as she set her down , '' said Mr Ruiz . `` I personally went up to the mother and asked her , 'Are you doing OK ? Is the kid OK ? '
`` And she said , 'Yes . She 's tired and thirsty . It 's 11 o'clock at night . ' ''
The little girl is two-year-old Yanela Denise , according to the Daily Mail newspaper .
Mr Valera said Ms Sanchez and their daughter had left the Honduran city of Puerto Cortes without telling him or the couple 's three other children .
He said he believed she went to the US in search of better economic opportunities .
Mr Valera told Reuters : `` If they are deported , that is OK as long as they do not leave the child without her mother . I am waiting to see what happens with them . ''
He told the Daily Mail he understands Ms Sanchez paid $ 6,000 to a smuggler to get her across the border .
According to the newspaper , the couple 's three other children are aged 14 , 11 and six .
Mr Valera said : `` The kids see what 's happening . They 're a little worried but I do n't try to bring it up that much . They know their mother and sister are safe now . ''
Time magazine defended its cover on Friday , saying that the photograph of the girl `` became the most visible symbol of the ongoing immigration debate in America for a reason '' .
`` Our cover and our reporting capture the stakes of this moment , '' wrote the magazine 's editor-in-chief Edward Felsenthal .
The magazine also corrected its story , which said the girl was `` carried away screaming by US Border Patrol agents '' , to instead say the mother and daughter were `` taken away together '' .
White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders on Twitter claimed that Democrats and the media `` exploited this photo of a little girl to push their agenda '' .
`` She was not separated from her mom . The separation here is from the facts , '' she wrote .
On Friday , Mr Trump accused Democrats of playing politics with `` phony stories of sadness and grief '' .
Approximately 2,300 children have been removed from their families since Mr Trump 's `` zero-tolerance '' policy began in May , and housed in detention centres run by the Department of Health and Human Services .
Some shelters , including three in Texas , house so-called `` tender age '' children , who are under five years old .
About 500 children have been reunited with their families since May , a Homeland Security official said on Thursday .