The leader of a union representing 12,000 federal immigration officers said Monday his group is joining a growing list of similar organizations opposed to the sweeping immigration bill crafted by the Gang of Eight lawmakers and under consideration in Congress .
Kenneth Palinkas , president of the National Citizenship and Immigration Services Council , said his union was never consulted by the group of bipartisan lawmakers writing the bill , which he claims was written with special interests in mind and fails to address “ some of the most serious concerns the USCIS Council has about the current system . ”
The union represents officers of U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , the agency responsible for processing visas and other immigration papers .
Palinkas says the bill doesn ’ t address the pressure he claims is put on adjudication officers to rubber stamp applications instead of conducting diligent case reviews . He says it fails to fix the “ insurmountable bureaucracy ” which often prevents USCIS officers from contacting and coordinating with ICE agents in cases that should have their involvement , and doesn ’ t do enough to address the problem of student visa overstays .
“ We are the very backbone of our nation ’ s immigration system and will be at the center of implementing any immigration reform , ” Palinkas said in a statement obtained by FoxNews.com .
This month , the National ICE Council , which represents more than 7,000 agents , sent a letter to Congress sharply criticizing the legislation and saying it will not support it . There are three major unions that represent the country 's immigration officers and agents .
Members of the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight spent last week marking up the bill in the Judiciary Committee . On Tuesday , Florida Sen. Marco Rubio seemed to show signs of strain within the group after senators rejected a Republican proposal to require a biometric entry and exit system at ports of entry in the U.S .
President Obama has been cautiously optimistic about the Senate ’ s strategy of a bipartisan approach .
On Thursday , House negotiators also told reporters that they had reached a tentative agreement of their own but did not disclose details .