With an immigration bill finally on the table , Republicans would do well to stop and ponder how they have arrived at this juncture . Since the November election they have been preoccupied with how to approach Hispanics on this critical issue . Because almost 80 percent of illegal immigrants are Hispanic , conservative elites have​—​appropriately​—​been wrestling with terminology and have just about persuaded themselves that “ illegals ” are more prudently referred to as “ the undocumented . ”
But the soul-searching seems to have stopped there . Whatever they call them , Republicans continue to insist that the undocumented must be treated as law-breakers , even as criminals , who must be penalized and not allowed to benefit from their transgressions . For a party struggling to renew itself , this isn ’ t much progress . What Republicans now need to consider is that the undocumented are hardly the only law-breakers here . More precisely , Republicans must assess how much responsibility for illegal immigration can be fairly attributed to employers .
This won ’ t be easy . Especially at this juncture in the process , no one wants to point fingers​—​certainly not at employers who are complicit in illegal immigration . To be sure , back in 2009 the Obama administration prioritized the criminal prosecution of employers who hire the undocumented and brought some large firms to heel . But right now , Democrats want to mobilize their troops and focus attention on the travails of worthy newcomers who just happen to be here without documents .
Republicans , as I have suggested , have their own problems . For them , immigration enforcement has meant securing our border with Mexico , for which public support has been readily mobilized with images of imposing physical barriers , sophisticated surveillance technology , and thousands of Border Patrol agents . By contrast , interior enforcement has been a much tougher sell . After all , it arouses images of busy Americans being hassled at highway checkpoints or hard-working businessmen wasting their time filling out government forms and answering the questions of intrusive bureaucrats . And since employers tend to be well organized and vocal when it comes to immigration , Republicans have sought to avoid offending what looks to be a natural constituency . But then so have many Democrats .
As for the rest of us , Americans tend to identify with employers , who are like “ us. ” In many cases the employers are us , insofar as they are homeowners relying on laborers , gardeners , painters , carpenters , cleaning ladies , and nannies , who are typically undocumented .
In fact , casual reliance on illegal immigrant workers is unlikely to run afoul of the law . Individuals who hire fewer than 10 illegal workers during any 12-month period are effectively exempt from prosecution . To be sure , candidates for high government appointments and politicians are subject to embarrassing exposure on this point , and they might be legally vulnerable for failing to pay Social Security taxes for undocumented workers . But the average American can still drive down to the Home Depot parking lot and hire a day laborer without fear of violating the law .
And so it has been for most of our history . It was not until 1986 , when Congress enacted the Immigration Reform and Control Act ( IRCA ) , that employers were prohibited from hiring noncitizens lacking work authorization . Up to that time , to be sure , it had been a felony to harbor illegal aliens . But at the insistence of agricultural interests , the so-called Texas Proviso stipulated that employing illegals was not to be construed as harboring them . So those who insist on upholding “ the rule of law ” would do well to consider how immigration law has evolved and changed .
In any event , IRCA changed all that , and for the first time , employers​—​excepting the homeowners described above​—​became subject to fines and prosecution for hiring undocumented immigrants . Yet an unholy alliance of immigrant advocates , business interests , and civil libertarians raised alarms about the creation of a “ national identity card ” and stymied efforts to create a secure means of identification that would allow employers to reliably determine the legal status of job applicants . At the same time , Congress enacted anti-discrimination provisions to discourage employers from avoiding the risk of hiring illegal immigrants simply by not hiring foreign-looking applicants . The result is that employers have been required to ascertain the legal status of their employees but discouraged from doing so aggressively .
It gets worse . To establish their eligibility for employment , applicants may rely on driver ’ s licenses , Social Security cards , and birth certificates​—​all of which can be counterfeited . Yet employers are not required to verify the authenticity of such documents , merely to confirm that they “ reasonably appear on their face to be genuine. ” Documenting all this on the now-infamous I-9 form completes the ritual and allows employers to satisfy the letter of the law by affirming that they did not knowingly hire undocumented workers .
Despite such ease of compliance , employers​—​no one knows how many​—​still evade or violate the law outright . Many hire undocumented workers indirectly by relying on subcontractors who assume the risk of skirting the law . Perhaps most notorious for this tactic is Walmart , which has used subcontractors who secured undocumented workers to clean its stores . Much less notoriously , homeowners routinely hire , for example , landscaping contractors who employ illegals . Technically , such homeowners are not in violation of the law , but this was small consolation to Mitt Romney a few years back . More blatant is the hiring of undocumented workers off-the-books and paying them substandard wages “ under the table ” with no benefits .
Such common practices highlight why American employers have grown so dependent on illegal immigrant workers . The usual explanation is lower wages , which are undeniably part of the story . Yet not to be overlooked is the willingness of undocumented workers to work long hours on short notice . As economist Gordon Hanson has pointed out , illegals are valuable to employers precisely because they are more flexible and responsive to market forces than other workers . This is particularly true in agriculture but also in construction and the service industry .