By the start of the week , the Trump administration ’ s degenerate-Satanic-jackboot-sieg-heil policy of detaching from their parents the children of captured illegal border-crossers was taking on water and listing amidships : a failure of what they call “ optics. ” Which means the way things look , in politics most of all . You don ’ t do things your political opponents can sell to the voters as degenerate , Satanic , and the rest of it . Thus prospects multiply for an early rethink of the present policy .
Sen. Jeff Merkley , an Oregon Democrat , afforded an instance of the rhetorical possibilities sprouting from too much diligence in guarding your national borders . “ Ripping children out of their parents ’ arms to inflict harm on the child to influence the parents is unacceptable , ” said Merkley .
“ Cruel , ” was in fact Laura Bush ’ s word , in a column written for the Washington Post . Melania Trump herself drew back from the spectacle in dismay and disarray , saying in a formal statement she “ hates to see children separated from their families ” ; accordingly , she urges “ successful immigration reform . ”
Wouldn ’ t that be nice , however improbable it seems when the border control optics trump — as it were — the idea of nationhood as a thing hardly less valuable than the unity of families fleeing…whatever it is they are fleeing when they attempt to cross the U.S. border .
Poverty ; political chaos ; gangs ; homelessness ; hopelessness — such are the motives for northward travel as a strategy for survival . No American looks on any of this without , at the very least , some twinges of sympathy . “ I was a stranger , and ye took me in , ” said the Son of God , in a hypothetical way , regarding Christian duty .
The matter is hard all the same — optics or no optics . There are , in my judgment , valid arguments for and against laxity on immigration , depending on what you mean by “ laxity . ”
It needs to be emphasized that an illegal entrant into the United States brings no rights with him . He is a petitioner , an entreater , a suitor , dependent on the kindness of strangers , in the words Tennessee Williams gave to Blanche DuBois .
Kindness is a great human virtue — an extraordinary human virtue . It adorns the personal and , often enough , the cultural sphere . But government has large fish to fry in behalf of — in our case — 326 million people . In our fallen world ( Gen. 3:14-19 ) a kind action is not a reflexive action as our leaders , representing whatever political arrangement , regularly tell us .
The unkindness of “ ripping children out of their parents ’ arms ” — as Sen. Merkley would have it — grows from the generally recognized , rarely acted-upon perception that you can ’ t have much of a nation if anyone can just kind of come here . You have to have rules . The rules , once you have them , must be enforced — preferably according to a common appreciation of other people ’ s worth . Which is no easy game to play .
Our sympathies , it seems to me , properly belong on both sides of the present argument — with children bereft of parents , with authorities trying to enforce the law for the general , not the individual , good .
I see I am arguing for compromise . Holy moley ! Compromise ? Who is going to do that ? And according to what premises , what suppositions about the national good in an era when cheap transport and an old-fashioned desire to flee lousy conditions make immigration to the West , including Canada and Europe , an international cause ?
Some strong and persuasive vetting of prospective immigrants is manifestly in order , that our institutions and national spirit might fly on like the red , white , and blue . Also in order is recognition that America ’ s shrinking work force needs more workers — and many more contributors , if I may be brutally frank , to Social Security and Medicare .
Deep down , most Republicans and Democrats surely take aboard these seemingly opposed considerations . They just can ’ t say so , being obliged by the politics of the moment to tear out each other ’ s throats . Where , then , does this thing go — this thing that isn ’ t about children ripped from parents ’ arms but is about , in a large and formless way , human destiny , and what kind of country we hope to be 50 years hence . There are no winners in this cause at present .
William Murchison is completing a book about moral restoration in the 21st century .