Republicans are claiming outrage after Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez ( D-N.Y. ) compared immigration detention centers along the southern border to concentration camps—remarks she first made during an Instagram Live session late Monday and has since defended .
“ That is exactly what they are : They are concentration camps , ” Ocasio-Cortez told her followers on Monday . “ I want to talk to the people that are concerned enough with humanity to say that ‘ never again ’ means something . ”
“ I don ’ t use those words lightly , ” she continued . “ I don ’ t use those words to just throw bombs . I use that word because that is what an administration that creates concentration camps is . A presidency that creates concentration camps is fascist , and it ’ s very difficult to say that because it is very difficult to accept the fact that that ’ s how bad things happen . ”
As her comments emerged in the media , Republicans accused Ocasio-Cortez of debasing Holocaust victims and survivors . “ You demean their memory and disgrace yourself with comments like this , ” Rep. Liz Cheney ( R-Wyo . ) said in a tweet Tuesday morning .
Ocasio-Cortez quickly responded by asking Cheney how she would describe the use of “ mass camps of people detained without a trial. ” Cheney , in turn , recommended that Ocasio-Cortez read testimonies from Holocaust survivors , as well as Elie Wiesel ’ s seminal memoir , Night . “ Here ’ s an Amazon link to make it easy for you to purchase , ” the Wyoming congresswoman added .
Cheney ’ s response notably did not include an answer to Ocasio-Cortez ’ s initial question .
Hey Rep. Cheney , since you ’ re so eager to “ educate me , ” I ’ m curious : What do YOU call building mass camps of people being detained without a trial ? How would you dress up DHS ’ s mass separation of thousands children at the border from their parents ? https : //t.co/OOfrrfa1Ew — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez ( @ AOC ) June 18 , 2019
The back-and-forth on Tuesday echoed a similar fury professed by Republicans back in November , when Ocasio-Cortez cited past global refugee crises , including the Holocaust , to defend today ’ s migrants seeking asylum at the US-Mexico border . “ I recommend she take a tour of the Holocaust Museum in DC , ” Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) said . “ Might help her better understand the differences between the Holocaust and the caravan in Tijuana . ”
As Graham and others implied that she was ignorant on the subject , a strategy conservatives have frequently used to undermine the freshman congresswoman , the official Twitter account for the Auschwitz Memorial appeared to tweet a veiled line of support for Ocasio-Cortez .