President Trump warned Friday that if Democrats do not agree to his demands to fund a wall on the southern border , he will “ close the Southern border entirely ” and cut aid to Central American countries -- while pulling back on trade with Mexico .
“ We will be forced to close the Southern Border entirely if the Obstructionist Democrats do not give us the money to finish the Wall & also change the ridiculous immigration laws that our Country is saddled with , ” he tweeted Friday morning . “ Hard to believe there was a Congress & President who would approve ! ”
The tweetstorm came amid the partial government shutdown that will soon enter its second week . The closures began last Saturday after Republicans and Democrats were unable to agree on a funding package that would keep the government open and fund Trump ’ s promised border wall . Trump has demanded $ 5 billion for the barrier , but Democrats have refused , instead offering $ 1.3 billion for general border security .
With both sides refusing to budge and little activity on Capitol Hill amid the holiday break , there are no signs of the impasse ending anytime soon . One member of the House Republican leadership told ███ on Thursday that a resolution may not emerge until the new year .
But on Friday , Trump not only renewed his demands for the wall , but threatened numerous consequences in the absence of that money . He even suggested pulling back on the recently renegotiated North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) , which now goes by the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement ( USMCA ) .
“ The United States looses [ sic ] soooo much money on Trade with Mexico under NAFTA , over 75 Billion Dollars a year ( not including Drug Money which would be many times that amount ) , that I would consider closing the Southern Border a 'profit making operation , ' '' he tweeted .
“ Bring our car industry back into the United States where it belongs . Go back to pre-NAFTA , before so many of our companies and jobs were so foolishly sent to Mexico , ” he carried on . “ Either we build ( finish ) the Wall or we close the Border . ”
He then said the U.S. would terminate aid with Honduras , Guatemala and El Salvador , which he said are doing “ nothing for the United States but taking our money , ” and referred to reports that another caravan of migrants hoping to get to the U.S. is planning on leaving Honduras in January .
“ Word is that a new Caravan is forming in Honduras and they are doing nothing about it . We will be cutting off all aid to these 3 countries - taking advantage of U.S. for years ! ” he said .
Trump has previously threatened to shut down the border , but took no action to do so following those threats . He also previously threatened to cut aid to countries that assist , or do nothing to stop , the caravans . But earlier this month , the U.S. pledged a total of $ 10.6 billion in aid and investment for Central America and southern Mexico -- as part of a push to promote better security and job opportunities so that Central Americans and Mexicans do not have to emigrate to the U.S .
NIELSEN ANNOUNCES DEAL WITH MEXICO TO OVERHAUL ASYLUM PROCESS , COMBAT 'CATCH AND RELEASE '
A cut-off of trade relations with Mexico could also risk a new agreement that DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen announced this month that calls for immigrants claiming asylum in the U.S. to be returned to Mexico as their cases are processed .
Mick Mulvaney , Trump ’ s incoming acting chief of staff , claimed Friday on “ Fox & Friends ” that it appeared Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer is interested in a deal but Speaker-designate Nancy Pelosi is preventing it . He alleged Democrats are not dealing because Pelosi is waiting until she secures the speakership .
“ We don ’ t think they will [ negotiate ] until after the new Congress is sworn in , ” he said .
But Pelosi has denied claims they have n't provided a counteroffer .
`` Democrats have offered Republicans three options to re-open government that all include funding for strong , sensible , and effective border security – but not the President 's immoral , ineffective and expensive wall , '' said Drew Hammill , Pelosi 's deputy chief of staff . `` With the House Majority , Democrats will act swiftly to end the Trump Shutdown , and will fight for a strategic , robust national security policy , including strong and smart border security , and strong support for our servicemembers and veterans . ''