Members of a migrant caravan from Central America cross the Tijuana River near the border wall between the U.S. and Mexico in Tijuana , Mexico , November 25 , 2018 . ( Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters )
The last week has shown how Trump ’ s critics were wrong to dismiss the caravan .
It ’ s roughly the three-week anniversary of CNN reporter Jim Acosta repeatedly telling President Donald Trump at a press conference that the migrant caravan is “ hundreds and hundreds of miles away ” and “ not an invasion , ” and objecting to a campaign ad that showed migrants climbing border walls — “ they ’ re not going to be doing that . ”
Now , thousands of migrants from the caravan have arrived in the border city of Tijuana , Mexico . Over the weekend , hundreds of them stormed a border crossing , climbing the fence and throwing rocks . U.S. border agents used tear gas to repel the mob . If the throng was too small to constitute an invasion , it certainly wasn ’ t a rules-bound group of asylum-seekers .
Trump relied too heavily on the caravan as an issue in the midterm election , but the last week has shown how his critics were wrong to sneer .
It was conventional wisdom in the press that the caravan was a concoction of Trump ’ s fevered imagination . It soon would dissipate and even if not , take months to reach the United States . This widely repeated factoid was based on calculations of its movement on foot ( it apparently didn ’ t occur to anyone that the caravan also would travel by bus or truck ) .
In the immediate aftermath of the election , when Trump didn ’ t talk about the caravan as much and Fox News covered it less , liberal commentators were outraged . The diminished attention supposedly proved that the focus on the caravan had been entirely cynical electoral politics . But there was a genuine lull in the news . With the weekend ’ s border incident bringing new attention , liberal outlets are back again to complaining that Fox is covering the caravan too much .
The latest once again puts the Left ’ s radicalism on display . It ’ s not just that Immigration and Customs Enforcement should be abolished ; border agents can ’ t defend themselves from an aggressive rabble .
Hawaii senator Brian Schatz wondered on Twitter if the use of tear gas violated the Chemical Weapons Convention ( the answer is an emphatic “ no , ” and he deleted the tweet ) . Representative Barbara Lee of California described the gassing of “ women and children ” as an atrocity and called for U.N. inspectors . Progressive darling Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez compared the migrants to Jews fleeing Nazi Germany .
All of this rending of garments , despite the facts that the tear gas was directed at the adult males who led the charge , similar crowd-control tactics were used at the border during the Obama administration , and , of course , cops use tear gas during disturbances involving fellow U.S. citizens all the time .
The larger issue at the border is the set of rules for Central American migrants . It allows adults with children and minors into the country while their ( almost always rejected ) asylum claims are adjudicated . They can easily abscond once admitted , and the laxity of the system is an incentive for more Central American family units to come .
By working out a possible deal with the Mexican government for migrants to stay in Mexico while they apply for asylum — and forbidding migrants who enter the U.S. illegally from applying — the administration has hit on an approach to tighten up the current loopholes . But the deal with Mexico may not be final and a California district judge , in what looks like another instance of resistance jurisprudence , has put an injunction on the policy regarding illegal entrants .
Trump has been wrong to portray the migrants as inherently threatening — the overwhelming majority just want a better life — but we have the sovereign right to decide who does and doesn ’ t come to this country , and demand that it be an orderly , lawful process .
If any significant portion of the caravan gains entry , it will send a message that large-scale movements of people are better than small groups . This could lead to even more pressure at the border , no matter how much it will be dismissed by the same people who insisted the caravan would never arrive at the border .