The prospects for an immigration overhaul effort that could reshape the contours of American society appeared grim Wednesday after a closed door meeting of House Republicans .
A majority of the fractious House Republican Conference lined up in opposition to ( barely ) bipartisan legislation already approved by the Democratic-controlled Senate , despite the urging of leaders to do something on the issue .
NPR 's Tamara Keith tells us that after the meeting , Colorado Rep. Doug Lamborn said `` there 's almost unanimous agreement among the Republicans that the Senate bill is fatally flawed . ''
The Senate bill includes a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants , a provision that 's anathema to the majority of House Republicans , most of whom reside in electorally safe , predominantly white districts .
California Rep. Buck McKeon , chairman of the House Armed Services Committee , said : `` There was pretty strong consensus that the border has to be secured before anything else . '' Including a path to citizenship .
According to Louisiana Rep. John Fleming , House Speaker John Boehner reassured the conference — as he has done in public and private many times before — that he will not allow an immigration bill to pass without a majority of the majority , a practice referred to as the Hastert Rule .
Fleming said he trusts Boehner when he says any immigration bill will pass with a majority of the majority . But he still worries that the Senate could take that bill up , modify it and then jam the House — putting pressure on them to pass something with a majority of Democrats and only a few Republicans .
`` We control the House , we Republicans , and our constituents hold us accountable ... so that is our concern . We want to be sure that something like that does n't happen , '' Fleming said . `` That whatever passes out of the House has a majority of Republicans that support it . ''
After the afternoon meeting , House leadership , including Boehner , issued this statement :
`` Today House Republicans affirmed that rather than take up the flawed legislation rushed through the Senate , House committees will continue their work on a step-by-step , common-sense approach to fixing what has long been a broken system . The American people want our border secured , our laws enforced , and the problems in our immigration system fixed to strengthen our economy . But they do n't trust a Democratic-controlled Washington , and they 're alarmed by the president 's ongoing insistence on enacting a single , massive , Obamacare-like bill rather than pursuing a step-by-step , common-sense approach to actually fix the problem . The president has also demonstrated he is willing to unilaterally delay or ignore significant portions of laws he himself has signed , raising concerns among Americans that this administration can not be trusted to deliver on its promises to secure the border and enforce laws as part of a single , massive bill like the one passed by the Senate . ''
Democratic groups have funded advertising campaigns that target Republican House members perceived as persuadable on the immigration issue and those in districts where Latinos represent a growing constituency .
One of those targeted , Rep. Mike Coffman of Colorado , has said he would consider a path to citizenship for young people brought to the country illegally by their parents . But he told us late Tuesday that he was `` unsure about what to do with the adults . ''
Rep. Joe Heck of Nevada , a Republican in a politically competitive district with a Latino population of 16 percent , also supports the so-called Dream Act piece of immigration overhaul .
Here 's what his spokesman Greg Lemon told us this week :
`` Congressman Heck believes that we should find a way to give young people who were brought here illegally a chance to make a life for themselves in the only country they have ever known . His concern is making sure those young people are prepared to succeed and provide for their future families . ''
To Heck , that translates to a requirement of four years in the military , an associate or undergraduate degree , or a vocational certificate .
But on a pathway to citizenship ? `` His position has always been that he is open to considering proposals that address earned citizenship , '' Lemon said . `` The process must be tough but fair , and not penalize those already waiting in line . '' And , he said , they must be linked to border security measures that extend beyond the Senate bill 's 10-year sunset .
New York Rep. Michael Grimm , whose Staten Island-based district 's Latino population now exceeds 15 percent , opposes the Senate bill `` because it does n't contain strong enough enforceable triggers , '' his spokeswoman , Carol Danko , told us . `` Since the House seems likely to bring up its own bill , he will have to see it first before he can make a decision on how he will vote .
That leaves Republicans like freshman Rep. David Valadao , whose California district is 70 percent Latino , a rare GOP advocate of comprehensive immigration reform .
`` Our office as a whole is going to remain hopeful on this , '' said Anna Vetter , Valadao 's spokeswoman . `` A lot of our members who do n't support it either do n't understand the issue fully , or are n't directly affected by it . ''