Still , Mr. Miller has left a big mark , in ways both obvious and obscure . After two highly publicized failures , he helped craft a travel ban that passed court muster . A fervent critic of refugee programs , he has helped cut annual admissions by about three-quarters since the end of the Obama administration .
Writing in Politico , his uncle , Dr. Glosser , expressed an “ increasing horror ” at his nephew ’ s hostility to refugees and noted that their ancestor , Wolf-Leib Glosser , arrived at Ellis Island after fleeing Russian pogroms . Had Mr. Miller ’ s policies prevailed then , he wrote , the Glossers probably “ would have been murdered by the Nazis , ” as most in their village were .
With less fanfare , Mr. Miller has guided a series of policy changes that critics liken to building an “ invisible wall. ” The Migration Policy Institute , a nonpartisan research group , counted more than 100 of them , noting that “ most have moved forward untouched . ”
The Trump administration quadrupled the number of work site investigations . It slowed the processing of temporary H-1B visas . It imposed new performance measures on immigration judges , to encourage faster deportations .
Though Mr. Miller was often the driving force , many of these changes were longstanding goals of the restrictionist movement . “ He comes from a community of people who ’ ve been working on this , some of them , since the ’ 90s , ” said Roy Beck , the president of NumbersUSA .
Beyond the commas and clauses of government rules , Mr. Miller and Mr. Trump are trying to change something deeper : America ’ s self-conception as a land of immigrants . Mr. Trump is the son of an immigrant . Two of the three women he married are immigrants . Four of his five children have an immigrant parent . Yet his immigration agency rewrote its mission statement to remove the phrase “ nation of immigrants . ”
Mr. Miller even took to the White House briefing room to offer a revisionist view of the Statue of Liberty . Like many in his movement , he argued it should not be seen as welcoming immigrants because it was originally built for a different purpose ( to celebrate political freedom ) and that the Emma Lazarus poem hailing the “ huddled masses ” carries little meaning because it was added later .