U.N. agencies convene Monday in Geneva to request a sum of $ 434 million to fund a massive emergency response to the Rohingya refugee crisis in eastern Bangladesh , where nearly 600,000 people have crossed the border after fleeing recent violence in Myanmar .
The crisis began in the days after an Aug. 25 attack on state security forces by Rohingya insurgents , which triggered a brutal military crackdown on civilians that has sent more than half of the total Rohingya population fleeing in what may be the fastest cross-border exodus in modern history .
The Myanmar military has been accused of a campaign of “ ethnic cleansing. ” Refugees arrived alleging gang rape , extrajudicial killings and the burning of hundreds of villages , which rights groups have documented in satellite imagery . The government of Aung San Suu Kyi , the country ’ s de facto leader and a Nobel Peace Prize laureate , denies the atrocities .
But eight weeks later , waves of desperate and dehydrated refugees continue pouring across the Bangladeshi border , seeking sanctuary in what is becoming the world ’ s largest displacement camp . The government of Bangladesh , itself an impoverished country that does not recognize the Rohingya as refugees , has allowed them entry but is struggling to cope with the world ’ s most rapidly developing humanitarian crisis .
Read more : Will the Rohingya Exodus Be Aung San Suu Kyi ’ s Fall From Grace ?
The response needs are many in what aid workers describe as a textbook example of a “ complex crisis. ” An already enormous refugee population — some 400,000 Rohingya have lived in camps along the border since fleeing earlier violence in the 1970s , 1990s and in Oct. 2016 — more than doubled in the span of just a few weeks , as others continue to arrive each day .
The sprawling camp complex is now home to about a million people , most of whom live in flimsy bamboo structures with tarpaulin rooftops and no electricity beyond a few solar panels salvaged by refugees as they fled . U.N. staff have warned that the crowded and filthy compound , comprising two decades-old camps called Kutupalong and Balukali which have now become a sort of city for the displaced , is ripe for an outbreak of disease such as cholera or malaria .
UNICEF says about 60 % of Rohingya refugees are children , many suffering from severe acute malnutrition . The agency , which has requested $ 76 million to support life saving assistance over the next six months , said last week that children are arriving at the astounding rate of up to 12,000 per week . Once settled in the relative safety of the displacement camp , they face additional threats of malnutrition , disease and vulnerability to human trafficking .
Read more : The Rohingya Exodus Surges Again , as Thousands More Arrive at the Bangladesh Border
The U.N. ’ s World Food Program , the compound ’ s primary nutritional provider , says it needs $ 77 million to assist some one million people . The agency currently has only about 30 % of the funding it needs , which will keep operations up through November , but still requires an additional $ 54 million to maintain its work through February . WFP provides rice , lentils and soybean oil that the refugees need to survive , as well as high-nutrition supplements for the many pregnant women and malnourished children under five among them .
UNHCR , the U.N. ’ s refugee agency , will request $ 84 million to assist what it has deemed a “ level 3 emergency , ” the body ’ s most severe crisis alert . The agency to date has delivered about 500 tonnes of material assistance in five airlifts . The refugee community is completely reliant on such aid , having no livelihood opportunities at present .
High-level delegates attending Monday ’ s conference include members of a Central Emergency Relief Fund managed by the U.N. ’ s Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ( OCHA ) . Members include the governments of Canada , Japan , the U.K. and the U.S. Rights groups worry that existing funds , allocated in six-month intervals amid a decades-long crisis that has shown no sign of easing soon , are not enough to meet the extreme humanitarian needs .
Amnesty International called Friday for new assistance from other Asian countries to help share the burden suddenly thrust on Bangladesh , itself a poor country and among the world ’ s most densely populated . Omar Waraich , Amnesty ’ s Deputy South Asia Director , called for an immediate and sustained response to the “ unprecedented crisis . ”
“ This means that more countries , particularly those from the region , need to play a much bigger role and share the burden of responsibility , ” Waraich said in a statement . “ Bangladesh , a poor country which has shown extraordinary generosity , can not be left to deal with this alone . ”