JACKSON , MS -- Donald Trump seemed to back away this week from a cornerstone of his campaign : His hardline stance on illegal immigration , including his support for mass deportations and opposition to legalization for undocumented immigrants .
Embed Trump modifies his stance on immigration 3:26 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog
The move stunned pundits and even prompted criticism from some outspoken pro-Trump commentators , including conservative author Ann Coulter . After all , Trump 's vigorous opposition to illegal immigration helped separate him from the GOP primary pack and catapult him to prominence in the race .
But , at least so far , the voters attending his rallies do n't seem bothered .
`` That 's how he negotiates things , '' said Barry Meadd , a Tampa Bay builder who attended Trump 's rally there Wednesday . Meadd said the shift simply reflected the negotiation strategy Trump lays out in his book , `` The Art of the Deal . ''
`` You always , in the process of dealing with anything you start out high and you come back to what you were gon na start with , in the middle . Everybody thinks they get a good deal -- and he gets what he wants . ''
Meadd said that , as the owner of a small construction firm , his business had suffered because of low-wage undocumented workers . But he accepted Trump 's softer stance on deportations because , `` to me , that 's just being reasonable . ''
Meadd 's comments were characteristic of the sentiment expressed by Trump supporters at his rallies across the nation this week .
Their blasé attitude suggests Trump could maintain his base of support even as he softens his stance on immigration and other key issues in a bid to broaden his support for the general election .
Some Trump fans saw the candidate 's move away from mass deportations as an expected and even necessary shift .
`` I think it 's necessary for him to give up those positions , '' said Elizabeth Huckabee , a nurse from Tupelo who attended Trump 's Jackson rally . `` He has made a lot of people mad . ''
Trump 's comments on Mexican immigrants being `` rapists and murderers '' were some of his most incendiary , and set the tone for a campaign that 's seen the candidate offend a different minority or religious group nearly every month . So it 's no surprise that , as Trump looks to revamp his image for the general and make up for lost ground against Democrat Hillary Clinton in August , he 's softening his stance on immigration and offering a more sympathetic tone on the issue .
And anti-illegal immigration advocates say the shift away from mass deportations actually brings him closer to orthodoxy on the issue . Roy Beck , executive director of NumbersUSA , a group that advocates for a reduction in immigration levels , said most groups like his oppose mass deportation because it 's impractical and costly .
`` So to the extent that he is sending that signal ... he 's putting himself in line with most of the pro-enforcement community , '' he said .
But not all were willing to overlook the shift . Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions , an immigration hardliner who 's advised Trump on the issue , seemed puzzled by it . `` Did he say soften ? '' he asked reporters , unable to respond when asked how he felt about Trump 's appearance on Fox . Coulter called Trump 's softening on immigration a `` mistake . ''
And Beck warned , before Trump 's town hall with Hannity aired , that allowing law-abiding undocumented immigrants to stay in the U.S. -- exactly the policy Trump seemed to float during the town hall -- `` then I think he would lose a ton of support . ''
`` I think an awful lot of his base of support is based on , he was actually going to do something , '' Beck said .
It 's too early to tell if Trump 's shift will do any lasting damage to his support , or even if he 'll codify his new rhetoric into policy . He left enough wiggle room during his interviews to change course yet again , and on Wednesday night was back to attacking the media for `` pushing amnesty . ''
But if Trump ends up entirely abandoning conservatives on immigration , he 'll have one constant to fall back on to give him an advantage : He 's not Hillary Clinton .
`` Trump is not trustworthy on immigration—Hillary is , '' said Mark Krikorian , executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies , which supports immigration restrictions . `` Hillary can be trusted to be the worst president on immigration in history . ''
Even those Trump supporters who are concerned about his comments say they 're more worried about Clinton .
Tye Stout , an IT manager at Trump 's rally in Austin , said he was opposed to allowing any undocumented immigrants to become permanent residents , and seemed uncomfortable with Trump 's apparent immigration shifts .
`` Hopefully he 's still gon na consider securing the border , '' he said , seeming to acknowledge Trump 's most recent comments may even throw Trump 's border wall into doubt .
But even if Trump does abandon his original policy , `` I just would n't consider voting for Hillary ever , '' Stout said . He also felt that the libertarian and green tickets are n't viable .
`` And I will vote , '' he added , `` so there 's only one option . ''