New Jersey Gov . Phil Murphy signed a bill on Thursday allowing illegal immigrants to obtain driver 's licenses , making the Garden State the 14th state in the country , along with the District of Columbia , to enact such a measure .
`` Expanding access to driver 's licenses is critical for the safety of New Jerseyans and a step toward building a stronger and fairer New Jersey for all , '' Murphy said .
Murphy , a Democrat , signed the bill after it was approved by the Democratic majorities in both the state Assembly and Senate , during their final legislative sessions of the year .
“ The legislation advanced on the Assembly floor and by the Senate today is fair and responsible , ” Assembly Speaker Craig Coughlin , a Democrat , told The Wall Street Journal . “ It brings us one step closer to ensuring all motor vehicles and drivers are insured , thereby creating safer roadways for all New Jersey residents . ”
ACTING DHS SECRETARY : STATES PLAYING POLITICS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY BY GIVING DRIVERS LICENSES TO ILLEGALS
The legislation allows illegal immigrants over age 16 to obtain driver 's licenses and learner 's permits . Applicants can use foreign documents such as passports or their old driver 's license from their home country to complete the process . A Social Security number is not required , according to The Associated Press .
The law reportedly establishes two types of licenses . One would conform to federal REAL ID requirements and would require proof of legal residency . The second license would only require six points of identification . The applicant would not have to provide proof of U.S. citizenship .
A similar measure known as `` The Green Light Law '' was signed by New York 's Democratic Gov . Andrew Cuomo earlier this year and went into effect this week . It also allows illegal immigrants to obtain a license without having to provide a Social Security number or proof of American citizenship .
Fox News ' Danielle Wallace and The Associated Press contributed to this report