Marco Rubio has been the junior senator from Florida for barely two years , but he 's already considered a likely 2016 presidential contender .
The 41-year-old Republican 's political star rose still higher this week when he joined a bipartisan group of senators offering a path to citizenship to millions of unauthorized immigrants .
It 's the latest in a series of shifts on immigration by Rubio , the Miami-born son of Cuban exiles who ran for Senate in 2010 as a Tea Party-backed conservative , rejecting a so-called earned path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants , which at the time he called `` code for amnesty . ''
`` This allows people the access to make their status at this moment legal , if they meet certain benchmarks . And , ultimately , to have access to the regular opportunity that anybody else in the world would have , to get a green card , '' Rubio said this week , in joining other senators to announce the framework of their plan . `` And obviously , once you get a green card , you 're three to five years away from being a citizen . ''
In a brief interview , Rubio called his reason for joining the bipartisan effort simple : `` It 's important for our country . It 's important for Florida . And I just want us to handle it in a way that 's permanent and responsible . ''
`` He appears to be different things to different people , '' says Rollins College political scientist Richard Foglesong , a fellow Floridian . `` And if one looks back over his career , he 's done a pretty good job of being what it is that people want him to be . ''
But another Florida political observer sees Rubio 's current position as a return to his roots on the issue of immigration .
`` When Marco was in the Florida House , he was what you consider to be progressive today on immigration issues , '' says Steve Schale , a Democratic consultant who watched Rubio 's career in the state Legislature . `` He fought for things like in-state tuition for children of illegal immigrants . In a lot of ways , I think this is Rubio making the full circle back to where he was on these issues 10 years ago . ''
Rubio 's move may also give conservatives needed political cover to join him .
`` I think he 'll be a great voice on immigration reform , '' says Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , who 's part of the bipartisan group . `` He 's a good solid conservative , rising star in our party . I think it will help our chances of success greatly . ''
But an immigration overhaul with a path to citizenship can be a tough pill to swallow for many conservatives . Emory University political scientist Merle Black says it 's also a big risk .
`` What Rubio 's done is to put himself in a position where he has to explain his position , and he 'll have to do this over and over again , '' says Black .
For his part , Rubio waged a charm offensive all this week with conservative talk show hosts . He told Rush Limbaugh that since Democrats are pushing for immigration changes , conservatives had to be in the mix as well .
`` I know this is a tough issue . I do . I know why people are uncomfortable about it , '' Rubio said during an interview with Limbaugh . `` It does n't feel right , to in some instances , to you know , allow people who have come here undocumented to be able to stay . I know that for some people they are uncomfortable with that notion . This is a tough issue to work through . ''
Limbaugh seemed charmed : `` What you are doing is admirable and noteworthy . You are recognizing reality . You 're trumpeting it . You 're shouting it . ''
Yet William Gheen , president of the advocacy group Americans for Legal Immigration , says he feels betrayed by Rubio .
`` Marco Rubio , you will never be president of the United States of America , '' says Gheen . `` Trying to stand up for illegal alien invaders instead of American citizens is a campaign killer , and Marco Rubio 's name is now synonymous with a Republican turncoat trying to push amnesty for illegal immigrants . ''
Such pushback , says Democratic consultant Schale , should not surprise Rubio .
`` He 's a pretty bright guy . I think he understands the risk he 's taking here , '' says Schale . `` But he 's also ambitious , and I 'm sure he 's made the calculation that in the long run , this is the right place to be . ''
Much may depend on how many of Rubio 's fellow conservatives think it 's the right place to be .