Democrats Reject Trump Border Wall Proposal , Calling It A 'Non-Starter '
With negotiations over reopening the government at a standstill , President Trump offered to back temporary protections for some immigrants brought to the country illegally as children , many of whom are now adults , in exchange for funding for a wall on the Southern border .
In a White House speech on Saturday , Trump also offered to extend the Temporary Protected Status program that blocks deportation of certain immigrants fleeing civil unrest or natural disasters .
$ 805 million for drug-detection technology to secure ports of entry ;
75 new immigration judge teams for a court backlog of nearly 900,000 cases ;
Allowing Central American minors to apply for asylum in their home countries ;
$ 5.7 billion for strategic deployment of physical barriers , or a wall , but not , Trump said , a 2,000-mile concrete structure . The president said he wants to add 230 miles this year and claimed the crime rate and drug problem `` would be quickly and greatly reduced '' and that `` some say it would be cut in half . ''
Three years of legislative relief for some 700,000 recipients of the Obama-era initiative known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA , which protects some immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children from deportation . The Trump administration had moved to end DACA , but the decision was challenged in court and is currently held up in legal proceedings . Trump 's proposal would give an extension of legal status ;
A three-year extension of Temporary Protected Status for some 300,000 facing expiration ;
The president said these measures would allow three more years of certainty to work on a larger immigration deal .
However , even before he spoke , the deal appeared to be dead on arrival with Democratic leaders . They insisted Trump needs to open the government before beginning any negotiations over border security or barrier funding .
Before the speech , House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , responded to initial reports of the president 's offer by calling it `` a compilation of several previously rejected initiatives , each of which is unacceptable . '' She added that Trump 's proposal does not `` represent a good faith effort to restore certainty to people 's lives . ''
Some 800,000 federal workers throughout the country have either been furloughed or made to work without pay . Workers have now missed one paycheck and will miss another if the shutdown is not resolved in the next week . Trump has signed legislation to give back pay to federal workers once the government is reopened .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , pledged to put Trump 's proposal up for a vote this week .
`` Everyone has made their point — now it 's time to make a law , '' McConnell said in a statement shortly after the speech . `` I intend to move to this legislation this week . With bipartisan cooperation , the Senate can send a bill to the House quickly so that they can take action as well . The situation for furloughed employees is n't getting any brighter and the crisis at the border is n't improved by show votes . But the president 's plan is a path toward addressing both issues quickly . ''
Rep. Mark Meadows , R-N.C. , head of the conservative House Freedom Caucus , praised Trump 's move and put the ball in Democrats ' court .
But not everyone in the conservative base was happy with Trump 's proposal . Conservative commentator Ann Coulter called Trump 's move `` amnestying millions of illegals . ''
During this , the longest partial government shutdown in U.S. history , Trump has suffered in the polls , which have found more people blame the president than congressional Democrats . And that number is on the rise . An NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist poll also found Trump 's approval rating down to 39 percent and slipping with his base .
Coming out Saturday and making this speech was an attempt by the president to reclaim the narrative and appear conciliatory . Democrats indicate the president did not reach out to them before the speech and do n't see what he 's doing , as Pelosi noted , as a good faith effort at compromise .
Trump 's offer is based , in part , on bipartisan legislation proposed by Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , and Dick Durbin , D-Ill. , known as the Bridge Act . The bill would give three years of protections to the so-called `` DREAMers '' — immigrants who came to the U.S. illegally as children . But before Trump 's speech , Durbin , a member of the Democratic leadership in the Senate , rejected Trump 's use of the bill in this way and called for the government first to be reopened before any negotiations on a border barrier could take place .
`` First , President Trump and Senate Majority Leader McConnell must open the government today , '' said Durbin , the minority whip in the Senate . `` Second , I can not support the proposed offer as reported and do not believe it can pass the Senate . Third , I am ready to sit down at any time after the government is opened and work to resolve all outstanding issues . ''
This is the latest move by the White House in the midst of its showdown with Democrats , who have balked at providing the money for construction of a border wall . Democrats contend that Trump 's push for the wall is immoral and that it is an ineffective way to stop illegal crossings .
Trump argues a wall is necessary for national security . He has refused to sign any spending bill without funding for it . Back in December , the president indicated that he would sign temporary funding measures to keep the government open but then faced a backlash in conservative media over it . He reversed course , which led to the shutdown .
Until now , the White House had said it would be open to negotiating on the amount of money it will accept for a wall but has been noncommittal about offering other concessions to Democrats .
Almost a year ago , Democrats offered some $ 25 billion in exchange for a path to citizenship for those almost 700,000 DACA recipients . Democrats say Trump balked at the offer , demanding more after Democrats thought they had a deal .
Democrats have passed several bills out of the House to fund and reopen agencies that are currently shut down . McConnell has not brought them to the floor of the Senate , deferring instead to the need for negotiations between Trump and Democrats .