Nonprofit news organization ProPublica published a report Monday uncovering a Facebook group for current and former Border Patrol agents filled with derogatory posts targeting migrants and lawmakers .
Created in August 2016 , the Facebook group is called “ I ’ m 10-15 , ” referring to the code for `` aliens in custody , '' and boasts roughly 9,500 members from across the country .
The group is described as secret , and it is not immediately clear whether ProPublica was able to verify how many of the members are actually current or former agents .
At least some of the posters were verified to be agents by ProPublica .
In one post , group members reportedly joked about a 16-year-old Guatemalan migrant who died in May while in custody at a Border Patrol station in Weslaco , Texas .
Another post included a photo illustration of Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Alexandria Ocasio-CortezOcasio-Cortez blasts McCarthy as a 'bumbling , sloppy , dishonest mess ' over Trump defense House Ethics panel reviewing Tlaib over campaign salary Ocasio-Cortez : Trump amplifying calls for civil war 'pathetic ' and 'reckless ' MORE ( D-N.Y. ) , who has been bombarded with sexist and racist comments since being elected last year , engaged in oral sex with a detained migrant .
Another post included an illustration of a smiling President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE forcing Ocasio-Cortez ’ s head toward his crotch . The agent who posted the image commented : “ That ’ s right bitches . The masses have spoken and today democracy won . ”
Ocasio-Cortez shared the report Monday , saying it showed `` a violent culture '' in Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) .
`` 9,500 CBP officers sharing memes about dead migrants and discussing violence and sexual misconduct towards members of Congress . How on earth can CBP ’ s culture be trusted to care for refugees humanely ? PS I have no plans to change my itinerary & will visit the CBP station today , '' she tweeted .
9,500 CBP officers sharing memes about dead migrants and discussing violence and sexual misconduct towards members of Congress .
How on earth can CBP ’ s culture be trusted to care for refugees humanely ?
PS I have no plans to change my itinerary & will visit the CBP station today . — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez ( @ AOC ) July 1 , 2019
“ These comments and memes are extremely troubling , ” Daniel Martinez , a sociologist at the University of Arizona in Tucson who studies the border , told ProPublica “ They ’ re clearly xenophobic and sexist . ”
The postings , for Martinez , reflect what “ seems to be a pervasive culture of cruelty aimed at immigrants within CBP . This isn ’ t just a few rogue agents or ‘ bad apples . ’ ”
Rep. Joaquin Castro Joaquin CastroJudge blocks Trump administration from detaining migrant children indefinitely Live coverage : House panel to hear about whistleblower complaint Julián Castro : It 's time for House Democrats to 'do something ' about Trump MORE ( D-Texas ) , head of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus , reviewed the Facebook discussions and was incensed .
“ It confirms some of the worst criticisms of Customs and Border Protection , ” he told ProPublica . “ These are clearly agents who are desensitized to the point of being dangerous to migrants and their co-workers . ”
The CBP on Monday announced that it reached out to the agency ’ s Inspector General after learning of the posts in the group .
`` These posts are completely inappropriate and contrary to the honor and integrity I see — and expect— from our agents day in and day out , '' Border Patrol chief Carla Provost said in a statement .
`` Any employees found to have violated our standards of conduct will be held accountable . ''
The investigation comes after an analysis of thousands of police officers ’ Facebook accounts published by BuzzFeed News and Injustice Watch earlier this year which found hundreds of violent and racist posts .