President Trump said Tuesday that the administration has no plans to revive the controversial policy that allowed for family separations at the border , amid renewed speculation about whether the practice could return amid the shakeup at the Homeland Security department .
“ We ’ re not looking to do that , ” Trump told reporters on Tuesday prior to a closed-door meeting with Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi .
KIRSTJEN NIELSEN MAKES FIRST PUBLIC COMMENTS SINCE RESIGNATION AS DHS BOSS
He added that “ once you don ’ t have it , many more people are coming , like a picnic . Like Disney Land . ”
The president ended the practice under pressure and mounting criticism last year .
But the issue of family separations has emerged once again after DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen 's resignation and other changes in the department . The president also withdrew the nomination of acting Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) Director Ron Vitellio to become the permanent head of the agency , telling reporters that “ Ron ’ s a good man , but we ’ re going in a tougher direction , we want to go in a tougher direction . ”
Speaking with reporters on Tuesday , though , Trump sought to pin the blame on his predecessor for the uproar .
“ Obama separated the children , just so you understand . President Obama separated the children , ” Trump said . “ The cages that were shown , very inappropriate , they were built by President Obama and the Obama administration –not by Trump . ”
“ The press knows it , you know it , we all know it , ” he said . “ I ’ m the one that stopped it . ”
Initial images of cages with children inside that spread on social media last year indeed were from the Obama administration . The photos , taken in 2014 by The Associated Press , were wrongly described as illustrating imprisonment under the Trump administration .
But while some family separations may have happened under Obama , it was not nearly as widespread as it was during the Trump administration , amid a “ zero tolerance ” policy that led to the separations .
Neither the Obama administration nor the Trump administration had an explicit family separation policy , but the “ zero tolerance ” policy meant that anyone caught crossing the border illegally was to be criminally prosecuted , even if they had few or no previous convictions . Under that policy , adults were taken to court for criminal proceedings , while their children were separated from them . If the charges took longer than 72 hours to process , children would be sent from the care of Customs and Border Protection to the Health and Human Services Department .
SECRET SERVICE DIRECTOR TO STEP DOWN , ON HEELS OF NIELSEN RESIGNATION
Last June , Trump signed an executive order that stopped family separations .
Trump also slammed congressional Democrats Tuesday for not doing enough to `` act '' on border security .
`` Homeland security is what we want -- there 's no better term , there 's no better name , '' Trump said . `` We want homeland security and that ’ s what we ’ re gon na get . ''