The news last week that federal authorities had to release 2,837 convicted sex offenders back onto the streets has renewed focus on a Supreme Court case that requires the government to release immigrants whose home countries won ’ t take them back .
A report released last week by the Government Accountability Office said the nearly 3,000 sex offenders are part of the 59,347 immigrants who the courts have ruled can not be held , whom the U.S. has been unable to send home , and who instead were released under some sort of supervision as of September 2012 .
The GAO took a sample of the sex offender cases and concluded that about 5 percent of the time U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement didn ’ t ensure that the immigrants released were properly registered with local authorities as sex offenders .
“ I ’ m surprised that only 5 percent of them are not properly registered , ” said Jessica Vaughan , director of policy studies at the Center for Immigration Studies .
She said ICE isn ’ t particularly rigorous about monitoring many of those it releases .
Following on news this year that ICE released a number of immigrants from custody and blamed automatic budget cuts , the latest report again highlights a thorny part of the immigration system .
SEE ALSO : Immigrant-rights groups call for October rally in D.C .
In this case , the sex offenders and other immigrants — legal and illegal — who have been released are thanks to a 2001 Supreme Court ruling in what is known as the Zadvydas case . The court ruled 5-4 that detention for immigration purposes can ’ t be punitive ; therefore , if there isn ’ t a likelihood someone can be deported , they generally have to be released .
That matters because many countries delay documents to make it more difficult for U.S. deportation . The worst is Qatar , which takes an average of 800 days to issue the necessary deportation documents , according to ICE numbers that Ms. Vaughan obtained . That is followed by Cambodia at 522 days and Vietnam at 368 days .
Judy Rabinovitz , deputy director at the American Civil Liberties Union ’ s Immigrants ’ Rights Project , said the GAO report highlights how the system is supposed to work : Once illegal immigrants are released , they are supposed to be under supervision , and ICE is supposed to make sure the sex offenders register with authorities according to state and local laws .
“ The GAO report is focusing on the more important thing , which is that it ’ s the criminal justice system that ’ s responsible for these people and ICE should be cooperating with the criminal justice system , ” Ms. Rabinovitz said .
ICE regularly faces criticism from both sides of the immigration issue .
Advocates for strict enforcement want the agency to do more to detain dangerous immigrants it is trying to deport , and to do a better job of tracking those it doesn ’ t detain to make sure they don ’ t disappear into the country . But immigrant rights advocates said too many people are being detained and often are held in poor conditions , far from their families .
Under existing law , once another country refuses to accept its people for repatriation , the government is supposed to begin refusing to issue travel visas for citizens of that country to visit the U.S .
Ms. Vaughan said that can be a devastatingly effective tool , but administrations of both parties had refused to use it .
“ When you start denying student visas — any narrow category that you want , that hits people in the ruling elite in that other country — they start paying attention , ” Ms. Vaughan said . “ That is the best leverage we have with people in other countries , is visas , because they all want to come here , go to school here , go to Vegas , Disney World , whatever . ”
But Ms. Vaughan said the Department of Homeland Security hasn ’ t been proactive in pushing the visa retaliation .
A Homeland Security spokesman didn ’ t return a request seeking comment .
The massive immigration bill that passed the Senate this year waters down the visa penalty law , giving wide latitude to Homeland Security and the State Department to determine whether another country is being recalcitrant .
One of their immigration bills , which cleared the Judiciary Committee this year , would give the Homeland Security secretary the power to indefinitely order the detention of immigrants who are deemed to be public safety threats . That bill could come to the House floor this year if Republicans move ahead with an immigration debate .
The bill mirrors an approach championed by Rep. Lamar Smith , Texas Republican , in the previous Congress .
Ms. Rabinovitz at the ACLU said giving ICE permanent detention powers could be unconstitutional and is certainly misguided . She said the agency should be trying to figure out ways to reduce the population of detainees .
“ It ’ s just stupid , ” she said . “ We ’ re talking about a situation where we ’ re spending so much money on detention , we ’ re in a period of fiscal straits where we should be concerned about spending our money . To lock up people who aren ’ t a flight risk doesn ’ t make sense . All we ’ re saying is provide them with a bond hearing . ”