The House voted Friday to cancel the annual diversity visa lottery and give those immigration visas to high-tech foreign-born who earn advanced degrees from American universities , as Republicans powered through their chamber the first major immigration bill since the election .
The 245-139 vote was a test of the GOP ’ s plan to tackle immigration piecemeal , and while the bill passed , the strong opposition from Democrats suggests that Republicans ’ strategy will face difficult hurdles .
And while the chief selling point of the bill was to boost green cards given to science , technology , engineering and technology students , the bigger fight came over Republicans ’ plans to cancel the diversity visa lottery , which the GOP argues is rife with fraud .
“ We want to put to the head of the line the people who , every single one of them that comes , net creates jobs , ” said Rep. Darrell Issa , California Republican , who managed the bill on the House floor .
Democrats , though , objected to making immigration a zero-sum equation , where any new visas would have to come at the expense of existing lines of immigration .
“ I can ’ t support a bill that pits immigrant communities against each other , ” said Rep. Zoe Lofgren , the ranking Democrat on the House immigration subcommittee .
She also said that it ’ s not a one-to-one exchange , and immigration would actually decrease under the GOP bill .
While all 55,000 diversity visas are used every year , she said statistics from the National Science Foundation show that there are only about 30,000 students a year who would even qualify .
After Hispanics were credited with helping boost President Obama in this year ’ s elections , both parties have been eager to find ways to tackle immigration .
Democrats say they want to pass a broad bill that legalizes most illegal immigrants and rewrites the legal immigration system , while House Speaker John A. Boehner has said his chamber will go piece-by-piece .
Both Republicans and Democrats agree more should be done to keep desirable would-be immigrants , such as those earning advanced degrees , here in the U.S . But they disagree over whether to do that as a stand-alone , or what should be coupled with it .
In the case of this week ’ s bill , it eliminates the diversity visa lottery — a long-time target of some Republicans , who say it invites fraud and could be a national security risk .
The lottery doles out immigration visas based on chance , with the goal of giving those in lesser-represented countries a chance to earn a spot . Every year , millions of would-be immigrants apply for the 55,000 slots .
House Judiciary Committee Chairman Lamar Smith , who wrote the legislation , said the visa lottery invites fraud .
In an effort to sweeten the bill for Democrats , he included a provision that would allow legal immigrants to let their family members , who are also seeking green cards , to wait in the U.S. with them , rather than have to wait in their home countries .