Sen. Marco Rubio said Tuesday that there aren ’ t 60 votes to pass the immigration bill he wrote and that the Senate will have to embrace even stiffer enforcement in order to win voters ’ confidence and sway lawmakers reluctant to repeat the mistakes of the 1986 amnesty .
The Florida Republican ’ s acknowledgement comes as both sides of the debate are preparing for the bill to hit the Senate floor next week . After weeks of discontent simmering beneath the surface , conservatives and liberals have begun to publicly take shots at the bill , leaving immigrant rights groups to circle the wagons ahead of what ’ s expected to be a bruising floor fight .
“ In essence , what people say to us is , ‘ We know we have to reform the legal immigration system . We know we have to deal with the 11 million people that are here illegally , but we are only willing to do that if we can make sure that this never , ever , happens again , ’ ” Mr. Rubio said Tuesday on “ Fox and Friends . ”
Asked directly whether the proposal that the immigration bill that recently passed the Senate Judiciary Committee has the votes to pass the Senate , Mr. Rubio said , “ No . ”
Immigrant rights groups questioned whether Mr. Rubio was trying to scuttle the deal he negotiated with seven other senators — three Republicans and four Democrats — that would give quick legal status to illegal immigrants but withhold the full pathway to citizenship until after some steps are taking on enforcement .
Cristina Jimenez , an official with United We Dream , a group of young illegal immigrants who were granted stays of deportation by President Obama , said Mr. Rubio is “ moving the goalposts ” on a final immigration bill .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , Nevada Democrat , said he will push the bill ahead no matter what , and said it will be up to the GOP to decide whether they want something to pass .
“ Ninety percent or more of Democrats are going to vote to move forward on immigration . We want this bill passed . The system ’ s broken and needs to be fixed , ” he said .
Republicans already have signaled they won ’ t filibuster bringing the bill to the floor , which will give Mr. Rubio a chance to offer amendments to try to improve immigration enforcement .
Mr. Rubio said he thought even Democrats would concede they lack the votes to pass the bill , and in fact that ’ s the case . Late last month , Sen. Robert Menendez , another of the Gang of Eight senators who wrote the bill along with Mr. Rubio , said they lacked enough support right now .
“ We don ’ t currently have 60 votes identified in the Senate , ” the New Jersey Democrat told Univision . “ We need to add more votes on the floor . ”
The bill ’ s authors had hoped to clear not just the 60-vote threshold needed to overcome a filibuster , but to get 70 or more votes , which they hoped would give their bill momentum and convince wavering House lawmakers to take up the issue .
In his interview with Univision , a Spanish-language network , Mr. Menendez called for viewers to lobby their lawmakers to support the bill .
In the two months since senators unveiled their immigration bill , supporters have had momentum on their side , while the opposition had been relegated to a slim but vocal minority . That momentum pushed the bill through the Senate Judiciary Committee on a 13-5 vote , with three Republicans joining all 10 Democrats on the panel in support .
But with a week to go until the full floor debate , opposition has begun to increase , particularly on the left , where advocates warned that American workers could suffer from the bill ’ s provisions allowing future foreign workers to come into the country .
“ Increasing immigration levels through amnesty and new visa programs , particularly at the low-skilled level , will flood the labor market with millions more people , leading to higher unemployment , more poverty , and a lower standard of living for many in the black community , ” said Frank Morris , a leader of the Black American Leadership Alliance and a former executive director of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation .
Sen. Bernard Sanders , a Vermont independent who caucuses with Democrats , took to the Senate floor Tuesday to say that while he backs legalizing illegal immigrants , he fears that skilled-worker visas could triple and the influx of blue-collar foreign workers could rise eightfold under the bill .
“ At a time when the youth unemployment rate is more than 16 percent and the teen unemployment rate is over 25 percent , many of the jobs that used to be done by young Americans are now being performed by temporary guest workers , ” the senator said .
Meanwhile , conservatives have begun to poke at flaws they see in the bill .
Sen. Rand Paul , Kentucky Republican , announced Tuesday that he will offer an amendment that would require Congress to vote every year to certify whether the border was getting more secure — taking that evaluation out of the hands of the administration .
Under what he called his “ Trust but Verify ” amendment , if Congress deems the border not secure then much of the bill would be halted .