A US border security chief says he has temporarily stopped launching criminal prosecutions of migrants who illegally enter the country with children .
Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) Commissioner Kevin McAleenan told reporters in Texas the prosecution referrals were suspended last week .
He said it followed an order last week by President Donald Trump calling for an end to migrant family separations .
But Mr Trump had suggested the families would instead be detained together .
The Republican president bowed to public pressure last Wednesday , signing his executive order to `` keep families together '' in migrant detentions .
Mr McAleenan maintained that the Trump administration 's `` zero tolerance '' tactics were still in effect , although the commissioner 's guidance to his agents largely leaves the policy in limbo .
The CBP chief said parents can not be prosecuted if US officials no longer intend to separate them from their children , who are legally not allowed to be kept in adult detention facilities .
He said his agency and the Department of Justice must figure out how to prosecute the parents without splitting them from their children , the Associated Press news agency reported .
The border official 's decision paves the way for US immigration enforcement to revert largely to the approach under the Obama administration .
It means US border agents who stop undocumented adult migrants accompanied by children will hand them a court summons and allow them to go on their way , rather than hold them in a detention facility . Adults unaccompanied by children will still be detained .
Mr Trump repeatedly lamented this `` catch and release '' policy before his administration began in April criminally prosecuting adult migrants and holding their children separately to deter border crossings .
On Monday , White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said the reality was that the US did not have the space to hold all the undocumented families coming across the US-Mexico border .
`` We 're not changing the policy , '' she told reporters . `` We 're simply out of resources . ''
Mr Trump earlier said that the US needed `` a nice simple system that works '' .
`` We want a system where , when people come in illegally , they have to go out , '' he said .
The Pentagon confirmed on Monday that two Texas military bases will be used as temporary camps to house the immigrants .
But Defence Secretary Jim Mattis did not specify whether the facilities - Fort Bliss and Goodfellow Air Force Base - would house migrant families together .
US media earlier reported that one of the bases would be used to house migrant families and the other would shelter undocumented children who enter the US unaccompanied by an adult .
Meanwhile , US Attorney General Jeff Sessions talked tough on immigration at a school police officers ' conference in Reno , Nevada , on Monday .
America 's top law official said that refusing to prosecute adults who illegally enter the US `` would be a disservice to the people of this country '' , reports the New York Times .
He told the audience that lax border enforcement would `` encourage more adults to bring more children illegally '' .
However , he also said the Trump administration would `` do everything in our power to avoid separating families '' .
The government has yet to reunite parents with more than 2,000 children who have been taken away since last month and sent to holding cells , converted warehouses , desert tents or foster care around the US .
The American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) sought a federal court injunction in San Diego , California , on Monday to stop the administration from separating undocumented immigrant parents from their children .
It said that Mr Trump 's order to end separations contained `` loopholes '' .
Court papers filed by the ACLU contained numerous accounts of parents unable to locate or communicate with their children after they were separated by border officials .
In one declaration filed with the brief , a mother identified only by her initials E.J.O.E . said the government told her she would be reunited with her son as she applied for asylum .
But she says she was deported without her eight-year-old boy .
More than 20 separated children are at a US government tent camp in Tornillo , Texas .
CBS News , which was allowed to tour the facility , said the commander in charge described the `` zero tolerance '' policy as `` a dumb , stupid decision that should 've never happened '' .