Democratic lawmakers and candidates are increasingly seeking the elimination of Immigration and Customs Enforcement as part of their suite of demands in D.C. 's heated border battle .
The calls reflect not only the deepening divide between the two partisan poles on immigration -- with one side seeking a border wall , and the other looking to dismantle the lead enforcement agency -- but the growing influence of the progressive wing .
More and more Democratic politicians have embraced such causes as 'Medicare for all ' and a federal jobs guarantee . Now , they 're getting behind the call to abolish ICE , with gusto .
Perhaps no 2018 moment better captured that growing influence than liberal primary challenger Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez 's shocking victory Tuesday night over Rep. Joseph Crowley , D-N.Y. , a member of party leadership .
Ocasio-Cortez ran on all three of those platforms , and even protested outside an ICE center in Texas .
Crowley had hardly used moderate language in his description of ICE , making do with calling it a “ fascist ” organization that needed to be put “ back on its leash . ”
But that stance apparently was not enough for Democratic primary voters , who overwhelmingly backed Ocasio-Cortez . In comments to CNN Wednesday morning after her primary win , she went even further and claimed ICE was running “ black sites ” at the border .
“ Its extra-judicial nature is baked into the structure of the agency and that is why they are able to get away with black sites at our border , with the separation of children , ” she said .
The focus on ICE comes in the wake of the controversy over the Trump administration ’ s “ zero tolerance ” policy , which called for all illegal border crossers to be prosecuted . This in turn led to the separation of families due to longstanding detention rules , until President Trump signed an executive order last week ordering families be detained together .
With that controversy in the headlines , the abolition of ICE -- which has long been the purview of far-left sections of the Democratic Party base advocating for open borders and no deportations -- has moved from being a slogan on protest placards to an idea being mulled by rumored 2020 hopefuls .
On the East Coast , New York Gov . Andrew Cuomo is coming under heavy pressure from the left to call for the elimination of ICE , particularly amid a far-left challenge from actress and activist Cynthia Nixon -- who called it a terrorist organization .
“ ICE has strayed so far away from its mission . It is supposed to be here to keep Americans safe but what it has turned into , frankly , is a terrorist organization of its own that is terrorizing people who are coming to this country , ” she said , according to NY1 News .
While Cuomo has not called for abolishing the agency , he accused ICE in April of engaging in an “ assault on our democracy ” for its raids in the state and issued a cease-and-desist letter .
`` The reckless and unconstitutional practices ICE is deploying in our communities violate everything we believe in New York and are an assault on our democracy , '' Cuomo said .
On the West Coast , Sen. Kamala Harris , D-Calif. , who has been floated as a 2020 Democratic contender , said that the U.S. should consider “ starting from scratch ” for ICE -- though stopped short of calling to abolish it .
“ There ’ s no question that we ’ ve got to critically re-examine ICE and its role , and the way that it is being administered , and the work it is doing , ” Harris said on NBC ’ s `` Meet the Press '' Sunday . “ And we need to probably think about starting from scratch . ”
In Oregon , Rep. Earl Blumenauer , who voted against the agency ’ s creation in 2002 , doubled down on his opposition in a recent Medium post in which he called for it to be shut down .
“ We should abolish ICE and start over , focusing on our priorities to protect our families and our borders in a humane and thoughtful fashion , ” he said .
Rep. Mark Pocan , D-Wis. , announced Monday that he will introduce a bill to abolish the agency , set up during President George W. Bush ’ s administration in the wake of 9/11 .
“ I ’ m introducing legislation that would abolish ICE and crack down on the agency ’ s blanket directive to target and round up individuals and families , ” Pocan said in a statement . “ The heartless actions of this abused agency do not represent the values of our nation and the U.S. must develop a more humane immigration system , one that treats every person with dignity and respect . ”
The shift to the left on immigration has some Republicans and conservatives delighted , thinking that it may move Democrats into unelectable territory .
`` Based on the last week , Democrats apparently want to campaign on open borders , mass migration , & abolishing ICE , '' Sen. Tom Cotton , R-Ark. , said on Twitter . `` Give them points for honesty . Let 's vote . ''
“ Please , Democrats , make ‘ Abolish ICE ’ the focus of your campaign this fall ! ” tweeted Mark Krikorian , head of the Center for Immigration Studies which advocates for tighter immigration restrictions .
While calls to abolish ICE may sit well in New York City and Los Angeles , it is unclear how such calls would play in states like Pennsylvania , Ohio and Michigan -- where voters backed a hardline immigration policy with President Trump in 2016 .
In Florida , Democrats running against Republican Reps. Carlos Curbelo and Mario Diaz-Balart have shied away from embracing the ICE talking point .
`` Abolishing ICE is not the answer , '' Democrat Debbie Mucarsel-Powell , who is running against Curbelo , said , according to McClatchy . `` I believe the agency must correct its abuses and should dedicate its staff to protecting the country from actual threats , like child exploitation , human trafficking and drug-related crimes , instead of attempting to induce fear in immigrant communities . ''
But in the Democratic primary for Republican Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen ’ s seat , candidate Matt Haggman has repeatedly called to abolish the agency .
Haggman told ███ ’ Tucker Carlson last week that the agency needs to be replaced with something that would do more than simply focus on enforcement , although he wouldn ’ t say exactly what that would be .
“ The way we had it before under [ the now-defunct Immigration and Naturalization Service ] , something like that , we can enforce our immigration laws through another mechanism , not ICE which is out of hand , ” he said .
Some Democratic leaders , though , have continued to stress a need for border security .
When President Trump accused Senate Minority leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , of wanting open borders , Schumer was quick to respond by touting his support for border security measures .
“ Open borders , @ realDonaldTrump ? '' he tweeted . “ The bipartisan immigration bill I authored had $ 40 billion for border security and would have been far more effective than the wall . ”