The U.S. Supreme Court in Washington , D.C. , November 13 , 2018 ( Al Drago/Reuters )
The notion that a Democratic president should be able to unilaterally implement a policy like DACA but that it should be unlawful for a Republican president to undo the same policy in the same way really reflects the contemporary progressive view of American governance . Democrats these days seem to believe the use of power is justified by the strength of intentions and outcomes . Process is an afterthought .
Whether most voters are concerned with constitutional norms or not ( and I tend to think very few are ) the fear of political retribution had long induced political leaders parties to show some minimal restraint . You never know when you ’ ll be in the minority . While this was always been a rickety truce , Barack Obama and Harry Reid blew it up after 2010 . And today Democrats act as if history began in 2016 .
The Supreme Court heard arguments on Tuesday on the administration ’ s decision to end DACA . Democrat AGs maintained that the asserted rationale of the Trump administration wasn ’ t good enough . Then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions had argued that the program had exceeded the president ’ s statutory authority , which is the most persuasive argument there is for rolling back a program that , even by Obama ’ s admission , was implemented to circumvent Congress . The deadlock over immigration reform — or any other issue , for that matter — reflects the position of the elected legislative branch ; it ’ s not a signal for the president to act like a monarch . After all , we still have a deadlock on immigration , and Democrats surely don ’ t believe Trump should be dictating policy by pen and phone .
The executive branch doesn ’ t exist to be tie-breaker in tough national debates , and it doesn ’ t exist to craft laws in perpetuity . Even Obama called DACA “ a temporary stopgap measure ” — even after he had said over and over again that doing it was illegal . As a matter of politics , a DACA rollback might well be a problem for Republicans because somewhere around 70 percent of the American public supports it . I certainly support any comprehensive reform effort that also deals with illegal immigrants who were brought here as children . In the matter of reasserting the proper limits of power , however , an administration win on DACA is a win for the Constitution . Because in this instance , for his own reasons , Trump is on the side of restraint .