The Trump administration on Tuesday announced the “ orderly wind down ” of the Obama-era program that gave a deportation reprieve to illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. as children – putting pressure on Congress to come up with a replacement .
“ I do not favor punishing children , most of whom are now adults , for the actions of their parents . But we must also recognize that we are a nation of opportunity because we are a nation of laws , ” President Trump said , in a lengthy written statement explaining the decision .
The Department of Homeland Security formally rescinded the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , known as DACA , with a six-month delay for current recipients . According to Acting Homeland Security Secretary Elaine Duke , the interval is meant to give Congress “ time to deliver on appropriate legislative solutions . ”
“ However , I want to be clear that no new initial requests or associated applications filed after today will be acted on , ” Duke said in a written statement .
The decision touched off a firestorm on Capitol Hill , where Democrats blasted the president and Republicans blamed the prior administration for putting Trump in a legal bind .
Attorney General Jeff Sessions , speaking to reporters , decried what he called the Obama administration 's `` disrespect for the legislative process '' in enacting the 2012 policy . He said the “ unilateral executive amnesty ” probably would have been blocked by the courts anyway .
“ The executive branch , through DACA , deliberately sought to achieve what the legislative branch specifically refused to authorize on multiple occasions , ” Sessions said , blaming the policy for the recent “ surge ” at the border . “ Such an open-ended circumvention of immigration laws was an unconstitutional exercise of authority by the executive branch . ”
The Trump administration was facing a Tuesday deadline to make a decision on DACA or face legal action by Republican state AGs who hoped to force the president ’ s hand in discontinuing the program . A day earlier , Sessions sent Duke a letter with his legal determination that the 2012 executive action was unconstitutional .
Administration officials cast their approach Tuesday at the least disruptive option .
In his statement , Trump stressed that while new applications for work permits won ’ t be accepted , “ all existing work permits will be honored until their date of expiration up to two full years from today . ”
Trump also said applications in the pipeline will be processed .
“ This is a gradual process , not a sudden phaseout , ” he said . “ Permits will not begin to expire for another six months , and will remain active for up to 24 months . Thus , in effect , I am not going to just cut DACA off , but rather provide a window of opportunity for Congress to finally act . ”
Trump vowed to resolve the issue “ with heart and compassion , ” only this time working through Congress .
During the 2016 presidential campaign , Trump had promised to terminate DACA , though he appeared to soften his stance since taking office . In ending the program with a six-month delay , Trump put the onus on Congress to pass a legislative fix .
According to DHS , no current beneficiaries will be impacted before March 5 , 2018 .
“ Congress , get ready to do your job - DACA ! ” Trump tweeted Tuesday morning .
While some Republicans support the goals of the DACA program , many opposed the use of executive action to institute it , describing the move as a presidential overreach .
Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , is among those who now support the call to protect so-called “ Dreamers ” with legislation .
“ I have always believed DACA was a presidential overreach , ” he said in a statement . `` However , I equally understand the plight of the Dream Act kids who -- for all practical purposes -- know no country other than America . ”
On a conference call , administration officials said Tuesday they are still prioritizing criminal aliens for deportation . But they described the original DACA criteria as very broad and cited the legal determination of the Justice Department .
During the presidential campaign , Trump referred to DACA as “ illegal amnesty. ” However , he seemed to edge away from that stance in April when he told the Associated Press that DACA recipients could “ rest easy . ”
The DACA program was formed through executive action by former President Barack Obama in 2012 , allowing recipients to get a deportation reprieve – and work permits – for a two-year period subject to renewal . Under the program , individuals were able to request DACA status if they were under the age of 31 on June 15 , 2012 , came to the U.S. before turning 16 and have continuously lived in the country since June 15 , 2007 . Individuals must also have a high school diploma , GED certification , been honorably discharged from the military or still be in school . Recipients can not have a criminal record .
Congress had been considering legislation to shield young illegal immigrants from deportation for years , dating back to the George W. Bush administration . Lawmakers tried again to pass a bill during the Obama administration , but couldn ’ t muster the votes amid flagging Republican support before Obama formed the program in 2012 .
Nearly 800,000 undocumented youth are currently under the program 's umbrella .
HILL REPUBLICANS REVIVE ‘ DREAM ACT ’ TALKS AS TRUMP DECIDES FATE OF OBAMA PROGRAM
On Friday , House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , said he supported a legislative solution to protect undocumented minors , but also urged the president to reconsider scrapping DACA .
Following Tuesday 's announcement , however , Ryan called DACA a “ clear abuse of executive authority ” and urged Congress to act .
“ Congress writes laws , not the president , and ending this program fulfills a promise that President Trump made to restore the proper role of the executive and legislative branches . But now there is more to do , and the president has called on Congress to act , ” he said in a statement . “ At the heart of this issue are young people who came to this country through no fault of their own , and for many of them it ’ s the only country they know . ”
Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez said in a statement that , with the decision , `` Donald Trump has secured his legacy as a champion for cruelty . ''
`` President Trump ’ s decision to end DACA is a deeply shameful act of political cowardice and a despicable assault on innocent young people in communities across America , '' House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , said in a statement
Even as they blasted the president , Democrats called for legislative action , leaving open the possibility that the two parties could pass a bill in the coming months .