Law enforcement in San Francisco will no longer be cooperating with Immigration and Customs Enforcement , per a directive by San Francisco ’ s newly elected sheriff .
Paul Miyamoto , who was elected to be the top law enforcer in San Francisco in November 2019 , declared to a local media outlet Tuesday that his department will not help with federal immigration enforcement . While San Francisco has long opposed most cooperation with ICE , the announcement further cements the progressive city ’ s status as a sanctuary jurisdiction .
“ Our department is not involved in immigration enforcement , ” Miyamoto , the first Asian American sheriff of San Francisco , told KTVU Fox 2 . “ We feel that is a federal matter , and our realm of interest is public safety , and you can ’ t really have a safe community if the community members are afraid to come to us to report crimes . ”
Namely , his department will not honor immigration detainers lodged by federal agents . If an illegal alien in San Francisco is placed into local custody for an unrelated crime , and ICE asks that the individual be transferred into the agency ’ s custody , that request will simply be ignored .
Miyamoto argues that the policy promotes public safety , despite that there are many documented cases of illegal aliens committing additional crimes after they have been released from local custody .
The directive appears somewhat redundant given that authorities all across California have already been greatly prohibited in how they can work with ICE . Having been in effect since January 2018 , the California Values Act bars state and local agencies from honoring ICE detainer requests , making it impossible for illegal aliens to be directly transferred into the agency ’ s custody .
While giving his latest State of the Union address earlier in February , President Donald Trump specifically highlighted California as an example of the dangers of sanctuary policy . The president invited as his guest the brother of a man who was killed by an illegal alien . That particular alien had been arrested by local authorities and had an ICE detainer placed on him , but because of the California Values Act law , he was released back into the public .
The Trump administration took its opposition to California ’ s sanctuary policies a monumental step farther this month when the Department of Justice announced a complaint against a state law that prohibits the operation of private detention facilities . Attorney General William Barr said at the time that the law was intended to forbid the detention of aliens in the state .
San Francisco Mayor London Breed , a Democrat , declared that the city was being unfairly targeted by the Trump administration , but she remained adamant about the city ’ s protection of illegal aliens . ( RELATED : ‘ Endangers The Lives Of The Public ’ : Trump Goes On Rant About Los Angeles Mayor )
“ We ’ re being targeted on so many levels , ” Breed said . “ But , the fact is we ’ re a strong city , we ’ re a resilient city and we will fight against those attacks and we will protect the people of this city . ”