It might seem like an odd time for immigrants to sign up to formally become Americans — after all , Donald Trump ’ s campaign rhetoric showed more antipathy to immigrants ( especially Mexicans and Muslims ) than any presidential campaign in decades , and his electoral victory indicated that a great many Americans agreed with him .
But as the five new citizens getting naturalized at Thomas Jefferson ’ s home in Monticello this July Fourth , whom I spoke to in the days leading up to the ceremony , emphasized , citizenship is also a personal journey .
“ When we came here in 2009 , I was thinking , when I have to become a US citizen , when I have to become part of this great nation , ” says Laique Khan , who emigrated from Pakistan . “ That ’ s what I was thinking when they said , ‘ Mr . Khan , you have passed , and I would like to say that you are now becoming a US citizen in the coming month. ’ And I was really delighted , I was so happy . ”
The fact of it happening on the Fourth of July was just the cherry on top . Khan teased his wife ( who was naturalized earlier in a small ceremony ) about getting to become a citizen on Independence Day ; “ I sometimes said , ‘ You seem to be jealous of me , ’ ” he jokes .
It ’ s a choice that isn ’ t made in a moment , but over years or decades of living in the United States — deciding at the outset to become an American , or realizing it gradually over time . It ’ s a process that represents a long wait and a lot of sacrifices . And it ’ s an opportunity to have one ’ s voice heard going forward .
On the eve of their naturalization , no one in America was more patriotic than the Americans-to-be .
“ I knew that I would always make this my permanent home ”
Most of the citizens-to-be I spoke to had come to the US as very young children — they ’ re part of a group that scholars call the “ 1.5 generation , ” because they ’ re technically first-generation immigrants who came to the US themselves but have lived lives more similar to those of immigrants ’ US-born children .
Their parents had come to the US to make more money than they were making in their home countries , or to pursue an educational opportunity or help with a growing family business . But once they got here , they put down roots .
“ When we moved to America , my parents thought that we were going to go back , ” said Tina Chai , whose family initially came here from China so her father could take a medical research fellowship . But they were impressed by the quality of the education Chai was getting at school , and how “ elastic ” the curriculum was : Instead of having to study either science or the humanities , Chai could study both in interdisciplinary ways . It paid off : At UVA , she ’ s preparing for a career in medicine ( though “ who knows where life will take me , ” she says with a laugh ) by studying biochemistry as well as English , “ because I like to say that English really feeds the soul . ”
Economic opportunity could mean upward mobility — Juan Becerra ’ s parents came from a part of Mexico where there was “ nothing much besides working the cornfields ” — but it also meant sacrifice . Victor Zarate ’ s father , who had struggled to find work as a civil engineer in Mexico , found employment in the US in the hospitality industry ; he ’ s now a banquet manager at a country club .
It ’ s not easy to migrate to the US as an adult — more because of the language barrier , the new citizens said , than anything cultural . “ Even though we 've been living here for about an equal amount of time , ” Chai says of her parents , “ they can tell that I 'm definitely more of an American than they are — in the sense that I just speak very fluent English . ”
“ They definitely struggled more with the language barrier and not having that many friends that were American , ” Zarate said of his parents . “ They didn ’ t feel part of the community as much as my sister and I did. ” But he stresses that the whole family “ just put ourselves out there , ” making friends with Americans and “ trying to do a lot of what Americans were doing , ” and that it ultimately paid off .
“ When I came , ” says Khan , the only new citizen I spoke to who immigrated as an adult , “ everybody said that it lasts one , two , three years each ” to adjust — to get comfortable enough , personally and professionally , to find a career in the States . “ You have to start real hard , ” he admits , but “ after three and four years , each week goes better and better and better — and that 's life . ”
The younger generation appreciates these sacrifices intellectually — but knows that they don ’ t , fundamentally , see the US the same way their parents do .
“ My dad talks about how hard it is to get here and how hard it is to be successful here , ” says Athina Patac , who came to the US from the Philippines when she was young . “ But I just do n't understand because I did n't grow up the way that he grew up in a Third World country . ”
Most of the other new citizens I talked to haven ’ t been back to their home countries much either . Zarate is returning to his hometown of San Miguel de Allende , which he describes as “ one of the biggest tourist destinations in Mexico , ” for a brief internship after he becomes a citizen , and is looking forward to riding around on horseback and seeing the local museums — “ doing things with my family , things I never got to do growing up . ”
They ’ ve never really had the chance to think of themselves as anything but American .
“ Being young , I didn ’ t really understand what it meant to be Mexican or American . I just knew that my home was in Mexico , ” Zarate said . “ But after a couple of years living in the US , I liked it here ; all my friends are here right now . I knew that I would always make this my permanent home . ”
“ I think I was too young to really identify myself with any country at the time when I came , ” says Chai . “ But then I turned , I would say , maybe 13 or 14 , and that 's when I kind of saw myself as American — in the sense that , you know , this is where I 've been growing up for so long , this is where my friends are , where my parents are , where my heart is . ”
“ Always . I 've always considered myself an American , ” says Patac . “ I 've always considered myself , I guess , the same as everybody else . I did n't even put a title on my nationality , like whether or not I was a citizen of the Philippines or a citizen of the United States. ” Only when her Filipino passport expired when she was in college did she even think seriously about her citizenship — “ and then it was just like , oh , my gosh , so I need to get my life in order right now . ”
The road to citizenship hasn ’ t been bumpy — but it ’ s been long
When you ’ ve grown up American in your heart , becoming one on paper might seem like an inevitability . “ I didn ’ t really decide anything , ” says Chai ; “ it just sort of fluidly occurred . ”
But the process isn ’ t automatic . For Becerra , it ultimately took some help from a Brazilian woman who was running naturalization classes — and a lot of studying because , as a landscaping business owner , he ’ d forgotten some of the things he needed for the civics test . “ It 's not like we 're studying about historical stuff , you know , we 're out there doing lawn care . ”
Everyone I talked to was relieved and elated when they officially found out they were going to be naturalized — and realized , finally , just how long they ’ d been waiting for this moment .
Victor Zarate ’ s father told him the good news . “ He called me and was like , ‘ Have you looked ? ’ and I was like , ‘ No ’ and he was like , ‘ Well , you got it , ’ ” Zarate says . “ It was just a great feeling . ”
Athina Patac ’ s husband saw the envelope in the mail ; “ he Snapchatted me immediately . He 's like , ‘ Look what I got ! ’ And I was like , aaaaah ! Because we had been waiting for it for so long . ”
And for people who ’ ve lived near Monticello for years , being naturalized there is doubly significant . Zarate ’ s family was rooting for his naturalization ceremony to be located there ( which naturalization ceremony you ’ re part of is determined by the region where you live ) ; Tina Chai says it has extra significance for her because “ now I go to the University of Virginia , which , you know , is Jefferson ’ s university . ”
“ I 'm a part of history now , ” says Patac . “ Like I can tell my daughter that ... you know , like , this is how your mother , your grandmother became a citizen here on Independence Day , the national holiday of America . ”
It ’ s not about Trump — but it is about the need to have a voice
Of course , as timeless as it is to get naturalized on the Fourth of July , they ’ re also getting naturalized in 2017 — under a president whose attitude toward immigrants has been chilly at best . Donald Trump has targeted Muslim immigrants like Khan ; Mexican immigrants like Becerra and Zarate ; even “ the Chinese , ” like Chai .
For some immigrants , life under Trump has been alienating ; for others , it ’ s inspired them to get citizenship . But for the immigrants getting naturalized at Monticello whom I spoke to , getting citizenship isn ’ t about Trump — it ’ s about a personal journey .
None of the immigrants I spoke to have experienced personal discrimination , or prejudice , in the US .
“ It bothers you when you ’ re little , ” says Juan Becerra , but “ at the end of the day , I live a normal life and pay my taxes , pay for my home , and they 're not paying my bills , so I ai n't worried about them. ” ( Becerra dismisses Trump ’ s rhetoric about Mexicans ; the president is just talking about unauthorized immigrants and criminals , he says , and “ I 've never been in trouble with everything . I try to live a good life , uh , the right way . ” )
As for politics , Khan just doesn ’ t bring it up with anyone . “ Where I work , everybody respects me . I respect my bosses . They are so nice , so good , and I do n't want to talk any politics to them . ”
Victor Zarate admits that the “ political climate ” of 2017 isn ’ t exactly what he imagined he ’ d be welcomed into when he formally became an American . “ The political climate obviously hasn ’ t been all that friendly toward immigrants and Mexicans . The things you hear on the news aren ’ t , like , too awesome or fun to hear . ”
It ’ s been alienating for his parents , he says — “ with some of the rhetoric going around , I definitely don ’ t think they feel they are American or want to be ” — but ultimately , he rejects it as “ just a short phase . ”
“ That ’ s not really what Americans are about . It ’ s not really going to change what America is at all , I don ’ t think , ” he says . “ I ’ m still proud , I ’ m still excited to become an American . ”
In fact , Zarate says , he ’ s going to use his citizenship to speak up on behalf of his parents and others like them . “ Because I ’ m American I can , first of all actually be a part of the political process , I can vote , just have my voice heard more . I ’ m definitely going to speak up and help support immigration or immigrants that are here . That ’ s my story , and I had people that helped me growing up , so I want to try and help others who don ’ t feel like they have a voice . ”
While other new citizens weren ’ t so explicit about what they plan to advocate for , all of them shared that sentiment : that being American meant not just that they could vote , but that they could speak up in their community and have it matter .
“ Looking into leadership for the country and leadership for my daughter 's future , that really pushed me ” to naturalize , says Athina Patac . “ I want to be able to have a voice in any type of benefit for my future as well as any of my children 's future — I only have a daughter right now , but any of my future kids as well . But if I do n't have my citizenship , I would n't be able to vote , [ so ] even if I stood against any type of initiative strongly , there 's nothing I could do . ”
“ I want to be a part of voting , and I want to be part of , you know , the state , ” says Juan Becerra . “ It would feel good to be able to have a say in voting . People say that one vote does n't matter , but you never know , you know ? ”