A lawyer claims that several fathers have been separated from their children by Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) for a second time , after the fathers refused to withdraw their children ’ s cases to stay in the US and allow the government to deport the family together .
The fathers say that shortly after being reunited with their teenage children , they were presented with forms that gave them three “ options ” for their families ’ cases — with the option for deporting the child along with the parent already selected . One parent says the check mark had been made in pen ; two others report that they were told they had to sign the form with that option selected .
The allegation comes in a filing late Saturday night in the court case overseeing the federal government ’ s efforts to reunite families it separated at the US-Mexico border .
The Trump administration has said parents who have exhausted their own options to seek asylum have a choice : They can choose to have their children deported with them , withdrawing the child ’ s immigration case , or they can choose to be deported alone while the child stays .
In a comment to ███ regarding the allegations , a Department of Homeland Security official reiterated this . “ Asking parents in ICE custody , who are subject to a final order of removal , to make a decision about being removed with or without their children , is part of longstanding policy , ” the official said . “ ICE does not interfere in the parent ’ s decision to allow the child to remain in the US to pursue his or her own legal claim . ”
But Saturday night ’ s filing offers evidence of ICE agents doing just that . Either all four parents who spoke to the lawyer are lying or the lawyer ’ s declaration shows that the choice isn ’ t always being freely offered — and that parents who select the second option are having their children summarily taken from them , with no chance to say goodbye , for the second time in a matter of months .
ICE reportedly preselected one option on forms , and yelled at and threatened parents who wanted to select the other one
The testimony filed Saturday night comes from a pro bono lawyer who has been working with separated families in El Paso . She spoke to four fathers who were briefly reunited with their sons — all 16- or 17-year-olds — in a facility in El Paso on July 25 ( the day before the deadline to reunify all separated families ) , and placed on a bus with them that was then turned around and returned to the processing site .
The fathers claim that ICE agents presented them with forms that were written mostly in English , with three options at the bottom in Spanish : being deported with their children , being deported without their children , and waiting to speak to a lawyer .
All four claim that the first option — parent and child alike getting deported — had already been selected for them .
Join the conversation Are you interested in more discussions around family separation at the border ? See the full Q & A with Dara Lind in our Facebook community .
According to the testimony , parents who attempted to cross that out and choose the second option — being deported while allowing their children to pursue their case and stay in the US — were yelled at by the ICE agents or told they simply were not allowed to select another option . One was told that if he opted to be deported alone , his son would still get deported — and might be deported first .
When , ultimately , the four fathers whose accounts are represented in the testimony succeeded in selecting the option of getting deported on their own , they were prevented from saying goodbye to their children . Instead , their children were forced to wave to them from inside the bus they were still sitting on . One father testified :
He then asked if he could at least go back to the bus to retrieve his belongings from the storage area underneath the bus , and was told he could do so quickly . He said that when he went to the bus to do so , his son attempted to come outside the bus to see him , but was unable to do so .
Another father told the lawyer that “ being separated from his son the first time was hard , but being separated again after seeing his child for only ( a ) few hours , thinking they were going to be together , was harder . ”
Hundreds of parents could be deported in the next few days . This account raises the possibility that they ’ ve been coerced into taking their children with them .
When the Trump administration separated families at the US-Mexico border ( a practice it engaged in widely before a June 20 executive order , and that it was barred from using in most cases by a ruling in this lawsuit on June 26 ) , the children were reclassified as “ unaccompanied alien children ” as if they had arrived in the US without guardians .
That reclassification gave them more options for seeking legal status and a better chance of being allowed to remain in the US . Parents of as many as 1,000 children ( of the 2,551 kids ages 5 to 17 separated under the policy ) have already lost their asylum cases permanently , with the government claiming they have already exhausted their options for legal review . But their children ’ s cases are still alive .
Lawyers for the Trump administration have argued that simply bringing a child to the US shouldn ’ t allow an adult to stay once the adult ’ s case has been completed . The ACLU and the federal judge in the reunification case ( as well as a federal judge overseeing a court settlement about families in immigration detention ) have agreed .
The understanding , up until this point , has been that parents should be given the options presented on the form : be deported alone and accept indefinite separation , or be deported together and withdraw the child ’ s claim for legal status .
The ACLU has expressed concerns all week that in the chaos of family reunification , parents may not have realized what they agreed to , and that they need more time with their children to discuss their options before they ’ re deported . The government maintains that they were freely able to choose and have gotten all the time they need .
The new allegations seriously challenge the government ’ s claims . They paint a picture of a choice that isn ’ t being freely made at all — and one in which parents , instead of making a decision with their children , aren ’ t even being allowed to say goodbye .
The full response from a Department of Homeland Security official :
Asking parents in ICE custody , who are subject to a final order of removal , to make a decision about being removed with or without their children , is part of long-standing policy ( see Detained Parents Directive ) . For parents who have a final order of removal , and whose children have not received a final order , it is the parent ’ s decision whether to return with or without their children . ICE accommodates , to the extent practicable , the parent ’ s efforts to make provisions for the children . As appropriate , ICE will work with the parent to have the child return with the parent to their country of citizenship . When a child is in the care and custody of [ the Office of Refugee Resettlement ( ORR ) under the Department of Health and Human Services ] , ICE works with ORR to reunite the parent and child and with the consulate to assist the parent with obtaining a travel document for the child . Alternatively , a parent may opt to have ORR pursue release of the child to another parent , guardian , or sponsor who has been approved by ORR . ICE does not interfere in the parent ’ s decision to allow the child to remain in the U.S. to pursue his or her own legal claim . When parents are removed without their children , ICE , ORR , and the consulates work together to coordinate the return of a child and transfer of custody to the parent or foreign government upon arrival in country , in accordance with repatriation agreements between the U.S. and other countries . Unaccompanied children often are received by the country ’ s child welfare agency , who facilitate the reunification . When possible , ORR and ICE coordinate with in-country repatriation programs , which provide services to returned , unaccompanied children .
Are you interested in more discussions around family separation at the border ? Join our Facebook community for a live discussion with Dara Lind on Monday , July 30 , at 1 pm Eastern .