NEW YORK ( ███ ) - A federal judge on Friday ruled that the Trump administration must fully restore a program that protects from deportation some young immigrants who were brought to the United States illegally as children , including accepting new applications for the program .
U.S. District Judge John Bates in Washington , D.C. , said he would stay Friday ’ s order , however , until August 23 to give the administration time to decide whether to appeal .
Bates first issued a ruling in April ordering the federal government to continue the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA , program , including taking applications . He stayed that ruling for 90 days to give the government time to better explain why the program should be ended .
On Friday Bates , who was appointed by former President George W. Bush , a Republican , said he would not revise his previous ruling because the arguments of President Donald Trump ’ s administration did not override his concerns .
Under DACA , roughly 700,000 young adults , often referred to as “ Dreamers ” , were protected from deportation and given work permits for two-year periods , after which they must re-apply to the program .
The program was created in 2012 under former President Barack Obama , a Democrat .
Two other federal courts in California and New York had previously ordered that DACA remain in place while litigation challenging Trump ’ s decision to end it continued . Those rulings only required the government to process DACA renewals , not new applications .
Another lawsuit in a Texas federal court is seeking to end DACA .
A spokesman for the U.S. Department of Justice said on Friday that the government would continue to defend its position that it “ acted within its lawful authority in deciding to wind down DACA in an orderly manner . ”
Congress so far has failed to pass legislation to address the fate of the Dreamers , including a potential path to citizenship .
Friday ’ s ruling came in lawsuits filed by several groups and institutions , including the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and Princeton University .