SAN FRANCISCO — The attacks on San Francisco and other cities with similar immigration policies began moments after a jury acquitted a Mexican man of killing a woman on a popular pier , some calling for a boycott of the city that fiercely defends its reputation as a refuge for all .
President Donald Trump called the verdict a “ complete travesty of justice , ” and U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions demanded cities like San Francisco scrap immigration policies that bar cooperation with federal deportation efforts .
Twitter users turned to the hashtags # BoycottSanFrancisco and # kateswall to demand construction of the U.S.-Mexico border wall that Trump has called for . Conservative politicians and celebrities such as former Alaska Gov . Sarah Palin and actor James Woods lambasted the city as unsafe .
City officials vowed to stand behind their “ sanctuary city ” policy . It ’ s what led Jose Ines Garcia Zarate to be released from San Francisco ’ s jail despite a federal request to detain him for deportation several weeks before Kate Steinle was fatally shot in the back in 2015 . He had been deported five times and was wanted for a sixth .
“ San Francisco is and always will be a sanctuary city , ” said Ellen Canale , a spokeswoman for Mayor Ed Lee .
Sanctuary policies improve public safety by allowing immigrants to cooperate with police without fear , said state Sen. Scott Wiener , a Democratic former San Francisco supervisor .
“ This family has been through hell , but there are people , including our president , who continue to use this tragedy to demonize immigrants and to slander immigrants by suggesting they are all criminals , and that is not true , ” he said Friday .
San Francisco was among the first U.S. cities to establish a sanctuary law in 1989 as part of a national wave of local policies intended to help Central American refugees .
Since then , the city consistently has been an early adopter of some of the most immigrant-friendly policies nationwide , and it takes pride in serving as a safe place for religious and gender minorities , non-English speakers and people in the country illegally . Hundreds of other cities have similar immigration policies .
A judge did not allow immigration politics into the courtroom for Garcia Zarate ’ s trial .
San Francisco Deputy District Attorney Diana Garcia urged jurors to convict Garcia Zarate of first-degree murder , saying he had come to the pier with a gun and a desire to hurt someone .
His attorneys argued that he found a gun wrapped in cloth under a chair on the pier and it fired when he picked it up .
Jurors rejected charges of murder and involuntary manslaughter but did convict Garcia Zarate of being a felon in possession of a firearm , which carries a maximum sentence of three years in jail . It ’ s likely he will have served long enough behind bars considering his time in custody .
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement said it would “ ultimately remove ” Garcia Zarate from the country .
During the 2016 presidential campaign , then-candidate Trump and others pointed to Steinle ’ s death as reasons why the country ’ s immigration laws should be tightened .
Trump called the verdict “ disgraceful ” and posted on Twitter that “ the Kate Steinle killer came back and back over the weakly protected Obama border , always committing crimes and being violent , and yet this info was not used in court . ”
“ His exoneration is a complete travesty of justice . BUILD THE WALL , ” Trump tweeted .
Garcia Zarate ’ s convictions were immigration and drug-related but he had no record of violence .
Former President Barack Obama had kept his Republican predecessor ’ s policy of allowing U.S. immigration officials to ask local police to detain people suspected of living in the country illegally for up to 48 hours .
Garcia Zarate had finished a federal prison sentence for illegal re-entry into the United States and had been transferred to San Francisco ’ s jail in March 2015 to face a 20-year-old charge for selling marijuana . The sheriff ’ s department released him a few days after prosecutors dropped the marijuana charge despite a request from federal officials to detain him for deportation .
Federal officials got an arrest warrant for Garcia Zarate days after the shooting , which they say was a violation of his supervised release on the illegal re-entry conviction . A judge unsealed that warrant Friday .
Michael Cardoza , a longtime San Francisco Bay Area lawyer , said the prosecutor overreached in asking for a first-degree murder conviction , which would have meant that Garcia Zarate intended to kill Steinle despite strong evidence that the bullet ricocheted around 90 feet ( 27 meters ) before striking her .
Cardoza said a better case could have been made to convince jurors that Garcia Zarate had a “ reckless disregard for human life ” and to convict him of second-degree murder .
Steinle ’ s father , Jim , told the San Francisco Chronicle that “ justice was rendered , but it was not served . ”
“ We ’ re just shocked — saddened and shocked … that ’ s about it , ” he said in an interview described as the family ’ s last .
Associated Press writer Sophia Tareen contributed to this report from Chicago .