Well , it ’ s been discussed . It ’ s been debated . And now the Trump White House supposedly has a final decision : The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program that originated under the Obama administration is over . There will be a six-month enforcement delay , however . Eliana Johnson of Politico has more [ Emphasis mine ] :
President Donald Trump has decided to end the Obama-era program that grants work permits to undocumented immigrants who arrived in the country as children , according to two sources familiar with his thinking . Senior White House aides huddled Sunday afternoon to discuss the rollout of a decision likely to ignite a political firestorm — and fulfill one of the president ’ s core campaign promises . Trump has wrestled for months with whether to do away with the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , known as DACA . He has faced strong warnings from members of his own party not to scrap the program and struggled with his own misgivings about targeting minors for deportation . Conversations with Attorney General Jeff Sessions , who argued that Congress — rather than the executive branch — is responsible for writing immigration law , helped persuade the president to terminate the program , the two sources said , though White House aides caution that — as with everything in the Trump White House — nothing is set in stone until an official announcement has been made . In a nod to reservations held by many lawmakers , the White House plans to delay the enforcement of the president ’ s decision for six months , giving Congress a window to act , according to one White House official . But a senior White House aide said that chief of staff John Kelly , who has been running the West Wing policy process on the issue , “ thinks Congress should ’ ve gotten its act together a lot longer ago . ”
Katie reported on Friday that a decision was imminent , though the White House said an official announcement is slated for Tuesday . Under DACA , there are around 800,000 illegal aliens benefitting from the program and they ’ ve been preparing “ for the worst ” ( via USA Today ) :
We 're taking it day by day , because one day it 's one thing and another day it 's another , but we must be prepared for the worst , '' said Luz Gallegos , community programs director at TODEC Legal Center . `` We 're making sure the community has all their family plans in place , making sure kids are aware , you know , if something were to happen to parents , what next steps to take . '' [ … ] Gary Finn , an Indio immigration attorney , said the effects of a DACA repeal would not be immediate . Some people would lose their jobs when their work permits expired , if not sooner . Immigration and Customs Enforcement could begin removal proceedings for DACA recipients , but that process takes years `` People may go into a panic , I 'm kind of afraid of that , but it 's not like ICE will be knocking on the doors the next day , '' Finn said .
Last week , Axios ’ Jonathan Swan reported that one of the reasons why DACA was n the chopping block was that the Trump administration ’ s lawyers felt that they could not defend its legality . Moreover , Swan added that even the Department of Homeland Security noted that if Congress wanted to keep DACA as it is today , it would require an act of Congress . The constitutionality of this Obama-era executive action has been in legal limbo for years . In short , the program allows illegal aliens who entered the U.S. as minors to be shielded from deportation , with the possibility of a work permit , if they meet certain criteria . The application fee is $ 495 . Donald Trump ran on a hardline immigration enforcement platform . It ’ s looking like this will be another promise kept by Trump .