( ███ ) - A federal judge said on Friday the U.S. government had made “ very promising ” progress toward reuniting some 2,500 immigrant children separated from their parents at the U.S.-Mexico border as part of a crackdown on illegal immigration .
Dunia , an asylum seeker from Honduras , is reunited with her five-year-old son Wilman at Brownsville South Padre International Airport in Brownsville , Texas , U.S. , following their separation of more than five weeks through the Trump administration 's `` Zero Tolerance '' policy , July 20 , 2018 . ███/Loren Elliott
The government has six days left to comply with the reunification order by U.S. District Judge Dana Sabraw , who summoned government attorneys to appear in his San Diego courtroom to update him on efforts made in bringing families back together .
“ I ’ m very impressed with the effort being made , ” said Sabraw at the end of the brief hearing .
Lawyers for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement reported in a court filing late Thursday that 364 children aged 5 and older had been reunited since Sabraw ’ s order was issued more than three weeks ago . The number was updated to 450 today , an ACLU spokesperson said .
In Thursday ’ s status report , filed as part of an American Civil Liberties Union lawsuit challenging parent-child separations at the border , the government did not say how many reunifications were likely before the July 26 deadline .
Nearly 850 parents had been interviewed and cleared for reunification as of Thursday and another 229 parents had been deemed ineligible because of criminal records , or because they “ waived ” reunification or for other reasons , the report said . The rest are pending review .
More than 850 parents are facing final deportation orders , government lawyers told the court on Friday . The ACLU has asked Sabraw to give those parents at least a week after being reunited with their children before deportation so they have adequate time to obtain legal counsel and consider options .
Sabraw has temporarily barred deportations of reunified families pending a final decision .
Also late Thursday , a federal judge in Seattle ordered U.S. immigration officials to share the information they have provided to the ACLU with attorneys general from 17 states and the District of Columbia . The AGs in June filed their lawsuit , which , like the ACLU case , challenges the administration ’ s family separations and other immigration policies .
Children were parted from their parents by U.S. officials at the border as part of a broader “ zero tolerance ” crackdown on illegal immigration by the administration of President Donald Trump , sparking an international outcry . The president ordered the practice stopped on June 20 .
Sabraw and the government have been at odds over the speed of reunifications , which the government has said have been slowed by the need to protect the safety of the children .
After several testy exchanges in hearings and court papers , Sabraw said on Monday he felt that the government was finally emphasizing family reunification over lengthy procedures such as DNA testing and background checks on parents .
On Thursday , U.S . Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said her staff was focused on meeting the judge ’ s deadline that same day , but added that “ we will not cut corners . ”