Can America solve its illegal immigration problem both justly and humanely ? Yes , but it requires first building a border wall . Washington Post columnist and Pulitzer Prize-winning author Charles Krauthammer explains why .
Have you taken the pledge for school choice ? Click here ! https : //www.schoolchoicenow.com
Joining PragerU is free ! Sign up now to get all our videos as soon as they 're released . http : //prageru.com/signup
Download Pragerpedia on your iPhone or Android ! Thousands of sources and facts at your fingertips .
Join Prager United to get new swag every quarter , exclusive early access to our videos , and an annual TownHall phone call with Dennis Prager ! http : //l.prageru.com/2c9n6ys
Join PragerU 's text list to have these videos , free merchandise giveaways and breaking announcements sent directly to your phone ! https : //optin.mobiniti.com/prageru
Do you shop on Amazon ? Click https : //smile.amazon.com and a percentage of every Amazon purchase will be donated to PragerU . Same great products . Same low price . Shopping made meaningful .
Every sensible immigration policy has two objectives : 1 ) to regain control of our borders so that we decide who enters ; and 2 ) to find a humane way to deal with the 11 million illegal immigrants who now live among us .
Start with the second . For both practical and moral reasons , America can not and will not and should not expel 11 million people . That leaves us with two choices : ignore them or figure out a way to legalize them . Ignoring them hasn ’ t worked . But there is also a huge problem with legalization : it creates an irresistible incentive for new illegal immigrants to come .
We say , of course , that this will be the very last , very final , never-again , we're-not-kidding-this-time amnesty . And everyone knows it 's phony . That ’ s what was said in 1986 , when we passed the Simpson-Mazzoli immigration reform . It turned out to be the largest legalization program in American history -- nearly 3 million people got permanent residency . There was no enforcement . We now have 11 million new illegal immigrants in our midst .
The irony of this whole debate , which bitterly splits the country , is that there is a silver bullet that would not just solve the problem , but also create a national consensus behind it .
A vast number of Americans who oppose legalization and fear new waves of immigration would change their minds if we could radically reduce new -- i.e. , future -- illegal immigration .
First , build a barrier . Call it a wall . Call it a fence . Call it what you will . Add cameras and sensors . Add drones . Beef up the patrols . All that matters is that we regain control of the border .
Fences work . The triple fence outside San Diego led to a 90 percent reduction in infiltration . Israel ’ s border fence with the West Bank produced a similar decline . Even holier-than-thou Europeans have conceded the point : Hungary , Macedonia , Bulgaria , Austria , Greece , Spain – why , even Norway — have all started building border fences to stem the tide of Middle Eastern refugees .
Then enforce two other measures : a national E-Verify system that makes it just about impossible to work if you are here illegally , and a functioning visa tracking system , since 40 % of illegal immigrants are visa overstays .
The wall/fence will , of course , be ugly . So are the concrete barriers to keep truck bombs from driving into the White House . Sometimes function has to supersede form .
And do n't tell me that this is our Berlin Wall . When you build a wall to keep people in , that 's a prison . When you build a wall to keep people out , that 's an expression of sovereignty .
Of course , no barrier will be foolproof . But it does n't have to be . It simply has to reduce the river to a manageable trickle . Once we do , everything becomes possible – including dealing with our 11 million illegal immigrants .
So , let ’ s fix that . Track the visas , do E-Verify , build the damn barrier . It ’ s ridiculous to say that it can ’ t be done .
And who would certify that the border is back in our control ? I would have a neutral party , perhaps a commission of retired jurists , issue the judgment . Once they do , we legalize the 11 million , granting them the right to stay and work here .