Chairman Patrick Leahy has been pushing the panel to get its work done . | John Shinkle/███ Judiciary panel OKs immigration bill
The Senate Judiciary Committee gave final approval Tuesday to a sweeping immigration reform bill , setting up a debate on the Senate floor for early June .
Three Republicans joined 10 Democrats to support the bill , which would create a pathway to citizenship for 11 million undocumented immigrants , invest billions in new border security measures and overhaul the legal immigration system .
The landmark legislation easily passed the Judiciary Committee , giving reform its best chance in six years on the Senate floor . Yet even if the bill clears the Senate , the GOP-controlled House isn ’ t likely to take it up in its current form .
The vote came after the committee deliberated for five days and considered more than 200 amendments . But the Gang of Eight , which drafted the legislation , held together and fended off all but minor changes to the bill .
“ This is a big step forward , ” said Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , a leader of the Gang . “ We got a good vote in committee , we expanded our little group to another vote , and the feeling is very strong here . I think we gained some momentum today . I really do . ”
Schumer and Sen. Jeff Flake ( R-Ariz. ) told reporters that they remained hopeful that the bill could pick up 70 votes on the Senate floor .
“ I think it ’ s possible , ” said Flake , another Gang member . “ We got a lot of hard work to do . A lot of hard work . ”
The committee room , which was packed with reform proponents , erupted in applause and cheers of “ Yes , we can ” after the final vote . Democratic senators posed for pictures with supporters and received a succession of high fives and hugs .
President Barack Obama issued a statement congratulating the committee and urging the Senate to take up the bill “ at the earliest possible opportunity . ”
“ The process for considering this legislation has been open and inclusive with multiple hearings , and more than a hundred amendments were considered and adopted , in many cases with bipartisan support , ” Obama said . “ None of the Committee members got everything they wanted , and neither did I , but in the end , we all owe it to the American people to get the best possible result over the finish line . ”
Senate leaders hope to begin considering the bill following the Memorial Day recess in June . That prospect got a boost on Tuesday when Minority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) said he would not block debate from starting on the floor .
House leaders want their members to put forward their own version of immigration reform , which will be more conservative than the Senate bill . A bipartisan group of House negotiators announced an agreement last week on reform principles , but the lawmakers are struggling to finalize the deal .