WASHINGTON—President Donald Trump on Sunday issued a new ban on entry to the U.S. that applies a range of restrictions on nationals from eight countries , including new targets Chad , North Korea and Venezuela .
The new restrictions , replacing his previous order that expired on Sunday , apply to five of the six countries covered by the previous travel ban—Iran , Libya , Somalia , Syria and Yemen . The African nation of Sudan was subject to the original ban but dropped under the new version .
The new rules take effect on Oct. 18 . Countries that were subject to an earlier version will operate under the old rules until then .
The new rules vary by country , with some nations facing outright travel bans and others subject to more limited restrictions . For instance , nationals of some countries are barred from migrating to the U.S. but are allowed to travel for school . Still , in most cases , the majority of potential travel to the U.S. will be banned .
“ As president , I must act to protect the security and interests of the United States and its people , ” Mr. Trump wrote in the Sunday order .
The new order reflects painful lessons learned after intense criticism of two previous versions . Mr. Trump ’ s first executive order , issued after just a week in office , touched off confusion in airports , protests across the country and a quick judicial rebuke . The second version , in March , allowed for the restrictions to be phased in , but it too was put on hold by the courts almost immediately before the Supreme Court in June allowed a modified version to take effect .
Administration officials were hoping for a calmer reception this time , both from the public and the courts . For the first time , officials applied a set of objective standards to every nation to determine which countries pose a threat .
In one sense the ban was expanded , with the list of affected nations growing from six to eight . But the sanctions are more specific and targeted , with different rules for different countries , details that may help the administration defend itself in any court challenge .
Officials said they expect the new list will overcome charges that Mr. Trump ’ s order was a thinly disguised unconstitutional ban on Muslims . This time , two non-Muslim countries were included , though neither stands to be significantly affected by the new rules . North Korea allows few people to enter the U.S. , and a White House official said any North Korean refugees would be eligible for waivers . Venezuela ’ s restrictions are being applied only to certain government officials and their families , while most other countries face sweeping prohibitions .
“ The number of Venezuelans and North Koreans affected is vanishingly tiny . It ’ s still a Muslim ban , ” said Omar Jadwat , who brought several of the court challenges for the American Civil Liberties Union .
Opponents said the new version might be better but that doesn ’ t make it acceptable . “ Just because the original ban was especially outrageous does not mean we should stand for yet another version of government-sanctioned discrimination , ” said Naureen Shah , senior campaigns director for Amnesty International USA .
Trump administration officials say just the threat of a travel ban persuaded more than a half dozen countries to change their policies and they are now cooperating more fully with the U.S. in vetting their citizens .
Mr. Trump ’ s proclamation also ordered additional scrutiny of Iraqis who seek to travel to the U.S . The order said Iraq didn ’ t meet the standards that the U.S. used to assess nations in its world-wide review , but the president opted not to restrict travel , citing the “ close cooperative relationship ” with the Iraqi government and the war in that country .
The new restrictions have no set end date . Rather , restrictions will be added or removed as conditions change , officials said . The new rules apply only to prospective visa applicants , not current visa holders , so the rollout is less likely to cause confusion at airports as was the case after Mr. Trump ’ s executive order in January .
The previous order came under sharp political attack , and legal challenges kept the rules on hold for months . The Supreme Court is set to hear arguments on the outgoing executive order Oct. 10 . It wasn ’ t immediately certain how the new order would affect the case , but it is possible the justices could choose not to rule on an outdated travel ban that has been replaced by other restrictions .
The Justice Department on Sunday night filed a letter with the court suggesting that both sides in the litigation be required to file new legal briefs by Oct. 5 addressing what effect the new restrictions would have on the case .
Mr. Trump and his supporters said the original travel ban was needed to keep potential terrorists from entering the U.S . Critics pointed to Mr. Trump ’ s campaign promise to ban Muslims from entering the U.S. and said the executive order was driven by prejudice .
In evaluating countries for the new order , the administration considered three criteria : the integrity of documents , such as passports , that are used to confirm a person ’ s identity ; whether a country shares information with the U.S. about suspected terrorists and criminal histories of visa applicants ; and the national-security risk presented by each country , such as whether it is known as a terrorist safe haven .
The global review flagged 16 countries as being “ inadequate ” under one or more of the three criteria , and 31 others as at risk of becoming so . Facing the prospect of being included in a travel ban , many of these countries changed policies , administration officials said , and the list was whittled down . The administration also considered foreign-policy and national-security goals in determining whether to impose restrictions .
Sudan , which was subject to the previous travel bans , was found to meet the requirements during the initial world-wide review , an administration official said .
Under the order , two countries—North Korea and Syria—are subject to a ban on travel for people seeking to migrate to the U.S. and on those who just want to visit .
The order noted that North Korea doesn ’ t cooperate with the U.S. in “ any respect , ” a point underscored by the high-profile battle of insults and threats between Mr. Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un . Syria , the order says , doesn ’ t identify security risks and is a source of “ significant terrorist threats . ”
North Korean citizens ’ ability to travel to the U.S. was already heavily restricted , largely by North Korea ’ s own isolation . An administration official said that the number of visas issued to North Koreans now was “ very low . ”
North Korean officials at the United Nations didn ’ t answer a phone call seeking comment .
The administration is banning citizens of three countries—Chad , Libya and Yemen—from traveling to the U.S. on immigrant visas and on visas for business and tourism .
The presidential proclamation said the African country of Chad has shown a willingness to improve its policies but that it doesn ’ t adequately share information and has several terrorist organizations active in or near its borders . Just over half of Chad ’ s population is Muslim , according to the Central Intelligence Agency ’ s World Factbook .
The situation is similar in Libya and Yemen , the White House said , with willingness to help but not enough compliance and too much risk . Both of these countries were subject to the original travel ban and a revised version issued in March .
The order found Iran failed the U.S. standards in multiple ways and suspended travel for all Iranians except those on certain student and exchange visitor visas . Those people , though , were ordered to undergo enhanced vetting .
The restrictions on Venezuela are focused on government officials , not regular citizens , saying the U.S. has alternate ways of obtaining information on Venezuelans despite government noncooperation . Under the order , a range of government officials and their immediate family members are barred from entering on business or tourism visas . The order also directed additional screening on others from the South American country .
The inclusion of Venezuela came days after Mr. Trump pledged in a U.N. speech to take “ further action ” to escalate the isolation of the Venezuelan government of Nicolás Maduro , following moves by Mr. Maduro that the U.S. and other Latin American countries have characterized as a slide toward dictatorship . In both sanctions and public statements , the Trump administration has tried to draw a distinction between its desire to punish the government and its willingness to help the Venezuelan people .
A spokesman for Venezuela ’ s Information Ministry wasn ’ t immediately available for comment .
In the case of Somalia , the administration concluded that it was meeting the “ bare minimum ” of U.S. demands but that it was also home to a “ persistent terrorist threat , ” officials said . The order bars admission of people seeking to move to the U.S. Those who want to visit will be subject to additional scrutiny to determine if they are connected to a terrorist organization .
The order allowed the administration to issue case-by-case waivers for a wide range of situations such as someone with close family in the U.S. or an infant in need of medical care .
The Supreme Court , ruling on the previous order , had instructed the administration to make exceptions for people who have “ bona fide ” relationships with people in the U.S. , such as close family members . The new proclamation doesn ’ t incorporate this blanket exception , except for during the transition period through Oct. 18 .