The momentum that helped carry the massive immigration overhaul through the Senate last month is beginning to fade , as House Republicans slam the brakes on the debate while rejecting the Senate 's bill entirely .
The discontent in the House Republican caucus was evident in a closed-door meeting late Wednesday . Cheers erupted when GOP leaders said they would not take up the Senate-passed bill .
`` One thing is clear . House Republicans want to do this on our terms and not on the Senate 's terms and not on the president 's terms , '' said Rep. Michael McCaul , R-Texas , chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee .
Senate leaders , who had been banking on the assumption that political pressures would force the House to act , are now watching as the House weighs options that would be a direct challenge to those who crafted the original bill .
Sens . John McCain , R-Ariz. , and Charles Schumer , D-N.Y. , who helped write the Senate bill , still voiced optimism after emerging Thursday from a meeting with President Obama and Vice President Biden .
McCain said his message to House colleagues is `` we are ready to negotiate '' and stressed that the two chambers can find `` common ground . ''
House Speaker John Boehner also said `` Republicans ought to be part of the solution . ''
But the House is taking a very different approach . Boehner and other GOP leaders said Wednesday they will take a `` step-by-step '' approach -- meaning they will break the legislation into a series of smaller bills .
And that 's if rank-and-file Republicans will agree to vote on anything . Sources told ███ that Republicans repeatedly voiced concern Wednesday about border security . But they raised another concern that could signal major problems ahead -- that if the House passes anything , the proposal would then go to what is known as a conference committee , where select lawmakers from each chamber would try and hammer out a compromise . The concern is that the conference committee could produce a bill that House Republicans ca n't abide .
Rep. Kevin Cramer , R-N.D. , said the members are fearful and do n't `` trust the conference process . ''
Sources told ███ that Boehner repeatedly stood up during the meeting to tell members he would not appoint any House members to a conference committee who do n't reflect the position of the chamber .
`` But they 're not hearing that , '' groused one Republican member . `` It just goes over their head . ''
White House Press Secretary Jay Carney on Wednesday said the administration knew this would be an `` uphill battle . ''