The sober and logical reasons for President Donald Trump ’ s executive order on refugees and visitors are rising above the noise after an evening of hysterical over-reactions and emotional meltdowns on the nation ’ s TV networks .
Advocates of sane , secure immigration policy have long noted that it ’ s almost impossible to have a reasonable discussion of the refugee and immigration issues , because it ’ s been sentimentalized and politicized beyond the realm of rational thought .
This weekend brings them another superb example of media-magnified shrieking about fascism , bleating about “ white nationalists , ” howling about “ religious persecution , ” false invocations of the Constitution , and theatrical sobbing on behalf of the Statue of Liberty .
For readers who want to wallow in the emotion , examples can be found in this handy dossier of hysteria compiled by the Washington Post . But clear-eyed adults prefer to examine plain facts about Trump ’ s executive order :
1 . It is NOT a “ Muslim ban. ” You will search the Executive Order in vain for mentions of Islam , or any other religion . By Sunday morning , the media began suffering acute attacks of honesty and writing headlines such as “ Trump ’ s Latest Executive Order : Banning People From 7 Countries and More ” ( CNN ) and printing the full text of the order .
Granted , CNN still slips the phrase “ Muslim-majority countries ” into every article about the order , including the post in which they reprinted its text in full , but CNN used the word “ Muslim , ” not Trump . The order applies to all citizens of Iraq , Iran , Syria , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , and Yemen . It does not specify Muslims . The indefinite hold on Syrian refugees will affect Christians and Muslims alike .
As Tim Carney at the Washington Examiner points out , the largest Muslim-majority countries in the world are not named in the Executive Order .
More countries may be added to the moratorium in the days to come , as the Secretary of Homeland Security has been instructed to complete a 30-day review of nations that don ’ t provide adequate information for vetting visa applicants .
It ’ s also noteworthy that the ban is not absolute . Exceptions for “ foreign nationals traveling on diplomatic visas , North Atlantic Treaty Organization visas , C-2 visas for travel to the United Nations , and G-1 , G-2 , G-3 , and G-4 visas ” are expressly made in the order . The Departments of State and Homeland Security can also grant exceptions on a “ case-by-case basis , ” and “ when in the national interest , issue visas or other immigration benefits to nationals of countries for which visas and benefits are otherwise blocked . ”
There is a provision in the Executive Order that says applications based on religious persecution will be prioritized “ provided that the religion of the individual is a minority religion in the individual ’ s country of nationality . ”
This has been denounced as a “ stealth Muslim ban ” by some of the very same people who were conspicuously silent when the Obama administration pushed Christians – who the most savagely persecuted minority in the Middle East , with only the Yazidis offering real competition — to the back of the migration line .
2 . The order is based on security reviews conducted by President Barack Obama ’ s deputies . As White House counselor Kellyanne Conway pointed out on “ Fox News Sunday , ” the seven nations named in Trump ’ s executive order are drawn from the Terrorist Prevention Act of 2015 . The 2015 “ Visa Waiver Program Improvement and Terrorist Travel Prevention Act of 2015 ” named Iraq , Iran , Sudan , and Syria , while its 2016 update added Libya , Somalia , and Yemen .
“ These are countries that have a history of training , harboring , exporting terrorists . We can ’ t keep pretending and looking the other way , ” said Conway .
3 . The moratorium is largely temporary . Citizens of the seven countries named as security risks are banned from entering the United States for the next 90 days . Refugee processing is halted for 120 days . The longest-lived aspect of the ban may prove to be the halt on Syrian refugees , but that isn ’ t given a time frame at all . It will last “ until such time as I have determined that sufficient changes have been made to the USRAP to ensure that admission of Syrian refugees is consistent with the national interest , ” as President Trump wrote .
4 . Obama banned immigration from Iraq , and Carter banned it from Iran .
“ Fact-checking ” website PolitiFact twists itself into knots to avoid giving a “ true ” rating to the absolutely true fact that Jimmy Carter banned Iranian immigration in 1980 , unless applicants could prove they were enemies of the Khomenei theocracy .
One of Politifact ’ s phony talking points states that Carter “ acted against Iranian nationals , not an entire religion. ” As noted above , Trump ’ s Executive Order is precisely the same – it does not act against an “ entire religion , ” it names seven countries .
As for Barack Obama , he did indeed ban immigration from Iraq , for much longer than Trump ’ s order bans it from the seven listed nations , and none of the people melting down today uttered a peep of protest . Richard Grenell summed it up perfectly in a Tweet :
Obama took 6 months to review screening for 1 country . Trump will take 3 months for 7 countries . # MAGA @ realDonaldTrump — Richard Grenell ( @ RichardGrenell ) January 29 , 2017
5 . Trump ’ s refugee caps are comparable to Obama ’ s pre-2016 practices : David French , who was touted as a spoiler candidate to keep Donald Trump out of the White House during the presidential campaign – in other words , not a big Trump fan – wrote a lengthy and clear-headed analysis of the Executive Order for National Review . He noted that after the moratorium ends in 120 days , Trump caps refugee admissions at 50,000 per year… which is roughly the same as President Obama ’ s admissions in 2011 and 2012 , and not far below the 70,000 per year cap in place from 2013 to 2015 .
Obama had fairly low caps on refugees during the worst years of the Syrian civil war . He didn ’ t throw open the doors to mass refugee admissions until his final year in office . Depending on how Trump ’ s review of Syrian refugee policy turns out , he ’ s doing little more than returning admissions to normal levels after a four-month pause for security reviews .
6 . The Executive Order is legal : Those invoking the Constitution to attack Trump ’ s order are simply embarrassing themselves . The President has clear statutory authority to take these actions . As noted , his predecessors did so , without much controversy .
Most of the legal arguments against Trump ’ s order summarized by USA Today are entirely specious , such as attacking him for “ banning an entire religion , ” which the order manifestly does not do . Critics of the order have a political opinion that it will in effect “ ban Muslims , ” but that ’ s not what it says . Designating specific nations as trouble spots and ordering a pause is entirely within the President ’ s authority , and there is ample precedent to prove it .
It should be possible to argue with the reasoning behind the order , or argue that it will have negative unintended consequences , without advancing hollow legal arguments . Of course , this is America 2017 , so a wave of lawsuits will soon be sloshing through the courts .
7 . This Executive Order is a security measure , not an arbitrary expression of supposed xenophobia . Conway stressed the need to enhance immigration security from trouble spots in her “ Fox News Sunday ” interview . French also addressed the subject in his post :
When we know our enemy is seeking to strike America and its allies through the refugee population , when we know they ’ ve succeeded in Europe , and when the administration has doubts about our ability to adequately vet the refugees we admit into this nation , a pause is again not just prudent but arguably necessary . It is important that we provide sufficient aid and protection to keep refugees safe and healthy in place , but it is not necessary to bring Syrians to the United States to fulfill our vital moral obligations .
French ’ s major objection to the Executive Order is that applying it to green-card holders is “ madness , ” but unfortunately many of the terrorists who attacked Americans during the Obama years were green-card holders . Daniel Horowitz and Chris Pandolfo addressed that subject at Conservative Review :
Both liberals and conservatives expressed concern over hundreds of individuals going over to fight for ISIS . We are already limited in how we can combat this growing threat among U.S. citizens . Given that it is completely legal to exclude non-citizens upon re-entry , Trump extended the ban to legal permanent residents as well . If a Somali refugee is travelling back to Somalia ( so much for credible fear of persecution ! ) , government officials should have the ability to prevent that person from coming back when necessary . Obviously , there are some individuals from these seven countries who already have green cards and we might not want to exclude . That is why the order grants discretion to the State Department to issue case-by-case exemptions for “ religious persecution , “ or when the person is already in transit and denying admission would cause undue hardship. ” A CBP agent is always stationed at any international airport from which these individuals would board a direct flight to the United States ( Paris and Dubai , for example ) . That individual would not allow anyone covered by this ban onto a U.S.-bound flight unless he grants them a hardship exemption . Indeed , it appears that green card holders returning yesterday from those seven countries were all granted entry .
Because he is a progressive globalist , Obama deliberately blinded us to security threats , in the name of political correctness and left-wing ideology . Ninety or 120 days isn ’ t much time for Trump to turn all that around , especially because it is unlikely much will change in the seven countries Trump named .
The hysterical reaction to Trump ’ s order illustrates the very thing that worries advocates of strong immigration security : Americans ’ security is the lowest priority , far below progressive ideology , crass political opportunism , and emotional theater .
We ’ re being effectively told by the theatrical class to tolerate a certain amount of Islamic terrorism because their feelings would be hurt by the tough measures we need protest ourselves from a tough enemy . But this time , President Trump is proving tough enough to push our security up into the top priority .