Democratic mayors in so-called `` sanctuary cities '' are poised for a major clash with President-elect Donald Trump as city officials from Los Angeles to Washington vow not to cooperate with his administration on deportation orders for illegal immigrants .
Trump 's election has spurred mayors and police chiefs in nearly a dozen major cities to re-affirm their `` sanctuary '' status , putting them in direct conflict with Trump 's immigration enforcement push -- and effectively daring him to slash sanctuary-city funding as he promised during the campaign .
“ To all those who are , after Tuesday ’ s election , very nervous and filled with anxiety as we ’ ve spoken to , you are safe in Chicago , you are secure in Chicago and you are supported in Chicago , ” Mayor Rahm Emanuel said during a press conference . “ Chicago will always be a sanctuary city . ”
Emanuel joined officials in New York ; Seattle ; Boston ; San Francisco ; Los Angeles ; Oakland , Calif. ; Providence , R.I. ; Santa Fe , N.M. ; Denver ; and Washington , D.C. , in saying they will maintain their sanctuary status .
`` I would say to the president-elect , that the idea that you ’ re going to penalize Boston , New York , Los Angeles , Chicago , San Francisco , Philadelphia -- these are the economic , cultural and intellectual energy of this country , '' Emanuel said in a radio interview .
New York Mayor Bill de Blasio said last week he would go so far as to destroy a database of undocumented immigrants with city identification cards before handing it over to the Trump administration .
“ We are not going to sacrifice a half-million people who live amongst us , ” de Blasio said . “ We will do everything we know how to do to resist that . ”
In sanctuary cities , local law enforcement officials aren ’ t required to contact U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement about the immigration status of people they come in contact with . That can mean , for example , that they do n't notify the feds when an undocumented immigrant is about to be released from custody .
Sanctuary cities can also bar their employees , including police , from asking about a person 's immigration status because crime victims and witnesses might be less likely to talk to investigators if they are worried about being deported .
Trump said in a recent `` 60 Minutes '' interview that he plans to deport 2 million to 3 million undocumented immigrants who have a criminal history . He ’ s also said he could create a special deportation task force within ICE , though sanctuary city resistance could complicate their efforts .
`` Sanctuary '' policies surged back into the national spotlight last year after the shooting death of Kathryn Steinle by an undocumented immigrant in San Francisco . The shooter had been released from a county jail even though federal officials had asked him to be held until they could take custody .
Critics of sanctuary cities argue the policies harbor criminals and endanger public welfare .
“ President-elect Trump is talking about a very focused effort to get rid of people who are criminals , ” former House Speaker Newt Gingrich told ███ ' `` The O'Reilly Factor . '' “ You ’ d think that the mayor of Chicago , in the middle of the worst murder pattern in the city ’ s history , would be thrilled to have somebody help him get rid of criminals . ”
But Los Angeles Police Chief Charlie Beck calls Trump ’ s plan to deport illegal immigrants misguided and impractical .
“ I need them to work with their local police stations , I need them to be witnesses to violent crime , ” Beck said . “ For a local law enforcement agency to take on [ the ] role of immigration enforcement tears that fabric apart . ”
Because states and cities ca n't be required to enforce federal law — and there 's no U.S. requirement that police ask about a person 's immigration status — one of the only options Trump and the Republican-controlled Congress have is to pull funding .
During a September campaign stop in Phoenix , Trump said , “ Cities that refuse to cooperate with federal authorities will not receive taxpayer dollars ” and pledged his administration would “ work with Congress to pass legislation to protect those jurisdictions that do assist federal authorities . ”
Trump ’ s ability to cut off federal funding rests primarily with Congress . In the past , congressional Republicans have tried -- and failed -- to use federal funds as leverage .
Last year , Democrats in the Senate blocked a bill by Republican Sen. David Vitter that would have stripped some federal funding from cities that shield undocumented workers from federal immigration officials .
Vitter , who is retiring from the Senate , tweeted Tuesday : “ # SanctuaryCities are illegal , dangerous . Obvious 1st step : Withhold fed funding for cities ignoring immigration law . ”
Big GOP wins in the House and Senate on Election Day have some like Dan Stein , president of the Federation for American Immigration Reform , optimistic there is momentum for change .
“ This is one of [ Trump ’ s ] marquee campaign promises and it ’ s got strong Republican support , ” Stein said . “ It ’ s very likely we ’ ll see legislative action early on . ”
Rep. Vern Buchanan , R-Fla. , is pushing for Congress to quickly pass two bills tied to sanctuary cities -- Kate ’ s Law , which would toughen penalties against anyone who re-enters the country after being deported , and the Stop Dangerous Sanctuary Cities Act , which would cut federal funding to any city that refuses to enforce immigration laws .
“ Taxpayers should not be supporting cities that ignore federal law , ” Buchanan said in a written statement . “ While we are a nation of immigrants , we are also a nation of laws . Our No . 1 priority should be targeting criminals that are here illegally . ”
Despite the show of support from some GOP lawmakers , it ’ s still unclear what money Trump might actually pull from the cities .
The Supreme Court has held that for Congress to impose conditions on the receipt of federal money by the states , the conditions must be reasonably related to the purpose of the money . For example , the feds threatened to withhold highway funds from any state that failed to adopt a 0.08 blood-alcohol limit : Both the limit and the highway funding were related to road safety .
Still , the Justice Department ’ s inspector general looked at some jurisdictions with sanctuary policies earlier this year and concluded some appear to violate a federal law that says state and local governments may not prohibit or restrict officials from sharing information about a person ’ s immigration status with federal immigration officials . Having such policies could jeopardize millions of dollars in DOJ grant money the jurisdictions receive , the IG memo said .