Lorenzo Victorino hasn ’ t driven a car in more than two years .
The last time the Tucson resident got behind the wheel , his pregnant daughter was in pain , and he was driving her to an urgent care clinic at 2 a.m . He was pulled over by a police officer . When the unauthorized immigrant was unable to produce a valid driver ’ s license , the officer called immigration and an agent took Mr. Victorino to a detention center .
Victorino had worked as a mechanic in an auto repair shop for 16 years . By the time he was released from the detention center two months later , he had lost his job .
The native of Ciudad Juárez in Mexico , who came to the United States 18 years ago with his wife , says he is n't sure why he was n't deported but thinks it was because of his clean record . In cases such as Victorino ’ s , the government often exercises prosecutorial discretion to allow detainees with no criminal background to avoid deportation . He gave up driving because he doesn ’ t want to do anything else that might jeopardize his and his wife ’ s lives in America .
Whether Victorino picks up his car keys again may depend on the US Supreme Court , which is scheduled to hear a case Monday that will determine whether two of President Obama ’ s executive actions , designed to give relief to an estimated 4 million unauthorized immigrants , are allowed to take effect .
For the administration , the immigration reforms would allow millions of people who have spent more than a decade in the country to fully contribute to the society in which they live . For opponents , one of the Constitution ’ s most hallowed principles – the separation of powers – is at stake , not to mention the rule of law .
But the impact is most intimate and immediate for millions of families like Victorino ’ s . Faced with more legal uncertainty , and now the added alarm of rhetoric from Republican presidential candidates on illegal immigration , they say they have never been more unsure about whether to stay in the shadows or come out into the light .
“ The skepticism and anxiety in this population is quite evident , ” says Muzaffar Chashti , head of Migration Policy Institute ’ s New York office. “ They have been salivating for comprehensive immigration reform for 10 years now , and they ’ ve had their hopes dashed every time . ”
A Supreme Court tie would force Victorino and his wife , Norma Rodriguez , to retreat into their home and file away the purple folder filled with family birth certificates , school records , and old utility bills they are collecting as proof of their lives here . Victorino says he would occasionally earn some cash fixing friends ’ broken cars and Rodriguez would care for children at home , halting plans to get trained as a certified senior care provider .
The couple would then turn to one of their four daughters , who became a lawful resident after marrying a citizen , to help them gain legal status . But before Nancy Alvarez can sponsor her parents , she would have to become a citizen herself and prove that she has enough assets to support them , as well as her own family .
“ We can only wait and hope for a favorable outcome at the Supreme Court , ” Victorino says .
The two actions were both announced by Mr. Obama in 2014 . The first would broaden the eligibility requirements for the 2012 Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , which offered people who entered the US before they turned 16 and before June 2007 a renewable work permit and exemption from deportation . The second would lower the priority for removing undocumented immigrants who have lived in the US since 2010 and have children who are citizens or permanent residents . The program , called the Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents ( DAPA ) , also provides a three-year , renewable work permit .
A month after Obama announced both programs , 26 states sued the administration . Andrew Hanen , a federal judge in southern Texas , issued a preliminary injunction blocking the expanded DACA and DAPA programs . The administration appealed but the US Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the injunction . The Supreme Court – reduced to eight justices after the death of Antonin Scalia in February – will now hear the case , US v. Texas , on Monday , with a decision expected in June . In the event of a tie , the Fifth Circuit ’ s decision will stand .
The administration argues that with federal resources already stretched thin , authorities have to prioritize whom they target for deportation . Obama ’ s executive actions sought to focus efforts on those with criminal records , while providing temporary relief to otherwise law-abiding immigrants , including children and adults who , like Victorino , have children who are citizens or permanent residents .
These kinds of “ mixed-status ” families are becoming increasingly common , experts say . At least 9 million people live in such families , according to a 2011 Pew report . Research has shown that growing up with parents in the country illegally puts children at a disadvantage . A recent report from the Migration Policy Institute found that those children were more at risk for health problems , developmental delays , and low school achievement . The poverty rate for DAPA families is 36 percent , compared with 14 percent for families with US-born parents , according to MPI . Providing work authorization for unauthorized parents in these families could raise their income by 10 percent .
But others say the law can not make exceptions and remain the law .
“ We can ’ t make a public policy that says you get to ignore immigration laws if you have a child here , ” says Jon Feere , “ otherwise the result is people coming here illegally in the ninth month of pregnancy . ”
Mr. Feere , who is a legal policy analyst for the Center for Immigration Studies , is also critical of the administration ’ s prioritization rationale .
“ That ’ s not how immigration laws are supposed to operate , ” he says . “ If you ’ re here illegally you ’ re required to leave . Violence shouldn ’ t be a prerequisite for immigration enforcement . ”
Texas and its co-respondents have also argued that , were Obama ’ s executive actions to be upheld , it would open the door for sweeping executive powers that could allow future presidents to circumvent the legislature and judiciary on a range of issues .
For undocumented immigrants across the country , the protracted legal battle – and the extreme political climate that has emerged around it – has exacerbated years of uncertainty and anxiety over their future in the country .
“ The people eligible for DAPA have been here a while , so they ’ ve been living with that stress for years , ” says Shane Ellison , deputy executive director of the Nebraska chapter of Justice For Our Neighbors , a national immigrant advocacy group , who authored an amicus brief supporting the administration . “ Some folks might decide it ’ s not worth it , that they can ’ t bear it anymore and that they have to go back to whatever difficult situation in the first place made them come here . ”
Merced Cruz hasn ’ t seen her family in Mexico in 18 years – even for funerals .
Ms. Cruz and her husband came to America on temporary visas to work in 2003 , but stayed after her husband was diagnosed with cancer in order for him to have better medical care . Their children were both born in the US , but have grown up “ in the shadows ” with their parents .
Like many “ mixed-status ” families , where some family members have legal status and others do not , the Des Moines family struggles to make ends meet .
“ You can go anywhere and have a problem , ” she says . “ You have to go to work or take your children to school , you have to go to your job , but always with that fear . ”
For Cruz , who would be eligible for DAPA , the program would give her more economic security and freedom of movement . She works two part-time jobs , while her husband ’ s illness means he can only work for a few hours each day . He ’ s run out of medication several times because they couldn ’ t afford a refill , she says . One bright spot for the family : Her daughter will be going to college this fall on a full scholarship .
“ Otherwise it would be impossible , ” she says . “ I don ’ t make enough money to do that ; I make just enough to pay the bills . ”
Cruz remembers growing up in Mexico City surrounded by family , having parties with her cousins and going to family reunions . When she talks about how her two teenage children haven ’ t been able to do that , she begins to choke up .
“ They didn ’ t have the opportunity to have uncles or aunts or cousins , like how I grew up , ” she says . “ It ’ s hard because we have a lot of family – but not here . ”