President Trump will propose a pathway to citizenship for 1.8 million illegal immigrant Dreamers , nearly tripling the Obama-era DACA program , the White House said Thursday .
Mr. Trump ’ s vision , which he will submit to Congress next week , would grant legal status to fewer than the 3 million people under the plan Senate Democrats have backed . But the number of people is far higher than the 690,000 in the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program .
White House officials said they felt they had to go that far in order to demand major changes on the security side , including an end to catch-and-release of illegal immigrants snared at the border , faster deportations for those caught overstaying their visas inside the U.S. and $ 25 billion for Mr. Trump ’ s wall .
The president also will demand strict limits on the chain of family migration across the board — not just for newly legalized Dreamers .
He would allow immigrants to petition for spouses and minor children but would eliminate parents , siblings and adult children from chain migration . Extended family already in the backlog would be allowed to enter , but no further applications would be accepted .
The combination of legalization and security puts Mr. Trump squarely in the middle of the immigration debate , between Democrats who want a more generous amnesty and House Republicans who opposed citizenship and were instead pushing a massive package of security changes .
SEE ALSO : Trump says he ’ s open to more time on DACA if needed
“ As part of this effort to ensure there is full bipartisan support for this package , we believe the total number that will be able to apply for legal status … will be a population of individuals of 1.8 million people , ” a senior White House official said .
The official said Mr. Trump wouldn ’ t agree to a deal on Dreamers without the border security , enforcement and policy changes .
“ This is kind of a bottom line for the president , ” another official told reporters at the White House .
The plan calls for a $ 25 billion trust fund to build Mr. Trump ’ s border wall and other infrastructure . That would ensure a future Congress couldn ’ t withhold the money .
Mr. Obama supported a path to citizenship for Dreamers but was unable to get that legislation through Congress , which was why his administration circumvented Capitol Hill to create the DACA program .
Begun in 2012 , the program approved some 800,000 people for renewable two-year permits granting them a stay of deportation and authority to work in the U.S. Of those people , some 690,000 were still protected under DACA as of late last year .
Of the additional 1.1 million people Mr. Trump would enroll , about 600,000 were eligible for DACA but , for various reasons , didn ’ t apply , and 500,000 or so who would be admitted under adjusted timelines .
The White House called the 1.8 million “ a dramatic concession by the White House to get to 60 votes in the Senate . ”
It would take the immigrants 10 to 12 years to earn citizenship .
Sen. Ted Cruz , Texas Republican , said the president had embraced an amnesty that even President Obama was denied .
“ I do not believe we should be granting a path to citizenship to anybody here illegally , ” he said . “ All of these proposals being floated that have a path to citizenship for DACA recipients are markedly to the left of where President Obama was . DACA itself has no path to citizenship under President Obama ’ s illegal executive amnesty . ”
Democrats remained skeptical of Mr. Trump ’ s support for citizenship , which he announced to reporters on Wednesday .
“ What he says on Tuesday is not necessarily what he says on Thursday , ” said Sen. Ron Wyden of Oregon , the top Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee .
Other Democrats said Mr. Trump ’ s calculus of a trade of Dreamers for the wall was still unacceptable .
“ I do not support border wall funding , ” said Sen. Cory A. Booker , New Jersey Democrat .
He said he was holding out hope that Dreamers could get citizenship without a wall .
“ I ’ m a prisoner of hope , but that does not mean I have some Pollyannaish view that this is going to work out , ” said Mr. Booker . “ Hope is work , hope is sacrifice , so we are going to fight this . ”
Still , Sen. Michael F. Bennet , Colorado Democrat , said the president ’ s move toward citizenship for Dreamers was encouraging .
“ I think there is a general consensus among people working on this that a pathway has to be part of it , ” he said .
The White House plan could undercut efforts by House conservatives , who back a much tougher security plan . That would grant the 690,000 people under DACA a new legal status of three-year work permits , approved by Congress , in exchange for mandatory use of E-Verify for employers to check work status , curtailing abuse of the asylum system , cracking down on sanctuary cities and punishing repeat illegal immigrants .
The White House said it envisioned Mr. Trump ’ s plan as the basis for Senate negotiations but expected the House to pass its own bill .
“ We ’ re not trying to force something on the House at this point . I think the House has got its own independent process , ” an adviser said .
The White House said the president ’ s plan would boost security at the northern border as well , which could entice senators in Montana , North Dakota and Minnesota who are calling for attention to the U.S.-Canada line .
Mr. Trump ’ s plan would cancel the Diversity Visa Lottery , which gives 50,000 visas per year based on chance . Those visas would be recaptured and used to reduce the backlog in merit-based migration .
The president also asked Congress to allow faster deportations for those who overstay their visitors ’ visas , who could account for half of all new illegal immigration .
Mr. Trump said Congress must change the laws to help end the catch-and-release policy that applies to countries other than Mexico and Canada who can not be quickly turned back home .
Under the current system , migrants who can not be detained are released with the hope that they will return for their deportation hearings . They rarely do .
The White House said it had dozens of other enforcement changes it could have demanded , such as E-Verify , but it would pursue those later .
“ This is the first bite , ” said a White House official . “ There is a second phase to this . There are 11 million people who live here illegally . ”
The plan is unlikely to please activists on either side of the debate .
Indeed , immigrant rights groups were skeptical even after Mr. Trump said he would support full citizenship rights .
Frank Sharry , executive director of America ’ s Voice , called it “ a spoonful of sugar before the bitter medicine of Trump ’ s far-reaching nativist agenda . ”
“ No way . We won ’ t stand for it , ” he said . “ They don ’ t get to exploit a crisis they created to take a wrecking ball to the Statue of Liberty . ”