President Donald Trump corrected his Chief of Staff John Kelly after he said that the president had “ evolved ” on the wall .
“ There ’ s been an evolutionary process that this president has gone through , ” Kelly said in an interview with Fox News host Bret Baier , pointing out that Trump had “ very definitely changed his attitude ” towards DACA recipients and the wall .
But Trump pushed back on Twitter against the suggestion that he had evolved on the wall .
“ The Wall is the Wall , it has never changed or evolved from the first day I conceived of it , ” Trump said .
The Wall is the Wall , it has never changed or evolved from the first day I conceived of it . Parts will be , of necessity , see through and it was never intended to be built in areas where there is natural protection such as mountains , wastelands or tough rivers or water… .. — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 18 , 2018
He explained that parts of the wall would be “ see-through ” and that it was never meant to stretch across the whole 2,000-mile border where there were already natural barriers .
Kelly said that he and border experts told Trump that 800 miles of wall would “ suffice ” which included 600 miles of existing fencing .
“ He has evolved in the way he ’ s looked at things , ” Kelly said . “ Campaign to governing are two different things and this president has been very , very flexible in terms of what is within the realm of the possible . ”
Kelly also suggested that the wall would not be paid “ directly ” by Mexico , something that Trump also corrected .
“ The Wall will be paid for , directly or indirectly , or through longer term reimbursement , by Mexico , which has a ridiculous $ 71 billion dollar trade surplus with the U.S. , ” he wrote . “ The $ 20 billion dollar Wall is ‘ peanuts ’ compared to what Mexico makes from the U.S. NAFTA is a bad joke ! ”
….The Wall will be paid for , directly or indirectly , or through longer term reimbursement , by Mexico , which has a ridiculous $ 71 billion dollar trade surplus with the U.S . The $ 20 billion dollar Wall is “ peanuts ” compared to what Mexico makes from the U.S. NAFTA is a bad joke ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 18 , 2018
Trump added that without wall funding there would be no DACA deal .
“ We need the Wall for the safety and security of our country , ” he wrote . “ We need the Wall to help stop the massive inflow of drugs from Mexico , now rated the number one most dangerous country in the world . If there is no Wall , there is no Deal ! ”