PHOENIX — U.S. Sen. John McCain condemned the Trump administration ’ s practice of separating families in a sharp statement Monday , reflecting a break within Republican ranks on the controversial policy .
Three of Arizona ’ s five GOP House members have avoided public comments on the `` zero tolerance '' crackdown at the border that has resulted in an estimated 2,000 children being separated from their families .
By contrast , all four of the state ’ s U.S. House Democrats have pilloried the practice in recent days .
U.S. Sen. Jeff Flake , R-Ariz. , also hinted at his dismay in questions about the policy he put to the Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen .
June 18 : Couple raises record $ 3.9 million on Facebook to reunite immigrant families
`` The administration ’ s current family separation policy is an affront to the decency of the American people , and contrary to principles and values upon which our nation was founded , ” McCain , R-Ariz. , said in a blistering tweet Monday evening . “ The administration has the power to rescind this policy . It should do so now . ”
The administration ’ s current family separation policy is an affront to the decency of the American people , and contrary to principles and values upon which our nation was founded . The administration has the power to rescind this policy . It should do so now . — John McCain ( @ SenJohnMcCain ) June 18 , 2018
The family separations have sparked a national outcry and emerged as a searing test of how far Americans are willing to go in their efforts to enforce immigration and border control .
The White House itself has offered conflicting accounts of the policy and the reasons behind it . Officials have alternately — and falsely — blamed Democrats for it , denied there is a separation policy or suggested the policy is intended as a deterrent to reduce illegal immigration .
As the administration founders , congressional Republicans have done what they have often done in other high-profile spasms of controversies involving President Donald Trump : They waited .
June 18 : Papá ! Papá ! ’ : Immigrant children at detention center cry for parents in heartbreaking audio
June 18 : Fact check : Viral image of child in a cage was not detained by ICE
Late Monday , U.S. Rep. Martha McSally , a Republican whose Tucson-based district includes part of the border with Mexico , issued a statement that suggests she does n't like the separation tactics , but does n't find fault with the Trump administration .
`` We need to enforce our laws in a consistent and humane manner and ( Homeland Security ) should not have to choose between enforcing the law and keeping children with their parents , '' she said . `` My immigration bill , which I 've been working on since last September , fixes this by allowing children to stay with their parents as they undergo due process . I hope we can get a version of my bill out of the House this week and on the President 's desk immediately to address many urgent issues like this . ''
While McSally did not challenge the administration , one of her Democratic opponents in the race for the state 's open Senate seat , U.S. Rep. Kyrsten Sinema , did .
`` The administration 's choice to separate families at the border is wrong — they should stop immediately . I 'm ready to work with anyone to fix our broken immigration system , secure our border , & protect our communities , '' she wrote in a tweet .
The administration 's choice to separate families at the border is wrong – they should stop immediately . I 'm ready to work with anyone to fix our broken immigration system , secure our border , & protect our communities . — Kyrsten Sinema ( @ RepSinema ) June 19 , 2018
U.S. Rep. Paul Gosar , R-Ariz. , pointed the blame at former President Barack Obama .
`` The Obama Admin ’ s lack of enforcement of our immigration laws is responsible for this crisis , '' he said in a tweet . `` The ( Justice Department 's ) zero-tolerance policy returns to the rule of law & ensures families are no longer lured to our borders with false promises . Elections matter . ''
The Obama Admin ’ s lack of enforcement of our immigration laws is responsible for this crisis . The DOJ ’ s zero-tolerance policy returns to the rule of law & ensures families are no longer lured to our borders with false promises . Elections matter . # NoAmnestyhttps : //t.co/qqg6OTFdD0 — Rep. Paul Gosar , DDS ( @ RepGosar ) June 18 , 2018
McCain and Flake are Republicans who have cast themselves as the conscience of their party as their congressional careers wind down . McCain , the 2008 GOP presidential nominee , is battling an aggressive form of brain cancer ; Flake is not seeking re-election this year .
June 18 : No Republicans support Senate bill that would stop child separations at border
June 17 : Migrant detention center : Not much room for kids to play in the warehouse-like facility
`` Ensuring the safety and security of young children is a longstanding priority of the American legal system , '' Flake said . `` In asylum cases , it is especially important to keep families together when neither the child nor the parent has violated any laws . Contrary to what ( Homeland Security ) has indicated as proper procedure , we are currently seeing cases where immigrant families seeking asylum are separated after lawfully presenting themselves at a U.S. port of entry . I believe DHS ought to respond to valid questions concerning asylum processing , including any policies pertaining to the separation of families . ''
He posed a series of questions for Nielsen that outlined his concerns .
As the separation story gathered steam last week , U.S. Rep. Raúl Grijalva , D-Ariz. , repeatedly hammered the White House for its actions . He elaborated in a statement Monday .
`` As children are ripped from their parents ’ arms , and mass trials and gross violations of due process permeate the border region , Trump and his henchmen continue their macabre public relations tour to justify their abhorrent policies that attack asylum seekers and innocent children . In the process , Trump has reached a disgusting new low by using asylum seekers and their children as leverage to get his border wall , '' Grijalva said .
`` Current anti-immigrant legislation like the Goodlatte/McSally bill and the Republican ‘ compromise ’ have nothing to do with the refugee crisis at the southern border . By holding the children seeking asylum hostage , Trump and his baby snatchers are lying to the American people . ''
Follow Ronald J. Hansen and Yvonne Wingett Sanchez on Twitter : @ ronaldjhansen and @ yvonnewingett