Immigrant taxpayers should be able to use federal safety net programs , the author says . Pathway should n't exclude safety net
Imagine that you buy homeowner ’ s insurance , but the policy won ’ t cover your house if it catches fire until 13 years after you start paying premiums . That would obviously not be fair . But that is exactly the situation in which people on the pathway to citizenship will find themselves because of restrictions in the Senate immigration bill , S.744 .
The Congressional Budget Office estimates the bill will raise $ 451 billion of new revenue over 2014-2023 and another $ 1.5 trillion in the decade after that , mostly from income and payroll taxes paid by immigrants . Immigrants on the pathway to citizenship contribute to the funding of all federal programs with their tax dollars , but nearly all of them will be barred from using federal safety net programs for at least 13 years .
CBO ’ s score emphasizes what other studies have shown : immigrants pay billions of dollars in taxes . Researchers at Harvard and the City University of New York found that immigrants , both legal and undocumented , contributed $ 115.2 billion more to Medicare than they took out between 2002 and 2009 . The Social Security Administration estimates undocumented immigrants contributed $ 120-240 billion to the Social Security trust fund .
The strict requirements in the bill make clear that undocumented immigrants have to keep paying taxes to get on and stay on the pathway to citizenship . Immigrants must continue working and paying taxes , pay $ 2000 of fines each , and meet other requirements to earn permanent legal status . Grover Norquist testified to the Senate Judiciary Committee that once immigrants earn legal status they will pay even more in taxes than they do now .
No one disputes it should be this way . Immigrants on the pathway must continue to pay taxes just like everyone else . The strict tax requirements in the Senate bill are the right policy .
What are wrong are the policies in the bill that prohibit most immigrant taxpayers from being able to use federal safety net programs for at least 13 years , the minimum length of time on the pathway . Their taxes pay for these programs but they can ’ t use them . That is profoundly unfair .
The 13-year-long pathway to citizenship will be hard enough without these restrictions . Work hard to save up money not just for your kids ’ school supplies , but to pay the penalties in the bill . Lose your job and you risk losing your legal status and being deported .
The restrictions in the bill make the pathway even more treacherous . Pay your taxes , but don ’ t get sick . Pay your taxes , but don ’ t come to us for help .
These restrictions are not only unfair , they are bad economics . We should all want immigrants to be successful , start businesses and continue contributing to the economy . However , few people would use their life savings to start a business if they think their children will go hungry or go without healthcare if the business fails . The safety net programs exist so people can take risks to improve their economic circumstances .