The arrest and jailing of a U.S. citizen in Allentown , Pa. , turned into a court case that complicates President Trump ’ s clampdown on ‘ sanctuary cities . ’
ALLENTOWN , Pa.—One of the chief strategies in President Donald Trump ’ s battle against illegal immigration is being undercut by an unlikely figure : a New Jersey native named Ernesto Galarza .
In 2008 , Mr. Galarza was doing construction work in this eastern Pennsylvania city when his boss allegedly sold drugs to an undercover police detective . Mr. Galarza was arrested along with the boss , and booked into the Lehigh County jail .
Mr. Galarza posted bond , but wasn ’ t released because a federal immigration agent had asked the jail to hold him . He sat behind bars three extra days before anyone realized he was a U.S. citizen .
The American Civil Liberties Union later won $ 95,000 from Lehigh County for violating Mr. Galarza ’ s constitutional rights , laying the groundwork for today ’ s high-profile battle between President Trump and what are often called “ sanctuary cities . ”
The Galarza case , and two similar ones that followed , signaled that counties will be held accountable in court if they wrongly imprison someone , and that acting at the request of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency isn ’ t a viable legal defense .
Many cities and counties nationwide , including Lehigh , no longer hold people just because ICE asks . So while the president and his aides are at war with liberal enclaves like San Francisco and Chicago that declare themselves sanctuaries , they also are on a collision course with places like Lehigh County , a middle-class region where Republicans control the county commission .
This spring , the Trump administration published a list of nearly 140 cities and counties it believed were refusing to honor “ detainer ” requests ; 41 % of them voted for Mr. Trump in 2016 . On a separate list of noncompliant jurisdictions compiled by the Immigration Legal Resource Center , a pro-immigration advocacy group , 62 % of counties listed favored Mr. Trump .
The fight over sanctuary policies is playing out in courtrooms , Congress , statehouses and city councils . At least 36 states are considering legislation regarding such policies , according to the National Conference of State Legislatures .
In recent months , the debates have unfolded in Nashville , Tenn. , Howard County , Md. , Poughkeepsie , N.Y. , Libertyville , Ill. , and other municipalities .
A bill in California ’ s legislature would make the entire state a sanctuary , barring ICE officers from local jails unless they have a warrant . Texas , meantime , enacted legislation that compels counties to cooperate with ICE . The Texas debate was so heated that lawmakers broke into a brawl on the statehouse floor ; the law is being challenged in court .
In Washington , the House approved legislation last month that would deny federal grant funding for jurisdictions that don ’ t cooperate with ICE and offer legal protections for jails that do . And on Thursday , the Justice Department threatened to pull grant money from four cities , asserting its own authority .
Few people had ever heard of the issue back in 2008 , when Mr. Galarza was arrested .
Born in 1974 in Perth Amboy , N.J. , he spent part of his childhood in Puerto Rico , where his family is from . At 21 , he moved to Allentown , a city of about 120,000 people some 60 miles north of Philadelphia .
Allentown was made famous by the Billy Joel song chronicling the breakdown of the postwar American economic compact , but today it is home to a gentrifying downtown and a growing Latino population , which topped 42 % in 2010 .
On Thursday Nov. 20 , 2008 , Mr. Galarza was on a job , pulling up worn floorboards from a house , while his boss allegedly sold 14 grams of cocaine to an undercover Allentown police detective . The detective concluded Mr. Galarza was acting as a lookout and arrested him too .
After posting bail , Mr. Galarza was on his way out of the county jail when an officer stopped him .
“ I was about to go out the main door , and the main door was getting open and then it started closing , ” he said in an interview . “ I ’ m like what ’ s going , what ’ s going on ? They turned me back around . ”
Mr. Galarza had told the officer he was born in New Jersey but she didn ’ t believe it and reported him to ICE , according to court documents .
An ICE officer then filed a “ detainer ” instructing the jail to hold Mr. Galarza . He spent the weekend in the jail . On Monday , he was peppered with questions by ICE officers and finally released that night . By then , he had lost a part-time job and wages from two other jobs , court documents show . Five months later , he was acquitted of the drug charge .
More than a year later , the legal director of the ACLU in Pennsylvania , Witold Walczak , was passing through Allentown to give a speech and had lunch with a local attorney he knew .
Mr. Walczak asked the lawyer , David Viada , if he knew of any American citizens who had been wrongly held on an ICE detainer . Mr. Viada had represented Mr. Galarza in his drug trial and made the introduction .
For the ACLU , Mr. Galarza was an ideal plaintiff . The group wanted to challenge the Obama administration ’ s stepped-up use of detainers . “ We had come up with a legal framework , and we needed a plaintiff , ” said Mr. Walczak .
In November 2010 , the ACLU filed a federal lawsuit on Mr. Galarza ’ s behalf against the Allentown detective , the ICE agents , the city of Allentown and Lehigh County . It alleged that Mr. Galarza ’ s constitutional rights were violated and noted that no probable cause to hold him had been established .
“ This case is quite straightforward , ” attorney Jonathan H. Feinberg argued in court on Mr. Galarza ’ s behalf . “ Ernesto Galarza is a United States citizen . As a result of the actions of these defendants , he was held on an immigration detainer . That is wrong . ”
All four defendants moved to dismiss the case . The officers and the city lost and each settled out of court .
The judge let the county off the hook , but Mr. Galarza appealed to the Third U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals . Lehigh County , which operates the jail , defended itself by saying it was simply following orders from a federal agency .
That argument was undermined by statements from ICE that detainers were “ requests ” and compliance couldn ’ t be compelled .
In 2014 , the appellate court ruled , 2-1 , that the federal government had no right to require agencies to comply with detainers , under Supreme Court precedent preventing Washington from “ commandeering ” state and local agencies for federal purposes .
Lehigh County settled the case for $ 95,000 and by agreeing to a new policy whereby it no longer holds people because of an ICE request . The vote by the county commission was 9-0 .
The ACLU then wrote to officials in every Pennsylvania county , informing them of the Galarza opinion and urging them to follow Lehigh County ’ s lead .
Lehigh County officials also spread the word . Edward Sweeney , then-director of corrections for the county , wrote an essay in the trade journal Corrections Managers ’ Report , warning his colleagues of legal peril if they honored ICE detainers . He also made the point on an email distribution list used by jail officials .
Mr. Sweeney , a registered Republican , said in an interview he was happy to help ICE before the court ruling but not after : “ If the federal circuit court of appeals told me what I was doing was improper , you don ’ t have to hold a gun to my head to get me to make a change in policy . ”
Other counties followed suit . A report from the Temple University law school found that by 2015 , about half of Pennsylvania counties had adopted policies of not routinely cooperating with ICE detainers . Of the 32 such counties , 25 went for Mr. Trump in the 2016 election .
Many of the local officials involved say they were motivated by the Galarza case , or by two similar court rulings that followed , from cases originating in Rhode Island and in Oregon .
So many counties were resisting ICE that in 2014 , the Obama administration stopped pressuring local jails to comply in every case , instead negotiating terms of cooperation .
Now , under Mr. Trump , the issue is being freshly debated across the country .
In March , after Lehigh County was put on a Trump administration list of noncompliant counties , the president of a local tea party group , Tom Campione , asked the commissioners to change their policy , saying federal funds were on the line . Others at the meeting urged commissioners to stand firm .
This spring , it became an issue in a Republican primary for county executive , with Commissioner Brad Osborne under fire for supporting the new policy in 2014 .
“ Osborne allowed Lehigh to be a Sanctuary County for illegal immigrants targeted by President Trump , ” read a flier distributed by his opponent , Glenn Eckhart .
Mr. Osborne , who won the primary , replied by noting that the county still cooperates with ICE in other ways , such as informing them when someone is being released . “ I don ’ t consider Lehigh County to be a sanctuary county by any means , before or after this resolution , ” he said .
Undeterred , the local tea party group is working to keep the issue alive . In June , about a dozen members of the group ’ s immigration committee met to plot strategy to persuade the commissioners to overturn the policy .
Dean Browning , who heads the committee , is also hunting for people who were released from the jail despite detainers to see if they subsequently committed any crimes . And he hopes to be appointed to the board of commissioners if Mr. Osborne is elected county executive . If he is , he says he will push for a policy shift from within .