On Friday , Team Obama released the following advertisement criticizing former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney for not staking out a definitive position on the president ’ s controversial ( and unconstitutional ? ) executive order granting temporary status to hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants .
In many ways this is a savvy political maneuver on the president ’ s part . Indeed , if Mitt Romney supports the executive order ( which , I think , will be interpreted as a form of amnesty ) he will no doubt alienate conservatives . On the other hand , if he explicitly opposes the order -- or vows to rescind it upon securing the presidency -- I suspect Hispanics will be less inclined to vote for him . This puts Team Romney in a precarious position , to be sure , forcing the campaign to address immigration reform much earlier than they may have originally anticipated . In any event , the presumptive Republican nominee did in fact address an audience of Latino lawmakers and elected officials yesterday in Florida , informing the American people precisely where he stands on the issue of immigration .
There are at least three crucial points Mitt Romney raised during his remarks . ( 1 ) President Obama had the opportunity ( and the means ) to tackle comprehensive immigration reform during his first presidential term . He failed . ( 2 ) The economic policies of the last three years have left the Hispanic community disproportionally unemployed ; in fact , 2.3 million more Hispanics now live in poverty . This , in effect , begs the all-important question : are Latino voters better off today than they were three and a half years ago ? ( 3 ) President Obama ’ s temporary solution to fixing our immigration woes ( i.e . his executive order ) is fundamentally flawed . For example , the parents of young illegal immigrants recently granted temporary status are still being deported from the country at increasingly alarming rates . Romney , by contrast , pledges to “ put in place his own long-term solution ” that , among other things , strengths legal immigration , secures the border , implements an employment verification system , and promotes strong families .
In sum , Governor Romney may have been hesitant -- even evasive -- over the last week or so , refusing to answer any questions directly regarding his position on the president ’ s controversial fiat . But now that he ’ s introduced his own sweeping reforms , however , it seems the Hispanic community is warming up to him . Remember , President Obama has already broken one solemn pledge to fix the nation ’ s broken immigration system . And so , given his horrendous track record -- and slew of broken campaign promises -- why should he be trusted now ? That 's a question every American should be asking themselves every day from now until November .