House Republican leaders will bring a pair of immigration bills to the floor next week , sinking a push from reform-minded centrists to force votes on bipartisan bills opposed by GOP leadership .
The House will vote on a conservative immigration bill authored by Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte ( R-Va. ) and a more moderate compromise measure that is still being put together after weeks of closed-door negotiations facilitated by Republican leaders .
“ Members across the Republican Conference have negotiated directly and in good faith with each other for several weeks , and as a result , the House will consider two bills next week that will avert the discharge petition and resolve the border security and immigration issues , ” AshLee Strong , spokeswoman for Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanDemocrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Three-way clash set to dominate Democratic debate Krystal Ball touts Sanders odds in Texas MORE ( R-Wis. ) , said in a brief email .
“ The full Conference will discuss tomorrow morning and we 'll have more to share at that point . ''
While leadership ’ s announcement throws a wrench into moderates ’ plans , Rep. Carlos Curbelo Carlos Luis CurbeloOvernight Energy : Lawmakers show irritation over withheld Interior documents | Republican offers bipartisan carbon tax bill | Scientists booted from EPA panel form new group GOP congressman introduces bipartisan carbon tax bill Pelosi : GOP retirements indicate they 'll be in the minority , with Democrat in the White House MORE ( R-Fla. ) , sponsor of the discharge petition , said they will continue to pursue their discharge efforts .
“ While the legislation to be revealed in the coming days is based on the productive negotiations hosted by House Leaders over the last several weeks , it is vital our colleagues remain committed to the discharge petition , ” he said in a statement .
“ While we believe all parties have negotiated in good faith , until and unless we confirm the proposed legislation fully addresses the interests and concerns that unite us we must and will keep up the pressure . ”
They could relaunch the discharge effort , having one more shot to force votes on the issue on July 23 . Yet the discharge route would only get tougher in the weeks ahead , as former Rep. Charlie Dent Charles ( Charlie ) Wieder DentOvernight Health Care — Presented by Better Medicare Alliance — Federal judge blocks Trump from detaining migrant children indefinitely | Health officials tie vaping-related illnesses to 'Dank Vapes ' brand | Trump to deliver health care speech in Florida ███ 's Morning Report — Mueller testimony gives Trump a boost as Dems ponder next steps ███ 's 12:30 Report : Muller testimony dominates Washington MORE ( R-Pa. ) won ’ t be around to sign it . And at least one other endorser , Rep. Chris Collins Christopher ( Chris ) Carl CollinsIndicted GOP congressman Chris Collins resigns ahead of expected guilty plea ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff GOP Rep. Chris Collins to plead guilty to insider trading MORE ( R-N.Y. ) , said he ’ s been pushing for a vote on the Goodlatte bill all along .
The decision to bring the two bills to the floor is backed by GOP leaders and the chairman of the conservative House Freedom Caucus , Rep. Mark Meadows Mark Randall MeadowsImpeachment push threatens to derail bipartisan efforts on health care costs ███ 's 12:30 Report : Dems seize on Ukraine transcript in impeachment fight Gaetz : Some lawmakers reviewed transcript at White House MORE ( R-N.C. ) . Yet it ’ s unclear if the centrist GOP immigration reformers — whose discharge petition was the driving force behind any shot at immigration votes this year — are all on board .
Indeed , Ryan ’ s decision to side with Meadows and bring the Goodlatte bill directly to the floor would effectively quash the centrists ’ discharge petition — and with it , much of their leverage to dictate the debate over the fate of the so-called Dreamers , or young undocumented immigrants brought the U.S. as children . And it remains unclear if the compromise option — which is yet finalized — will win the moderates ’ backing .
Rep. Will Hurd William Ballard HurdHurd : ' I think we should be protecting the whistleblower ' Pelosi : Turning Texas blue is 'our hope for the future ' Sunday shows lineup : Trump impeachment dominates the talk circuit MORE ( R-Texas ) , one of the early champions of the discharge petition , took to the House floor late Tuesday night with a warning : an immigration bill that doesn ’ t have bipartisan support , he said , is sure to fail .
“ The only way that this body gets things done [ is ] if we work across the aisle to get things done , ” Hurd said .
GOP leaders have been scrambling to avoid a divisive immigration fight less than five months out from November ’ s midterm elections . They were successful in preventing the discharge petition from hitting the needed 218 signatures by promising a pair of on-the-fence centrists — Reps. Dennis Ross Dennis Alan RossWave of GOP retirements threatens 2020 comeback Israel should resist Trump 's efforts to politicize support Pro-Saudi Arabia think tank abruptly closes in Washington MORE ( R-Fla. ) and Dan Newhouse Daniel ( Dan ) Milton NewhouseHouse passes bill to protect 'Dreamers ' Immigrant Heritage Month should spur congressional action to fix immigration laws Thirty-four GOP members buck Trump on disaster bill MORE ( R-Wash. ) — floor action on an agricultural package that includes guest worker program reforms before the August recess .
“ Given this significant progress , I will not sign the discharge petition today , ” Newhouse said in a statement , shortly after Ryan ’ s office announced plans for immigration votes next week . “ I also commend the Speaker and the Majority Leader for committing to me personally to bring forward an immigration bill that addresses agriculture ’ s labor needs before the August district work period . ”
Before the House adjourned Tuesday evening , the discharge petition was just two signatures short of the number needed to move forward with the discharge petition and force a free-wheeling immigration debate after Rep. Henry Cuellar ( D-Texas ) opted to sign on Tuesday evening .
“ After conferring with Democratic leadership and receiving their commitment to help me fight the border wall , I signed the discharge petition to protect DREAMers and [ Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ] recipients . As one of the longest and strongest supporters of DACA in Congress , I am proud to add my signature , ” Cuellar said in a statement .
“ I will continue to fight against the border wall and work in a bipartisan manner to find cost-effective , 21st-century measures to securing our borders . ”