WASHINGTON , D.C. — House Republicans passed a border supplemental bill Friday night .
The 223 – 189 vote came after an initial attempt at a border supplement failed to make it to the floor Thursday due to lack of support .
Late-night meetings and tweaks to the original bills found members emerging from a Friday morning House GOP conference meeting expressing optimism about the prospects of passing a supplemental border bill to help alleviate the ongoing crisis of unaccompanied minors and family units illegally crossing the southern border .
The GOP victory comes after conservative House members pressed hard for changes tightening up the initial bill that failed to come to the floor Thursday due to lack of support .
According to Fox News ’ Chad Pergram , four Republicans voted “ no : ” ( Reps. Thomas Massie ( R-KY ) , Stephen Fincher ( R-TN ) , Walter Jones ( R-NC ) and Paul Broun ( R-GA ) , and one Democrat voted “ yes : ” Rep. Henry Cuellar ( D-TX ) .
A bill targeting President Obama ’ s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program is now set to be brought to the floor following the border supplement . Many Republicans have pointed to the presidents ’ DACA program — which shields certain illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. as children from deportation — as inciting the flood of illegal immigration .
Since October more than 57,000 unaccompanied minors — the vast majority of who are from El Salvador , Honduras , and Guatemala — have been detained illegally crossing the southern border into the U.S. forcing the federal government to scramble for additional resources to cope with the influx .
Earlier in the summer , President Obama requested $ 3.7 billion to deal with the ongoing crisis . The supplemental appropriations bill the House GOP passed Friday night would supply $ 694 million to deal with the crisis — including providing additional funding to states to deploy the National Guard — and “ fixes ” a 2008 trafficking law that has made removing unaccompanied minors from countries other than Mexico difficult .
“ Our plan reallocates $ 694 million to secure the border , provide emergency care , and prevent future arrivals , ” House Republican Conference Chair Cathy McMorris Rodgers ( R-WA ) said after the vote . “ This will ensure that children are reunited with families in their home countries . Our solution addresses the problem humanely , effectively , and expeditiously . The crisis at the border demands our attention . It demands our action . And it demands our immediate and unwavering leadership . ”
The legislation is unlikely to go much farther , however . The Senate left for August recess this week after failing to pass a supplemental border bill and President Obama slammed House Republicans Friday for “ trying to pass the most extreme and unworkable versions of a bill that they already know is going nowhere , that can ’ t pass the Senate and that if it were to pass the Senate I would veto . They know it . ”
The Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee Bob Goodlatte ( R-VA ) threw the ball back in Obama ’ s court after the bill ’ s passage , however , saying “ while the House acted today to provide targeted and narrow funding to meet urgent needs at our southern border , it is ultimately up to President Obama to end this crisis by reversing his policies that created it . ”
House Speaker John Boehner also released this statement in response to the bill ’ s passage :