There ’ s a key difference between Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao and Rep. Ilhan Omar ( D-Minn. ) , according to Darin Miller , the deputy press secretary for Vice President Mike Pence : Chao is a good immigrant who “ worked hard and assimilated , ” but Omar “ seems content to criticize America at every turn. ” That ’ s the gist of an email I received yesterday from Miller , shortly after publishing this roundup of some of the worst responses to President Donald Trump ’ s racist weekend tweetstorm .
Miller emailed me to say that he thought I had misconstrued the comments that Pence ’ s chief of staff , Marc Short , made to Fox News on Monday . In that interview , Short said that Trump can ’ t have “ racist motives ” because he appointed Chao—the former secretary of labor during the George W. Bush era and wife of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) —as the secretary of transportation .
Here 's Marc Short , Pence 's chief of staff , defending Trump 's racist tweets this morning by claiming that he ca n't have had `` racist motives '' because Elaine Chao serves in his cabinet , and he 's making the point that Ilhan Omar never says positive things about the U.S .. pic.twitter.com/B7WkNxjQPG — Matthew Gertz ( @ MattGertz ) July 15 , 2019
Since the president ’ s tweets on Sunday that told four freshman Democratic congresswomen of color—Reps . Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York , Ilhan Omar of Minnesota , Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts , and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan—to “ go back…from which they came , ” the Republican Party is still struggling with how to deal with the situation . Most GOPers have remained silent , a few have joined Democrats in officially condemning Trump ’ s tweets , and others have committed wild jumps in logic to claim his tweets weren ’ t racist—and Short ’ s comment about Chao fit into the latter category . That ’ s why I included them in a collection of responses to Trump ’ s tweets .
But the office of the Vice President didn ’ t agree . And Miller insisted that Chao is a different kind of immigrant than Omar . Here ’ s what he wrote :
I think you misconstrue what [ Short ] was saying , which is that Secretary Chao ’ s story is an example of what the President supports : She came legally to the U.S. , worked hard and assimilated , and is dedicated to giving back and serving her country , and we can all support that . Contrast that with Rep. Omar , who seems content to criticize America at every turn , instead of trying to fix problems she sees—for instance , she opposed the overwhelmingly bipartisan emergency border aid bill , which provided much-needed humanitarian aid for asylum seekers .
The truth is there isn ’ t a meaningful difference between Chao and Omar ’ s immigration stories . Like Chao , Omar immigrated legally to the country and now serves in the federal government , albeit with a different agenda . Omar , along with many other of her Democratic colleagues , didn ’ t vote for the border bill due to policy disagreements .
Still , as of Wednesday , the saga of Trump ’ s racist tweets is continuing to play out in Congress . Tuesday night , as the House of Representatives debated to vote on a resolution to officially condemn Trump ’ s tweets , House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ran afoul by calling them racist , thanks to an very old House rule that says lawmakers can ’ t insult a president ’ s character on the floor . Trump , of course , had something to say about it .