A federal judge in Maryland added a new legal blockade to President Trump ’ s travel ban early Wednesday , ruling that the White House ’ s third attempt at “ extreme vetting ” is still poisoned by the president ’ s campaign-season “ religious animus ” toward Muslims .
The ruling by Judge Theodore D. Chuang , an Obama appointee to the bench , came just hours after another Obama-appointed judge in Hawaii issued a similar injunction .
Both judges have said Mr. Trump ’ s attempt to severely curtail admission of visitors and would-be immigrants from Chad , Iran , Libya , Somalia , Syria and Yemen is likely illegal .
They have , however , allowed restrictions to go into effect for North Korea and Venezuela , two non-Muslim countries .
Judge Chuang , like his Hawaii colleague , had ruled previous versions of the travel ban illegal , and said little has changed in Mr. Trump ’ s effort to revive the policy with an updated and more supported plan , which the president laid out in a proclamation last month .
“ The proclamation ’ s ban generally resembles President Trump ’ s earlier description of the Muslim ban , ” Judge Chuang wrote in his 91-page ruling .
He said the fact that the current list of eight countries subject to severe restrictions is similar to the previous list of six suggests little has changed .
The earlier ban applied to Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen . The new list , which came after months of study by the Homeland Security and State departments of nearly 200 countries ’ level of cooperation in information-sharing , drops Sudan and adds Chad , North Korea and Venezuela .
Administration officials were already working on their appeal of the Hawaii ruling .
The Supreme Court had been slated to hear arguments on the earlier version of the travel ban last week , but after Mr. Trump ’ s revisions in September they called off the hearing , saying the lower courts needed to evaluate the new policy .
While Tuesday ’ s ruling affects the country-specific travel ban , another part of the original executive order — a 120-pause on refugee admissions — remains mostly in effect , with some court-ordered exceptions .
The 120-day period expires at the end of this month , and analysts are waiting to see whether Mr. Trump tries to extend the pause . He ’ s already slashed the overall refugee target from 110,000 people in 2017 to 45,000 in 2018 .