So far , Mr. Rubio has seen early success wooing grass-roots Republican voters . When he joined the bipartisan group late last year , after Mitt Romney lost the presidential election in part because he was overwhelmingly rejected by Hispanic voters , Mr. Rubio quickly went on a one-man blitz of conservative news media outlets , explaining his guiding immigration principles and winning plaudits from the likes of Rush Limbaugh and Sean Hannity .
“ The argument is that it ’ s not conservative policy to have 11 million illegal immigrants in this country , ” said Phil Musser , a Republican consultant and former executive director of the Republican Governors Association . “ By showing up and by boldly deciding to engage people who have had their fingers in their ears on this issue , he ’ s been able to decalcify a process that ’ s been stuck for a long time . ”
He and his staff have studied the mistakes of the last attempt at immigration overhaul , in 2007 , and have tailored their pitch to address conservative concerns . Mr. Rubio stresses that strict goals for border security must be met before any illegal immigrants can be put on a path to citizenship . And he talks of refining the current system — from increased enforcement to a workable plan for future legal immigrants — saying he wants to ensure the country does not face another wave of illegal immigrants down the road .
“ His emphasis on strong border security and enforcement is a big deal , and I think the Democrats are finally beginning to get that , and I think that is because of his strong leadership and communication skills , ” said Mel Martinez , a former Republican senator from Florida who was part of the failed 2007 attempt at an immigration overhaul .
In calling for a full committee review , Mr. Rubio also hopes to prevent the dynamic that helped kill the 2007 bill — the impression the immigration proposal was written in secret , then rushed to the Senate floor .
Mr. Rubio has also been active behind the scenes . In one-on-one phone calls and meetings , he has continued to regularly reach out to conservative news media outlets , grass-roots supporters and House Republicans . ( “ By the way , I spoke to Marco Rubio today about this off the air , ” enthused Mr. Limbaugh on his show Thursday . “ He ’ s insistent this thing not be ramrodded through , that there be hearings . ” )
In January , Mr. Rubio brought Enrique Gonzalez , a well-known immigration lawyer based in Miami , onto his staff full time , and has assigned a legislative assistant to work nearly exclusively on immigration issues .