House Speaker John Boehner announced plans Tuesday to effectively push off a looming battle over President Obama 's immigration policies until next year , while potentially averting a partial government shutdown later this month .
The speaker met behind closed doors Tuesday with fellow Republicans . Boehner is attempting a balancing act -- as he tries to avert a budget showdown , while also letting conservatives vent over the president 's controversial executive actions on immigration .
Congress needs to approve a new spending bill by Dec. 11 to avoid a partial shutdown , and opposition to Obama 's immigration approach has complicated that effort .
The plan , as of Tuesday , is a two-step approach . The House would vote later this week for a largely symbolic measure disapproving Obama 's executive actions to suspend deportations for millions of immigrants here illegally . The bill would try to block those actions , but would certainly face a presidential veto , if it made it past the Senate .
The House would then vote next week on a must-pass spending bill , with a twist .
The plan would fund most elements of the government for the remainder of the current fiscal year , which ends Sept. 30 , 2015 . But , under one proposal , it would only fund immigration-related activities until early next year -- setting up a new fight over immigration in early 2015 , when Republicans control both the House and Senate .
While Obama 's Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson was being grilled over immigration at a Capitol Hill hearing , Boehner said Tuesday that Obama has ignored the American people .
`` This is a serious breach of our Constitution , '' Boehner said .
He also said lawmakers `` have limited options and abilities to deal with it directly . ''
Some conservatives want more ; they circulated bill language Monday stipulating that no money or fees `` may be used by any agency to implement , administer , enforce or carry out any of the policy changes '' announced by Obama .
Meanwhile , House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi put Republicans on notice last week that her party would n't support a plan that did n't fund the government for the entire fiscal year and also chipped away at some immigration-related activities . In the Senate , Democrats still maintain the majority and could cause problems for any plan that does not fully fund the government through next year .