Immigrants Wait To See How Obama Will Act On Immigration
President Obama is poised to approve some changes to the immigration enforcement system using an executive order . The specifics of that order are still being hashed out .
We do n't know just when President Obama will act , nor do we know precisely what he will do .
But if President Obama acts on his own to change immigration policy , we do know millions of lives will be affected .
GREENE : The president says he 'll act because Congress did not . Republicans say that would exceed his authority .
INSKEEP : Beyond the politics immigrants and their advocates are waiting to see what happens .
GREENE : And our coverage begins with them . Here 's NPR 's Richard Gonzales .
RICHARD GONZALES , BYLINE : Thirty-four-year-old Jong-Min You was brought to the United States by his South Korean parents when he was only a year old . Raised in Tennessee and New York , You graduated from college in 2003 . But he 's unable to fulfill his dream of going to law school and becoming a judge because he is here in the U.S. illegally .
GONZALES : American in the sense that he works seven days a week managing his parents ' grocery store in Brooklyn . You had hoped he could take advantage of a program President Obama created two years ago temporarily delaying deportation for undocumented immigrants brought here as children . Technically it was called Deferred Action or DACA , but it applied only to people under the age of 31 . And You was too old to qualify .
YOU : Hopefully President Obama will expand DACA for those people who have aged out , like myself , and parents are included . Obviously , my parents hopefully would be included since they 've been here 30 years - that they be protected as well .
GONZALES : Deferring deportation for non-criminals is at the top of many advocates ' list . You and other immigrant advocates hope the president 's executive order will expand protections to include those who work or go to school , pay taxes and who have some equity in America . Reshma Shamasunder is the executive director for the California Immigrant Policy Center .
RESHMA SHAMASUNDER : We believe that those categories should be as broad as possible and cover as many of the 11 million undocumented as possible .
GONZALES : The administration could announce as early as this week its plans and the requirements immigrants would need to meet . According to news reports , the president 's program would allow parents of children who are American citizens or legal residents to get work permits and not worry about deportation . This would address two other items on the advocates ' wish list - keeping families intact and letting people work legally .
Immigration policy experts say as many as 5 million people could be protected , but that number depends on who is considered eligible . The president 's executive order could potentially affect a wide range of immigrants , from those work in the fields to those in high tech . Emily Lam is vice president of Health Care and Federal Issues for the Silicon Valley Leadership Group . She says the president ca n't create new visas , but she hopes he 'll clarify federal rules , making it easier for entrepreneurs to get work authorizations , also known as green cards . Another group needing work permits are the spouses of H1-B visa holders , who are currently barred from working , says Lam .
EMILY LAM : Particularly difficult if they have an advanced degree or are highly educated . They come here to support their spouse and they end up having to volunteer or not doing anything at all and kind of feeling like their careers are stagnating . It 's very , very frustrating for people .
GONZALES : Regardless of what steps President Obama takes , they will only be temporary . They could be changed by whoever succeeds him or by Congressional action . Either way , advocates say they expect the president to deliver on his pledge to change the immigration system . Richard Gonzales , NPR News .
NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm , Inc. , an NPR contractor , and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR . This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future . Accuracy and availability may vary . The authoritative record of NPR ’ s programming is the audio record .