The federal government has caught at least five adults whose claims to be parents of illegal immigrant children were disproven with DNA tests . Eight more had serious criminal records , including murder and kidnapping charges , that made them unfit to take back their own children , the government said Tuesday .
Those were among the tougher cases the government has had to sort through as it rushed to make a judge ’ s deadline for reuniting the youngest of the children separated in the aftermath of President Trump ’ s zero-tolerance border policy .
Federal officials signaled Tuesday that they were scrapping the policy for dozens of families , preparing to release them rather than detain them , as the president had promised .
Yet even with that retreat , the government was still struggling to meet the deadline imposed by Judge Dana Sabraw .
Just 38 of the original 102 separated children under age 5 were guaranteed to be reunited by Tuesday , officials said . Another 16 were on the bubble for reunification , the government said , saying it depended on whether they were able to finish out a series of checks to make sure the children weren ’ t heading to unsafe conditions .
Judge Sabraw told them to speed it up , saying they could cut corners on their usual process in order to get the kids back with people who claimed to be their parents .
“ These are firm deadlines . They ’ re not aspirational goals , ” the judge said during a hearing Tuesday to get an update on progress .
Judge Sabraw ruled last month that separating families violated illegal immigrant parents ’ rights . He blocked separations going forward and gave the government 14 days — until Tuesday — to reunite children under 5 who ’ d been separated and were still in government custody . He set another deadline of July 26 for juveniles ages 5 to 17 to be reconnected .
Between 2,000 and 3,000 children separated from parents are in government custody , with 102 of them falling into this week ’ s under-5 deadline .
Of the 102 children under the immediate deadline , they said four had already been released by Tuesday afternoon and another 34 were about to be turned over to parents . Sixteen children were awaiting final DNA tests on people who ’ d cleared background checks but still needed to have their relationship confirmed , while one other parent had a criminal background check that was still being resolved .
Another 12 children belonged to parents who ’ d already been deported , and the government was unsure how to handle those — other than to try to reach them in their home countries . And eight parents had been released into the U.S. , and needed full safety checks , the government said .
In the final 27 cases , officials say , they ’ ve ruled out reunification , at least for now .
Ten parents are serving time in federal or state jails or prisons and can ’ t be reunited until their sentences are done . One child ’ s parent has been missing for more than a year — and it ’ s possible both the child and parent are American citizens .
Eight parents had major criminal records that made them unsuitable candidates to take custody of their children , one parent was deemed a danger for child abuse , one parent lived in a home where another occupant had a child sex-abuse charge pending , and another parent has a communicable disease that must be cleared up .
Then there are five of the 102 cases where adults had claimed to be parents , but those claims were disproved once the government started to investigate by DNA tests .
Officials said those cases are evidence for why the government needs to do extensive vetting before turning children over .
“ Our process may not be as quick as some would like but there is no question it is protecting children , ” said Chris Meekins , a high-ranking official at the Health and Human Services Department .
In some of the toughest cases , Mr. Meekins said , they have found two instances of men who assert parentage but DNA tests come back negative .
He said it ’ s possible the men don ’ t know they aren ’ t the biological fathers . In those cases , if the adults are proved to be parents through other means such as birth certificates , they ’ ll bury the DNA results , saying it ’ s not their role to interfere in whatever the family situation is .
Judge Sabraw , though , was not impressed with the government ’ s lengthy checks .
He ordered a “ streamlined approach ” for vetting parents , saying DNA tests should only be used if there ’ s a specific reason to suspect fraud .
“ The court could not have been clearer that business as usual is not acceptable , ” said Lee Gelernt , a lawyer handling the case for the families on behalf of the American Civil Liberties Union . “ The Trump administration must get these children and parents reunited . ”
In pushing to meet the deadlines the government signaled it ’ s ended the zero tolerance policy of holding illegal immigrants until they can be deported , at least in these cases .
Instead , U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement expects to quickly release most of the parents and children . In some cases the parents will be given ankle bracelets to try to make sure they appear for their immigration court proceedings .
Matthew Albence , the executive associate director at ICE for Enforcement and Removal Operations , said they don ’ t have high hopes that will lead to the people being deported when the time comes . He said ICE released 80,000 people under alternatives to detention last year , and just 2,400 were actually deported .
Trump critics , though , said deportations aren ’ t as important as reuniting children and parents — and they said it was a black eye on the Trump administration that it missed the court ’ s deadlines .
“ This is an abject failure and a betrayal of American values , ” said Sen. Dianne Feinstein , California Democrat . “ Congress has a moral obligation to stop this , since the Trump administration has demonstrated that it lacks the competency to do so . : ”
The government ’ s struggles to reunite the first 102 children led critics to say they have no faith the reunification of more than 2,000 juveniles 5 and older will be smoother .
Federal officials declined to give reporters a timeline for those reunifications Tuesday , saying they would wait for more guidance from the court .