Renee Ellmers ’ fight has been the exception to the rule in this year ’ s House GOP primary . The race where immigration matters
Renee Ellmers is in a highly unusual position for a House Republican : She is the only GOP incumbent facing a primary challenge centered on her support for immigration reform .
The North Carolina Republican is one of a handful of House GOP lawmakers to publicly advocate legalizing the millions of immigrants who are here illegally . Her views sparked a Republican challenge from economic commentator Frank Roche , who is skewering Ellmers for favoring “ amnesty . ”
Most observers think Ellmers — a nurse and former tea party favorite — is likely to win the intraparty fight on Tuesday . Still , reform advocates , particularly those on the center-right , are closely watching her race as a test case of how much the politically charged issue of immigration will matter in GOP primaries . Republicans had feared that conservatives , stoked by grass-roots anger and help from outside groups , would descend on the districts of members who sided with the reformers .
But in a surprise to some , Ellmers ’ fight has been the exception to the rule in this year ’ s House GOP primary contests . Despite conservative threats , the slew of anti-immigration primary challenges — for the most part — simply haven ’ t materialized . Of course , Democrats could still badger Republicans on immigration come November .
Filing deadlines for more than 80 percent of sitting House Republicans elapsed as of the end of April . And advocates closely tracking GOP primaries could name only Ellmers ’ race as one where an incumbent House Republican is facing a primary precisely over his or her immigration stance .
Reps. Sam Johnson and John Carter of Texas — two Republican negotiators in a bipartisan House group that painstakingly tried to negotiate a House immigration bill with a pathway to citizenship — breezed through their March 4 primaries without much being made of their advocacy . Johnson walloped his challenger by 80 percent , and Carter didn ’ t even have an opponent .
The Mark Zuckerberg-backed advocacy group FWD.us argued earlier this year that only one incumbent congressional Republican lost to a primary opponent primarily because of immigration in the past decade : then-Utah Rep. Chris Cannon to Rep. Jason Chaffetz in 2008 .
“ It ’ s essentially a nonissue in most of these races , ” said Jeremy Robbins , the executive director of the Michael Bloomberg-backed Partnership for a New American Economy , which supports immigration reform . But he added : “ It concerns me any time that someone who is very , very good on this issue is challenged . ”
A wide array of immigration advocates , lobbyists , North Carolina political observers and reform critics interviewed believe Ellmers will prevail , but several think the primary could be closer than the sophomore lawmaker would like because of immigration .
Her campaign declined a request for an interview with Ellmers , as it did in other stories where Roche was featured . In a phone interview , Roche said he wants to enforce the immigration laws on the books and that he believes “ multiculturalism is a problem for our country . ”
Roche — who previously ran unsuccessfully in the GOP primary in another North Carolina district , as well as for state treasurer — opposes efforts to legalize undocumented immigrants and supports sharply reducing the number of people who legally immigrate to the United States .
“ There are 20 or so members who have made clear that they are supportive of amnesty , and she is one of them , ” Roche said . “ Renee ’ s position is the position of John Boehner , Nancy Pelosi and President Obama . ”
By most metrics , Ellmers should win . She has eclipsed Roche in fundraising — as of mid-April , she had raised more than $ 950,000 , compared to Roche ’ s paltry $ 23,000 . She hasn ’ t been pummeled during her reelection bid by influential outside groups . As a nurse , she is an ideal spokeswoman against Obamacare — key to revving up the Republican base .
But Roche ’ s conservative backers hope he can capitalize on what they argue is deep grass-roots distaste for Ellmers ’ thumbs-up to overhauling the nation ’ s immigration laws , including some kind of legal status for those who are in the country unlawfully .
“ She ’ s gotten an earful from our members in North Carolina for weeks now , ” Roy Beck , executive director of NumbersUSA , said of Ellmers .
His group , one of the most prominent to oppose immigration reform efforts on the Hill , doesn ’ t get directly involved in political races . But NumbersUSA can quickly activate thousands of its members to contact lawmakers at their congressional offices , which Beck said it has certainly done with the group ’ s 5,300 members in Ellmers ’ district .
Some conservative activists , led by radio host Laura Ingraham , have recently began circulating a “ no-amnesty pledge ” for congressional candidates to sign , but that ’ s still a nascent effort .
Of course , many House Republicans have stayed mum on the topic of immigration , avoiding public statements that could earn them a challenger .
In the mold of other House Republicans like Mike Coffman of Colorado who have said they favor immigration reform , she penned an op-ed in the Fayetteville Observer in January , saying while she doesn ’ t back “ amnesty , ” undocumented immigrants — particularly those who have long worked and lived in the country — can ’ t be ignored .