Another father , whose son was shot and killed while working as a clerk on an overnight shift , said his family sets up a Christmas tree on his son ’ s grave every year . Holding a challenge coin he had been given by acting Immigration and Customs Enforcement Director Thomas Homan , the father said , “ I wish some of our media had the same integrity as our president , our vice president . ”
Trump mostly steered clear of directly addressing the family separation issue that sparked an international backlash , although some of the parents alluded to it in their remarks . The president ’ s comments were more somber than his Twitter outburst early Friday morning , in which he accused Democrats of telling “ their phony stories of sadness and grief , hoping it will help them in the elections . ”
Several of the parents carried large photographs of their deceased sons and daughters , many of which appeared to have been autographed by the president .
“ I was going to end my life . I had no purpose , but President Trump coming down that escalator that day and talking about illegal immigration stopped me in my tracks . And I had no clue at that point that I would ever be at the White House , ” one mother , who wore the ashes of her son , killed by a drunk driver , in a locket around her neck . “ Remember when you go home and hug your kids that there are many of us , thousands of us who do n't get to do that anymore . ”
The event marked the end of a week which the White House spent fully on the defensive , pushing back against a tidal wave of outcry over its policy of referring all illegal border-crossers for prosecution , a practice that resulted in the forcible separation of thousands of children from their parents .
Early in the week , the Trump administration held fast to its position that the administration ’ s hands were tied on family separation by established law , even though no such law exists and the policy was the result of a Justice Department policy directive that could be easily reversed .
The White House also argued that the practice could only be ended by a change in the law and therefore it was obstinate Democrats , unwilling to accede to the president ’ s broader immigration demands , who were to blame for the separations .
With both White House arguments proving untenable and public pressure mounting in the wake of photographs of children kept in cages at a Texas facility and audio of them crying out for their moms and dads , Trump signed an executive order Wednesday intended to keep families together at the border .
But even after the president ’ s order , confusion remained as to what would happen to the already separated families and how exactly families crossing the border illegally would be treated moving forward .
While administration spokespeople were steadfast in their positions , they quickly found themselves on an island , with Republicans on Capitol Hill growing increasingly vocal in their criticism of the practice .
The issue remained contentious Friday afternoon on Capitol Hill , where Rep. Ted Lieu ( D-Calif. ) , played audio of children wailing inside a detention center on the House floor as Rep. Karen Handel ( R-Ga. ) , who was presiding over the chamber at the time , tried to gavel him down , accusing him of violating House rules .
Throughout the week , administration officials complained often that the media ’ s coverage of illegal immigration and the issue of family separation neglected to reflect the victims of crimes committed by undocumented immigrants , a group Trump spotlighted frequently on the campaign trail . Friday ’ s event , portions of which were carried live by all three major cable news networks , seemed an effort at redirecting the media ’ s attention .
“ I can not imagine it being any worse , but we promise to act with strength and resolve , '' the president said . “ We ’ ll not rest until our border is secure , our citizens are safe and we end this immigration crisis once and for all… Your loved ones have not died in vain . ”