Congressional Republicans beat a full-scale retreat Monday from the administration ’ s zero-tolerance border policy , joining Democrats to demand that President Trump stop jailing parents and find ways to keep families together while trying to stop a new surge of illegal immigration .
High-profile Republicans said they are writing bills that would end family separations , and Massachusetts Gov . Charlie Baker , a Republican , said he will no longer allow his National Guard troops to assist with border security as a protest against Mr. Trump ’ s policies .
Former first lady Laura Bush also weighed in , comparing family separations to internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II .
But Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said both President Obama and President George W. Bush — Mrs. Bush ’ s husband — both oversaw family separations at the border on their watch , too .
“ Their rate was less than ours , but they absolutely did this , ” she said .
White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders added that it was Mr. Bush who signed a key 2008 law that the administration blames for helping create the conditions that lead to family separation .
SEE ALSO : El Salvador says Trump violating human rights with border policy
The comments came as the administration tried to hold the line against a hostile press corps , rabid Democrats and increasingly skittish Republicans .
Ms. Nielsen called Democrats “ cowardly ” for refusing to work with Mr. Trump on solutions .
“ Congress and the courts created this problem , and Congress alone can fix it , ” she said .
She said answers offered by Democrats — releasing the families into the community , where most of them are unlikely to show up when it comes time for their hearings or deportation — amounts to to “ open borders . ”
Congressional Republicans , though , are abandoning the administration and stepping up with their own plans that would stop separations .
Sen. Ted Cruz , Texas Republican , said he ’ s writing legislation that would double the number of immigration judges , vastly expand the amount of space detention space Homeland Security has to hold families , and push for faster decisions on asylum claims so people get quick answers and can either be released if they are deserving , or deported if they are rejected .
“ While these cases are pending , families should stay together . Children belong with their mothers and fathers , ” Mr. Cruz said .
Sen. John Cornyn , Texas Republican , said he ’ ll revive a bill he wrote four years ago , back when the first surge of illegal immigrant children and families overwhelmed the Obama administration and sent Homeland Security scrambling to buy more detention beds for families .
Democrats at the time objected , and that refusal , combined with court rulings and a complex web of laws protecting some illegal immigrant children , has created the mess that ’ s ensued .
Nearly 70 children are being separated each day now , according to numbers released on Capitol Hill — up from fewer than 50 just weeks ago .
Separations happen for a number of reasons . Sometimes a parent is deemed abusive or a security risk , and other times an adult shows up trying to claim parentage of an unrelated child — sometimes the child was even abducted along the way so someone could pose as a family . There have been hundreds of those cases so far this year , Homeland Security says .
But the big change has been the Trump zero-tolerance policy . Border Patrol agents are now referring almost all illegal immigrants at the border for prosecution , and prosecutors are bringing cases against most of them .
Jumping the border has been a crime for decades , but the Bush and Obama administrations used the criminal penalties sparingly , instead treating illegal immigration through the civil side of the law and trying to deport people .
Over the last five years , though , migrants have figured out how to exploit that system , realizing they can get more lenient treatment if they arrive as families , and figuring that if they claim asylum , even with dubious cases , they can often get released into the U.S. where they can disappear into the shadows .
Unwilling to accept that outcome , the Trump administration said it would follow the laws and bring criminal charges . But that means parents who travel with children are getting jailed , and since jails can ’ t handle families , the children are taken and put into government-run dorms .
Some 2,342 children were separated between May 5 and June 9 , Sen. Dianne Feinstein reported , citing Homeland Security numbers .
It ’ s likely that many of them have already been reunited with their parents , who served a few days in jail , but exact numbers are elusive .
Two new polls Monday found about two-thirds of Americans opposed to family separations , with Democrats adamantly opposed and Republicans more mixed .
In Washington , Democrats have blasted the Trump administration , saying it is using children as bargaining chips to try to win tougher border security and funding for the president ’ s wall .
“ There ’ s no law requiring the separation of families . President Trump could end this immoral policy today . If he won ’ t , Congress must act , ” said Ms. Feinstein , who has written a bill that would ban most family separations .
Key Democrats say their preferred solution is to release families from detention altogether , but give them counseling . They said a pilot program under Mr. Obama showed that was effective in getting people to show up for their court dates .
The Trump administration canceled that pilot , the Family Case Management Program , last year . Homeland Security didn ’ t respond to a request for comment on that decision .
Mr. Trump , for his part , said he won ’ t accept the border being overrun .
“ The United States will not be a migrant camp and it will not be a refugee holding facility . It won ’ t be , ” he said in brief remarks at the White House , where he again insisted the situation was ‘ the Democrats ’ fault . ”
His aides fanned out across the country to make their case Monday .
Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Ms. Nielsen were in New Orleans addressing the National Sheriffs ’ Association , where they said zero tolerance was the only choice for an administration intent on stopping illegal immigration .
Ms. Nielsen then flew back to Washington where she appeared at the White House to answer questions from a hostile press corps in an evening briefing .
“ Is this not specifically child abuse ? ” demanded one CNN reporter .
Ms. Nielsen countered that the abuse came from parents who sent their children on the treacherous journey north to the U.S. border , braving rape , beatings , robbery and other dangers .
The secretary also said she was stunned by lawmakers who were telling her to stop enforcing the laws they passed making illegal immigration a crime .
“ It ’ s a law passed by the United States Congress . Rather than fixing the law , Congress is asking those of his who enforce the law to turn our backs and not enforce the law , ” she said . “ That ’ s not an answer . ”
Sen. Kamala Harris , a California Democrat eyeing a presidential run in 2020 , said she ’ d heard enough . She called for Ms. Nielsen to resign .