A company behind a popular card game is trying to sabotage President Donald Trump ’ s plan to build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border by purchasing up portions of land in that long horizontal area , and offering potential customers a cut .
Known as “ a party game for horrible people , ” Cards Against Humanity is asking for $ 15 from visitors to its site in a holiday promotion claiming that in return they ’ ll receive “ six surprises . ”
One of those gifts , according to the company , is a formal opportunity to buy a plot of land on or right near the border and be covered by legal representation specializing in eminent domain — rendering it not a surprise at all . The goal for the company is “ to make it as time-consuming and expensive as possible for the wall to get built . ”
“ Donald Trump is a preposterous golem who is afraid of Mexicans , ” reads the website ’ s promotion called “ Cards Against Humanity Saves America . ”
Ironically , despite the company ’ s sympathy for immigrants and foreigners , it says in its Frequently Asked Questions ( FAQ ) section that if a would-be customer doesn ’ t live in U.S. or Canada , they can ’ t sign up .
“ No . This is ‘ Cards Against Humanity Saves America , ’ not ‘ Cards Against Humanity Saves The Dumb Country You Live In , ' ” the company ’ s answer reads .
Nevertheless , the company says “ America will be saved , ” specifically from “ injustice , lies , racism , the whole enchilada ” if people send $ 15 .
The jabs at Trump and his administration are aplenty . The business admits that “ we ’ re liars , just like the president. ” Furthermore , surprises don ’ t contain sexual content “ or footage of Donald Trump watching Russian prostitutes urinate on a bed Obama slept in , ” according to the company .
When asking in the FAQ section of the website “ Why don ’ t you just stick to card games ? ” and not get political , the company retorts in typical sassy fashion : “ Why don ’ t you stick to seeing how many Hot Wheels cars you can fit up your asshole ? ” ( RELATED : In Strange Move , DNC Knocks Trump For Lack Of Progress On Border Wall )
All 150,000 slots to sign up for the peculiar gifts sold out within the first day .
Cards Against Humanity did not respond to ███ News Foundation ’ s request for further details by time of publication .