WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Months of bipartisan negotiations in the U.S. Senate over the fate of young , undocumented immigrants known as ‘ Dreamers ’ turned angry on Friday , with the lead Democratic negotiator blasting the White House for making “ hardline anti-immigrant ” demands .
'Dreamers ' hug as they meet with relatives during the 'Keep Our Dream Alive ' binational meeting at a new section of the border wall on the U.S.-Mexico border in Sunland Park , U.S. , opposite the Mexican city of Ciudad Juarez , Mexico , December 10 , 2017 . Picture taken from the U.S side of the U.S.-Mexico border . ███/Jose Luis Gonzalez
President Donald Trump in September ordered that an Obama-era program that prevented young immigrants from being deported should end in six months . The program is known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA .
Saving the Dreamers from deportation is a high priority for Democrats , but Republican and Democratic lawmakers have struggled to reach a bipartisan deal .
Senator Dick Durbin , the No . 2 Senate Democrat , said the White House on Friday had submitted a list of demands it wanted in order to agree a deal that were simply a repeat of a document it sent to Congress in early October . Democratic leaders rejected those demands at the time .
Further inflaming the negotiations , Durbin said , was an added White House demand for $ 18 billion to fund the construction of a wall along the southwestern border with Mexico , despite staunch Democratic opposition .
On Saturday , congressional Republican leaders are due to huddle with Trump at Camp David , the presidential mountain retreat , to discuss 2018 legislative priorities .
Republican and Democratic leaders are also scheduled to meet with Trump at the White House on Tuesday to talk about immigration legislation .
Durbin said the latest White House move , coming as Congress also struggles to pass a bill by Jan. 19 to fund the government through September , could push federal agencies closer to a shutdown .
Earlier , some congressional Republicans downplayed the likelihood of a deal with Democrats on legislation to protect the Dreamers - some 700,000 young immigrants who were brought to the United States as children .
Republican Senator John Cornyn accused Democrats in a tweet of trying to force a deal on Dreamers by doing a “ slow walk ” on efforts to approve critical disaster aid and defense spending .
Two other Republicans late on Thursday said the sides remained far apart . “ Our discussions on border security and enforcement with Democrats are much further apart , and that is key to getting a bipartisan deal on DACA , ” senators Thom Tillis and James Lankford said in a statement .
On Oct. 8 , the White House released a list of immigration “ principles ” Trump wanted in return for giving Dreamers legislative protection from deportation .
Besides the border wall , it included the hiring of 10,000 more Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents and 300 federal prosecutors .
Immigration advocacy groups fear the hiring expansion would be part of an attempt to round up the adult relatives of Dreamers to ship them to their native countries .
Resubmitting the demands that were dismissed by Democrats three months ago , Durbin said , was “ outrageous. ” But he added that bipartisan negotiations continue among senators .
Democrats have said they are open to tying DACA to additional funding for border security technology . But they oppose Trump ’ s wall , which government estimates have said could cost over $ 21 billion .
Republican lawmakers met with Trump at the White House on Thursday and initially emerged saying they were optimistic that they could find a legislative fix for DACA .
The struggle over the Dreamers carries political weight for both parties heading into the November 2018 midterm congressional elections . Most of the Dreamers came from Mexico and Hispanics tend to vote for Democrats .
Cornyn , in an interview on Fox News on Friday , said Trump would demand that an immigration deal address the visa lottery system and chain migration that unites family members .
“ Those are things that he ’ s insisted upon , ” and Democrats would have to embrace them along with border security , said Cornyn .