SOUTH ORANGE , N.J. — From a distance , the small group of Haitian immigrants at the public library looks like a prayer meeting or political gathering . Dressed colorfully but comfortably , the women speak in heavily accented English and sit every day for hours around a small wooden table studying to be nurses .
The library sits at the heart of one of the most diverse counties in the USA . More than 50 languages are spoken in the public schools , and this is what more and more communities across America will look like soon — very soon .
Racial and ethnic diversity is spreading far beyond the coasts and into surprising places across the USA , rapidly changing how Americans live , learn , work and worship together — and even who our neighbors are .
Cities and towns far removed from traditional urban gateways such as New York , Miami , Chicago and San Francisco are rapidly becoming some of the most diverse places in America , an analysis of demographic data by ███ shows .
Small metro areas such as Lumberton , N.C. , and Yakima , Wash. , and even remote towns and counties — such as Finney County , Kan. , or Buena Vista County , Iowa — have seen a stunning surge in immigrants , making those places far more diverse .
The USA is experiencing a `` great wave '' of immigration — call it a `` second great wave . '' The first , which stretched from the 1880s to the 1920s , coincided with the opening of Ellis Island and the social and political transformation of the nation .
The people in this second wave , arriving roughly since 1970 , are more likely to be middle-class and , because of improved transportation and technology , can assimilate more quickly .
The result : For the first time , the next person you meet in this country — at work , in the library , at a coffee shop or a movie ticket line — will probably be of a different race or ethnic group than you .
███ used Census data to calculate the chance that two random people are different by race or ethnicity and came up with a Diversity Index to place every county on a scale of 0 to 100 . The nationwide ███ Diversity Index hit 55 in 2010 , up sharply from 20 in 1960 and 40 as recently as 1990 . In South Orange , the index is 59 .
This is just the beginning . Barring catastrophe or a door-slam on immigration , the Diversity Index is on track to top 70 by 2060 , according to a ███ analysis of population projections by ProximityOne of Alexandria , Va. That means there will be less than a 1-in-3 chance that the next person you meet will share your race or ethnicity , whatever it is : white , black , American Indian , Asian , Native Hawaiian or Hispanic .
As people from varying cultures and races come together or collide , local governments and other institutions deal with a host of new issues , from conflicts over spending and diverse hiring to violence in the streets and language barriers .
This month , health workers in Dallas going door-to-door at the 300-unit apartment complex that housed the first U.S. patient with Ebola had to translate leaflets about the disease into eight languages . Among the tenants , the complex 's owner said , were many refugees being resettled .
Students witness the changing face of the country firsthand : Public schools began the 2014-15 school year with an unprecedented profile : For the first time , non-Hispanic white students are in the minority , according to Education Department projections .
Almost half of the Americans , 49 % , polled by ███ say the country will be `` better off '' as communities diversify , racing toward a point where no racial or ethnic group has a majority ; 25 % say the country would be `` worse off . ''
The fastest change is happening in regions such as the upper Midwest , where there was almost no diversity 30 years ago . Minnesota 's Diversity Index rose from 7 in 1980 to 31 in 2010 . Diversity has sprouted in many places because of local factors .
• In Finney County , Kan. , the Diversity Index rocketed from 46 to 60 from 1990 to 2010 . Two big meatpacking plants that employ more than 2,500 drew immigrants . The county is 47 % Hispanic . The same pattern has made Buena Vista County , Iowa , pop . 20,000 , the most diverse in the state . Its Diversity Index soared from 6 in 1990 to 49 in 2010 .
• In Monroe County , Pa. , in the Pocono Mountains , the Diversity Index jumped from 9 in 1990 to 48 in 2010 as minorities from Queens and Brooklyn , N.Y. , came looking for a home they could afford to own .
Just 3 % of counties had a Diversity Index that topped 50 in 1990 , but today , 14 % do . At the top end of the scale , hyper-diverse counties whose index tops 67 have nearly doubled since 2000 , from 33 to 60 . They , too , are spreading . They 're located in 17 states , up from 10 states in 2000 .
An inner-ring suburb of Newark , South Orange has consciously struggled for decades to maintain its racial , ethnic and economic diversity , even as rising housing prices have squeezed moderate- and low-income families out of neighboring suburbs . Here , the index was just 8 in 1970 . It soared to 57 in 2000 and 59 in 2010 .
CLOSE Extremely multiracial , multicultural Gwinnett County , Ga. , with a Diversity Index score of 71 , offers lessons on where the nation will be in 2060 . Jeff Reid , WXIA-TV , Atlanta
Like Newark , it 's part of Essex County , where the index has hit 72 , up from 69 in 2000 . Librarians increasingly find themselves not just checking out books but providing space for groups of immigrants — as well as for a growing corps of volunteers who tutor newcomers in English and run conversation groups . Nearly a third of the library 's patrons speak a language other than English at home , and among the most requested products is an online language tutoring program , library Director Melissa Kopecky says .
`` I 've always said that the public library is the living room of the community , '' says Keisha Miller , who runs the library 's teen programs . `` This is where you come — you have conversations , you meet people , you see your neighbors , you make new friends , you see old friends . '' Miller , 32 , attended school here as well . She 's the daughter of immigrants from Trinidad and Jamaica .
For decades , much of South Orange 's diversity has been driven by effective `` fair housing '' laws that opened up affordable housing beyond Newark city limits . Activists have also pushed to keep these suburban neighborhoods diverse , working with Realtors to persuade them to show prospective families a broader swath of houses for sale . In many cases , activists have taken newcomers on a kind of `` outsiders ' real estate tour '' o ? f their own .
`` We wanted to see if we could actually encourage people to live in all parts of the community , '' says Nancy Gagnier , executive director of the South Orange-Maplewood Community Coalition on Race .
After a commuter rail line directly connected the area with Manhattan in 1996 , diverse families increasingly began settling here from Manhattan , Brooklyn , Queens , Jersey City and Hoboken , Gagnier says . `` They 're looking for that step out into the suburbs that does n't fully remove them from an urban feel and has a level of diversity . ''
The change had many locals worried about white flight to more far-flung suburbs . The coalition hired the same consultant who helped Shaker Heights , Ohio , stay integrated . They offered home improvement loans in at-risk neighborhoods and aggressively marketed South Orange and nearby Maplewood as appealing places to live .
`` I guarantee you , you ask any person walking down the street , 'Why did you move here ? ' or 'What 's the community 's best asset ? ' and they 'll use the term 'diversity , ' `` Gagnier says .
In addition to housing policy , much of the shift to suburbs by immigrant groups can be traced to a subtle change in attitude , says David Dante Troutt , the founding director of the Rutgers Center on Law in Metropolitan Equity ( CLiME ) . He 's the author of the 2014 book The Price of Paradise : The Costs of Inequality and a Vision for a More Equitable America .
As cities gentrified and urban housing grew more expensive , immigrants whose forerunners had long settled in cities began to rethink that idea , deciding `` the city is no longer the place to be , '' Troutt says . Add troubled urban schools to the mix , he says , and the result is an explosion of ethnic enclaves , comprised of new immigrants , outside central cities .
`` It 's fascinating , and it holds all sorts of promise , '' he says . `` It both contradicts American ideas about immigration and demographics and supports many long-standing ideas about it , including the belief that the American dream is found in the ownership of a single-family home in the suburbs . ''
He says much of the diversity of places such as South Orange will depend on how strongly local attitudes support diverse kinds of housing . `` It 's still a delicate balance , '' he says . `` Let 's not kid ourselves . Even discussion of building workforce housing in some of these progressive towns will meet with a vitriol and an opposition that you can expect from the most affluent , conservative places . ''
In nearby Montclair , N.J. , he says , residents fought to block four lower-cost units from being built in one neighborhood . In another case , in Marin County , Calif. , in 2011 , filmmaker George Lucas decided to sell some land to a developer of affordable housing , but neighbors fought the move , saying they feared the development would bring in `` lowlifes , '' `` drug dealers '' and `` criminals . ''
At the time , an annual household income up to $ 88,000 qualified buyers for affordable housing , Troutt says . `` The public commenters who came in and railed against these prospective tenants in these vitriolic terms were talking about people who were making as much as assistant district attorneys , who were in fact prosecuting criminals and lowlifes and drug dealers , '' he says . `` What it suggests to me is that people are much more careful to either hide or overcome their racial animus — but what they are much less reflective about is their class animus , that it is almost OK to speak in hate-speech-like terms about people who we regard as our economic inferiors . ''
Not every corner of the country is changing rapidly , or even in the same direction . Nearly 200 counties , or about 6 % , saw their Diversity Index fall in the past decade .
For a glimpse of what the USA looked like in 1970 and still looks like in some places , drive around Idaho , South Dakota or Wisconsin . If you want to see what the USA might look like in 2040 , when the Diversity Index is projected to reach 65 , look at Denver , Albuquerque , Austin or Phoenix , which already have reached that level .
The changes are so widespread they have even reversed the trend in some places . Counties along the Texas border — notably El Paso — have become less diverse as Hispanics have grown to make up more than 90 % of the population .
The second wave of immigration is putting its own stamp on the makeup of communities across the country .
Access to transportation and a wider geographical swath of jobs means immigrants are not just showing up in big coastal cities and staying for generations . They 're moving to `` new destinations , '' as demographer Jacob Vigdor calls these places — not just suburbs but rural parts of the South , Midwest and West .
The black American experience , forged early on by slavery that brought millions from Africa , also is diversifying . Almost 10 % of blacks are new immigrants from Caribbean or African countries , especially Haiti , the Dominican Republic and Jamaica . Some must learn English as a second language and face other challenges typical of immigrants .
While this second wave brings tensions and battles over school districts , religion , public spaces , law enforcement and affordable housing , it also brings new energy : The immigrants have higher birth rates , ensuring a steady supply of workers for future generations . They bring new role models , new foods and traditions , new sports , a tremendous entrepreneurial energy and , perhaps most significantly , intact , religiously devout families that place a heavy emphasis on education .
`` We should be really happy that we have this large minority growth in the United States , '' says Brookings Institution demographer
William Frey , author of the upcoming book Diversity Explosion : How New Racial Demographics Are Remaking America .
Frey says `` new minorities '' — Hispanics , Asians and multiracial Americans — are arriving as the USA 's white population is growing quite slowly and actually declining for the younger part of the population . `` So it 's in fact a tonic , '' he says . `` We 're going to need this as we look ahead . ''
“ We should be so thankful that they 're here , ” demographer William Frey says of immigrants boosting the USA ’ s diversity .
With the new growth in diversity , Frey says , should come a new attitude about ethnic and racial minorities . `` This is everybody 's business to make sure we have a productive multi-ethnic population in the United States , '' he says . `` And we should be so thankful that they 're here , because if we did n't have the immigration and the fertility of these groups in the last 20 years , we would be in the same situation as Japan or a lot of European countries , which are facing a declining labor force and an aging population . ''
Frey puts it rather bluntly , noting that Census projections show that in about 10 years , the USA 's white population will not only be crowded out — it 'll start to shrink . `` A lot of people do n't realize this , '' he says . `` It 's the full-scale demographic scope of all this that 's really important for us to get our arms around because it 's really important for our future as a country . ''