Rep. Paul Ryan , the GOP ’ s 2012 vice presidential nominee , recently told a Wisconsin town-hall meeting that the House has plans to vote on immigration reform in October .
If Ryan , R-Wis. , is willing to publicly talk in such terms , then he is opening the door to Republicans allowing their leadership to pass the bill with votes from Democrats .
Recent remarks by other GOP leadership figures give reason for increased optimism on immigration reform as well .
On “ Fox News Sunday , ” House Majority Leader Eric Cantor ( R-Va. ) promised a vote on separate bills containing components of immigration reform as it passed the Senate .
Cantor committed neither to a vote on a comprehensive package nor a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants already in the United States .
Still , the promises of floor votes from Ryan and Cantor amounts to a breakthrough at a moment when House Republicans fear primary challenges from hardliners who might accuse them of going soft and giving “ amnesty ” to illegal immigrants .
Most House Republicans are still risk-averse on immigration reform , content to do nothing and let it die without any vote and without any conference with the Senate that could require further compromise .
But the new posture on immigration reform by high profile Republicans could end the paralysis .
The House needs 218 votes to pass any immigration bill . Rep. Luis Gutierrez ( D-Ill. ) , a key negotiator on immigration reform , estimates that 195 of 201 Democrats currently support the bill that passed the Senate in June . That means about 23 GOP votes are needed .
Immigration reform groups are targeting about 50 Republicans during the August recess , holding rallies and trying to drive large turnout for town-hall meetings . The idea is to show those House Republicans that there is support within their districts for immigration reform from business groups , farmers , labor unions and evangelical groups .
Cecilia Munoz , director of the White House Domestic Policy Council , has taken a lead role in galvanizing support for immigration reform inside Congressional districts during the recess .
“ I am optimistic [ there will be a vote on immigration reform in the House ] , ” she told me in a recent interview for Fox News Latino . “ None of us ever believed it was going to be easy . This isn ’ t about it being easy… [ but ] we now have strong bipartisan support . It is visible all over the country . ”
As the third week of recess begins , there is a glimmer of hope as a few more rank-and-file Republicans are voicing support for an immigration deal . And there is pressure building from the outside .
Last week , for example , the Bipartisan Policy Center 's immigration task-force , co-chaired by former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice , released recommendations closely mirroring the Senate-passed immigration bill . That could give more cover to House Republicans to support comprehensive immigration reform .
Already , GOP Reps. Joe Heck ( Nev. ) , Jeff Denham ( Calif. ) and Dave Reichert ( Wash. ) are saying they could support a pathway to citizenship . So , too , are Reps. Peter King ( N.Y. ) , Aaron Shock ( Ill. ) and Daniel Webster ( Fla. ) .
House GOP Whip Kevin McCarthy ( Calif. ) has not embraced the path to citizenship yet , but he has moved to the point of allowing illegal immigrants to become eligible for some legal status .
Pro-immigration reform groups , including labor unions , have targeted McCarthy during the August recess in his California district , which is home to a growing Latino population .
Another Republican feeling pressure from pro-immigration groups during the recess , Rep. Mike Coffman ( Colo. ) , appeared at a mostly Hispanic meeting in his district and spoke about the need for immigration reform that is “ compassionate in keeping families together . ”
Immigration advocates are also highlighting the lack of a Tea Party backlash during the recess against prominent Republican senators who took the risk of supporting immigration reform , such as Sens . Lindsey Graham ( S.C. ) and Lamar Alexander ( Tenn. ) .
There are several options when it comes to the mechanics of passing immigration reform in the House .
One drastic political move would be for Democrats and a few Republicans to force a vote on a comprehensive immigration bill using a discharge petition . The GOP leadership would have to promise its renegades not to punish them for defying their caucus to support the petition .
That strategy would protect both the leadership and most Republicans — who could continue to oppose legalization or citizenship — from charges of going soft on immigration reform even as it passed into law .
Ryan proposed something similar but far less bold at one town-hall meeting .
He said the Republican leadership might just bring the various parts of the Senate ’ s immigration bill to the floor and allow votes to see if there is a “ majority of the majority ” support inside the GOP caucus .
“ We don ’ t know if we have a majority until we vote on it , ” Ryan said .
He added : “ I ’ ve spoken to [ Speaker ] John Boehner…we all agree it is better to legislate in stages…I believe what I ’ ve just laid out is something that a consensus of Republicans and Democrats can agree to . ”
With House Democrats ready to support the components of the Senate bill , the Republican leadership , by lowering the bar to the vote , would be allowing the bill to become law . Yet at the same time , Boehner and his lieutenants would be insulating themselves from some of the danger of a backlash from hard-right opponents of immigration reform .
Ryan later told an interviewer : “ A lot of members know we need immigration for our economy , especially the agricultural ones…most Republicans agree that legal immigration , properly structured , is good for the economy and good for the country . ”