NEW YORK ( ███ ) - President Trump ’ s administration has drafted a plan to pause a program that allows family members join refugees already settled in the United States until they can undergo increased security checks , two sources with knowledge of the situation told ███ .
The measure is one of several being considered for refugees , the sources said .
The administration also may expand the use of intensive security checks by multiple federal agencies , called “ security advisory opinions ” ( SAO ) to apply to women from countries designated as high-risk by the U.S. government . Currently there are usually only mandatory SAOs , as they are called , for men from those countries , the sources said .
The administration is also considering expanding the categories of refugees required to be fingerprinted , the sources said .
The proposals , if implemented , could significantly slow down refugee admissions and leave refugees who thought they were headed to the United States in perilous situations abroad , say refugee advocates and former officials .
David Lapan , a spokesman from the Department of Homeland Security said he could not comment on specific proposals that are still in the review process .
A State Department official also declined to comment while the review is underway and a White House spokeswoman said they have no announcements at this time .
Republican President Donald Trump came into office in January with a goal of sharply cutting refugee admissions and quickly issued temporary bans on refugees and travelers from several Muslim-majority countries that were challenged in court .
A 120-day temporary ban on refugees , put in place to study current procedures , expires on Oct. 24 .
The sources , who requested anonymity because they are not authorized to speak about the plans before they are announced , said the new measures could be announced at the end of the temporary ban .
Trump has said “ extreme vetting ” of refugees and immigrants and visitors is needed to prevent terrorist attacks .
The administration could pause the visa issuing process for “ following-to-join ” spouses and children of refugees who have already made it to the United States , known as V93 cases , the sources said . In 2015 , just 3 percent of the nearly 70,000 refugee arrivals were those types of beneficiaries , according to the Department of Homeland Security .
“ Reports on the type of vetting measures being considered for our refugee resettlement program are disturbing , ” said Hans Van de Weerd , the Vice President of U.S. Programs at the International Rescue Committee .
They amount “ to a desertion of victims of war and heinous persecution , who have done everything asked of them as they prepare to arrive to the US , ” he said .
Refugees currently undergo differing levels of security checks when applying for admission to the United States in a process that can take 18-24 months .
“ When you put in additional security checks you can basically halt the system , ” said Robert Carey , the former director of the Office of Refugee Resettlement under former President Barack Obama , a Democrat .
“ Every check is only good for a finite period of time and they expire and the whole process has to start all over again , ” he said , adding that the level of scrutiny is higher for refugees than most any other visa applicant to the United States .
Trump also lowered the maximum number of refugees to be allowed into the United States in 2017 to 50,000 from the 110,000 originally set by Obama . The 2018 level has been set at 45,000 , the lowest number in decades .