WASHINGTON—A Hawaii judge late Thursday ordered a nationwide loosening of President Donald Trump ’ s temporary ban on U.S. entry for some travelers from six Muslim-majority countries , ruling the administration ’ s strict approach contradicted a recent Supreme Court ruling .
The decision is a fresh legal blow for the president just two weeks after a Supreme Court ruling allowed the administration to implement its travel ban against refugees and foreign nationals from six countries who have no connection to the U.S .
The justices said Mr. Trump ’ s administration couldn ’ t enforce the ban against people with bona fide relationships to people or organizations in the U.S. Days after , the Trump administration adopted a narrow view of what relationships counted for an exemption from the ban .
The Justice Department said Friday it would ask the Supreme Court to overturn the judge .
“ The Supreme Court has had to correct this lower court once , and we will now reluctantly return directly to the Supreme Court to again vindicate the rule of law and the executive branch ’ s duty to protect the nation , ” Attorney General Jeff Sessions said .
Administration officials said visa applicants and refugees with U.S.-based spouses , children , parents and siblings would be allowed in . But those with only lesser ties—such as grandparents , grandchildren , aunts , uncles and cousins—would be subject to the ban .
U.S. District Judge Derrick Watson in Hawaii took issue with that interpretation . He issued an order late Thursday , which applies nationwide , that says people with broader family ties are also exempt from the ban .
“ The Government ’ s definition of close familial relationship is not only not compelled by the Supreme Court ’ s June 26 decision , but contradicts it , ” the judge wrote .
Mr. Trump ’ s restrictions sought to impose a 90-day ban on U.S. entry for people from Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen , and to suspend temporarily the U.S. program for admitting refugees . Mr. Trump has said the order would help prevent terrorism and allow his administration time to study vetting procedures world-wide .
Thursday ’ s order , like previous decisions in the legal saga , wasn ’ t a final ruling on the ban , but instead a decision on what rules should be in place while litigation continues over whether Mr. Trump ’ s restrictions are legal .
The Supreme Court will give the case a full airing in October , and it intended its June ruling to strike a balance in the meantime , allowing Mr. Trump to bar some travel , but not for people with close connections to the U.S. , such as with family , schools and employers .
Judge Watson said the Trump administration ’ s ban implementation after the high court ruling tilted the scale too far in its favor and against those travelers with U.S. family connections . He ordered that the ban not apply to “ grandparents , grandchildren , brothers-in-law , sisters-in-law , aunts , uncles , nieces , nephews , and cousins of persons in the United States . ”
“ Common sense , for instance , dictates that close family members be defined to include grandparents . Indeed , grandparents are the epitome of close family members , ” the judge wrote .
Judge Watson also loosened some Trump administration restrictions on what type of U.S. relationships qualify to exempt refugees from the ban . The judge said refugees aren ’ t subject to the ban if they are covered by a formal admissions agreement between the U.S. government and a refugee resettlement agency .
Lawyer Neal Katyal , who is representing Hawaii in its challenge to the Trump travel ban , on Twitter called the ruling a sweeping victory .
The Justice Department had argued the Trump administration ’ s implementation of the ban was faithful with the Supreme Court ’ s ruling . It also argued that only the high court should be able to clarify or modify its ruling .