President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty for illegal immigrant Dreamers approved 93 percent of all applications decided through December — a strikingly high number that will likely play a role next month when the Supreme Court hears a legal challenge to a broader amnesty .
The program for Dreamers was considered a test run for the broader amnesty Mr. Obama announced in late 2014 , and which has been held up by lower courts as judges sort out whether the administration had the authority to grant tentative stays of deportation , issue work permits and make illegal immigrants eligible for some taxpayer benefits .
For Mr. Obama , the key to his argument is that he is not rewriting the law but only offering guidance on how to prioritize enforcement . He insists his officers still have discretion in every case to grant or deny amnesty , even if someone meets all the criteria for the program , known in governmentspeak as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA .
But his opponents say the 93 percent approval rate undercuts that argument .
“ It tells me that they ’ re rubber-stamping DACA applications . Any program that four years after its initiation is still approving 93 percent of applicants is a program that doesn ’ t have very high standards , ” said Mark Krikorian , executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies , which advocates for an immigration crackdown .
Although Dreamers were in little danger of being deported under Mr. Obama ’ s policies , DACA went further . It granted a proactive two-year stay of deportation , issued work permits and Social Security numbers , and made illegal immigrants eligible for some taxpayer benefits .
The administration began accepting DACA applications in August 2012 , in the middle of Mr. Obama ’ s re-election bid . In 2014 , after his party was crushed in midterm congressional elections , Mr. Obama tried to expand the amnesty to three years and making as many as 5 million illegal immigrant parents eligible .
Texas led 25 other states in suing to stop the program , known as Deferred Action for Parental Accountability , or DAPA . Judges have halted the amnesty for parents while the case winds through courts . The Supreme Court is set to hear oral arguments April 18 and could issue a ruling by the end of June .
While DACA is different from DAPA , the two are so closely related that the lower-court judges have used the performance of the Dreamer amnesty to inform their rulings on the broader program for parents . That ’ s why the DACA approval rate has become an issue .
At of the end of last year , nearly 715,000 people had been approved and fewer than 55,000 had been rejected . That rate is similar to the 94 percent success rate of a farmworker amnesty that was part of the 1986 amnesty . Reports said fraud within that program could have been as high as 50 percent .
No such widespread fraud charges have been leveled against DACA , and advocates for Dreamers say part of the reason the approval rate is so high is that the immigrants themselves have done a good job of making sure they are eligible before they apply . That means there are fewer borderline cases to be judged , and possibly denied .
Also , the nearly $ 500 cost makes immigrants think carefully before applying , said Tom Jawetz , vice president of immigration policy at the Center for American Progress .
“ There are a number of very good reasons why you would expect to see an approval rate around where the approval rate is , ” Mr. Jawetz said .
He said a 7 percent denial is a “ meaningful amount ” that the lower court judges shouldn ’ t have dismissed .
The 93 percent initial approval rate is lower than at the beginning of the program .
Initially , 99.5 percent of applicants were granted DACA status , or what advocates call “ DACAmented ” — a play on the word “ documented. ” Trickier applications took longer to decide , and more of those were denied , part of the reason the approval rate has fallen .
The program has been around long enough that the initial two-year period has expired for hundreds of thousands of immigrants , who have applied for renewals . The renewal rate is 99.3 percent , according to the latest Homeland Security statistics .
District Judge Andrew S. Hanen and the majority on the 5th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals said the high approval rates suggested that Mr. Obama was writing a new policy . Judge Hanen rejected the president ’ s argument that he was only issuing guidelines to carry out existing law .
“ The key fact — more so than the 92 percent grant rate — is that the government has been unable to identify a single instance where a DACA applicant was denied for discretionary reasons , ” said Josh Blackman , an associate professor at the South Texas College of Law who has helped craft briefs supporting Texas ’ case .
Indeed , Judge Hanen said he asked the government during oral arguments for examples and , except for cases of fraud , the administration couldn ’ t point to any cases in which officers rejected an application that otherwise met the criteria .
Immigrant rights groups are countering that argument in a brief filed with the Supreme Court . They offered a number of cases that they said proved officers were using discretion to reject applications .
In one case , an immigrant identified by his first name , Christian , 24 , had already been ordered deported along with his father , who was accused of being part of crimes in Guatemala ’ s decades-old civil war . The advocates say Christian applied for the amnesty and met all the criteria and was even a hardship case because he was the sole provider for his daughter and her mother , yet he was denied without further explanation .
In another case , a Virginia man named Francisco , who arrived from Mexico when he was 10 , was denied DACA benefits . The immigrant rights advocates said he is married to a U.S. citizen , has a 6-year-old child who is a citizen and had a minor criminal record that shouldn ’ t have disqualified him — yet he , too , was denied .
Lawyers also raised the case of Gabriela , a 31-year-old who had been approved for the amnesty in June 2014 but had it revoked a year and a half later .
“ The argument that the government lacks discretion to deny deferred action , or to revoke it at any time once granted , is simply wrong , ” the attorneys for the immigrant rights groups said in their brief to the high court .