On Saturday , Vice President Joe Biden may have prematurely announced the Obama administration ’ s plans to formally stop even more deportations .
Biden , who has said that he believes illegal immigrants are already American citizens , was advocating for amnesty for all of the country ’ s illegal immigrants at a South Florida college ( Miami Dade ) when someone in the audience reportedly shouted , “ Stop deportations ! ”
According to the Associated Press , the vice president , who is a potential 2016 presidential candidate and has made no secret about wanting to court the Democrat party ’ s liberal base , replied , “ We ’ ll do that , too , kid , but let me finish my speech . ”
After amnesty legislation stalled in Congress earlier this year , pro-amnesty advocates have been calling President Barack Obama the “ deporter in chief ” to pressure him to unilaterally stop deportations and grant more amnesty , even though that notion has been thoroughly debunked by the mainstream press reports from the Los Angeles Times and the New York Times .
As ███ reported , the Obama administration succumbed to the pro-amnesty activists by calling for an administrative review of the country ’ s deportation laws . Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson has met with advocacy groups “ to reportedly consider administrative actions–such as granting more forms of amnesty , not deporting illegal immigrants who have not committed ‘ major ’ crimes , and allowing bond hearings for illegal immigrants–to further erode the nation ’ s laws . ”
Twenty-two senators recently wrote Obama a letter denouncing him for threatening the “ entire constitutional system ” by “ nullifying ” the nation ’ s immigration laws .
“ Your actions demonstrate an astonishing disregard for the Constitution , the rule of law , and the rights of American citizens and legal residents , ” the senators wrote in the letter to Obama . “ Our entire constitutional system is threatened when the Executive Branch suspends the law at its whim and our nation ’ s sovereignty is imperiled when the commander-in-chief refuses to defend the integrity of its borders . ”
Biden also reportedly praised Florida for becoming the 20th state to grant in-state tuition to illegal immigrants that may cost taxpayers up to $ 50 million .
Similarly , in 2012 Biden declared on Meet the Press that he was “ comfortable ” with gay marriage before President Barack Obama had a chance to formally announce his “ evolution ” on the issue . Obama reportedly froze Biden out after that gaffe .