Nearly 60,000 immigrants will be deported before November elections if the government holds its pace , and many of them might have earned tentative legal status had President Obama taken unilateral action to halt deportations .
Mr. Obama ’ s decision to put off any action until after midterm elections , which the White House leaked Saturday hours before he announced it himself in an interview with NBC , was mocked by Republicans and enraged immigrant rights groups , who said they felt betrayed after throwing their support to the president in the 2012 election .
In the near term , it could help several vulnerable Senate Democrats who feared that unilateral action by Mr. Obama doom their campaigns .
But outside such narrow partisan considerations , Mr. Obama ’ s decision managed to anger nearly everyone : Republicans who called it a cynical ploy , liberal Democrats who said they wished he had pressed forward , and immigrant rights activists who called it a cowardly move .
“ Tens of thousands of human beings are likely to be separated from their families between now and the election , ” said Janet Murguia , president of the National Council of La Raza , whose relationship with Mr. Obama grew testy over the summer as they sparred over how far the president would be willing to go to halt deportations .
“ Their suffering , and that of their family members , who include U.S.-citizen children and spouses , should weigh on the consciences of each and every person responsible for this delay , ” she said .
Mr. Obama imposed an end-of-summer deadline for taking some form of action to halt deportations . Among the options he was considering were expanding nondeportation policies to include illegal immigrants who have children who are already citizens of the U.S. , and parents of so-called dreamers , who were brought to the U.S. illegally as minors and to whom Mr. Obama granted tentative status in 2012 .
Republicans and some legal analysts have questioned whether Mr. Obama has the authority to make those moves .
In an interview taped Saturday for NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press , ” the president didn ’ t doubt his legal standing but said the timing , just ahead of congressional elections , was wrong . He said he needed to do more work to convince voters he is right .
He acknowledged that the surge of unaccompanied children across the U.S.-Mexico border , which he initially dismissed as a Central American problem , exposed holes in the U.S. immigration system .
“ The truth of the matter is that the politics did shift midsummer because of that problem , ” the president said . “ I want to spend some time , even as we ’ re getting all our ducks in a row for the executive action , I also want to make sure that the public understands why we ’ re doing this , why it ’ s the right thing for the American people , why it ’ s the right thing for the American economy . ”
White House press secretary Josh Earnest denied last week that politics were playing a role in Mr. Obama ’ s thinking .
“ That ’ s not what the president is focused on . What the president is focused on is trying to solve problems , ” he said .
Mr. Obama ’ s decision to put off action suggests the White House still believes Democrats can win enough seats to preserve a majority in the Senate . Republicans would need to net six seats to win control .
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell , who opposed unilateral action , called Mr. Obama ’ s decision cynical .
“ The president isn ’ t saying he ’ ll follow the law — he ’ s just saying he ’ ll go around the law once it ’ s too late for Americans to hold his party accountable in the November elections . This is clearly not decision-making designed around the best policy — it ’ s Washington politics at its worst , ” the Kentucky Republican said .
Senate Democrats , though , said blame should fall on Republicans , and particularly House leaders who refused to bring the Senate ’ s immigration bill to the floor for a vote . That bill would have granted a path to citizenship to almost all illegal immigrants in the U.S .
The Obama administration was deporting about 1,010 immigrants a day in the first half of the fiscal year . At that pace , it would deport nearly 60,000 more before Election Day .
Most of the estimated 11.5 million illegal immigrants have little fear of deportation . Indeed , a ███ analysis this year estimated that an illegal immigrant who has not crossed the border recently and doesn ’ t have a criminal record has less than a 1 percent chance a year of being deported .
But the weekend decision to delay action does reinforce long-standing questions immigrant rights advocates have had about Mr. Obama ’ s commitment — questions that date back to his days in the Illinois Senate and then as a U.S. senator , when he voted to build the border fence .
When Mr. Obama ran for president in 2008 , he promised Hispanic audiences that he would fight for an immigration bill in his first year in the White House . Instead , his priorities were health care reform , the economic stimulus , addressing climate change and other issues .
Months before his re-election in 2012 , Mr. Obama announced he would grant tentative legal status to young adults who came to the U.S. illegally as children , who completed a high school education and who had no criminal records .
More than a half-million illegal immigrants took advantage of that move , and Mr. Obama won an overwhelming percentage of the Hispanic vote in his re-election bid .
Some legal analysts questioned whether Mr. Obama had the legal authority to halt deportations , and a federal judge in Texas concluded it was illegal — though the judge ruled that he didn ’ t have jurisdiction over the case , leaving the president ’ s policies in place .
Activists had been calling on Mr. Obama to expand tentative legal status to include illegal immigrant parents of U.S. citizen children , and of the young adults who gained status under the 2012 policy .