Reid and Schumer say there 's time for the House to pass a bill . | John Shinkle/███ House pressed on immigration
After months of being on the receiving end of criticism that they ’ re not doing enough on immigration , Senate Democrats are aggressively pushing the focus back to House Republicans .
Liberal activists and lawmakers have largely concentrated on President Barack Obama recently , urging his administration to ease deportations . Now , some of those same voices are training their fire on the GOP lawmakers in the House — taking seriously threats from congressional Republicans that major executive action could kill the prospects of reform altogether .
The rhetorical pressure was on full display Wednesday with twin speeches on the Senate floor , as Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) and Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) took turns blasting House Republicans for not moving on immigration reform so far this year and warning them that time is running out .
“ I want to be clear what our window is for the House to pass immigration reform — it is the window between early June and the August recess , ” said Schumer , a member of the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight that produced a comprehensive reform bill that cleared the chamber nearly one year ago . “ If Speaker [ John ] Boehner , [ Majority ] Leader [ Eric ] Cantor and other Republican leaders refuse to schedule a vote on immigration reform during this window … it will not pass until 2017 at the earliest . ”
Reid noted that Wednesday marked 321 days since his chamber passed a sweeping comprehensive reform bill .
“ We need to move forward on comprehensive immigration reform , ” he said . “ We can only do that if the Republicans in the House , led by Speaker Boehner , do the right thing . ”
The strategy reflects a renewed hope that at least some type of immigration reform legislation is still possible after the issue has stalled on Capitol Hill for the past year amid intense opposition from conservatives in the House .
Buzz about a potential reform effort is growing this week . Speaking in San Antonio on Monday , Boehner said he still wants to do immigration reform and noted that lawmakers in both parties are “ getting closer on the policy side . ”
But the window for a new law — or even smaller pieces of a comprehensive bill — is rapidly closing . Obama noted on Tuesday that lawmakers have just “ two , three months to get the ball rolling . ”
Despite hope from immigration backers , the likelihood of a reform bill landing on Obama ’ s desk this year is still exceedingly dim . House Republicans have a deep distrust of the president that at times seems almost insurmountable — a problem that GOP lawmakers have named as their chief obstacle . And logistically , not much time remains before Capitol Hill becomes consumed with campaign politics ahead of the midterm elections .
“ Realistically , there ’ s not enough time to do it between now and November , ” Texas Sen. John Cornyn , the second-ranking Senate Republican , said Wednesday .
Still , pro-reform lawmakers say they have some time to press their case with House Republicans and are easing up — at least slightly — on their push for Obama to use his executive authority to make changes to the immigration system . Sen. Robert Menendez ( D-N.J. ) , who said in March that Obama should act to stop deportations “ today , ” now wants to focus the pressure on the House GOP .
“ I ’ m all for administrative action if we can not get immigration reform , ” said Menendez , another member of the Gang of Eight . “ But I also don ’ t want to give Republicans any excuse not to finally pass immigration . It ’ s just a question of timing . ”
Those who still believe some type of immigration overhaul is possible in the next few months point to a few developments that they believe bolsters their cause .