Record Hispanic turnout helped lift the president to victory on Tuesday . Immigration reform returns to fore
Top Republicans are signaling for the first time in five years that the party will get serious about immigration reform .
Immigration ’ s sudden rise to the top of Washington ’ s to-do list after years on the legislative back burner spotlights how worried Republicans are about Latinos abandoning their party . The renewed interest in tackling the issue , if sustained , would represent a fundamental shift for Republicans , who allowed conservative firebrands to set the agenda on immigration after several failed attempts to pass a bill during the Bush administration .
The chances of enacting a comprehensive overhaul remain low , given deep-rooted opposition in GOP ranks to creating a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants . But the fact that such a cross section of Republicans are demanding a break from the recent past suggests the issue could go further than anyone would have predicted even a few months ago .
It ’ s another sign of Republicans ’ public reckoning over their party ’ s need to adjust to changing demographics . Latinos helped lift President Barack Obama to victory on Tuesday with a record Hispanic turnout and a massive margin for the Democratic incumbent .
“ It ’ s clear to me , if Republicans are going to have the opportunity to be in the majority , we clearly have to determine how we deal with minority and Latino voters , ” said Kansas Sen. Jerry Moran , who is running for the National Republican Senatorial Committee chairmanship . “ In some fashion , the way we have dealt with immigration gives us a black eye . And we need to figure out how to talk about issues and pursue policies that matter to Latino , Hispanic voters . ”
Republicans aren ’ t the only ones under pressure . Latino leaders said Wednesday that they expect Obama to deliver on a promise that he failed to fulfill in his first term .
“ The Latino giant is wide awake , cranky and taking names , ” said Eliseo Medina , secretary-treasurer of the Service Employees International Union and a leader of Latino mobilization in battleground states .
Obama told the Des Moines Register editorial board last month that he was confident immigration reform would get done next year . He mused at the time that Republicans , after years of Latino alienation , would need to repair their relationship with one of the fastest-growing demographic groups .
Obama is expected to pursue a broad proposal early next year , Democratic officials said Wednesday .
The president had promised to introduce a comprehensive immigration reform bill during his first year in office but didn ’ t follow through because , he said , Republican support never materialized . Facing pressure from the Latino community to show progress on the issue , Obama took executive action last summer to allow certain young immigrants to stay in the country .
“ I feel very optimistic about , in my view , immigration reform , ” Vice President Joe Biden told reporters traveling on his plane , adding that “ it ’ s a different day . ”