President Trump fired back Tuesday night at Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer for offering , then rescinding , a deal to support border wall funding in return for an immigration package that protects illegal immigrants brought to the U.S. as children .
`` Cryin ’ Chuck Schumer fully understands , especially after his humiliating defeat , that if there is no Wall , there is no DACA , '' the president tweeted around 11 p.m . ET . `` We must have safety and security , together with a strong Military , for our great people ! ''
Earlier Tuesday evening , White House Deputy Press Secretary Hogan Gidley slammed Schumer during an appearance on ███ ' `` Outnumbered Overtime . ''
“ He comes over here with a phony plan and a fake promise , ” Gidley said , referring to Schumer , D-N.Y .
A Schumer aide confirmed to ███ on Tuesday that the leader withdrew his offer of a boost in funding for the president ’ s proposed border wall . It was initially made during negotiations over the government spending bill with the president last Friday , the aide said .
Schumer ’ s office says he pulled the wall offer on Sunday .
But Gidley said they didn ’ t take the offer seriously , saying the Democrat offered less than one-tenth of what was needed to secure the border in his “ bogus negotiation. ” The administration wants $ 18 billion for a border wall .
“ You ca n't rescind money you never really offered in the first place , ” he said .
After a three-day government shutdown , Democrats agreed to re-open the government Monday after Republicans assured them the Senate would soon consider legislation that would protect the so-called Dreamers .
During Tuesday ’ s press briefing at the White House , Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said the president opposes an immigration proposal brokered by Republican Sens . Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Jeff Flake of Arizona and Democratic Sen. Dick Durbin of Illinois .
“ In a bipartisan meeting here at the White House two weeks ago we outlined a path forward on four issues : serious border security , an end to chain migration , the cancellation of the outdated and unsafe visa lottery and a permanent solution to DACA , ” Sanders said . “ Unfortunately , the Flake-Graham-Durbin agreement does not meet these benchmarks . ”