Central American migrants walk along a highway near the border with Guatemala in Tapachula , Mexico , October 21 , 2018 . ( Ueslei Marcelino/Reuters )
The last thing the Left wants prior to the midterms is an image dramatizing the weakness of our southern border .
So the caravan of thousands of migrants , emanating from Honduras and headed toward the United States , is considered an illegitimate story , a shoddy excuse for President Donald Trump ’ s fearmongering .
It ’ s certainly true that Trump and his allies have thrown up a lot of chaff around the caravan . It ’ s not being paid for by George Soros , or infiltrated by unknown Middle Easterners . But the president gets the big point right : We have borders , and should enforce them .
Whatever Trump ’ s exaggerations , the caravan itself isn ’ t a fabrication . It started as a group of 160 people in Honduras . It quickly grew to 1,600 . Guatemala tried to close its border to the migrants , but rapidly gave in . The caravan grew to as large as 7,000 as it crossed into Mexico , before shedding people in recent days .
The media have run with the story because it isn ’ t every day that a group of thousands of migrants crashes through a Mexican border crossing . The images , of a throng of migrants as far as the eye can see on the roads , are compelling . To which the response of progressive commentators has been : No fair .
There have been complaints that the New York Times had front-page photos of the caravan two days running . Then there ’ s the footage on TV . “ Make no mistake , ” Bill Maher says , “ the TV media is helping Trump and his enablers win the upcoming election . ”
This is all misbegotten . Rather than urging that the media ignore the caravan , Democrats would be better advised to lessen their vulnerability on immigration by not treating concerns over border security as inherently fake or hateful .
How hard would it be to say that the caravan should disperse and legitimate asylum-seekers try to get protection in Mexico , long before they reach the U.S. border ?
Asked about Trump ’ s tone on the caravan , Senator Kamala Harris made it sound as though it ’ d be un-American to turn the migrants away : “ We are a country that — our strength has always been that we are a tolerant country , that we are welcoming , in particular , to those who have fled harm . ”
Another typical response is to tsk-tsk worries about the border by citing a decline in illegal border crossings since the 2000s . But this misses the point : Our laws and rules have conspired to render the southern border almost null and void for the category of migration that has been growing at the most rapid clip , families and minors from Central America .
What migrants in the caravan understand is that , as members of a family unit from Central America , if they set foot in the United States , they have a good chance of staying ( hundreds of migrants from a 1,500-strong caravan earlier this year reportedly made it into the United States ) . They can surrender to border agents and probably get a bus ticket to the interior , pending proceedings for which they may never show up .
This is an enormous incentive to make the trek . The caravan is dramatic , but it isn ’ t different in kind from the daily reality on the border of Central American minors and members of family units showing up and getting in .
Trump is correct that this is an insane way for a sovereign country to run its immigration policy , and that Republicans want to try to fix it by tightening the rules , while Democrats support the latitudinarian status quo .
If Trump ’ s opponents don ’ t want to see more caravans on TV , they could agree that the border shouldn ’ t be arbitrarily open to a swathe of migrants from Central America and help do something about it . Instead , they cry foul when Trump points out obvious deficiencies in the current system and hope news organizations don ’ t notice a group of thousands of people heading north to try to take advantage of our laxity .