A federal judge on Friday said the government must restart the entire DACA deportation amnesty , including accepting brand new applications — but gave the administration a chance to appeal before his ruling takes effect .
The ruling by Judge John D. Bates is a major blow to President Trump , and creates even more confusion about his immigration policy .
Judge Bates said Mr. Trump and his Homeland Security Department do have the power to revoke the Obama-era DACA program , but they cut too many corners in the way they tried to do it .
He said the government needs to prove that it has considered the benefits to society of having illegal immigrants here and working , versus the government ’ s interest in enforcing the laws as written . He said Homeland Security failed to do that in its original revocation last September , and even after he gave it a chance to update its reasoning , it still failed to convince him .
“ The court sees no reason to change its earlier determination that DACA ’ s rescission was arbitrary and capricious , ” he ruled .
Other courts had already put the revocation on hold and ordered the government to renew applications of some 700,000 people who already had DACA status and who reapplied .
But those courts had declined to restart the program in full , meaning brand new applications .
He did stay his own order for 20 days to give the government a chance to appeal . The government is already appealing the other judges ’ orders , and it ’ s likely they do so in this case as well — potentially speeding the case toward an eventual date with the Supreme Court .
DACA protects young adult illegal immigrants from deportation and grants them work permits , giving them access to jobs , driver ’ s licenses and some taxpayer benefits .
The Obama administration cut corners when it announced the program in 2012 — but some judges have said that the previous administration ’ s behavior is not a justification for the new administration to also cut corners .
Indeed , that corner-cutting has become a major hindrance for Mr. Trump , who has seen judges use the same grounds to question much of his immigration policy , environmental regulation rollbacks and Obamacare decisions .
DACA may be the most politically charged of those , however .
The issue led Democrats to shut down the government earlier this year , and attempts to pass immigration reforms that would grant full legal status to illegal immigrant “ Dreamers ” covered by DACA have failed in both the House and Senate this year .