The president would ’ ve been wise to give government agencies and foreigners time to prepare .
On Saturday , in explaining the lawfulness of President Trump ’ s executive order dealing with the entry of aliens into the United States , I opined that the question of legal authority was separate from that of policy wisdom . Whether something is good policy depends not only on whether its objectives are worthy but also on whether its implementation is sound . Poor implementation can undermine good policy objectives and create unforeseen , unnecessary legal problems .
The overarching problem is that the Trump administration opted for immediate implementation rather than giving travelers a brief notice period ( say , a week or even a few days ) , so that people who had done nothing wrong were not sandbagged . Through no fault of their own , they were detained or denied entry and put on a plane back to the country from which they had come . This seems inexplicably unfair ( and , as I ’ ll address in a bit , strategically foolish ) .
Even if you accept , as I do , that the inadequate vetting of aliens who come to our country is a serious security problem , surely the imposition of temporary restrictions ( in anticipation of more refined restrictions to come ) could have waited a few days . President Trump has been issuing orders since a few hours after he was sworn in ; if the threat situation is such that he could afford to wait a week to issue this EO , then there ’ s no reason he couldn ’ t have waited another week to give government agencies time to prepare , and foreign travelers a chance to alter their plans .
The second and most serious question , as David French , Dan McLaughlin , and Charlie Cooke have all discussed , is the application of the EO to green-card holders — i.e. , lawful permanent resident aliens ( LPRs ) . I agree that the EO should either have excluded them altogether or proposed a different procedure for them in the interim before the administration announced a more refined vetting plan . And , indeed , White House chief of staff Reince Priebus intimated in a Meet the Press appearance Sunday morning that the EO ’ s application to LPRs is being eased , if not rescinded .
Unlike some of my colleagues , I do not think there is any doubt that the order literally applies to LPRs . It states in pertinent part ( italics are mine ) :
[ P ] ursuant to section 212 ( f ) of the INA , 8 U.S.C . 1182 ( f ) , I hereby proclaim that the immigrant and nonimmigrant entry into the United States of aliens from countries referred to in section 217 ( a ) ( 12 ) of the INA , 8 U.S.C . 1187 ( a ) ( 12 ) , would be detrimental to the interests of the United States , and I hereby suspend entry into the United States , as immigrants and nonimmigrants , of such persons for 90 days from the date of this order [ . ]
LPRs are aliens who have immigrated to the U.S. — i.e. , permanent settlers . When they travel internationally ( as they are liberally permitted to do while maintaining their LPR status ) and then return to the U.S. , they seek an “ immigrant entry ” ( as opposed to a “ nonimmigrant entry , ” which generally involves alien visitors whose presence is lawful but who do not seek to settle in the United States ) . The terms of the EO clearly make it applicable to entry by any immigrant alien . Consequently , it applies to LPRs who have traveled from the seven countries implicated by the suspension order .
The application of these EO terms to LPRs is misguided . As my colleagues have noted , LPRs are already subjected to extensive vetting — no doubt more extensive than whatever heightened vetting the administration has in mind for most visa seekers . Some of them are on the cusp of naturalization as citizens . It would have been better , at least in the start-up phase , to treat LPRs as American citizens , because they are already considered “ U.S . persons ” for most purposes .
To be clear , this would not have meant an absence of vetting — as Priebus conceded Sunday . Upon entry , LPRs are already subject to examination by a Customs and Border Protection officer . Moreover , if there are articulable reasons to suspect that a specific LPR is a threat to the United States , that person may be questioned extensively , subjected to investigation under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act , and even detained if there are grounds to suspect a violation of the conditions under which LPR status was granted . But I believe it was shortsighted to suspend the entry of LPRs , as a class and without notice , when the government does not ( and may not ) do that to citizens ( who are not subjected to extensive vetting , as LPRs are ) .
Don ’ t misunderstand : As I pointed out yesterday , the president has the legal authority to apply the EO to LPRs under the sweeping power granted by Section 1182 ( f ) . The question is whether doing so is just and strategically sound ( again , I ’ ll get to strategy in a moment ) .
Finally , there is a legal fairness issue closely related to the lack-of-notice problem . The United States gave visas to the aliens who have been detained ( and , in a few cases , turned away and returned overseas ) . These aliens went through the application process , which was legal , even if the Trump administration — rightly — believes it was inadequate for security purposes . Then our government gave them lawful-entry authorization , which induced them to travel here . Do these facts open the door to any legal redress ? In theory , no : The law is pretty clear that the nation has the sovereign power to police its borders , and that this power is the province of the political branches , with the courts having little if any jurisdiction .
The Trump administration ’ s most consequential folly may be the litigating posture it has put itself in . It was inevitable that the EO in question was going to prompt court challenges . From the perspective of policymakers in Washington , that may not have been much of a concern . As a federal prosecutor in New York for almost 20 years , I saw this dynamic play out many times : Policymakers often assume that if the law is strongly on the side of the policy , judges will compliantly do their jobs and follow it . You know , like : “ Yeah , let ’ s put the alien terrorists at Guantanamo Bay ! It ’ s outside the U.S. , so it ’ s outside the courts ’ jurisdiction — they ’ ll never interfere . And if they try , we ’ ll get them reversed on appeal. ” How ’ s that one workin ’ out ?
Down here on planet Earth , those of us who have had to defend these policies in court find that judges are not such pushovers . And for a good , predictable reason : A judge ’ s job is not to promote the national security of the United States , at least not primarily ; judges are there to provide justice to the parties who appear before the court . They take this responsibility seriously , and they are working in a tradition that treats the government like any other litigant , entitled to no special treatment ( other than any preference the law prescribes in statutes and precedents ) . In my experience , the greater the difference in relative power between the litigants — e.g. , the mighty government versus a poor alien who doesn ’ t grasp the legal system and might not be entitled to counsel — the more federal judges bend over backward to ensure that the alien is getting due process .
The first thing this should suggest is that optics matter : If the law is solidly on the government ’ s side , it is to the government ’ s advantage to litigate the law as an abstract proposition , not as something that has been implemented and that has harmed apparently innocent people .
Let ’ s say the Trump administration had announced its new policy and explained that it would be implemented beginning one week from the date of the announcement . The ACLU & Co. would still have stormed immediately into court . . . but they wouldn ’ t have done so while representing highly sympathetic clients who were being detained at the airport amid swarms of protesters , news media , Democratic politicians making welcome-to-Nazi-Germany speeches , and so on .
A week ’ s delay would have convinced most aliens not to travel here and risk detention or exclusion .
The ACLU lawyers would have been trying to conjure up doom-and-gloom rhetorically but without flesh-and-blood horror stories . The government lawyers would have been citing their strong precedents . The judges would have been hesitant , even if they thought the policy was wrong , to take action under circumstances in which the government was on solid legal footing , the courts ’ jurisdiction was questionable , and no one had suffered real harm . Meantime , the chance that the policy would result in sympathetic victims would have diminished to near zero : A week ’ s delay would have convinced most aliens not to travel here and risk detention or exclusion ; and any aliens who came would have been doing so in knowing defiance of the EO , not in innocent reliance on the prior issuance of a visa .
Instead , the Trump administration must now litigate on the defensive . Some judge offended by the application of the order to LPRs may decide that LPRs are so woven into the fabric of our society they must be treated as citizens — and if that were to become settled law , it might later hurt the government in cases where there would have been investigative advantage in an LPR ’ s not being a citizen . Another judge offended by the callousness of giving people a visa and then pulling the rug out from under them once they get here , may decide , “ I want to explore whether a visa is the legal equivalent of a contract that the government has breached. ” Any of the judges inclined to entertain novel legal claims could order hearings — demanding testimony or answers from government attorneys about how the EO was formulated , which officials were consulted , what preparations were done , whether there are communications between officials about denying aliens entry after they ’ d been granted visas , and why , if we ’ re worried about the terrorist threat , Yemen is on the list but Saudi Arabia isn ’ t , and so on .
Maybe the government would have good answers to all these questions . But if officials could not answer them , answered them incorrectly ( which can happen in a chaotic situation in which everyone is not on the same page ) , or appeared to be stonewalling , that could generate bad judicial rulings and erode public confidence in the new policy ( and buoy the opposition to step up its efforts ) .
Good policy requires good implementation . Bad implementation begets victims with legitimate grievances and heightened judicial scrutiny — the kind of bad facts that tend to make bad law . And bad law makes it much harder to develop good policy . It can become a cycle of self-defeat .