President Obama ’ s immigration policies suffered a rough week , faltering in the courts , taking fire on Capitol Hill , angering his political base and even having his own deportation chief undercut his message as he struggles to find a middle-ground path to overhaul the nation ’ s immigration system .
The busy week climaxed late Friday , when U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement announced it had deported an illegal immigrant Mennonite pastor , in a case that has sparked fury among immigrant rights advocates who say it exposes the hypocrisy of Mr. Obama ’ s own statements about pushing for a more lenient policy that keeps families together .
The deportation was announced just hours after ICE Director Sarah Saldana was forced to walk back her statement from a day earlier that she wanted Congress to pass laws requiring state and local authorities to hold and turn over illegal immigrants .
Also Thursday , the federal judge who has temporarily halted Mr. Obama ’ s amnesty threatened further sanctions against the president ’ s attorneys , questioning whether they misled him by saying they hadn ’ t put any of the amnesty into action — even though they had been approving the so-called Dreamers under one part of the expanded program .
“ Like an idiot , I believed that , ” Judge Andrew S. Hanen said at a hearing in his Brownsville , Texas , courtroom , The Associated Press reported .
Republicans are gearing up for budget battles on the House and Senate floors this week , where immigration is likely to play a role as the GOP seeks to cut down on tax benefits available to those in the country without authorization .
Mr. Obama ’ s nominee to be the next attorney general , Loretta Lynch , has seen her support crater among Republicans over her backing of Mr. Obama ’ s amnesty moves , which she told the Senate earlier this year she believed were based on sound legal reasoning .
Judge Hanen has rejected that legal reasoning and issued an injunction . Ms. Lynch would be in charge of Mr. Obama ’ s appeal should she win confirmation to lead the Justice Department .
Even as conservative anger at Mr. Obama is boiling over , worry on the other side of the issue from immigrant rights advocates is growing after ICE last week deported Max Villatoro , a Mennonite pastor from Iowa who has been in the country for years , has four children who are U.S. citizens and whom the activists said was a perfect candidate for the president ’ s new , more lenient policies .
In addition to announcing proactive legal status for 4 million illegal immigrants , Mr. Obama in November also ordered immigration agents not to bother deporting most of the rest of the illegal immigrant population and to focus only on serious criminals .
ICE officials say Mr. Villatoro ’ s conviction in the 1990s for drunken driving makes him a priority for deportation , and despite a week of protests and demands for meetings between the activists and Homeland Security officials , late Friday , ICE sent Mr. Villatoro home to Honduras .
Mr. Villatoro was netted during a fugitive dragnet earlier this month that caught more than 2,000 illegal immigrants — some of whom had previously been released by state and local authorities who refused to cooperate by holding them for federal ICE agents .
That ’ s one reason Ms. Saldana agreed with congressional Republicans on Thursday that she would like to see Congress pass a law requiring cooperation .
“ Thank you . Amen , ” Ms. Saldana told the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform Thursday .
That statement , however , is at odds with Mr. Obama ’ s policy of only targeting states that try to crack down on illegal immigrants while encouraging those that have lenient policies . And by Friday , amid an outcry from immigrant rights advocates who excoriated the administration over Ms. Saldana ’ s remarks , she was forced to eat her words .
“ Any effort at federal legislation now to mandate state and local law enforcement ’ s compliance with ICE detainers will , in our view , be a highly counterproductive step and lead to more resistance and less cooperation in our overall efforts to promote public safety , ” she said in a statement .
Despite her retreat , it ’ s likely Ms. Saldana ’ s true feelings hew closer to her testimony to Congress .
Earlier this month , at a press conference touting the 2,000 illegal immigrants netted in Operation Cross Check , Ms. Saldana and Deputy Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas lamented the states and localities that refuse to cooperate with federal immigration officials .
Ms. Saldana described one illegal immigrant from Mexico whom the Ventura County Sheriff ’ s Office refused to hold . He had been deported in 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2008 and 2013 , and had sneaked back into the U.S. each time . He had a long rap sheet , yet the sheriff ’ s office released him , citing a California law that prohibits more extensive cooperation .
Mr. Mayorkas said cases like this , where a community refuses to help , actually hurt public safety .
“ That individual has been in the community despite his or her public safety threat — the public safety threat he or she poses , ” Mr. Mayorkas said . “ That is not of benefit to the community , nor to the benefit of law enforcement that is dedicated to protecting that community , because now the [ detention ] officers have to go in at personal risk to themselves to apprehend that very individual that we could have obtained custody of from a local facility . ”
Ms. Saldana ’ s effort to walk back her comments didn ’ t sit well with House Oversight Committee Chairman Jason Chaffetz , who said it underscores the administration ’ s aversion to immigration enforcement .
“ Her statement today reflects the Obama administration ’ s true priority : to not enforce the immigration laws already on the books , ” the Utah Republican said , vowing that his committee will press the issue with Ms. Saldana and other Homeland Security officials .
Perhaps the biggest threat to Mr. Obama ’ s immigration policy , however , remains the federal courts and Judge Hanen , who has issued an injunction against the 2014 amnesty , and last week said he ’ s still considering sanctioning the administration for misleading him over whether it was carrying out amnesty in certain cases already .
The Justice Department tried to apologize and throw itself on the mercy of the court , with Mr. Obama ’ s lawyers insisting he ’ s trying to do right . On Saturday , Mr. Obama ’ s lawyers told Judge Hanen there was no harm in letting the small part of the amnesty policy go into effect that extends the time that Dreamers can be granted “ deferred action ” from two years to three years .
The lawyers said they should get credit for having belatedly self-reported to the court that they were already carrying out part of the amnesty , and said there ’ s no harm to anyone right now in any case .
“ The inherent power of the court to impose sanctions is to be exercised with restraint and discretion , ” the administration said in a brief filed with the court . “ Here , absolutely no evidence of bad faith or willful abuse of this court ’ s processes exists to justify discovery into potential sanctions . ”