Democratic presidential hopeful Julián Castro visited a makeshift camp on Monday in the Mexican city of Matamoros , where asylum-seekers are being “ forced to live in squalor ” because of a Trump administration policy that has stranded some 50,000 people just south of the US-Mexico border . He was there to escort a group of vulnerable migrants as they petitioned for asylum at the port of entry , something that has become increasingly more difficult in recent months .
The Migrant Protection Protocols policy , also known as “ Remain in Mexico , ” forces migrants who ask for asylum at the border back to Mexico—often for months—to wait on their day in immigration court . The policy started out in the San Diego area at the beginning of the year and has since expanded along the border to South Texas , forcing tens of thousands of migrants to wait in dangerous Mexican border towns—including Matamoros , which sits across the Rio Grande from Brownsville , Texas , and has been given a level 4 “ do not travel ” warning by the US State Department .
In a tweet sent Monday morning , Castro didn ’ t mince words about Trump : “ Make no mistake : his agenda is killing people—and it ’ s on purpose . ”
What I saw in across the border in Matamoros , Mexico is a national embarrassment—one entirely of Trump ’ s creation . Make no mistake : his agenda is killing people—and it 's on purpose . pic.twitter.com/JU7MuskcL2 — Julián Castro ( @ JulianCastro ) October 7 , 2019
It was the first time Castro visited one of these camps in Mexico , and he urged others to do the same “ because it truly drives home how much we ’ re failing these people and unnecessarily harming their lives . ”
I spoke to the former secretary of housing and urban development on the phone as he was driving back to San Antonio . Our conversation has been edited for content and clarity .
I went to Matamoros today to spotlight the suffering of people there who are living in squalor , drinking dirty water , not eating enough food , and being subjected to crime , all because of this administration ’ s backwards policy to keep them out of the US while they seek asylum . Today I took 12 people [ to the port of entry ] —eight of them were from the LBTQ community , and one family with a person who is disabled—to appeal their placement in the [ Migrant Protection Protocols ] program . I did this because under the terms of the MPP program , people who have a mental health or physical disability are not supposed to be forced to remain in Mexico . Members of the LGBTQ community who have been persecuted , who have been threatened and suffered beatings , often have PTSD , and that should qualify as a mental health issue . The person who is deaf obviously shouldn ’ t have been placed in the MPP program in the first place .
What did you say when you walked up to the port of entry ?
I presented myself to the border agents there , asked for a supervisor , and said we were presenting these people who should not have been in the Remain in Mexico program to begin with . At that point they were taken in , and they were given an opportunity to make their case . Most of the LGBTQ migrants were from Cuba , and the rest from Central America .
Did you get any pushback from the agents at the port of entry ?
“ There are many children who are sick , who are not getting any kind of education , and who are desperate . ”
The saddest thing that I saw today was a mother with her young child on her lap and the child looked thin , probably from lack of eating much . He seemed weak and very fatigued , probably because of the heat , or perhaps because they don ’ t have clean drinking water . There are many children who are sick , who are not getting any kind of education , and who are desperate .
You ’ ve been speaking against the MPP/Remain in Mexico policy for most of the year , and you and I spoke about this back in May , but was there anything that surprised you today seeing it firsthand—especially having crossed into Matamoros ?
The scale of the squalor . They ’ re up to more than 1,000 people there in tents right on the other side of the border . Plus , Matamoros is the newest site ; you have more than 3,000 people in Nuevo Laredo and many more in Tijuana . The scale of the desperation is growing quickly as the policy expands . This is a humanitarian disaster that should be ended immediately .
Are you concerned with what the asylum-seeking process in the United States has turned into under this administration ?
“ We should stop playing games with people at the border . ”
Absolutely ! It ’ s become a sham ! First of all , we don ’ t have an immigration court system that is properly equipped to deal with the asylum claims , and it should be independent from the Department of Justice . We also should recognize people who are victims of domestic violence and gang violence in asylum claims . We should stop playing games with people at the border .
What was the outcome for the 12 people you took to the port of entry ?
We ’ re waiting to get the news , they are going to go through an interview their appeal of getting put through the MPP process , and we should find out at some point today what happened to them . We ’ re going to follow up with the Texas Civil Rights Project ; they have attorneys who are in contact with each of them .
Now , this was just a handful of people on one day , at one port of entry . We know that tens of thousands are being forced to wait in dangerous Mexican border towns for many months . Knowing the scale of this , what are you feeling right now as you drive away from the border ?
“ Desperate people are knocking on our door , and instead of allowing them safety as their asylum claim is determined , we push them to unsafe places along the border . ”
This is a betrayal of our values and who we should be as a country , because desperate people are knocking on our door , and instead of allowing them safety as their asylum claim is determined , we push them to unsafe places along the border and have made their lives much worse . Like a lot of people , I ’ m frustrated by this administration ’ s cruelty , and I feel more determined than ever to end this policy . There ’ s also , of course , a sadness , especially for the children who are going through all of this .
You ’ ve said that if elected president , you would quickly sign an executive order to end this policy . What else needs to happen , both short-term and long-term , to properly address asylum claims at the border ?
We need an independent immigration judiciary with enough judges and support staff to hear all of these claims in a timely manner . We also need to put more resources into getting people connected with family members who are already in the United States so they can find a loving home instead of placing them in the detention facilities . It would be more cost-effective than building more detention facilities . In addition to that , Mexico has a role , as well , in doing what it can to ensure that people have basic living conditions and that they ’ re safe .
Is there an image from your trip this morning that you ’ d like people to know about ?
Yeah , we went and laid flowers along the banks of the [ Rio Grande ] river where there were crosses to commemorate the death of a number of migrants , including Oscar and his daughter Valeria . And in that same river just feet away from those crosses little children were playing and bathing themselves . The river is heavily polluted , and that ’ s the water that people are bathing in .
Oscar and Valeria Martinez died on these shores—desperately crossing the river as a last resort for asylum . They aren ’ t the first to be killed by Trump ’ s immigration agenda , and they won ’ t be the last if we don ’ t act soon. # LetThemIn pic.twitter.com/QjosYWPHQX — Julián Castro ( @ JulianCastro ) October 7 , 2019