CLOSE The latest version of President Donald Trump 's immigration restrictions has been temporarily blocked by a federal judge . Video provided by Newsy Newslook
Just hours before President Trump ’ s third attempt at a travel ban targeting majority-Muslim nations was scheduled to go into effect Wednesday , federal judges in Maryland and Hawaii again shut down the controversial measure .
In Maryland , U.S. District Judge Theodore Chuang ruled late Tuesday that the travel ban continues to have the same problems , and violate the same constitutional principles , as previous versions of the ban . Despite tweaks made by the administration , Chuang ruled that it still constituted a “ Muslim ban ” that violates the Constitution ’ s protections against religious discrimination .
Earlier in the day in Hawaii , U.S. District Judge Derrick Watson struck down the ban on different grounds , arguing it violates a federal law that prohibits discrimination based on nationality . Watson said Trump overstepped his legal authority by banning 150 million people from countries targeted in the ban , and that the law does not give him “ unbridled discretion to do as he pleases . ”
The two rulings combined provide opponents of the ban with multiple legal attacks as the cases make their way through the appeals process .
“ They demonstrate the breathe of legal problems that the administration is facing as it tries again and again to impose the ban , ” said Omar Jadwat , an ACLU attorney involved in the Maryland case . “ They really undermine how any way you look at it , they lose . ”
The White House insists that will not be the case . Both judges who ruled Tuesday were appointed by former president Barack Obama . And for all the legal wrangling over the travel ban during the past nine months , the Supreme Court has not yet fully weighed in .
When it does , the high court will have Trump ’ s nominee — Justice Neil Gorsuch — on the bench , meaning the more conservative court could end up saving the travel ban for Trump .
White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Tuesday that she was , “ confident that the judiciary will ultimately uphold the president ’ s lawful and necessary action and swiftly restore its vital protections for the safety of the American people . ”
At issue is Trump 's third attempt to implement a travel ban set to begin Wednesday . The ban would block specific travelers from five of the original nations cited in Trump 's first ban issued in January — Iran , Libya , Somalia , Syria and Yemen — along with Chad , North Korea and Venezuela .
Iraq and Sudan were subtracted from the list in March and September , respectively .
Watson , issuing a nationwide block against the travel ban , said the measure was `` simultaneously overbroad and underinclusive '' because it targets entire countries rather than dangerous individuals . Watson ruled the new ban fails to show that nationality alone makes a person a greater security risk to the U.S .
“ The categorical restrictions on entire populations of men , women and children , based upon nationality , are a poor fit for the issues regarding the sharing of ‘ public-safety and terrorism-related information ’ that the president identifies , ” Watson wrote .
Watson 's ruling affects only the six majority-Muslim countries and does not include North Korea and Venezuela . But few people are affected by the ban in those countries .
More : Federal judge in Hawaii blocks Trump 's third travel ban
More : In victory for Trump , Supreme Court dismisses travel ban case
Chuang , in his ruling a few hours later , said the president 's own words make clear the focus is not on national security but on instituting a ban against Muslims . The judge said the administration had “ not shown that national security can not be maintained without an unprecedented eight-country travel ban . ”
Chuang 's ruling was more limited . It prohibits the administration from enforcing the ban against people who can prove they have a `` bona fide '' — or good faith — relationship with U.S. persons or entities , such as businesses or universities .
In using that wording , the judge followed guidance from the Supreme Court over the summer , when it allowed the Trump administration to implement a scaled-back version of an earlier travel ban . The court dismissed that case after Trump issued the latest version .
The Trump administration continues defending the ban , arguing that a president has broad authority to restrict immigration in the name of national security .
The administration points to a section of federal law that allows a president to bar admission to `` any aliens or of any class of alien '' that he declares are `` detrimental to the interests of the United States . '' And it says the latest version of the travel ban is a carefully constructed measure implemented after a thorough review by the departments of Homeland Security , State , Defense and Justice .
The Justice Department has said it will appeal Watson 's ruling .