House Speaker John A. Boehner on Thursday flatly ruled out chances of the House passing the Senate ’ s immigration bill , saying his chamber will debate its own bill instead .
The Ohio Republican and his top lieutenants in the party issued a joint statement that seemed designed to tamp down some of the momentum behind the Senate bill , which emerged from a committee on a bipartisan 13-5 vote this week , and to stake out a House GOP position .
“ While we applaud the progress made by our Senate colleagues , there are numerous ways in which the House will approach the issue differently , ” the Republican leaders said in their statement . “ The House remains committed to fixing our broken immigration system , but we will not simply take up and accept the bill that is emerging in the Senate if it passes . Rather , through regular order , the House will work its will and produce its own legislation . ”
Mr. Boehner is playing a proxy game of political checkers with House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , as a bipartisan group of lawmakers tries to craft a broad immigration deal that would include legal status for illegal immigrants and a rewrite of the legal immigration system .
Members of that “ Gang of Eight ” announced they had reached the outlines of a deal last week , then hit some snags , and said Thursday that they were back on track .
“ A bipartisan bill in the House has the best chance of passing the House and the best chance of producing a good immigration reform proposal when conferenced with the Senate ’ s bipartisan bill , ” said Rep. Luis V. Gutierrez , Illinois Democrat who is part of the group .
SEE ALSO : GOP lawmakers want Obama to hear out head of ICE union
In addition to encouraging the bipartisan group , Mr. Boehner also has green-lighted two committees to work on pieces of the puzzle . The Homeland Security Committee last week approved a border security bill , and the Judiciary Committee is preparing to move on legislation creating an agriculture guest-worker program and another bill to establish a nationwide electronic verification system for businesses to check their workers ’ legal status .
Those are all pieces of the bipartisan bill that cleared the Senate Judiciary Committee , but the Senate bill goes much further . It rewrites the legal immigration system and , most controversially , extends quick legal status to illegal immigrants with the promise of an eventual pathway to citizenship .
Democrats say citizenship rights are a non-negotiable part of any deal , but Republicans are still struggling with that .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , Nevada Democrat , said he will put the immigration bill on his chamber floor next month .
He signaled that he won ’ t pursue a fight over President Obama ’ s Labor Department secretary nominee because it could have upset the bipartisanship that has developed around the immigration bill .
Key Senate Republicans have said they won ’ t try to filibuster to block the bill from coming to the Senate floor .
There is some speculation that if a bill emerges from the Senate , Democrats would call on the House to pass it as well .
The House Republican statement seemed designed to shut down that avenue .
“ Enacting policy as consequential and complex as immigration reform demands that both chambers of Congress engage in a robust debate and amendment process , ” the leaders said .
Mrs. Pelosi said Thursday that one issue holding up the bipartisan House negotiations on immigration is over how insistent Congress should be that the administration create a nationwide electronic verification system to check workers ’ legal status .
“ If E-Verify is not effectively accomplished in five years , then all of these people revert to the status they have now . I think that ’ s pretty drastic , ” Mrs. Pelosi said .
But she shot down reports that she was insisting on broader health care coverage for illegal immigrants , saying she accepts the decision in the 2010 health care law that makes them ineligible .
“ I ’ m saying that there is no obstacle to our support of a bill if it says no taxpayer funding . That would be a subsidy in the Affordable Care Act , and it would also be Medicaid , ” she said .