The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of ███.com .
During the last year of the Obama administration , the U.S. allowed nearly 85,000 refugees to enter the country . President Trump campaigned on a strictimmigration crackdown and a desire to limit mass refugee immigration . TheTrump administration is planning on reducing overall annual refugeeadmissions to , at most , 45,000 annually . The cap has not been this low since 2006 .
President Trump has also signed a new executive order to limit immigration from eight nations “ until we are sure that we can conduct proper screeningand vetting of those countries ’ nationals. ” Venezuela and North Korea were added to six countries listed on previous bans—Chad , Iran , Libya , Somalia , Syria , and Yemen . This new limit is better clarified but is sure to be tested in the courts .
President Trump used his September 19th speech to the UN to explain a rationale and well-thought out plan on how to balance compassion with caution in dealing with the refugee situation . He emphasized a “ safe , responsible , and humanitarian approach ” that positions refugee settlements in a way that facilitates their eventual return to help rebuild the countries they love .
President Trump asserts : “ Over the long term , uncontrolled migration is deeply unfair to both the sending and the receiving countries . For the sending countries , it reduces domestic pressure to pursue needed politicaland economic reform , and drains them of the human capital necessary tomotivate and implement those reforms . For the receiving countries , thesubstantial costs of uncontrolled migration are borne overwhelmingly by low-income citizens whose concerns are often ignored by both media and government . ”
His plan is cost-effective and culture sensitive : “ For the cost of resettling one refugee in the United States , we can assist more than 10 in their home region . Out of the goodness of our hearts , we offer financial assistance to hosting countries in the region , and we support recentagreements of the G20 nations that will seek to host refugees as close totheir home countries as possible. ” Is it not better to be working in close to home in Jordan than being unemployed and out of place somewhere in the West ?
For those who think such limits are unnecessary , read Douglas Murray ’ s well-documented book , The Strange Death of Europe . It chronicles the impact of mass immigration on Europe . Rather than easily fitting in , the majority of Muslim refugees in France found their own suburbs to settle in , Seine Saint-Denis near Paris . The same has happening in certain towns in North England , Rotterdam , Amsterdam , Stockholm , and Malmo . Pubs and churches in these areas were closing .
From Theo van Gogh to Kurt Westergaard and from Oriana Fallaci to Michael Houellebecq , people who lead campaigns against the refugees were subject to physical intimidation or even killed . After numerous terrorist attacks , honor killings and cartoon attacks , it was becoming clear throughout Europe that assimilation was not working . There was no flexibility on equality of the sexes or gay rights . Militant refugees did not share the West ’ s views on freedom , individual rights , or religious tolerance .
In response to problems with mass immigration , porous borders began to close . The UK voted to leave the EU . Fences went up between Hungary and Serbia , between Bulgaria and Turkey , and between Macedonia and Greece . Refugees were becoming increasingly unwelcome .
After continual attempts to justify her decision to accept thousands of refugees , German Chancellor Angela Merkel , finally admitted the failure of refugees to assimilate into German society . Her Potsdam “ state of the nation ” speech in October of 2010 conceded that the integration and multiculturalism she had espoused had “ failed , utterly failed. ” She conceded that we had “ kidded ourselves for a while . We said , ‘ they won ’ t stay , some time they will be gone , ’ but this isn ’ t reality. ” At that point , only 48,000 people had received asylum . Her words did not result in a change in policy . After five years of increasing numbers , Chancellor Merkel allowed 1.5 million refugees into Germany in 2015 .
May Americans never face the sentiments expressed by a German Syrian migrant named Aras Bacho . He complained that migrants were “ fed up ” with the “ angry ” German people who “ insult and agitate ” and are “ unemployed racists. ” He continued , “ We refugees…do not want to live in the same country as you . You can , and I think you should , leave Germany . Germany does not fit you . Why do you live here ? ... Look for a new home . ”
Refugees to America will continue to be accepted at a slower pace . Muslim immigrants who are fully vetted from responsible nations will still be welcomed . But , thankfully , under the Trump administration , there will be no mass refugee immigration like Europe has experienced .