“ [ Marco Rubio ] says it ’ s ‘ dead on arrival ’ if it ’ s proposed . Well let ’ s make sure that it doesn ’ t have to be proposed . ”
-- White House Chief of Staff Dennis McDonough on “ This Week ” discussing a leaked draft of the president ’ s immigration legislation .
A toxic emission from the White House over the weekend may be the beginning of the end for hopes of ending a decade of political punting on illegal immigration .
Things had been progressing remarkably well . The initial excitement and the subsequent backlash that followed the announcement of a blueprint by a bipartisan group of senators had died down and lawmakers were about the boring business of crafting a bill .
The “ Gang of Eight ” was an immediate sensation in a town so soaked in partisan acrimony and so dysfunctional that not even the simplest , most necessary things can be accomplished . Two moderate Republicans , two conservative Republicans , two moderate Democrats and two liberal Democrats ( including the blue team ’ s only Hispanic member of the Senate ) crafted the outline of the deal , doing what all of the talking heads say Congress should : work across the aisle to address big problems .
There was considerable backlash on the right from conservatives who felt sure that they were being set up for a hornswaggling in which illegal immigrants get amnesty now and promised safeguards against future border jumpers never materialize .
But Sen. Marco Rubio did what Sen. John McCain didn ’ t do the last time around on the subject and faced critics head on . Rubio paid his respects and answered questions directly from Bill O ’ Reilly , Rush Limbaugh and others .
Conservatives still have deep concerns about how an amnesty would be arranged – the timing , conditions , etc . – but have mostly come around on the point that mass deportations and arrests are not possible . Republicans ran an immigration hardliner for president last year and have little to show for their efforts . So at the very least , the members of the red team now understand that the issue is a loser for their side .
Behind the scenes , senators were busy with the arduous process of crafting a compromise to the compromise with skeptical House Republicans . Majority Leader Eric Cantor ’ s remarks on the subject indicated that the work would certainly be slow but that there was hope for a big bill this year .
President Obama at first seemed eager to torpedo the legislation .
His press secretary took the opportunity of the announcement of the initial deal to remind prideful Republican lawmakers that it was the president who deserved credit for the deal , even if he hadn ’ t been part of it . He had created the atmosphere , according to Jay Carney , that made the deal possible . One can argue that by winning the election with a pro-amnesty campaign , Obama did change the atmosphere , but so what ? If you want something done in Washington , never force your adversaries to kiss your ring ( or anything else ) in the process .
It looked certain that Obama was going to come in and tip the whole thing over . With conservatives very carefully and tentatively trying to broker a truce in the border wars that have so damaged their party since 2007 , Obama making demands for a permissive , rapid amnesty program would be a disaster .
But bowing to pressure from the Hispanic Caucus of his own party , Obama opted to not be “ bold ” and instead sat on his own bill and make some general remarks about immigration . But he threatened future destructive boldness if lawmakers did not speedily produce a bill .
Obama acknowledged how counterproductive his participation in the legislation would be , but said he would come in and start punishing Republicans with accusations of intransigence and xenophobia if the law didn ’ t make it too his desk fast .
It would be a near miracle if the Senate had a completed , viable , bipartisan bill passed before its August recess . That would make passage of a final bill before the Thanksgiving break possible . By congressional standards , especially in a divided Congress , that would be very fast for such large legislation .
The White House leaked its immigration legislation over the weekend , revealing a plan so liberal that it wouldn ’ t even likely be able to get 51 votes in the Democratic Senate . Rapid amnesty and a special pathway to citizenship for those already in the country illegally are not going to be part of any law that passes in the Congress .
Obama had been unusually gracious on the subject in his State of the Union address last week , not engaging in the hectoring and shaming that he normally applies to the immigration debate .
But the Saturday leak of the plan and the Sunday threats from his chief of staff suggest that Obama ’ s self-restraint is already exhausted .
And this brings us back to where we began on immigration . Obama would rather have no bill and the chance to punish Republicans than compromise legislation that doesn ’ t meet his transformative goals .
Chris Stirewalt is digital politics editor for ███ , and his POWER PLAY column appears Monday-Friday on FoxNews.com . Catch Chris Live online daily at 11:30amET at http : live.foxnews.com .