Young people , who have been highly visible and vocal activists despite their undocumented status , have been calling on Mr. Obama for more than a year to stop deporting them and allow them to work . Many of them were elated and relieved on Friday .
“ People are just breaking down and crying for joy when they find out what the president did , ” said Lorella Praeli , a leader of the United We Dream Network , the largest coalition of illegal immigrant students .
Republicans reacted angrily , saying the president had overstepped his legal bounds to do an end run around Congress . Some Republicans accused Mr. Obama of violating the law . “ The president ’ s action is an affront to the process of representative government by circumventing Congress and with a directive he may not have the authority to execute , ” said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa , the senior Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee . “ It seems the president has put election-year politics above responsible policies . ”
In many ways , the president ’ s move was a clear play for a crucial voting bloc in states that will decide whether he gets another term . It also held the potential for considerable payoff .
The action was the first measure by Mr. Obama that offers immediate relief to large numbers of illegal immigrants , in contrast to smaller steps the administration had taken that were intended to ease the impact of deportations but in practice had little effect . During the three years of his term , Mr. Obama has deported more than 1.1 million immigrants , the most by any president since the 1950s .
“ Now let ’ s be clear : this is not an amnesty , ” Mr. Obama said in the Rose Garden , anticipating the Republican response . “ This is not a path to citizenship . It is not a permanent fix . ”
The group of illegal immigrants that will benefit from the policy is similar to those who would have been eligible to become legal permanent residents under the Dream Act , legislation that Mr. Obama has long supported . An effort by the White House to pass the bill in late 2010 was blocked by Republicans in the Senate . Mr. Obama called on Congress again Friday to pass that legislation .
The president was facing growing pressure from Latino leaders and Democrats who warned that because of his harsh immigration enforcement , his support was lagging among Latinos who could be crucial voters in his race for re-election .
Illegal immigrants said the new policy would make a major difference in their lives . As students , when they graduate from high school , they often can not go on to college because they are not eligible for financial aid and must pay higher tuition rates . If they do succeed in graduating from college , regardless of their academic accomplishments , they can not be legally employed in the United States or obtain driver ’ s or professional licenses .
The Pew Hispanic Center , a nonpartisan research group in Washington , estimated on Friday that as many as 1.4 million immigrants might be eligible for the new measure . The vast majority are Latinos , with about 70 percent born in Mexico . Many of the students live in states that could be pivotal for Mr. Obama ’ s re-election prospects , including Colorado , Florida , Nevada and New Mexico .
Nationally , a Pew Center survey in December found that 91 percent of Latinos supported the Dream Act .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
For immigrants who come forward and qualify , Homeland Security authorities will use prosecutorial discretion to grant deferred action , a reprieve that will be valid for two years and will have to be renewed . Under current law , that status allows immigrants to apply for work permits .
In a memorandum issued Friday referring to the students , Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano instructed all enforcement agents to “ immediately exercise their discretion , on an individual basis , in order to prevent low-priority individuals from being placed into removal proceedings . ”
But Homeland Security officials said they would begin accepting requests from immigrant students in 60 days , leaving time to prepare procedures to handle the huge response they expect .
Representative Steve King , Republican of Iowa , who is an outspoken critic of illegal immigrants , said he would bring a lawsuit against the White House to stop the measure .
White House officials said they chose Friday for the policy shift because it is the 30th anniversary of a Supreme Court decision , Plyler v. Doe , that effectively established that all children , regardless of immigration status , were entitled to public education through high school .
Immigrant student leaders praised Mr. Obama , saying his action should convince other students that advocacy could be effective , even for immigrants without legal status . Although the reprieve is temporary , the leaders said they expected that the majority of students would seize the opportunity to work and come out into the open .
“ We ’ ve done away with the fear , ” said Gaby Pacheco , 27 , an Ecuadorean-born immigrant who was among the first in a wave of students in recent years who “ came out ” to declare publicly that they were in this country illegally .
Mr. Obama also received praise from Democratic lawmakers , including the Hispanic Caucus in the House and Richard J. Durbin of Illinois , the second-highest Democrat in the Senate who is the leading author of the Dream Act . Mr. Durbin first proposed in April 2010 that the president should grant deferred action to young students .
Over the past two months Mr. Durbin and other top Democrats , including Senator Harry Reid of Nevada , the majority leader , have quietly urged Mr. Obama to do something significant to help immigrant students .
Maricela Aguilar , 21 , who was born in Mexico and lives in Wisconsin , said she was in Los Angeles with a group of students when the news came of the new policy .
“ We were all watching and listening and screaming out in joy , ” she said . Ms. Aguilar graduated last month from Marquette University , but feared she would never find work professionally .
Some students were cautious , recalling that Mr. Obama had promised them help before . “ We don ’ t want to get too excited , ” said Daniela Alulema , 25 , an illegal immigrant from Ecuador who is a leader of the New York State Youth Leadership Council . “ We hope that what was announced will be implemented and will actually help our community . ”