The same week the White House was assuring Republicans they could trust him to enforce immigration laws , the Obama administration quietly announced that it was reinterpreting the rules for refugees and asylum seekers so applicants could be approved even if they had given “ limited ” material support for terrorism .
It was the latest blow to the chances for immigration reform , which now hang on the very question of whether Republicans can trust President Obama to enforce the laws .
“ Yet again , this administration is abusing the powers granted it by Congress , ” Rep. Bob Goodlatte , Virginia Republican , said after he had a chance to digest the changes . As chairman of the House Judiciary Committee , Mr. Goodlatte likely would be the chief Republican negotiator on any immigration bill , and his evaluation of the president ’ s willingness to reinterpret the law is indicative of where many of his colleagues stand .
Congressional Democrats say they , too , suffer from having their trust abused . Yet they blame Republicans , who they say have repeatedly promised to tackle the immigration issue but back away when the politics get rough .
“ We were teased over and over again , ” Sen. Richard J. Durbin , Illinois Democrat , told CBS ’ “ Face the Nation ” on Sunday . “ Let me tell you , any excuse will do . ”
He and fellow Democrats say Republicans ’ lack of trust in Mr. Obama rings hollow because of one chief statistic : Under his tenure , the government has deported about 2 million illegal immigrants , more than under any other president .
But sorting out the reality from those numbers can be difficult .
Immigration analysts question the validity of the 2 million deportation number , arguing that the Homeland Security Department has changed whom it counts as deportations .
Under other presidents , deportations generally were reserved for illegal immigrants living and working in the interior of the U.S. , while those caught at the border generally were “ returned ” rather than deported . But the Obama administration increasingly puts those caught at the border into deportation proceedings , which has boosted the numbers but doesn ’ t necessarily mean more illegal immigrants are deported from the interior .
A ███ analysis last year of fiscal 2013 deportation numbers found that only about 1 percent of the estimated 11 million to 12 million illegal immigrants living in the interior of the U.S. were deported .
Beyond the deportation numbers , the Republicans ’ list of breaches of trust is extensive . They point to the administration ’ s lawsuits against states that want to crack down on illegal immigration and note that the Justice Department has not sued Chicago or other “ sanctuary city ” communities that actively shield illegal immigrants .
The administration is years behind in devising a way to measure border security after scrapping the previous definition in 2010 .
Administration critics also point to a number of orders that have prevented immigration agents from deporting most rank-and-file illegal immigrants .
“ It has been systematic and across the board , ” said Jessica Vaughan , director of policy studies at the Center for Immigration Studies , a think tank that advocates a crackdown on illegal immigration .
She said there is no evidence that the administration would get tough on future illegal immigrants even if Congress enacts a law legalizing those currently in the country .
“ One of the big problems right now is that under the administration ’ s policy , people who are not approved for legal status are not a priority for removal — in other words , nobody is going after them to enforce the law . Whether it ’ s people who have been rejected for a green card or people who have been ordered removed by a judge , and absconded , ” she said . “ So even if there were to be a legalization program , there ’ s very little chance that people who don ’ t qualify under the rules Congress writes will have to leave . So it ’ s 100 percent amnesty anyway . ”
On Sunday , Sen. Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat , acknowledged the lack of trust and floated an idea designed to get around it : Pass the bill now but delay all of the implementation until 2017 , when the next president is in office .
“ I think the rap against [ the president ] that he won ’ t enforce the law is false . He ’ s deported more people than any other president . But you could actually have the law start in 2017 without doing much violence to it , ” Mr. Schumer said on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press . ”
He said the legalization program then would begin with anyone who arrived as of the end of last year — which would be more generous than the Senate bill , which cut off at the end of 2011 . Mr. Schumer ’ s plan would mean almost every illegal immigrant in the U.S. now would be eligible for an eventual path to citizenship .
Still , that idea comes with several major questions , including the status of illegal immigrants in the intervening three years , whether their families would be welcome to join them during that time , and whether enforcement could be boosted quickly enough to make sure no more people gain access to the U.S. illegally .
Sen . Rob Portman , an Ohio Republican who voted against the Senate bill last year , said Mr. Schumer ’ s idea could attract some Republican interest as long as there was an effort to boost enforcement .
“ The concern we have , as you know , is to get back to the 1986 law , last time we did this , where we did provide legalization but didn ’ t do the enforcement , 3 million people were legalized , another 6 million people came illegally , ” he said .