The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com .
Democrats and others on the left offer three reasons for their opposition to building a wall on America 's southern border .
Each one is false , so false as to constitute lies . So , the only question is : Do Democrats and others on the left believe these lies ?
This question has plagued me all my life . Leftism is built on lies -- and has been since Lenin . That 's why he named the Communist Party 's lying newspaper `` Pravda '' ( `` truth '' ) .
Did my left-wing professors at Columbia University really believe the United States and the Soviet Union were equally responsible for the Cold War ? Did they really believe one of the most genocidal regimes in history -- which butchered tens of millions its own people , starved as many as 4 million Ukrainians , enslaved seven Eastern European countries under totalitarian rule and created the monstrous North Korean communist regime -- was no more responsible for the Cold War than the United States , the freest country in human history ?
Did my left-wing professors really believe men and women are the same except for body parts ? And do today 's leftists really believe human beings with double X chromosomes , a vagina , a uterus , ovaries , menstrual periods and lactating breasts are not necessarily female ?
Do leftists really believe American universities constitute `` rape cultures '' ? If so , why does any left-wing parent send his or her child to college ? Would you send your daughter to a place you believe is permeated by rape ?
Do leftists really believe that the statement `` There is only one race : the human race '' is a racist statement ? That is the official position of the University of California .
Do leftists really believe that virtually every criticism of former President Barack Obama emanated from racism , that all opposition to lowering college admission standards for blacks is racist , that all attacks on George Soros are anti-Semitic ?
If leftists believe any of the above , let alone all of it , they are deluded people . And the existence of tens of millions of deluded people in a society can only portend catastrophe . If leftists do not believe those claims , they are not deluded ; they lie for effect and , therefore , engage in evil . The existence of tens of millions of people consciously committed to lying means society has little hope .
Do leftists believe the country can not afford $ 5.7 billion ? As the Democrats have approved $ 1.3 billion for border security , the difference is about one-tenth of 1 percent of U.S. federal spending ( $ 4.5 trillion ) . Democrats and the rest of the left make this argument . Yet they are the very people who , for more than half a century , have successfully pushed for unprecedented expansion of government spending ; the very people who are overwhelmingly responsible for local , state and federal government debts of such magnitude that they can not be paid without massive decreases in spending and the likely social disruption they entail . It is not possible these people believe America can not afford to pay for a wall . They are , therefore , lying when they claim the price tag is too high .
California Democrats have allocated some $ 77 billion to pay for a high-speed train between San Francisco and Los Angeles that will be ready in 2033 at the earliest . It will undoubtedly rise to more than a hundred billion dollars . And , thanks to the left and the Democrats , California is spending this money despite being an estimated $ 2 trillion in debt ( between debt and pensions ) .
The left says a wall ( or steel barrier ) would be `` ineffective '' at preventing illegal immigration . We know it does n't believe this , because just five years ago , Speaker Nancy Pelosi supported a bill that required the construction of 700 miles of border fencing . And Sen. Chuck Schumer was one among the `` Gang of Eight '' Republicans and Democrats who also supported 700 miles of fencing at the border . Every Senate Democrat voted for the Gang of Eight Bill , including 36 Democrats who serve in the Senate today .
Do Schumer and Pelosi and all these other Democrats regard fencing as effective but a wall as ineffective ? Do Democrats deny that Israel 's barrier has virtually ended Palestinian terrorism ? Do they believe Turkey 's just-built 500-mile wall across nearly its entire border with Syria will be ineffective ? Do they know about the effective walls/barriers between the Turkish- and Greek-controlled areas in Cyprus ; between Hungary and Serbia and Croatia ; Morocco and Algeria ; India and Pakistan ; and elsewhere ?
As for the Democrats and others on the left declaring a wall `` immoral , '' it is difficult to know which is preferable : that they are living in delusion or lying . On what grounds is it `` immoral '' ? They never say .
Is there a Democrat or leftist who regards walls or other physical barriers surrounding homes or communities as immoral ? One doubts it . For one thing , many of them live behind a physical barrier . So , then , why is n't a physical barrier that protects America equally moral ? The only possible answers are that these people do n't really regard America as their home or they are lying about a wall being immoral .
Because lies are effective in achieving left-wing goals . There are people in every political , social and religious group who lie . And there are people within every one of those groups who are truth tellers . But -- and this is a `` but '' whose significance can not be overstated -- while truth is a liberal value and truth is a conservative value , truth has never been a leftist value . For the left , there is ( SET ITAL ) always ( END ITAL ) something more important . In this case , it is the humiliation of the president of the United States .
Dennis Prager is a nationally syndicated radio talk-show host and columnist . His latest book , published by Regnery in April 2018 , is `` The Rational Bible , '' a commentary on the book of Exodus . He is the founder of Prager University and may be contacted at dennisprager.com .