The Obama administration has issued more than half a million new Social Security Numbers ( SSN ) to illegal immigrants granted amnesty under President Obama ’ s Deferred Actions for Childhood Arrivals program .
In a letter to Sens . Jeff Sessions ( R-AL ) and Ben Sasse ( R-NE ) , exclusively obtained by ███ , the Social Security Administration ( SSA ) reveals that by the end of Fiscal Year 2014 the Obama administration “ had issued approximately 541,000 original SSNs to individuals authorized to work under the 2012 Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) policy since its inception ” in 2012 .
The administration said it did not maintain a count of the number of individuals who applied but were denied an SSN .
“ We have longstanding , rigorous procedures for processing SSN requests . Under out stringent requirements , SSN applicants must present evidence of identity , age , and work-authorized immigration status , ” SSA Acting Commissioner Carolyn Colvin wrote to Sessions and Sasse in response to their March 12 request . “ As with all SSN applications , we review the evidence submitted for authenticity , and for non citizens , we also verify immigration and work authorization status directly with the Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) via an electronic process called the Systemic Alien Verification for Entitlements ( SAVE ) Program . ”
Colvin further noted that no SSNs had been granted under the Obama administration ’ s November 20 , 2014 expansion of DACA and Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents ( DAPA ) due to a federal district court judge ’ s preliminary injunction on those programs .
“ We would only issue SSNs to these individuals if DHS began to accept and adjudicate applications and grant work authorizations and documentation evidencing such authorization , ” Colvin wrote in the letter dated April 10 .
SSN are a key factor in accessing tax benefits such as Social Security Disability Insurance and Supplemental Security Income programs . Colvin asserted that none of the individuals had applied for and received benefits through those programs .
SSNs are also instrumental to getting tax refunds such as the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) and according to the IRS illegal immigrants granted SSNs can claim up to three years of back tax refunds for illegal work . Meaning in a single year an amnestied illegal immigrant could claim up to four years of tax credits .
According to a recent Congressional Research Service memo , the maximum level of EITC and Child Tax Credits ( CTC ) that a hypothetical family with three children could claim in the four years from 2011-2014 at the ‘ phase-out threshold ’ income would be able to obtain $ 35,521 . A family with four children in those circumstances could claim $ 35,560 .
As of December 31 DHS had approved more than 787,068 DACA applications .