Illegal immigrant Dreamers said they have been betrayed by Democratic leaders who failed to force a government shutdown showdown this week over demands to pass a legalization bill by the end of the year .
Congressional leaders signaled Wednesday that they will revisit the immigration issue early next year and vowed to complete legislation in January .
That wasn ’ t cutting it for Dreamers , who had set a year-end deadline and then watched in dismay as Democrats stumbled to deliver on it .
Hundreds of Dreamers , some risking arrest , took to the hallways in Congress to march and conduct lie-downs in office corridors to complain that they have been forgotten .
“ We want Dream Act , ” protesters chanted . They were referring to a bill that would grant tentative legal status to more than 2 million illegal immigrants and allow 1.7 million of them to earn green cards signifying permanent legal presence , according to the Migration Policy Institute .
Final negotiations were continuing late Wednesday over the shape of a get-out-of-town package of bills .
Democratic leaders insisted the Dream Act is still part of negotiations , but Republican aides said Democrats signaled days ago that it wasn ’ t one of the major sticking points .
The pieces that are in play include an extension of the government ’ s chief foreign intelligence communications surveillance program , which expires Dec. 31 ; disaster relief for states and U.S. territories affected by this year ’ s hurricanes ; and a renewal of the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program , a federal-state health program for children whose parents are too wealthy to qualify for Medicaid but too poor to afford their own insurance .
The biggest moving part , however , is a year-end spending bill needed to avoid a government shutdown when current funding expires Friday .
House Republicans have proposed full-year funding for the Defense Department coupled with a four-week extension of current funding for domestic needs , known as a “ continuing resolution. ” That continuing resolution would force all sides to revisit the domestic programs in January .
Democrats have said they won ’ t accept that and insist on parity between defense and domestic programs in order to dole out money for veterans ’ health , a pension bailout , opioid-fighting programs and medical research .
As of late Wednesday , House Republican leaders were still trying to figure out a path forward . Democrats said they were waiting for Republicans .
“ Unless we see a respect for our values and priorities , we continue to urge a strong NO on the continuing resolution , ” House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , wrote in a letter to her troops .
Rank-and-file Republicans complained that Democrats were pushing Congress toward a government shutdown by threatening an all-or-nothing Senate filibuster .
“ The American people sent us the Republican majorities in the House , the Senate and the White House . And we have to get eight votes on the Democrat side , and we should compromise , right ? But it should be proportional to Democratic Senate votes , ” said Rep. Dave Brat , Virginia Republican .
“ That is the crux of the issue , ” he said . “ They get a fair compromise , but they don ’ t get to control the Republican agenda . ”
Usually it ’ s Republicans facing calls for a shutdown showdown from their right flank .
But the Dreamers flipped the script , forcing Democrats into a tight spot by demanding a permanent fix after Mr. Trump announced a phaseout of the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals deportation amnesty .
Mr. Trump ’ s phaseout kicks in March 5 , but Dreamers set an artificial end-of-year deadline , and Democratic leaders initially agreed that , though some of them have backed off their red line .
Rep. Luis V. Gutierrez , an Illinois Democrat who has been a leading voice for Dreamers , said he believed his party ’ s leaders in the House were holding firm in their DACA demand and that some Senate Democrats were also adamant .
But he was less sure about Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat . “ I believe that at this particular moment the onus is on Sen. Schumer , ” Mr. Gutierrez said .
Dreamers were more pointed , saying Mr. Schumer was betraying them .
“ Time and time again , politicians have failed to stand by our community , ” said Cata Santiago . “ Now , at the peak of the Dream Act fight , Chuck Schumer and the Democrats won ’ t hold their promises to protect us . ”
Ms. Santiago was arrested last week while protesting in Mr. Schumer ’ s congressional office and stayed in custody by refusing to identify herself to police . She and a handful of other Dreamers who were also arrested staged a hunger strike in jail .
Mr. Schumer said Wednesday morning that he has been trying to find a DACA answer for weeks .
“ Because of the particular importance of all of these issues , especially the Dreamers , we can not do a short-term funding bill that picks and chooses what problems to solve and what not to solve . That will not be fair and will not pass . We have to do them all together , instead of in a piecemeal fashion , ” he said .
Dreamers and their defenders did not blame only Democratic leaders ; several dozen Republicans said they wanted a DACA solution this year .
Mr. Gutierrez said if those Republicans had joined forces with Democrats in refusing to vote for any year-end bill that doesn ’ t include the Dream Act , then they could have forced Republican leaders ’ hands .
Sen. Jeff Flake , an Arizona Republican who has been pushing for the Dream Act , said Wednesday that he has assurances the DACA issue will be taken up in January . He said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , Kentucky Republican , “ has committed to bring the bipartisan DACA bill we are currently negotiating to the Senate floor ” next month .
Mr. Gutierrez said Dreamers can ’ t bank on another promise . “ It ’ s very easy for Sen. Flake to send out a tweet this morning and say , ‘ Dreamers in January. ’ His kids aren ’ t getting deported . He ’ s going home to his wife . He ’ s celebrating Christmas , ” he said .