( ███ ) - President Donald Trump ’ s administration has agreed to reconsider the asylum claims of some 1,000 immigrant parents and children who were separated at the U.S. border as part of a deal to settle lawsuits over his “ zero-tolerance ” immigration policy .
The settlement , detailed in court documents late on Wednesday , represented a victory for rights groups that challenged Trump ’ s contentious family separation policy that was aimed at deterring illegal immigration .
If approved by U.S. District Judge Dana Sabraw in San Diego , immigrant parents and their children will get a second chance to apply for asylum even if U.S. authorities previously rejected their claims that they faced a “ credible fear of persecution or torture ” if sent back to their home countries .
More than 1,000 people will be eligible to apply again for asylum under the settlement , according to Muslim Advocates , one of the rights groups that sued the administration .
The family separations and the detention of thousands of children , mostly from Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador , prompted widespread condemnation of Trump ’ s policy . About 2,500 children and parents were separated before Trump abandoned the policy in June . Days later , a federal judge ordered the families reunited , a process that is still incomplete .
The agreement also leaves open the possibility that some of the hundreds of parents already deported without their children could return to the United States , according to the American Civil Liberties Union , which brought one of the lawsuits . Their claims would be considered on a case-by-case basis .
Immigration lawyers have said that some of these parents may have a case for returning to pursue asylum because they were coerced into dropping their asylum bid , believing it was the only way to get their children back .
The settlement stems from three lawsuits against the administration brought by the American Civil Liberties Union , Muslim Advocates and the Hogan Lovells law firm , among others .
One lawsuit alleged that parents were suffering extreme trauma from the forced separation of their children and therefore failed a “ credible fear ” interview , which was their only opportunity to avoid expedited removal from the United States .
Under the settlement , these parents will now be able to submit additional evidence and testimony to establish credible fear of returning to their home country .
Sirine Shebaya , an attorney for Muslim Advocates , called the agreement a significant victory for these parents . “ They will finally have a real chance to be heard and to secure safety and stability for themselves and their families , ” Shebaya said .
U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions has tightened U.S. asylum standards to exclude many people whose credible fear claims involved domestic violence or gang violence , reasons often cited by those fleeing Central America .
For asylum seekers who pass a credible fear test , their case then goes to an immigration judge . Many ultimately may not be granted asylum , but their cases may drag on for years . During that time , the applicant is allowed to live and work in the United States .
Last month , Sessions directed immigration judges to speed up their cases .
Trump , known for his hard line toward immigration , has taken steps to reduce illegal and legal immigration . His administration this month said it planned to withdraw from a court agreement that for 20 years has governed how the U.S. government detains immigrant minors .