There 's disagreement about how a bill will snake through the legislative process . Immigration debate : 5 things to watch
Right now , immigration reform seems like President Barack Obama ’ s best chance at a legacy achievement in 2013 .
Bipartisan groups in the House and Senate are closing in on a deal to overhaul the nation ’ s immigration laws , and leaders in both parties want it to happen .
As Congress comes back into session , lawmakers will be ironing out lingering details — but that ’ s not all that could happen to complicate the process in the week ahead .
Conservatives could bolt . The already tenuous relationship between the business and labor communities could fray . Key Republican proponents , like Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida and Rep. Raul Labrador of Idaho , will face pressure from the right flank . And when a bill finally makes it out of the backroom , disagreement about how it will snake through the legislative process could upend the whole effort .
Here are five things to watch as Congress enters a crucial stretch in the immigration debate :
Conservatives looking to trip up a deal will have a lot to work with .
Start with the secretive nature of the talks . Both the House and the Senate return from recess as bipartisan negotiating groups in both chambers attempt to wrap up a bill after months of hush-hush talks . They were so secretive that House members even refused at one point to acknowledge that their group existed .
Then there is the substance of the bill . It ’ s going to take a lot of convincing for many Republicans that the pathway to citizenship for the nation ’ s 11 million undocumented immigrants isn ’ t actually an amnesty program .
Perhaps most problematic is the cost . Although lawmakers in the Senate are aiming to make it budget-neutral , the legislation is expected to carry an overall price tag of at least tens of billions of dollars , fueling criticism about the burden it would place on the government in the near term and entitlement programs in the coming decades as immigrants access Obamacare , Medicare , Medicaid and Social Security .
House leaders recognize the danger from the right and have slowly urged that the House negotiators slow down its progress . The group was slated to unveil a bill this week , but aides involved in the negotiations say nothing is even on the horizon .
“ Our concern is to get it done well not quickly , ” Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) said on CNN on Sunday .
The immigration reform effort has benefited from a neutral , if not supportive , reaction from the country ’ s loudest conservative critics — Rush Limbaugh , Sean Hannity and Bill O ’ Reilly . Rubio , a member of the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight and a tea party darling , can take credit for some of it by initiating an effective charm offensive .
But when the details come out , all bets are off .
“ There will be a great deal of unhappiness about this proposal because everybody didn ’ t get what they wanted , ” Sen. John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) said Sunday on CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation . ”
As tough as the private Senate and House talks have been , pushing those agreements through each chamber will be infinitely harder .
In the House , there ’ s already talk of bypassing the committees and instead having a closed Republican meeting to hash out the details . Labrador and Diaz-Balart would be tasked with prodding Republicans to vote for the plan and making modest changes if they disagree .