For the latest facts on immigration today , please see the most recent update of this issue brief here .
Below are the latest and most essential facts about immigration in our nation today . The facts are broken down into four sections :
Below are the facts about immigrants today : who they are , where they live , and their impact on the U.S. economy .
There were 39.9 million foreign-born people in the United States in 2010 . 44 percent were naturalized citizens . 24 percent were legal permanent residents . 29 percent were unauthorized migrants . 3 percent were temporary legal residents ( such as students or temporary workers ) .
50.9 percent of our nation ’ s foreign born are women and 54.2 percent of naturalized foreign-born persons are women .
The foreign-born share of the overall U.S. population is 12.9 percent today , lower than the highest percentage ( 14.8 percent ) achieved in 1890 .
Most immigrants have made a home in the United States
11.5 million undocumented immigrants were living in the United States in January 2011 , an increase of one-third since 2000 , when there were 8.5 million undocumented immigrants .
, an increase of one-third since 2000 , when there were 8.5 million undocumented immigrants . 86 percent of undocumented immigrants have been living in the United States for seven years or longer .
5.2 percent of the U.S. labor force consisted of undocumented immigrants in 2010 , even though they comprise only 3.7 percent of the nation ’ s population .
, even though they comprise only 3.7 percent of the nation ’ s population . 45 percent of unauthorized immigrant households are composed of couples with children . By comparison , the figure for U.S. native households and legal immigrant households is 21 percent and 34 percent , respectively .
By comparison , the figure for U.S. native households and legal immigrant households is 21 percent and 34 percent , respectively . 16.6 million people are in families with at least one undocumented immigrant , and 9 million of these families are of “ mixed status ” with at least one unauthorized adult and one U.S.-born child .
, and 9 million of these families are of “ mixed status ” with at least one unauthorized adult and one U.S.-born child . 4.5 million U.S.-born children had at least one unauthorized immigrant parent in 2010 , an increase from 2.1 million in 2000 .
Immigrants have dispersed throughout the United States and even unfriendly laws aren ’ t making them “ self-deport ”
Undocumented immigrants are increasingly settling throughout the 50 states . Traditional “ gateway ” states such as California , Illinois , Texas , New York , and Florida continue to be home to large percentages of our nation ’ s foreign-born . But immigrants are increasingly dispersing to metropolitan areas outside these states . Fifteen states—Alabama , Arkansas , Colorado , Delaware , Georgia , Idaho , Kentucky , Minnesota , Nebraska , Nevada , New Mexico , North Carolina , Tennessee , South Carolina , and Utah—experienced at least a 200 percent increase in their immigrant populations between 1990 and 2009 . ( see chart above )
Traditional “ gateway ” states such as California , Illinois , Texas , New York , and Florida continue to be home to large percentages of our nation ’ s foreign-born . But immigrants are increasingly dispersing to metropolitan areas outside these states . Fifteen states—Alabama , Arkansas , Colorado , Delaware , Georgia , Idaho , Kentucky , Minnesota , Nebraska , Nevada , New Mexico , North Carolina , Tennessee , South Carolina , and Utah—experienced at least a 200 percent increase in their immigrant populations between 1990 and 2009 . ( see chart above ) The number of undocumented Mexican nationals arriving to the United States declined by 80 percent between 2004 and 2010 . In 2010 fewer than 100,000 Mexican nationals settled in the United States , compared to an annual flow of about 525,000 undocumented persons from Mexico from 2000 to 2004 .
In 2010 fewer than 100,000 Mexican nationals settled in the United States , compared to an annual flow of about 525,000 undocumented persons from Mexico from 2000 to 2004 . Increased enforcement isn ’ t encouraging immigrants to return home . Immigration from Mexico is at net zero , with slightly more Mexicans leaving the country than entering it . This decline in immigration can be attributed to tightened border controls , weak job and housing construction markets in the United States , increases in deportations , and declining Mexican birthrates .
Immigration from Mexico is at net zero , with slightly more Mexicans leaving the country than entering it . This decline in immigration can be attributed to tightened border controls , weak job and housing construction markets in the United States , increases in deportations , and declining Mexican birthrates . Policies of “ self-deportation ” do not lead to large-scale resettlement . Immigrants make the decision to stay because most have been in the country for more than a decade , live in families with children , and know that if economic conditions are bad in this country , they are worse in their home countries .
Immigrants make the decision to stay because most have been in the country for more than a decade , live in families with children , and know that if economic conditions are bad in this country , they are worse in their home countries . Immigrants , like other economic actors , are averse to losing their long-term investments . These include investments in homes or their children ’ s education , for example . Research drawing on cognitive psychology and behavioral economics has shown that this is another reason undocumented immigrants do not leave even in the face of harsh laws .
These include investments in homes or their children ’ s education , for example . Research drawing on cognitive psychology and behavioral economics has shown that this is another reason undocumented immigrants do not leave even in the face of harsh laws . Instead of leaving the United States , undocumented immigrants living in anti-immigrant states move to friendlier neighboring states . An abundance of anecdotal evidence stemming from a number of anti-immigrant measures has led researchers to believe that when migrants feel targeted , they resettle elsewhere in the United States .
$ 1.5 trillion —The amount of money that would be added to U.S. cumulative gross domestic product over 10 years with a comprehensive immigration reform plan that includes legalization for all undocumented immigrants currently living in the United States .
—The amount of money that would be added to U.S. cumulative gross domestic product over 10 years with a comprehensive immigration reform plan that includes legalization for all undocumented immigrants currently living in the United States . $ 11.2 billion —The amount of money households headed by unauthorized immigrants paid in state and local taxes in 2010 .
—The amount of money households headed by unauthorized immigrants paid in state and local taxes in 2010 . $ 4.5 billion to $ 5.4 billion—The amount of additional net tax revenue that would accrue to the federal government over three years if all undocumented immigrants currently living in the United States were legalized .
$ 2.6 trillion —The amount of money that would evaporate from U.S. cumulative GDP over 10 years if all undocumented immigrants in the country were deported or “ self-deport . ”
—The amount of money that would evaporate from U.S. cumulative GDP over 10 years if all undocumented immigrants in the country were deported or “ self-deport. ” $ 285 billion —The cost of removing the entire undocumented population from the United States over a five-year period , including continued border- and interior-enforcement efforts .
—The cost of removing the entire undocumented population from the United States over a five-year period , including continued border- and interior-enforcement efforts . $ 23,482—The cost of apprehending , detaining , processing , and transporting one individual in deportation proceedings .
The Obama administration has directed an unprecedented amount of resources to ensuring our southern border is secure and undocumented immigrants ( criminal and noncriminal ) are deported . In June 2012 the Department of Homeland Security announced they would allow DREAM Act-eligible youth to apply for deferred action , granting them protection against deportation and the ability to get work authorization .
Notwithstanding these efforts , in the absence of lasting solutions that fix our broken immigration system , state legislators have passed a wide array of immigration measures , ranging from Arizona ’ s famous “ papers please ” measure that has risen to the U.S. Supreme Court , to immigrant-friendly DREAM Act measures .
81 percent of the U.S.-Mexico border meets one of the top three levels of “ operational control ” by U.S. enforcement officials . The remaining 19 percent covers the most remote , inaccessible , and inhospitable stretches of the border . And according to 2010 FBI crime reports , there has been a 40 percent decline in violent crime rates in Southwest border states in the last two decades .
The remaining 19 percent covers the most remote , inaccessible , and inhospitable stretches of the border . And according to 2010 FBI crime reports , there has been a 40 percent decline in violent crime rates in Southwest border states in the last two decades . Border Patrol has 100 percent “ eyes on the border ” in high-density urban areas , meaning that they can view every attempted border crossing in real time .
Undocumented immigration levels of Mexicans are at net zero . According to the Pew Hispanic Center , 1.4 million Mexicans immigrated to the United States from 2005 to 2010 , while approximately 1.4 million Mexicans moved from the United States to Mexico in that same period of time .
The federal government ’ s voluntary web-based system that allows employers to verify the work authorization of their employees is used by 4 percent of all businesses in the United States . Some members of Congress are pushing to make E-Verify mandatory for every employer in the country , but a debate exists about the accuracy of the databases and the Congressional Budget Office estimated the program would cost $ 17.3 billion in revenue over 10 years .
Some members of Congress are pushing to make E-Verify mandatory for every employer in the country , but a debate exists about the accuracy of the databases and the Congressional Budget Office estimated the program would cost $ 17.3 billion in revenue over 10 years . The federal government has stepped up enforcement against employers who hire undocumented workers through auditing of I-9 forms , the federal paperwork that must be completed by all workers and employers upon hiring . Immigration and Customs Enforcement conducted 2,196 Form I-9 inspections in FY 2010 compared to 1,444 in FY 2009 . These inspections led to 196 arrests ; $ 42.9 million in fines , forfeitures , and restitutions ; and many undocumented immigrants losing their jobs .
Immigration and Customs Enforcement conducted 2,196 Form I-9 inspections in FY 2010 compared to 1,444 in FY 2009 . These inspections led to 196 arrests ; $ 42.9 million in fines , forfeitures , and restitutions ; and many undocumented immigrants losing their jobs . The Department of Homeland Security ’ s immigration enforcement program , Secure Communities , has been aggressively expanded under the Obama administration . The Secure Communities program checks the immigration status of immigrants booked into county jails in participating jurisdictions . It is largely thanks to this program that the Obama administration has deported over 1 million people . DHS has expanded the Secure Communities program from 14 jurisdictions in 2008 to over 3,000 in 2012 , and will deploy the program to every jurisdiction across the country by 2013 . But several states and counties including Washington , D.C. , are putting up a fight , arguing the program interferes with local policing priorities and inevitably leads to racial profiling .
The Secure Communities program checks the immigration status of immigrants booked into county jails in participating jurisdictions . It is largely thanks to this program that the Obama administration has deported over 1 million people . DHS has expanded the Secure Communities program from 14 jurisdictions in 2008 to over 3,000 in 2012 , and will deploy the program to every jurisdiction across the country by 2013 . But several states and counties including Washington , D.C. , are putting up a fight , arguing the program interferes with local policing priorities and inevitably leads to racial profiling . There has been a significant increase in the number of detained noncriminal immigrants . In 2010 , 363,064 immigrants were detained , more than twice the 2005 level of detentions . The average cost to detain one person for an average of 30 days is $ 3,355 .
In the absence of federal action , states have filled the legislative gap with their own measures
Arizona , Utah , Georgia , Indiana , Alabama , and South Carolina have enacted immigration enforcement laws that target undocumented immigrants and increase the authority of local police to enact immigration enforcement policies .
have enacted immigration enforcement laws that target undocumented immigrants and increase the authority of local police to enact immigration enforcement policies . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled to strike down three parts of Arizona ’ s S.B . 1070 in June 2012 . But the decision left in place Section 2 ( B ) of the law , a dangerous provision that leaves the door open to racial profiling and harassment of people of color in Arizona .
But the decision left in place Section 2 ( B ) of the law , a dangerous provision that leaves the door open to racial profiling and harassment of people of color in Arizona . Though the measures have undoubtedly created a deeply hostile climate for all people of color , citizen or not , in these states there is no evidence that undocumented immigrants have left the United States .
Arizona ’ s S.B . 1070 passed in April 2010 . Arizona lost $ 141 million due to conference cancellations and loss of attendees due to backlash to its immigration law . Cost projections from cancellations estimate losses at upwards of about $ 217 million for the state .
Arizona lost $ 141 million due to conference cancellations and loss of attendees due to backlash to its immigration law . Cost projections from cancellations estimate losses at upwards of about $ 217 million for the state . Georgia ’ s H.B . 87 was enacted in April 2011 . The law has already caused severe labor shortages as workers and their families avoid the unwelcoming state . The state lost an estimated $ 300 million in unharvested crops with a total possible statewide impact of $ 1 billion in 2011 alone .
The law has already caused severe labor shortages as workers and their families avoid the unwelcoming state . The state lost an estimated $ 300 million in unharvested crops with a total possible statewide impact of $ 1 billion in 2011 alone . Alabama ’ s H.B . 56 , the nation ’ s toughest immigration law , was passed in June 2011 . Though a federal court has put a temporary hold on many of the most severe provisions of the law , an Alabama district judge allowed some extreme measures to go into effect in the fall of 2011 , causing much damage to the state ’ s economy , society , and reputation . It ’ s estimated that the state economy will lose up to $ 10.8 billion ( 6.2 percent of its GDP ) and up to 140,000 jobs .
Though a federal court has put a temporary hold on many of the most severe provisions of the law , an Alabama district judge allowed some extreme measures to go into effect in the fall of 2011 , causing much damage to the state ’ s economy , society , and reputation . It ’ s estimated that the state economy will lose up to $ 10.8 billion ( 6.2 percent of its GDP ) and up to 140,000 jobs . Utah , Indiana , and South Carolina passed anti-immigrant measures in the spring of 2011 . The bills signed into law in all three states include Arizona-style enforcement provisions . These laws had been enjoined pending the outcome of the Supreme Court ’ s decision . The lower courts will now issue new rulings consistent with the Supreme Court ’ s opinion in the Arizona v. United States case .
The bills signed into law in all three states include Arizona-style enforcement provisions . These laws had been enjoined pending the outcome of the Supreme Court ’ s decision . The lower courts will now issue new rulings consistent with the Supreme Court ’ s opinion in the Arizona v. United States case . Other states are addressing immigrant communities ’ real needs by passing state-level DREAM Acts . State-level DREAM Acts , with some variation , grant access to in-state tuition at public colleges and universities to students who attended a high school in the state for a set number of years , graduated or received an equivalent degree , and meet other criteria , regardless of their immigration status .
State-level DREAM Acts , with some variation , grant access to in-state tuition at public colleges and universities to students who attended a high school in the state for a set number of years , graduated or received an equivalent degree , and meet other criteria , regardless of their immigration status . Texas led the way passing the first state DREAM Act in 2001 . California , Illinois , Nebraska , New Mexico , New York , Utah , Washington , Kansas , Connecticut , Maryland , and Rhode Island followed .
California , Illinois , Nebraska , New Mexico , New York , Utah , Washington , Kansas , Connecticut , Maryland , and Rhode Island followed . State DREAM Acts do not grant permanent residency . Federal inaction limits the impact of state Dream Acts . Despite widespread misconceptions , states do not have the authority to confer immigration status on undocumented immigrants .
Federal inaction limits the impact of state Dream Acts . Despite widespread misconceptions , states do not have the authority to confer immigration status on undocumented immigrants . Even these gains are not absolute . Opponents of the Maryland state DREAM Act began a campaign to repeal the bill soon after Gov . Martin O ’ Malley signed it . Maryland voters will decide in the 2012 elections whether the measure should remain in place and go into effect or not .
Public opinion polling has shown that most Americans strongly favor smart and balanced solutions to fix a broken immigration system that is currently failing to serve our core national interests .
Americans reject mass deportation and reward smart and balanced solutions
Voters overwhelmingly reject mass deportation . Only 19 percent of voters believed that all unauthorized immigrants should be sent back to their home country , according to a December 2011 Fox News poll . A National Journal poll released in the same month found that only 25 percent of voters believed that all unauthorized immigrants should be deported , regardless of length of residency .
Only 19 percent of voters believed that all unauthorized immigrants should be sent back to their home country , according to a December 2011 Fox News poll . A National Journal poll released in the same month found that only 25 percent of voters believed that all unauthorized immigrants should be deported , regardless of length of residency . Most Americans believe in a balanced approach . 66 percent of voters believe unauthorized immigrants should be allowed to stay in the country and eventually become citizens after paying back taxes , learning English , and passing a background check according to the December 2011 Fox News poll . And 67 percent support allowing unauthorized immigrants to stay if they have been here for many years and broken no laws , according to the National Journal poll released in December 2011 .
66 percent of voters believe unauthorized immigrants should be allowed to stay in the country and eventually become citizens after paying back taxes , learning English , and passing a background check according to the December 2011 Fox News poll . And 67 percent support allowing unauthorized immigrants to stay if they have been here for many years and broken no laws , according to the National Journal poll released in December 2011 . The public at large strongly supports the Obama administration ’ s decision to grant undocumented youth protection from deportation and work permits . A NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released in late June 2012 showed that nearly 7 in 10 Americans are in favor of the Obama administration ’ s new immigration policy toward DREAM-eligible youth . A Bloomberg News poll released just days after the administration ’ s announcement showed that independents backed the decision by more than a 2-to-1 margin .
A NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released in late June 2012 showed that nearly 7 in 10 Americans are in favor of the Obama administration ’ s new immigration policy toward DREAM-eligible youth . A Bloomberg News poll released just days after the administration ’ s announcement showed that independents backed the decision by more than a 2-to-1 margin . Support for the DREAM Act remains robust among the general electorate . Even in the “ show me your papers please ” state of Arizona , polling conducted by the Merrill/Morrison Institute release in April 2012 showed that nearly three-quarters of Arizona registered voters support the DREAM Act .
Even in the “ show me your papers please ” state of Arizona , polling conducted by the Merrill/Morrison Institute release in April 2012 showed that nearly three-quarters of Arizona registered voters support the DREAM Act . Americans ’ views toward immigration are more positive today than they were in the recent past . A Gallup poll conducted in early June 2012 showed that 66 percent of Americans say that immigration is a “ good thing ” for the country today . 59 percent said they felt this way about immigrants last year .
Latino voters care about immigration reform . Survey respondents in a January 2012 poll conducted by ABC/Latino Decisions/Univision News ranked immigration reform and the DREAM Act as their top priority ( 46 percent ) , followed by jobs and unemployment ( 35 percent ) , when asked which was the most important issue facing the Latino community . A June 2012 poll conducted by NBC/Telemundo/Wall Street Journal showed that 93 percent of Latinos see immigration as being an important issue to them .
Survey respondents in a January 2012 poll conducted by ABC/Latino Decisions/Univision News ranked immigration reform and the DREAM Act as their top priority ( 46 percent ) , followed by jobs and unemployment ( 35 percent ) , when asked which was the most important issue facing the Latino community . A June 2012 poll conducted by NBC/Telemundo/Wall Street Journal showed that 93 percent of Latinos see immigration as being an important issue to them . Latino voters have personal connections to our broken immigration system . 25 percent of surveyed Latino voters in a June 2011 poll by Latino Decisions said they know a person or family who is facing deportation or has been deported . 53 percent said they know someone who is undocumented .
25 percent of surveyed Latino voters in a June 2011 poll by Latino Decisions said they know a person or family who is facing deportation or has been deported . 53 percent said they know someone who is undocumented . Support for the Obama administration ’ s handling of immigration matters is high in the Latino community . A Hispanic oversample in a poll conducted by NBC/Telemundo/Wall Street Journal released in late June 2012 showed that 84 percent of Latinos surveyed knew about the administration ’ s relief to DREAMers , and 87 percent were in favor of the policy .
A Hispanic oversample in a poll conducted by NBC/Telemundo/Wall Street Journal released in late June 2012 showed that 84 percent of Latinos surveyed knew about the administration ’ s relief to DREAMers , and 87 percent were in favor of the policy . 91 percent of Latinos support the DREAM Act according to a December 2011 poll by the Pew Hispanic Center .
Latino voters strongly oppose Arizona ’ s anti-immigrant law , S.B . 1070 . In a May 2010 poll conducted by the SEIU , 81 percent of Arizona ’ s Latino voters opposed S.B . 1070 .
In a May 2010 poll conducted by the SEIU , 81 percent of Arizona ’ s Latino voters opposed S.B . 1070 . Latino voters reject hateful rhetoric on immigration regardless of a candidate ’ s other views . According to a November 2011 poll conducted by Latino Decision/Univision News , only 14 percent of Latinos would be more likely to support a candidate whose economic plans they liked but who talked tough on immigration , while 59 percent would be less likely to support that candidate . Conversely , 76 percent would be more likely to support a candidate with an economic plan they support and who had positive things to say about immigrants , while only 6 percent would be less likely .
Latinos are the fastest-growing segment of the electorate as the United States shifts to a majority-minority nation . They will soon make up the majority of new voters in key swing states . Politicians ignore this group at their own peril .
Latinos comprise 16.4 percent of the total U.S. population . They are relatively young compared to other Americans , with 62 percent under 44 years old , compared with 46 percent of all Americans .
They are relatively young compared to other Americans , with 62 percent under 44 years old , compared with 46 percent of all Americans . Latinos accounted for 55.5 percent of U.S. population growth from 2000 to 2010 . This is compared to Asians and African Americans , who accounted for 16 percent and 14 percent of population growth , respectively .
This is compared to Asians and African Americans , who accounted for 16 percent and 14 percent of population growth , respectively . By 2050 Latinos are expected to make up 24.4 percent of the U.S. population .
19.5 million Latinos were eligible to vote in 2008 . It is estimated that an additional 2 million Latinos will be eligible to vote in the upcoming presidential elections .
It is estimated that an additional 2 million Latinos will be eligible to vote in the upcoming presidential elections . 6.6 million immigrants naturalized between 2001 and 2010 , increasing the importance of the immigrant vote since naturalized citizens can vote .
In 2010 there were just over 8 million legal permanent residents eligible for naturalization .
Latinos comprise significant portions of the electorate in key states . Latino Decisions has estimated that Latinos will make up 38 percent of eligible voters in New Mexico , 28 percent in Texas , 24 percent in Arizona , 17 percent in Florida , 14 percent in Nevada , and 13 percent in Colorado in the 2012 election .
Latino Decisions has estimated that Latinos will make up 38 percent of eligible voters in New Mexico , 28 percent in Texas , 24 percent in Arizona , 17 percent in Florida , 14 percent in Nevada , and 13 percent in Colorado in the 2012 election . 90 percent of Latinos under age 18 are U.S. citizens and will be eligible to vote once they turn 18 . In addition , 50,000 Latino citizens turn 18 every month . That ’ s compared to the approximately 225,000 non-Hispanic whites that turn 18 every month and 63,000 non-Hispanic blacks that turn 18 every month . We can expect this trend will continue and grow as the proportion of Hispanics to other races increases in the coming years .
In addition , 50,000 Latino citizens turn 18 every month . That ’ s compared to the approximately 225,000 non-Hispanic whites that turn 18 every month and 63,000 non-Hispanic blacks that turn 18 every month . We can expect this trend will continue and grow as the proportion of Hispanics to other races increases in the coming years . Immigrant women are the drivers of naturalization in their families . Eighty-four percent of the women surveyed in a February 2011 poll by New America Media wanted to become citizens , with 90 percent of female immigrants from Latin American and Arab nations indicating a desire to naturalize .
Endnotes can be found in the PDF and Scribd versions .