CLOSE The leaders of several major U.S. corporations have denounced President Trump 's ban on refugees and immigrants from seven Muslim-majority countries . And the companies are putting their money where their mouths are . ███ NETWORK
SAN FRANCISCO — President Trump 's order banning immigrants from seven predominantly Muslim countries from entering the U.S. began hitting the tech industry Saturday , with Google 's CEO leading a growing list of tech executives condemning the ban .
The CEOs of Microsoft , Apple , Netflix , Uber , Airbnb and Tesla Motors denounced with the policy , which would affect their own employees working here legally , as well as their competitive quest for talent .
Airbnb CEO Brian Chesky went a step further , offering free housing to anyone displaced by the ban .
Several tech leaders expressed concern that the ban could wreak havoc on their businesses .
`` Trump 's actions are hurting Netflix employees around the world , and are so un-American it pains us all , '' Netflix CEO and founder Reed Hastings said in a Facebook post . `` It is time to link arms together to protect American values of freedom and opportunity . ''
In a staff memo , Google CEO Sundar Pichai said the move affects at least 187 of the Internet giant 's staff .
`` We ’ re concerned about the impact of this order and any proposals that could impose restrictions on Googlers and their families , or that could create barriers to bringing great talent to the U.S. , '' Google said in a statement . `` We 'll continue to make our views on these issues known to leaders in Washington and elsewhere . ''
The president 's executive order suspends the entry of all refugees to the United States for 120 days , halts the admission of refugees from Syria indefinitely and bars entry for three months to residents from the predominantly Muslim countries of Iraq , Syria , Iran , Sudan , Libya , Somalia and Yemen .
The order made good on one of Trump 's most controversial campaign promises , a series of Muslim-focused restrictions he says should prevent terrorists from entering U.S. soil . For many of his supporters , preventing or delaying legal immigrants from returning to high-paid tech jobs , which they say should go to U.S.-born workers anyway , is a small price to pay for the promise of more security .
The move is already roiling the tech industry , with affected employees being urged to return to the U.S. and consult with corporate immigration experts .
Internet Association President and CEO Michael Beckerman said the Internet industry is `` deeply concerned '' by Trump 's order .
`` While this order impacts many companies outside of the tech industry , Internet companies in particular thrive in the U.S. because the best and the brightest are able to create innovative products and services right here in America , '' Beckerman said in an emailed statement . `` While we support President Trump ’ s efforts to grow our economy and allow ‘ people of great talent ’ to come into the U.S. , the executive order signed yesterday has troubling consequences . ''
The ban includes green card holders who are authorized to live and work in the United States , according to a Homeland Security spokeswoman , Reuters reported . Some immigrants with legal visas trying to return to the U.S. from trips abroad were also detained , according to news reports .
The Executive Order 's humanitarian and economic impact is real and upsetting . We benefit from what refugees and immigrants bring to the U.S. https : //t.co/HdwVGzIECt — jack ( @ jack ) January 28 , 2017
`` The blanket entry ban on citizens from certain primarily Muslim countries is not the best way to address the country ’ s challenges , '' Elon Musk , CEO of Tesla and SpaceX and an adviser to President Trump said on Twitter . `` Many people negatively affected by this policy are strong supporters of the U.S . They 've done right , not wrong & do n't deserve to be rejected . ''
The blanket entry ban on citizens from certain primarily Muslim countries is not the best way to address the country ’ s challenges — Elon Musk ( @ elonmusk ) January 29 , 2017
In a memo sent to Google employees first reported by Bloomberg News and the Wall Street Journal , Pichai said one employee was rushing back from a trip to New Zealand before the order was assigned , while two others were grappling with what this might mean to their families .
A similar situation was playing out at other tech companies .
Microsoft said it 's providing legal advice and assistance to its employees affected by the executive order .
`` We share the concerns about the impact of the executive order on our employees from the listed countries , all of whom have been in the United States lawfully , '' the tech giant said in a statement .
According to Microsoft 's general counsel Brad Smith , 76 Microsoft employees are citizens with a U.S. visa from the affected countries .
`` We ’ ve already contacted everyone in this group , '' he told employees in a memo . `` But there may be other employees from these countries who have U.S. green cards rather than a visa who may be affected , and there may be family members from these countries that we haven ’ t yet reached . ''
Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella said in a LinkedIn post that his company would `` continue to advocate on this important topic . ''
`` As an immigrant and as a CEO , I ’ ve both experienced and seen the positive impact that immigration has on our company , for the country , and for the world , '' Nadella said .
Uber CEO Travis Kalanick told employees he would raise the immigration ban on Friday when he takes part in President Trump 's first business advisory group meeting .
`` While every government has their own immigration controls , allowing people from all around the world to come here and make America their home has largely been the U.S. ’ s policy since its founding . That means this ban will impact many innocent people , '' Kalanick said .
Apple CEO Tim Cook was in Washington , D.C. , where he has been meeting with GOP lawmakers and with Trump 's daughter Ivanka and her husband , Jared Kushner .
In a memo to employees , he said `` it is not a policy we support . ''
`` In my conversations with officials here in Washington this week , I ’ ve made it clear that Apple believes deeply in the importance of immigration — both to our company and to our nation ’ s future . Apple would not exist without immigration , let alone thrive and innovate the way we do , '' Cook wrote , according to a memo sent to employees worldwide and obtained by ███ . Apple co-founder Steve Jobs was the son of a Syrian immigrant .
For Box CEO Aaron Levie , the Trump order also hit home . One of the founders of the cloud-based storage and services company is Iranian-American and Box is currently trying to assess how many of its employees are affected .
`` At the corporate level , we are trying to take inventory on who could be impacted and ensuring that they stay within the country for now , '' Levie said . `` We are really just getting a handle on the legal side of the situation , what we can fight and ultimately how we protect employees in the process . ''
More broadly , the order sends `` the wrong moral message to the world and within our own country , '' Levie said , turning away refugees and doing nothing to make Americans safer . `` It 's very unfortunate and very disappointing , '' he said .
My grandfather came from Poland between the wars , at 17 , sponsored by an elder sister . Two more siblings made it . Everyone else died . — Stewart Butterfield ( @ stewart ) January 28 , 2017
`` Immigration is unambiguously an economic benefit , but , does n't matter : do the right thing because it 's right , '' he wrote in a series of posts on Twitter . `` My grandfather came from Poland between the wars , at 17 , sponsored by an elder sister . Two more siblings made it . Everyone else died . ''
Technology investor Chris Sacca pledged to match donations to the American Civil Liberties Union up to $ 25,000 and then quickly raised it to $ 50,000 . The American Civil Liberties Union and the Council on American-Islamic Relations , or CAIR , say they have either filed lawsuits or will do so shortly challenging the ban .
`` The @ aclu took Trump to court . Let 's stand with them , '' he tweeted .
I can barely keep up with the replies . Thank . You . All . 🇺🇸
So I 'll match up to $ 50k . https : //t.co/R3ttnbwgMV — Chris Sacca ( @ sacca ) January 28 , 2017
With protests spreading to airports on Saturday , Sam Altman , president of Silicon Valley tech incubator Y Combinator , urged the tech industry to speak up .
`` It is time for tech companies to start speaking up about some of the actions taken by President Trump ’ s administration , '' Altman said in a blog post . `` The tech community is powerful . Large tech companies in particular have enormous power and are held in high regard . We need to hear from the CEOs clearly and unequivocally . Although there is some business risk in doing so , there is strength in numbers—if everyone does it early this coming week , we will all make each other stronger . ''
Immigrants account for a significant part of the workforce in the tech industry , which has for years advocated loosening laws to increase the flow of skilled immigrants into the U.S. With its heavy reliance on the H-1B visa program that allows software engineers and other skilled workers to work in the U.S. , Silicon Valley fears what immigration restrictions will come from the Trump administration .
Trump 's perspective on immigrants , and Muslims in particular , has caused tensions between the White House and Silicon Valley . Tech executives and workers have denounced the president 's anti-Muslim views and some have pledged not to help build Trump 's proposed Muslim registry .
On Saturday , Chesky pushed back against Trump 's executive order in a tweet . `` Open doors brings all of U.S. together . Closing doors further divides U.S. , '' he wrote . `` Let 's all find ways to connect people , not separate them . ''
In a Facebook post , he offered free housing , even providing his personal email address . `` We have 3M homes , so we can definitely find people a place to stay , '' he write .
Some in Silicon Valley have direct ties to the Trump administration . Peter Thiel , a Trump transition team member , sits on the board of Facebook and he 's a part-time partner at Y Combinator . He 's an investor in many companies including Airbnb .
A Facebook employee of Middle Eastern descent told BuzzFeed News that some Facebook employees want the company to `` clarify '' its relationship with Thiel .
“ There are questions here that we want answered . Does Thiel support this ban ? '' the person said . `` Does he think the Facebook employees who come from Iran and those other countries shouldn ’ t be allowed to keep working here ? We deserve to know his position on this . ”
Uber 's Kalanick said his policy is to engage with Trump .
`` We partner around the world optimistically in the belief that by speaking up and engaging we can make a difference . Our experience is that not doing so shortchanges cities and the people who live in them . This is why I agreed in early December to join President Trump ’ s economic advisory group , '' he told employees . `` I understand that many people internally and externally may not agree with that decision , and that ’ s OK . It 's the magic of living in America that people are free to disagree . ''
The growing number of public statements from technology leaders was unusual , a measure of the perceived threat to their businesses and to their own political beliefs .
`` As a tech leader and public CEO , I ’ m often advised to stay apolitical , '' Twilio CEO Jeff Lawson wrote in a Medium post . `` But this isn ’ t politics , I believe this is a matter of objective right and wrong . Staying silent doesn ’ t feel like leadership to me . I encourage other leaders to consider the cost of silence . ''
Google 's Pichai was the second executive of a major tech company to speak out against Trump 's immigration order . Earlier Friday , Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg said he was concerned about the immigration order 's reach .
`` Expanding the focus of law enforcement beyond people who are real threats would make all Americans less safe by diverting resources , while millions of undocumented folks who do n't pose a threat will live in fear of deportation , '' he wrote on his Facebook page .
In a statement on Saturday , Facebook said : `` We are assessing the impact on our workforce and determining how best to protect our people and their families from any adverse effects . ''
Trump 's stance on immigration was one of the key reasons the tech industry widely opposed Trump 's candidacy . Many of tech 's most successful companies have been founded or are run by immigrants , and the industry employs thousands of immigrants , often from Asian countries .
After Trump 's win , tech executives from Google , Facebook , Amazon and others met with the president-elect in a summit seen as a pragmatic move to find some common ground with the new administration . Tech leaders were largely silent as Trump has rapidly signed orders in his first week in office .
That changed later in the week . Facebook COO and and Lean In author Sheryl Sandberg also broke her silence , taking to Facebook to criticize the order that would bar funding to overseas healthcare providers that give abortion counseling .