The broad agreement was put together by the influential Gang of Eight senators . | AP Photos Senate group reaches immigration deal
A powerful group of senators from both parties has reached a deal on the outlines of a comprehensive immigration overhaul , a development that will drive an emotional debate on a hot-button issue unseen in Washington for more than half a decade .
The group unveiled the basics of its proposal at a Monday news conference on Capitol Hill , essentially laying down a marker on the issue one day before President Barack Obama heads to Las Vegas to unveil more details about his own immigration proposal .
According to a five-page document provided to ███ , the sweeping proposal — agreed to in principle by eight senators — would seek to overhaul the legal immigration system as well as create a pathway to citizenship for the nation ’ s roughly 11 million illegal immigrants . But establishing that pathway would depend on whether the U.S. first implements stricter border enforcement measures and new rules ensuring immigrants have left the country in compliance with their visas . Young people brought to the country as children illegally and seasonal agriculture industry workers would be given a faster path to citizenship .
The broad agreement by the influential Gang of Eight senators amounts to the most serious bipartisan effort to act on the highly charged issue since George W. Bush ’ s comprehensive measure was defeated in the Senate in 2007 .
It remains to be seen if Obama will embrace the Senate effort , or how closely his own proposal hews to the Senate one . But the Senate proposal is expected to take precedence on Capitol Hill , given that bipartisan backing will be crucial to getting anything through the Democratic-controlled Senate — let alone the Republican-controlled House .
The bipartisan coalition includes influential Democrats such as Majority Whip Dick Durbin of Illinois and Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York , No . 3 in the leadership . It also has the backing of Sen. Bob Menendez , the Cuban-American Democrat from New Jersey poised to be chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee . And it has the support of Colorado Sen. Michael Bennet , the new chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee .
Republican heavy-hitters also have signed onto the deal ’ s framework , including two veterans of the bruising 2007 effort : Sens . John McCain of Arizona and Lindsey Graham of South Carolina . But it also won the support of Florida Sen. Marco Rubio , a rising GOP star and possible future presidential candidate . And the freshman Arizona Republican , Jeff Flake , who endorsed similar comprehensive plans during his House tenure , has also backed the proposal .
House Republicans are likely to be a tougher sell , but Rep. Paul Ryan ( R-Wis. ) recently endorsed Rubio ’ s approach and could be an important partner in selling the legislation to conservatives .
Many of the details have yet to be worked out since the plan has not yet been turned into legislation . There are bound to be fights within the group and off Capitol Hill as the legislative process begins in earnest , and it ’ s unclear whether the bipartisan group can stick together .