The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a Hawaii judge ’ s ruling barring Donald Trump ’ s travel ban — which would prevent all entries from six majority-Muslim countries for 90 days , and nearly all refugee admissions for 120 days — from going into effect on Monday .
The Supreme Court is now the last hope for the controversial executive order that sparked mass protests at airports around the country .
“ Immigration , even for the President , is not a one-person show , ” the court wrote in a per curiam opinion . “ The President ’ s authority is subject to certain statutory and constitutional restraints . We conclude that the President , in issuing the Executive Order , exceeded the scope of the authority delegated to him by Congress . ”
The Ninth Circuit ’ s ruling says the government should be allowed to resume its review of visa procedures — which is intended to lead to new “ extreme vetting ” tests for people seeking to enter the US — which the Trump administration had argued it hadn ’ t been able to do thanks to a lower-court order . But the parts of Trump ’ s executive order that prevent people from entering the US remain on hold .
The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Maryland also upheld a ( narrower ) ruling against the ban in May , and the Trump administration ’ s already appealed that ruling to the Supreme Court — in addition to asking it to stop both the East Coast and West Coast rulings from affecting policy while the Supreme Court considers the case , so that the ban could go into effect over the summer .
Now , though , the Ninth Circuit ’ s piled on yet another stinging defeat for the Trump administration . If the Supreme Court does what the administration wants and allows the travel ban to go into effect , it ’ ll be flying in the face of every ruling issued on the executive order so far .
The more the administration loses , the harder Trump makes it for them to win
The Ninth Circuit ’ s ruling doesn ’ t change the bottom line : The Supreme Court is the only thing that can save Trump ’ s travel ban now .
The ruling certainly doesn ’ t make it any easier for the administration . But the Supreme Court ’ s more conservative than either the Ninth or Fourth Circuits , there ’ s definitely a chance that the Supremes will overrule every judge who ’ s looked at the executive order so far and side with the administration .
But the courts , at this point , are no bigger a problem for the Department of Justice than the president himself . Every ruling against the administration on the travel ban sparks a potential temper tantrum from the president on Twitter ; every temper tantrum provides more fodder for the travel ban ’ s opponents .
The Ninth Circuit offered its own proof of this ; in a footnote , it cited Trump ’ s June 5 tweets criticizing the DOJ for revising the original executive order ( issued in January ) to make it more “ politically correct ” — effectively undermining the DOJ ’ s argument that the March executive order was the result of a thoughtful review of national-security policy .
The 9th Circuit decision on President Trump 's revised travel ban cites his June 5 tweet https : //t.co/qvc7rw61Gn pic.twitter.com/BAxD9pe6Io — Rebecca Berg ( @ rebeccagberg ) June 12 , 2017
In theory ( though President Trump appears to see it differently ) the purpose of the 90-day country-based ban , and the 120-day refugee ban , was to allow the government time to come up with a list of countries that weren ’ t providing the US with enough information , and ban entries from those countries indefinitely .
The Hawaii ruling put that whole process on hold . But the Ninth Circuit says the Hawaii decision improperly stopped “ inter-agency review ” and overturned that part of the Hawaii ruling . ( It didn ’ t officially allow the process to start up again , but that ruling should be forthcoming . )
This doesn ’ t change anything on the ground . The most controversial parts of the executive order Trump signed on March 6 have been put on hold since March 15 , when a Hawaii judge issued an injunction against them . The Ninth Circuit is just upholding that objection .
But it makes the question not just of whether the Supreme Court will take up the travel ban cases , but when , all the more relevant .
The Supreme Court has many ways to kill the ban — and it would have to act soon to save it
If it wants to , the Supreme Court can kill it without even taking up the case . It has the option of simply declining to hear the government ’ s appeals . For another , the Ninth Circuit has made a different legal argument against the ban than the Fourth Circuit did — so far , courts have ruled that the travel ban is unconstitutional because it discriminates against Muslims , while the Ninth Circuit argues that the ban violates the Immigration and Nationality Act by overstepping the president ’ s authority to suspend immigration into the US .
The biggest problem the administration is facing , though , might be the calendar .
The text of the executive order said that the ban would be in place for 90 days after the effective date of the order — and that the order would be effective on March 16 . It didn ’ t make any exception for what would happen if courts put the ban on hold .
So theoretically , the 90-day , country-based is expiring on Wednesday , June 14 . And theoretically , even if the Supreme Court overturned both the Fourth and Ninth Circuits and sided with the government , it wouldn ’ t be able to implement it . ( It would be able to implement the remainder of the 120-day refugee ban . )
In practice , if the Supreme Court decided to allow the travel ban to go into effect , it might try to interpret the phrase “ effective date ” to mean whichever day the ban was allowed to start .
But if the Supreme Court grants the administration ’ s request to hear the case , it won ’ t do so before its next term in the fall . So unless the Court acquiesces to the administration ’ s request to allow the ban to go into effect now and ask questions later , the process that the government was supposed to be doing while the ban was in place — which it can now restart under the Ninth Circuit ’ s decision — will have had more than 90 days to unfold . That raises the question of why the government would still need a ban on the six majority-Muslim countries at all , rather than going forward with its semi-permanent blacklist .
Those aren ’ t questions the Department of Justice is likely to want to answer . To avoid them , it will need the Supreme Court to step in ASAP and allow the travel ban to happen over the summer — overruling literally every court that ’ s considered the ban to date .