TIJUANA ( ███ ) - Hundreds of Central American migrants in Mexico massed on Thursday around a tense U.S. border crossing , where security measures held up long lines of Mexicans headed to Thanksgiving gatherings on the other side of the frontier .
With few belongings , and many of them with children in tow , the migrants set out for the crossing from the baseball field in the Mexican border city of Tijuana where they have been camped out . Around 6,000 migrants who have trekked across Mexico in a caravan in recent weeks are now crammed into the field .
They arrived at the Chaparral border crossing , opposite San Diego , California , and said they would wait there until they could request asylum , in spite of growing U.S. measures to tighten the border .
“ We are already desperate , last night it rained and we all got wet . There is no room left . We are all sick . My children have a cold ... and nobody has come to give us help , ” said David , a Honduran who only provided his first name .
Earlier on Thursday , U.S. President Donald Trump said he had authorized the use of lethal force on the border and warned that the United States could close the whole frontier .
The San Ysidro vehicular crossing into San Diego , one of the busiest in the world , was briefly shuttered in the afternoon by U.S. officials as they performed a security exercise .
Tens of thousands of Mexicans enter the United States daily to work or study , and many were trying to get to Thanksgiving celebrations . Mariana del Campo , a retired professor , had hoped to make it across before the closing , but was stuck in the line .
“ What ’ s happening on the border is maddening , ” she said as she waited in her car . “ I don ’ t know how long we can put up with this . Someone is going to get tired or explode . ”
Also stuck in her car waiting to cross for Thanksgiving was 54-year-old Aurora Diaz , who said her U.S.-based daughter was reluctant to visit Mexico in case Trump closed the border .
Tensions were palpable at the pedestrian crossing where the Central Americans had gathered . Mexican police and soldiers stood guard while a helicopter buzzed over the U.S side .
Edgar Corzo , an official from Mexico ’ s human rights commission , spoke into a megaphone to the crowd , telling them they could request assistance in Mexico .
But migrants arrived with blankets and prepared to bed down for the night outside the border station . Some of the children cried and complained of the cold .
Authorities in Tijuana said the migrants are facing up to a six-month wait to be able to get an appointment to plead their case for asylum with U.S. authorities .
Earlier this week , U.S. officials briefly closed the main border crossing in Tijuana , putting up concrete barricades and razor wire after reports that migrants could try to rush the crossing .
“ I want President Trump to know that we ’ re peaceful people , we don ’ t have weapons , we haven ’ t come to do evil , ” said a man who declined to give his name , holding a white flag on a wooden stick that read “ Peace , God is with us. ” “ We want to work , we want them to help us for the love of God , ” he added .