In their latest effort to pass amnesty for the majority of illegal aliens living in the United States , the pro-mass immigration GOP megadonor billionaire Koch brothers are throwing their support behind Democrats ahead of the 2018 midterm elections .
In their latest “ seven-figure project ” to promote amnesty for illegal aliens , the Koch brothers are thanking Democrats and their open borders agenda in mailers .
The Koch mailers , revealed by NPR , thank Rep. Raul Ruiz ( D-CA ) , Rep. Pete Aguilar ( D-CA ) , Sen. Chris Coons ( D-DE ) , Rep. Ben Ray Luján ( D-NM ) , and Rep. Michelle Lujan Grisham ( D-NM ) for their push for open borders and amnesty for illegal aliens .
The mailer campaign by the Koch brothers also thanks a number of Republicans for supporting their agenda of open borders and amnesty .
As ███ has chronicled , the Koch brothers have attempted to shape the Republican Congressional agenda ahead of the 2018 midterm elections .
Despite midterm voters repeatedly saying they want less immigration to the U.S. , the Koch brothers have pushed GOP lawmakers to endorse amnesty for illegal aliens and have set out on a campaign opposing Trump ’ s popular plan to cut legal immigration levels .
Paul Ryan , GOP Establishment Look to Fulfill Koch Brothers ’ Wage-Crushing Amnesty Dreams Ahead of Midtermshttps : //t.co/E3VJq8fArV — John Binder 👽 ( @ JxhnBinder ) April 19 , 2018
Currently , the U.S. admits more than 1.5 million legal and illegal immigrants every year , with more than 70 percent coming to the country through chain migration . In the next 20 years , the current U.S. legal immigration system is on track to import roughly 15 million new foreign-born voters . Between seven and eight million of those foreign-born voters will arrive in the U.S. through chain migration .
The Koch brothers have said they oppose wage-boosting cuts to legal immigration levels , ███ reported .
The slightly tightened labor market — a result of Trump ’ s increased border security and economic nationalist vision , which is opposed by the Koch brothers — has secured high-paying industry jobs for American teens , as well as history-making wage growth for American workers in the construction industry , the garment industry , for workers employed at small businesses , black Americans , and restaurant workers .