US President Donald Trump has called for speedy deportations that bypass any judicial process in a tweet on Sunday .
`` When somebody comes in , we must immediately , with no Judges or Court Cases , bring them back from where they came , '' Mr Trump wrote .
His comments come days after Mr Trump reversed a policy to separate migrant children from their parents following fierce backlash at home and abroad .
More than 2,300 children were separated from their parents in May and June .
As of May , all migrants who cross the US border illegally face criminal prosecution under the `` zero tolerance '' policy .
The president did not make the distinction between economic migrants and those seeking asylum .
Mr Trump has faced criticism , including from his own Republican Party , for his choice of language on Twitter .
When he earlier said illegal immigrants threatened `` to pour into and infest our Country '' , Republican congresswoman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen tweeted back at him saying his `` baseless rhetoric '' was `` repugnant '' and dehumanised those looking for a better life .
US immigration officials say 2,342 children were separated from 2,206 parents from 5 May to 9 June .
On 20 June , Mr Trump backed down from his support for the policy and signed an executive order ending the practice of separating families .
He said at the time : `` I did not like the sight or feeling of families being separated . ''
Mr Trump 's directive allows for long-term detention of immigrant children ( albeit with their parents ) , which violates federal law that limits child detention to 20 days .
A public outcry over migrant children being separated from their parents , forced Donald Trump to soften his immigration policy .
But since then , in a series of speeches , he has called for tougher laws - and claimed America 's current legislation is laughed at by the rest of the world .
He says that everyone found illegally trying to cross the border should be returned to their own country immediately - without involving judges or holding court cases .
Political opponents will be furious that that 's even been suggested but President Trump clearly believes his supporters back his hardline stance .
Following Mr Trump 's election in 2016 , the numbers of migrants held or detained entry while crossing the border had dropped significantly .
However , since February 2018 , the number of migrants crossing the border illegally is up , with arrests last month more than double those in May 2017 .
While illegal crossings can not be accurately counted , border arrests are used as a measure of illegal border crossings .