On Saturday , California Governor Jerry Brown signed Assembly Bill 1461 , the New Motor Voter Act , which will automatically register people to vote through the DMV , and could result in illegal aliens voting .
Any person who renewed or secured a driver ’ s license through the DMV may now register to vote , or choose to opt out of doing so . Because illegal immigrants are now eligible for obtaining driver ’ s licenses , they could be allowed to vote in elections if the Secretary of State ’ s office fails to verify their eligibility properly .
Brown and the California Democratic party know exactly what they are doing ; as a Public Policy Institute survey showed , among unregistered adults , 49 % lean toward the Democratic Party and 22 % toward the Republican Party . Any bill permitting illegal immigrants to vote would cement the Democratic Party ’ s hold on California .
True the Vote founder Catherine Engelbrecht stated , “ This bill is terrible . It makes an already bad situation much , much worse , ” adding that California ’ s registration databases “ lack the necessary safeguards to keep noncitizens off the voter rolls . ”
Election Integrity Project of California President Linda Paine echoed that AB 1461 “ will effectively change the form of governance in California from a Republic whose elected officials are determined by United States citizens and will guarantee that noncitizens will participate in all California elections going forward. ” The Election Integrity Project of California had joined True the Vote to demand that brown veto the bill , calling it a path to “ ‘ state sanctioned ’ voter fraud . ”
Although noncitizens ’ driver ’ s licenses in California feature the phrases “ Federal Limits Apply ” and “ not valid for official federal purposes , ” True the Vote spokesman Logan Churchwell pointed out that state officials “ specifically chose not to make noncitizen license holders searchable in their DMV database . ”
California Secretary of State Alex Padilla countered that the increase in voters will benefit the state , arguing , “ The New Motor Voter Act will make our democracy stronger by removing a key barrier to voting for millions of California citizens . Citizens should not be required to opt in to their fundamental right to vote . We do not have to opt in to other rights , such as free speech or due process . ”
California follows Oregon , where Democratic Gov . Kate Brown signed a bill in March allowing the automatic registration of all eligible Oregonians to vote when they obtain or renew a driver ’ s license or state identification card .
But Stephen Frank of California Political Review bluntly asserted that the bill will reduce voter turnout because voters will sniff fraud in the polls : “ AB 1461 assures corruption of our elections–our elections will look like those of Mexico and other corrupt nations–and honest people will stop voting since illegal aliens will out vote them . ”