The US government has asked for more time to reunite migrant families separated at the US-Mexico border as it emerged that some children 's parents have already been deported .
In a two-hour hearing on Friday , a government attorney said that 19 parents of children under the age of five held in custody had left the US .
The justice department has a deadline to release these children by 10 July .
But it says that more time is needed to perform the necessary identity checks .
On Thursday , the US Department of Justice issued a formal request to Judge Dana Sabraw , a federal judge in San Diego , for relief regarding the earlier court order to release 101 children aged five and under by next Tuesday .
The judge , who has yet to rule on the extension , said the government needed to provide a full list of those under five held in custody by Saturday afternoon , following which the original deadline would be re-evaluated .
He also said the government would need to present expectations for meeting the deadline for each child on the list to the American Civil Liberties Union , which brought the class action lawsuit .
Judge Sabraw also scheduled a status hearing on Monday morning , saying he hopes an agreement can be reached regarding whether Tuesday 's deadline will need to be extended .
The court order also includes a deadline to release children aged between five and 17 by 26 July .
During the hearing on Friday , the government attorney also provided an overview of the families affected . This included the following information :
46 parents are being held in custody by Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE )
Earlier this week , the US Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) said it had ordered DNA tests on some 3,000 children in an effort to reunite migrant families .
However , the justice department said that even while the health department was `` moving expeditiously '' with the tests , the process was time consuming .
It added that given the possibility of false claims , `` confirming parentage is critical to ensure that children are returned to their parents , not to potential traffickers '' .
The government also needed to determine whether the adults had a criminal history or could present a danger to their children , the department said .
The US government did not request a specific new set of deadlines .
More than 2,300 migrant children have been separated from their parents since early May under the Trump administration 's controversial policy , which seeks to criminally prosecute anyone crossing the border illegally .