The US state of Texas is deploying National Guard members to the border with Mexico following a call from President Donald Trump .
A Guard spokesman said 250 personnel would be sent to patrol the area within the next 72 hours .
Arizona is also planning to deploy 150 troops there next week .
President Trump says he wants to send up to 4,000 National Guard members to secure the border with Mexico , until his proposed border wall is built .
The states of New Mexico and California have been asked to take similar action to Texas and Arizona .
Also on Friday , the US president outlined plans to end a practice dubbed `` catch and release '' as part of his stricter anti-immigration policies .
Mr Trump wants illegal immigrants to be held in detention while they wait to hear if they will be deported , instead of being freed .
He has asked the US Department of Defense for a detailed list of military and other facilities that could perform that function .
Mr Trump has sent several tweets over the past seven days railing against illegal immigration , and accusing Democrats of allowing `` open borders , drugs and crime '' .
He declared on Twitter that Republicans should `` go to Nuclear Option to pass tough laws [ on illegal migrants ] NOW '' .
Mr Trump also threatened Mexico , saying the North American Free Trade Agreement ( Nafta ) was at risk unless it stopped the movement of migrants over the border .
Mexico 's President Enrique Pena Nieto has condemned what he called `` threatening or disrespectful attitudes '' from Mr Trump .
The president has called sending troops to the Mexico border a `` big step '' , but both his predecessors also dispatched the National Guard there .
President Barack Obama sent some 1,200 soldiers to guard the boundary , while President George W Bush deployed about 6,000 troops to help Border Patrol in what was called Operation Jump Start .
US Defence Secretary James Mattis has approved funding for up to 4,000 National Guard troops from the Pentagon budget until the end of September , the Associated Press reports .
Constructing a `` big , beautiful wall '' along the Mexican border was a signature Trump campaign promise , but so far the plan to erect a new physical barrier has been thwarted by lawmakers and appears to have stalled .
A major government spending bill which he signed last month included $ 1.6bn ( £1.1bn ) for the border wall - far short of the $ 25bn the White House sought .
And there were strings attached to the funding Congress did approve . Most of it can only be used to repair stretches of the border where there already is a wall , not to build new segments .
Last month the Pentagon confirmed Mr Trump had held `` initial '' talks with his defence secretary about using some of the Pentagon 's budget to build a wall .
But two Democratic senators wrote to the defence secretary on Monday saying his department had `` no legal authority '' to use its funds for such a purpose .
`` Such a controversial move could only be funded by cutting other vital priorities for our service members , '' wrote Senators Dick Durbin and Jack Reed .
In December , US Border Patrol announced arrests at the southern border had fallen to their lowest level since 1971 , apparently indicating that fewer people were attempting the crossing .