Sen. Charles Schumer says Gang of Eight has completed 90 % of its work on crafting legislation
Obama said he is `` prepared to step in '' and introduce his own plan if necessary
WASHINGTON — President Obama expressed optimism on Wednesday that Congress will have a bill that overhauls the nation 's immigration laws ready next month and that passage of the legislation can be completed by summer 's end .
`` If we have a bill introduced at the beginning of next month as these senators indicate it will be , then I 'm confident that we can get it done certainly before the end of the summer , '' Obama said in an interview with the Spanish-language network Telemundo .
Obama 's comments come as four members of the Senate 's so-called `` Gang of Eight , '' including Arizona Republican John McCain and Democrat Charles Schumer , took a tour of the Arizona-Mexico border on Wednesday .
Schumer told reporters after the tour that the lawmakers were 90 % done with their work crafting the legislation .
Obama called on Congress this week to hustle up and get him an immigration bill as soon as possible .
The president overwhelmingly won the Latino vote in his race against Mitt Romney , but he 's been criticized by some Latinos for failing to revamp immigration in his first term and for a record number of deportations being carried out under his watch .
In the Telemundo interview , Obama dismissed the suggestion that there could be potential political fallout for his party if the push on immigration falls short .
`` I 'm not concerned about the Democratic Party , I 'm concerned about the people whose actual lives are ( going to ) be impacted by it , '' Obama said .
`` The most important thing is that we 're seeing a strong commitment to finally solve this problem in a way that strengthens our border security , makes sure that there 's a pathway to citizenship , an earned one , a tough one , but a pathway so that people can live out their dreams and make sure that they have a better life for themselves and their kids , '' he said .
He also noted that he is reserving the option of introducing his own plan .
`` I 've got my own legislation I 'm prepared to step in , '' Obama said . `` But I do n't think that 's going to be necessary . ''