Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus had a message last week for outspoken conservatives who support strict immigration enforcement policies : Shut up .
Yes , the head of the RNC is more concerned about protecting the party 's Hispanic vote-pandering campaign than protecting law-abiding citizens from the devastating consequences of illegal immigration .
At the RNC 's annual summer meeting in Boston , Priebus complained that openly advocating self-deportation policies during last year 's election season was `` horrific '' and that rule-of-law rhetoric `` hurts us . '' Yes , really .
So is it OK to discuss during off-year election cycles ? Leap years ? Weekends ? Holidays ? Can the GOP sensitivity police let us in on their approved immigration discussion calendar ?
Priebus has yet to explain what exactly is `` horrific '' about telling foreign rule-breakers that they should n't wait for the government to eject them , and that the right thing for them to do would be to abide by our laws and go home on their own . This is an exceedingly and ridiculously polite policy suggestion , given how most other countries treat illegal line-jumpers , border-crossers , visa overstayers and deportation fugitives .
But Priebus treats the idea as if it were an international human rights violation .
Tellingly , the RNC chair has no response to the families of all races , classes and creeds who have raised their voices against America 's perilous deportation abyss , systematic non-enforcement and coddling of illegal alien DREAMers who have wreaked violence and havoc on their lives .
The relatives of murdered Los Angeles teen Jamiel Shaw posed a question to Priebus on Twitter after the RNC chair 's remarks at the GOP event last week touting minority outreach and diversity : `` How many Americans Have U Talked To Whose Kids were Killed by illegals ? ''
As I first reported in 2008 , 17-year-old Jamiel was gunned down by 19-year-old illegal alien Mexican gang member Pedro Espinoza . Young Espinoza was smuggled into the U.S. illegally when he was a toddler , just like all of the DREAMers the open-borders propagandists are always extolling in sweeping terms .
One day after he was released from jail for serving time for assault with a deadly weapon , this known illegal alien gang-banger was back on the streets . The feds failed to deport him . Local authorities failed to detain him . Espinoza celebrated his freedom by shooting star student athlete Jamiel execution-style in the head for carrying a red Spider-Man backpack , which the Latino 18th Street Gang thug mistook for gang colors . Jamiel 's mother , Army Sgt . Anita Shaw , had to travel home from serving in Iraq on her second tour of duty to join her family in burying her son .
Illegal alien teen killer Espinoza was sentenced to death last fall . Grieving parents Anita and Jamiel Sr. and their loved ones have valiantly kept Jamiel 's memory alive by supporting efforts to repeal dangerous illegal alien sanctuary laws , spotlighting lapses in detention and deportation policy , calling attention to violent illegal alien gangs targeting blacks in L.A , and opposing reckless bipartisan amnesty proposals .
As Mr. Shaw told Breitbart 's Matthew Boyle : `` Just because you were brought here under no fault of your own does n't mean you give amnesty to everybody . '' Amen . And instead of phony promises of enforcement later for blanket amnesty now , we need immediate reform of our bloodstained , loophole-ridden , under-funded and systemically sabotaged criminal alien detention and deportation system . Pronto .
Jamiel Shaw 's family members are vigilant community organizers against illegal immigration . But their activism will never be hailed by Hollywood , The New York Times op-ed page , the White House or the RNC 's elitist open-borders outreach panderers . Mr. Shaw , who testified at a House GOP panel hearing on the horrific consequences of our failed deportation policies earlier this summer , warns astutely that Republicans are `` up to something '' as they prepare to cut deals with open-borders Democrats in conference .
I think he 's right . I also believe it 's no coincidence that the RNC is now publicly marginalizing those who dare to challenge the rose-colored DREAMer propaganda of McCain-Graham-Rubio-Ryan-Mark Zuckerberg-La Raza -- just as the forces of Amnesty Incorporated conspire behind closed doors .
Question : Why wo n't Priebus acknowledge the horrific suffering of the Shaws and countless other families who have been harmed by illegal alien nightmares ? The political timing is inconveeeenient . Innocent lives be damned .