'We ’ re going to be aggressive in marketing the bill , ' Sen. Lindsey Graham said . Gang of Eight aims to stop conservative attacks
The Senate ’ s Gang of Eight is mounting an aggressive lobbying campaign with one major goal : weaken the conservative opposition to a sweeping immigration overhaul .
Hours after the bill was unveiled after 2 a.m. Wednesday , Republicans began to make their pitch for it on conservative talk radio and by urging their colleagues to hold their fire until they ’ ve had a chance to analyze it . Their hope is to define the measure as a workable compromise on a highly complex issue , one that will help broaden the GOP ’ s reach to Latino and moderate voters .
The push is part of a broader strategy to smooth passage for the complex legislation in the Senate , where the idea is to lure more than just a handful of Republican senators . If a broadly backed bill passed the Senate , House Republicans would be hard pressed to reject it , proponents believe .
“ Defining the bill quickly is good , ” said Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) , a member of the gang , in an interview . “ We ’ re going to be aggressive in marketing the bill . We ’ re going to be open minded about making it better . But this is an all-hands-on-deck approach . ”
On Wednesday , Graham and Sen. Marco Rubio made the rounds on conservative talk radio , with the Florida Republican planning for more appearances on Thursday . The initial reaction on the right was far less intense than they anticipated , proponents said . Rubio ’ s offices in Washington and Florida received fewer than 500 calls on immigration Wednesday , with more than 150 of those in favor of his bill , according to a source in his office .
And some GOP senators were circumspect , saying they would wait and see the details of the bill before making their minds up whether to pick it apart .
“ I ’ ll take another look at it , ” said Sen. Thad Cochran ( R-Miss . ) , who voted to block the 2007 bill .
“ Is that enough for me ? I don ’ t want to say yet . But it was a lot better than I thought it was , ” said Sen. Chuck Grassley , the top Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee , about the border security measures .
On the left , Democrats tried to shore up their own base . Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , another leading supporter , and Democratic senators privately met with a room full of immigration activists to implore them to put aside their fears for the “ greater good ” of passing the bill . And a senior White House official , Cecilia Muñoz , met with House Democrats in House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer ’ s office , offering broad support for the bill , hearing from Democrats worried about elements of the bill ’ s treatment of undocumented immigrants . The White House would also like the bill tweaked .