Reacting to the terrorist attack in London on Saturday night , Donald Trump tweeted that `` we need to be smart , vigilant and tough , '' `` stop being politically correct , '' and `` get down to the business of security for our people . '' But the only concrete policy he mentioned was his temporary ban on visitors from six Muslim-majority countries , which is unlikely to make the already tiny risk of dying in a terrorist attack any smaller .
`` We need the courts to give us back our rights , '' the president said on Saturday , meaning he wants the Supreme Court to lift the preliminary injunction against his executive order . `` We need the Travel Ban as an extra level of safety ! ''
We need to be smart , vigilant and tough . We need the courts to give us back our rights . We need the Travel Ban as an extra level of safety ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 3 , 2017
If that is Trump 's aim , the focus of his travel ban is rather puzzling . The executive order covers six countries ( down from seven in the original version ) : Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria , and Yemen . Since 1975 no one in the United States has died in an attack by a terrorist from any of those countries , although there have been less serious incidents , including two nonfatal knife attacks last year by people with Somali backgrounds , both of whom were killed in the midst of their assaults . From 1975 through 2015 , according to a count by Cato Institute immigration analyst Alex Nowrasteh , six Iranians , six Sudanese , two Somalis , and one Yemini were `` convicted of attempting or carrying out terrorist attacks on U.S . soil . ''
Continuing the administration 's pattern of ignoring relevant evidence , Trump 's order mentions just one of those cases , involving `` a native of Somalia who had been brought to the United States as a child refugee and later became a naturalized United States citizen . '' As the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit noted when it upheld the injunction against the travel ban , the order `` does not include any examples of individuals from Iran , Libya , Sudan , Syria , or Yemen committing terrorism-related offenses in the United States . '' But according to Nowrasteh , there are at least 13 such cases involving people from Iran , Sudan , and Yemen .
Even if Trump had included all the relevant examples , the case for targeting these six countries would be weak , since citizens of other countries account for a much larger share of terrorist plots , attacks , and casualties in the United States . From 1975 through 2015 , Nowrasteh found , 19 foreign-born terrorists came from Saudi Arabia , 14 came from Pakistan , 11 came from Egypt , and 11 more came from Cuba . Their combined death toll was 2,537 . During the same period , six foreign-born terrorists came from Iran , six from Sudan , two from Somalia , and one from Yemen . Zero came from Libya or Syria . The combined death toll for terrorists from those six countries was zero .
Nor is it clear how Trump 's plan , which calls for the development of improved vetting procedures during the three months when citizens of the six countries would be forbidden to enter the United States , can reasonably be expected to catch the tiny percentage prone to terrorism . As an internal Department of Homeland Security report prepared last March notes , `` most foreign-born , US-based violent extremists likely radicalized several years after their entry to the United States , limiting the ability of screening and vetting officials to prevent their entry because of national security concerns . '' In the one relevant case cited by Trump 's executive order , for instance , better vetting would have made no difference , since the offender entered the country as a child .
In a declaration cited by the 4th Circuit , 10 former national security , foreign policy , and intelligence officials ( mostly from Democratic administrations ) said `` there is no national security purpose for a total bar on entry for aliens '' from the seven countries named in the original travel ban ( the current six plus Iraq ) . `` Since September 11 , 2001 , '' they said , `` not a single terrorist attack in the United States has been perpetrated by aliens from the countries named in the Order . '' As noted above , that is not quite accurate . But it is fair to say that Trump 's selection of countries seems arbitrary given the backgrounds of terrorists who have carried out attacks in the United States , very few of whom came from any of those countries .
The same is true if you look at people convicted in connection with planned domestic attacks that never came to fruition . Nowrasteh identified four such cases involving people from the targeted countries ( two from Iran and two from Somalia ) since 9/11 .
Trump 's travel ban may indeed be tough ( at least as far as its impact on foreign nationals and their American relatives goes ) , and it may be politically incorrect . It may even be ( and probably is ) constitutional . But that does not make it smart .
Addendum : In a follow-up tweet this morning , Trump says , `` The Justice Dept . should have stayed with the original Travel Ban , not the watered down , politically correct version they submitted to S.C. '' That remark is weird for a couple of reasons : 1 ) It was Trump , not the Justice Department , who ultimately decided to issue a revised executive order rather than continue to defend the original version , and 2 ) excluding lawful permanent residents and current visa holders from the ban made the order harder to challenge .
Trump compounds the weirdness in a subsequent tweet : `` The Justice Dept . should ask for an expedited hearing of the watered down Travel Ban before the Supreme Court— & seek much tougher version ! '' Reverting to the original order after successfully defending the revised one would only prolong the legal battle , and here again Trump makes it seem as if he is not really in charge of his own administration , that the Justice Department decides which executive orders to issue .