The Border Patrol reported the first major instance of migrant caravan-related violence Saturday , saying a Honduran man threw rocks at agents to try to keep from being arrested Friday in Arizona .
The 31-year-old , whom authorities didn ’ t name , had climbed a tree to try to avoid capture , then lit the tree afire and began to throw rocks at the agents as well as a helicopter called in to help track him .
Neither the agents nor the helicopter were hit by the projectiles .
The man was eventually arrested , and agents said he told them he was part of the migrant caravan that had been in the news . They said he had previous arrests in the U.S. and had been deported back in June .
A local fire department had to be called to extinguish the fire .
Caravan members totaling as many as 10,500 have been massing on the Mexican side of the border in recent weeks , Homeland Security officials say .
While many images of the caravan show women and children , U.S. authorities say a majority of members are single adults , predominantly men , from Central America . That would make the Honduran man ’ s claims of caravan membership plausible .
President Trump last month had specifically warned of the danger of rock-throwing by caravan members , and had said agents should treat rock-throwers as if they were using firearms .
Indeed , rock-throwing , or “ rocking ” incidents , as they ’ re known to agents , can be violent encounters , often involving small boulders hefted at agents or their vehicles with enough force to shatter bones or dent trucks .
U.S. officials have been worried about caravan-related violence since watching thousands of people bust through Mexico ’ s southern border , tussling with Mexican police who ’ d been sent down to try to prevent them from entering .
It ’ s not clear why the Honduran man broke off from the rest of the caravans to attempt to enter on his own .
Agents had first detected him when they spotted footprints along the border just east of the Andrade , California , border crossing .