poster= '' http : //v.███.com/images/1155968404/201812/3970/1155968404_5978243965001_5978228446001-vs.jpg ? pubId=1155968404 '' Congress Trump says he ’ s ‘ proud ’ to shut down government during fight with Pelosi and Schumer The president battled with the Democratic leaders over his border wall in an extraordinary Oval Office meeting televised for the public .
President Donald Trump clashed sharply with Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer in a remarkable Oval Office meeting before reporters Tuesday , with the president threatening to shut down the government and the Democrats warning him they will not bend .
In a pitched partisan argument televised for all to see , the GOP president and the House and Senate Democratic leaders traded barbs over Trump ’ s border wall during what was supposed to be a private negotiating session to keep a large swath of the government from shuttering after Dec. 21 .
And in perhaps his most definitive statement yet , Trump said he would be “ proud ” to preside over a partial shutdown if that ’ s what it takes to get his campaign promise fulfilled .
Democrats urged the president against such a stance , even as they seized on the chance to blame Trump for any potential shutdown .
“ We shouldn ’ t shut down the government over a dispute , ” said Schumer , the Senate Democratic leader .
Morning Shift newsletter Get the latest on employment and immigration , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
“ The last time , Chuck , you shut it down , ” shot back Trump , referring to Democrats ’ brief shut down over immigration earlier this year . “ If we don ’ t get what we want … I am proud to shut down the government for border security , Chuck . ”
The public battle revealed the yawning gap between the president and congressional Democrats , foreshadowing the next 10 days of dramatic back-and-forth over whether roughly a quarter of the government will lapse due to the president ’ s $ 5 billion border wall request . It seems both parties have little incentive to give in : the Democratic grassroots doesn ’ t want a compromise with Trump , and the president sees no reason to give up now that the midterms are over .
Republicans are already grappling with the fallout . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said bluntly : `` I hope that 's not where we end up . ''
`` I understand it was a rather spirited meeting . But I feel like I see a smooth ending here . I have n't given up hope , '' McConnell said after a GOP lunch with Vice President Mike Pence .
After the meeting , Schumer said that Trump had a `` temper tantrum '' and Pelosi said when Democrats take over in January , they will pass a bill that keeps border security funded at current levels .
“ The President showed what he really thinks , he wants to shut down the government , ” Schumer told reporters at the Capitol . “ It ’ ll be a Trump shutdown and then Jan. 3 , if it happens , the House will open it up again . ”
Later , Schumer also backed away from a bipartisan Senate bill providing $ 1.6 billion in border fencing . Instead he 's endorsing only the amount of funding that the president got last year : $ 1.3 billion .
Inside the White House meeting , the Democrats appeared united in their vow not to accede to Trump ’ s demands , but the president seemed to revel in battling both of them for the cameras .
Trump repeatedly said that the outgoing House GOP majority will give him his border wall funding and that the problem is Schumer ’ s Senate , bragging that Republicans held the upper chamber even as Schumer ridiculed him for touting wins in deep red states .
Then Trump turned his fire on Pelosi , questioning her negotiating position as she battles for the speakership . Liberals say the two Democratic leaders should deny Trump anything for his wall , and Pelosi is taking on a fight while she 's still trying to accrue secure 218 votes to be elected speaker .
“ If we don ’ t have border security , we ’ ll shut down the government , ” Trump said , taunting Pelosi . “ Nancy ’ s in a situation where it ’ s not easy to talk right now ”
The California Democrat responded icily : “ Please don ’ t characterize the strength that I bring to this meeting . ”
As Vice President Mike Pence watched on , Democrats said that the public firefight was unproductive .
“ Let us have a conversation where we don ’ t have to contradict in public , ” Pelosi pleaded .
But Trump seemed to play up his persistence for the press .
“ I will take the mantle , ” Trump said of blame for a shut down . `` I will be the one to shut it down . ”
Pelosi told her caucus earlier Tuesday that she and Schumer are pitching two funding options to Trump — neither of which would deliver a funding boost for the border wall , according to multiple people in Democratic Caucus meeting .
Both of their options would punt the border wall fight until fall 2019 , long after House Democrats retake the majority , Pelosi told her caucus just ahead of the White House meeting .
Sen . Minority Leader Chuck Schumer returns to the Capitol after meeting with President Trump over border security and building `` the wall . '' | M. Scott Mahaskey/███
Democrats planned to pitch Trump on a yearlong stopgap bill for the Department of Homeland Security , which would reup a current budget of $ 1.3 billion for border fencing , while approving the other six unfinished bills . That idea has already been rejected by GOP leaders on Capitol Hill .
They also intended to present a new backup option : Approve a massive yearlong stopgap bill , and punt all funding fights until fall 2019 to maximize Democratic leaders ’ leverage in the House . But GOP leaders said they didn ’ t think Trump would sign something that barely speaks to his border wall request .
“ I don ’ t expect the president would go along with that [ if ] he ’ s not getting the border funding he wants , ” said Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn ( R-Texas ) .
Other Republicans said Trump ’ s remarks made their job harder but many blamed Democrats for being intractable .
“ I don ’ t think it ’ s something to be proud of , I think it ’ s something to be resolved , “ Sen . Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) . “ It ’ s absurd to deny this president additional wall money . ”
Ahead of the meeting , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell urged Pelosi and Schumer to cut a deal with Trump on funding the border wall , raising the prospects of another government shutdown this year over immigration . Senate Democrats refused to fund the government for a couple days in January in an effort to force a debate on immigration reform .
McConnell said he would watch “ eagerly ” to see if Democrats could accept a $ 5 billion infusion of money for border security .
“ There is no reason for my Democratic friends to end this year the way they began it . It would be truly bizarre for them to decide they ’ d prefer a partial government shutdown to reasonable funding for national security . It would signal that their party is more committed to political spite for the president than to the public interest , ” McConnell said .
While Congress has provided funding for border security , the massive spending bill Trump signed this spring was mostly restricted to fencing and border protection as a whole rather than a Trump-style wall or even the construction of wall prototypes .
He appeared to mix up the two again Tuesday when he claimed that Democrats voted in 2006 for a “ wall , ” which seems to refer to 2006 legislation to construct fencing along the southern border , even though it garnered little Democratic support in the House .
“ If the Democrats do not give us the votes to secure our Country , the Military will build the remaining sections of the Wall , ” Trump wrote . “ They know how important it is ! ”