President Donald Trump called Syrian refugees a “ great Trojan horse ” during the 2016 campaign , but his administration has resettled them in a quicker pace than President Barack Obama did .
Since Trump was inaugurated , 1,401 Syrian refugees have been resettled , State Department figures as of Wednesday reveal . This is more than double the 625 Syrian refugees resettled under President Obama in the same time frame last year .
The president has admitted about a third fewer refugees from all nations than Obama ’ s State Department did in this time span , as he has resettled 10,565 refugees so far and Obama resettled 14,841 . Syrian refugees , however , were a particular focus of President Trump ’ s when he was running for office .
“ Bad , bad things are gon na happen , ” Trump said about Syrian refugee resettlement at an August rally .
As president he signed executive orders temporarily halting refugee admittance from all nations , with the first one he signed banning Syrian refugee resettlement indefinitely . However , both of these actions were halted by the courts .
After the first order was blocked by a Seattle judge , Trump tweeted , “ 77 % of refugees allowed into U.S. since travel reprieve hail from seven suspect countries. ” ( WT ) SO DANGEROUS ! ”
As of Wednesday , 44 percent of refugees have been from these “ seven suspect countries ” ( Iran , Libya , Yemen , Syria , Sudan , Iraq , and Somalia ) .
The Department of Justice is currently appealing the two decisions that put Trump ’ s latest executive order on hold . A hearing for one of the cases is set for May . Last September , then-Secretary of State John Kerry told lawmakers that the U.S. seeks to admit 110,000 refugees in Fiscal Year 2017 , which runs from Oct.1 2016 through the end of September .
A State Department official told ███ , “ This language represents a ceiling on refugee admissions—it is not a mandatory target . ”
“ Due to a variety of factors , including the ongoing litigation and uncertainty regarding future funding levels , we are not in a position to speculate as to the final number of refugees that will be admitted by the end of this fiscal year , ” the official added .
The State Department would need to resettle refugees at about double the current pace to hit this ceiling for the fiscal year .
Republican Texas Rep. Brian Babin did introduce legislation before Trump took office that would prohibit refugee admittance until Congress passes a joint resolution allowing it . This received 72 cosponsors , but died in committee . Conservative author Ann Coulter told ███ in an email , “ YES ! ” when asked if she was disappointed with congressional leadership over this inaction .