( ███ ) - The U.S. government , under court order to quickly reunify parents and children who were separated after crossing illegally into the United States from Mexico , has expanded its use of DNA tests to establish paternity in immigration matters .
The government says DNA testing is a faster means of confirming parentage than relying on assembling documents such as birth certificates .
Under President Barack Obama , DNA testing of unauthorized border-crossers was rare , former administration officials said , but one said it was sometimes used as a last resort to verify family connections when placing unaccompanied minors with sponsors in the United States .
It was also used , and still is , to verify family ties of many refugees seeking permission for family members to join them in the United States .
Such testing looks at a small portion of DNA , known as “ short tandem repeats , ” to identify inherited regions of DNA that can vary from person to person .
In a declaration filed with the U.S. District Court in San Diego on Thursday , U.S. Health and Human Services official Jonathan White described the testing as a “ faster but costlier method for confirming parentage than collecting and assessing documentation and anecdotal information . ”
The filing was made in a class-action lawsuit brought by the American Civil Liberties Union against Immigration and Customs Enforcement on behalf of parents who were separated from their children by immigration officials . The judge in that case has ordered that children under age 5 be reunited with their parents by Tuesday , and that all minors separated from their parents be reunited by July 26 .
White said field teams are taking swabs from the cheeks of children and adults and sending them to a third-party laboratory for analysis . The process takes about a week , he said in the declaration , though it can take longer to complete verification .
LabCorp , one of the largest providers of DNA testing to prove parentage , said it is not involved in the current testing of immigrant parents and children . DNA Diagnostics , another company certified for DNA testing , declined to comment on any testing authorized by the federal government .
Dave Silver , marketing director at DNA Diagnostics , said the company ’ s tests to identify relatives can cost in the “ hundreds of dollars , ” due in part to expenses associated with assuring “ chain of custody ” for the DNA .
After the company conducts a DNA test at its laboratory , a written report is generally issued to whoever purchased the test and the collected DNA is destroyed after six months , he said
“ DNA testing is the method of parental verification most likely to protect children from harm given the compressed time frame imposed by the court ’ s order , ” White said in his declaration .
The testing is just one part of the reunification process , White said . Separately , DHS assesses parental fitness and potential child endangerment .
Neither HHS nor the Department of Homeland Security responded to requests for information on the testing .