Protesters carry American and Mexican flags at an immigration-reform march in Los Angeles , Calif. , in 2013 . ( Lucy Nicholson/Reuters )
Mexico does not explain why its citizens wish to leave their birth country — or why they are eager to enter a country ridiculed by the Mexican press and government .
Estimates suggest that there are eleven million to 13 million Mexican citizens currently living in the United States illegally . Millions more emigrated previously and are now U.S. citizens .
A recent poll revealed that one-third of Mexicans ( 34 percent ) would like to emigrate to the United States . With Mexico having a population of about 130 million , that amounts to some 44 million would-be immigrants .
Such massive potential emigration into the United States makes no sense .
First , Mexico is a naturally rich country . It ranks 19th in the world in proven oil reserves and is currently the twelfth-largest oil producer . Mexico certainly has significantly more natural advantages than do far wealthier per capita Singapore , Taiwan , or Chile .
Mexico also is one of the world ’ s most popular tourist destinations and earns billions in foreign exchange from visitors . It enjoys a temperate climate , is rich in minerals , and has millions of acres of fertile farmland and a long coastline .
In addition to being strategically located as a bridge between North America and South America , Mexico has ports on both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans .
It is not an overcrowded country : Mexico ranks in the lower half of the world in population density . Too many people and too little land are certainly not the reasons why millions of Mexicans either emigrate or wish to emigrate to the United States .
Second , popular progressive narratives in both Mexico and the United States cite America for all sorts of pathologies , past and present . The United States is often damned for prior colonialism and imperialism , as well as current racism and xenophobia .
Why , then , would millions of people south of the border leave their own homeland and potentially risk their lives to encounter a strange culture and language , to live in such a purportedly inhospitable place , and to adopt to an antithetical system based on supposedly toxic European and Protestant traditions ?
The answers to these two paradoxes are as obvious as they are politically incorrect and therefore seldom voiced . Life in Mexico is relatively poor , dangerous , and often unfree . In contrast , the United States is rich , generous , and secure .
Mexico — unlike , say , Japan or Switzerland , which are far less naturally endowed and yet far wealthier — has never fully adopted Western paradigms of free-market economics , constitutionally protected free speech , due process , gender equity , private property rights , an autonomous press , government transparency , an independent judiciary , and religious diversity and tolerance .
To the degree that Mexico can make strides toward these goals , its population will stabilize and become more affluent — and also become less likely to emigrate .
More importantly , millions of Mexican citizens recognize ( at least privately ) that the United States is not the bogeyman of mostly elite critiques . Instead , it is one of the world ’ s rare , multiracial , equal-opportunity societies . It is generous with its entitlements , even to those who cross its border illegally , and far more meritocratic than most of the world ’ s highly tribal societies .
Maybe that is why millions of impoverished people from Mexico have left their homes in expectation that they will be treated far better as foreign , non-English speakers in a strange land than they will at home by their own government .
Indeed , if the U.S. treated immigrants in the fashion that Mexico does , then Mexican citizens would probably never emigrate to the U.S .
After all , the Mexican government is quick to fault the U.S. , but it is rarely introspective . It does not explain publicly why its own citizens wish to flee the country where they were born — or why they are eager to enter a country that is so often ridiculed by the Mexican press and government .
Mexico apparently does not take care of its own citizens . But once they arrive inside the U.S. , Mexico suddenly becomes an advocate for their welfare . No wonder : Mexican expatriates send back an estimated $ 30 billion a year in remittances .
On both sides of the border , they often fault the U.S. and demand that U.S. immigration law be suspended — but only in their case .
Emigrating Mexican citizens wave Mexican flags at the border as they try to enter America , while their counterparts inside the U.S. do the same when they protest being sent back home .
Apparently , no one in Mexico or in the U.S. ever wishes to admit that Mexican citizens really like the United States — apparently far more than they do their own homeland .