A coalition of immigrant-rights advocates filed a lawsuit Thursday seeking to overturn an order by Arizona Gov . Jan Brewer that denies driver ’ s licenses to illegal immigrants who avoided deportation under a new Obama administration policy .
The class-action lawsuit seeks to block an Aug. 15 executive order issued by the governor after the federal government implemented the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which allows youths who came to the U.S. illegally as children to live and work in this country for renewable periods of two years .
The lawsuit was filed on behalf of the Arizona Dream Act Coalition , an immigrant youth-led organization .
“ Federal immigration authorities have lifted the shadow of deportation from these bright and hardworking DREAMers , but Arizona insists on pursuing its own immigration policy aimed at keeping them in the dark , ” said Jennifer Chang Newell , an ACLU staff attorney . “ Rather than deny these young people the ability to drive — an everyday necessity for most people — our leaders should come together to enact long-term solutions that would allow our talented immigrant youth to achieve the American dream . ”
The lawsuit alleges that the state has classified young adult immigrants as not having permission to be in the U.S. and asks a federal judge to declare the governor ’ s executive order unconstitutional because it is in conflict with federal law and denies licenses without valid justification .
“ Arizona ’ s creation of its own immigration classification impermissibly intrudes on the federal government ’ s exclusive authority to regulate immigration , ” the lawsuit states .
In June , the Obama administration took steps to block the potential deportation of as many as 800,000 immigrants from the U.S. if they were brought to this country before they turned 16 , were younger than 30 , had been here for at least five continuous years , had graduated from high school or obtained an equivalency certificate ( GED ) , or had served in the military .
Ms. Brewer ’ s executive order was aimed ensuring that Arizona state agencies adhere to the intent of state law by denying public benefits to illegal immigrants .
About 11,000 people in Arizona have applied for the deferred-deportation protection under the Obama administration ’ s policy .
The lawsuit claims that the Arizona policy violates the Supremacy Clause of the U.S. Constitution by interfering with federal immigration law , and also violates the Fourteenth Amendment ’ s Equal Protection Clause by discriminating against certain noncitizens . Arizona ’ s motor vehicle division implemented Ms. Brewer ’ s Sept. 18 order .