The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not necessarily represent the views of ███.com .
Up until last week , every GOP governor had either agreed to accept refugees or had yet to say one way or another , that is until Texas Governor Greg Abbott made his state the first to decline refugee resettlement , citing the “ disproportionate ” impact on the border state thanks to the Federal government ’ s “ broken ” immigration system and a “ responsibility to dedicate available resources to those who are already here , including refugees , migrants , and the homeless. ” Abbott ’ s decision predictably triggered the wrath of America ’ s ‘ woke police , ’ who rival Iran ’ s morality police in their hysterical zeal to impose their twisted definition of ‘ virtue ’ on the rest of society .
Presidential candidate Tom Steyer said the decision was “ inhumane and violates American values . ”
“ New , and awful , update to this , ” wrote The Washington Post ’ s Catherine Rampell . “ Despite the fact that mayors of * every * major city in Texas have asked to continue receiving refugees , Texas Gov . Greg Abbott ( R ) has now said they will be prevented from doing so . ”
RAICES Texas , an immigration legal services group , wrote : “ Prompted by xenophobia and fear , Gov . Abbott has decided to close the door on our refugee sisters and brothers seeking home & safety . There 's absolutely no reason for this decision . Refugees & immigrants make Texas better . ”
The Dallas Morning News claimed the state ’ s “ reputation is tarnished now by opting out of something as fundamental to our national character as welcoming those fleeing war and persecution , as were those who founded this great country . ”
“ Shameful. ” “ Violates American values. ” “ Morally wrong. ” “ Prompted by xenophobia and fear. ” Against our “ national character. ” These are all words and phrases used to tarnish not just those who stand against resettling refugees , but also those who oppose immigration in general . Critics accuse us of conflating refugee resettlement and immigration - both legal and illegal - but in truth , they are one and the same insofar as both , for the most part , represent the physical presence of impoverished , often unskilled peoples from cultures that often aren ’ t easily assimilable to ours . So from this point forward , I ’ m damn well conflating them , on purpose .
Granted , the idea that abortion & communist loving leftists are qualified to lecture anyone on morals is laughable and beyond absurd , sort of like listening to Adolf Hitler give a lecture about kindness to animals . But who really has the moral high ground here , immigration hawks or proponents of mass migration ?
Consider : When countries , particularly wealthy ones , open their borders to mass migration , it inevitably creates a vacuum that draws millions , if not billions , of the rest of the world ’ s population . It ’ s often a dangerous journey , and many die on the way . Certainly , should they make it , their lives can be improved from what they were . But , would the world truly be a better place if all who would live somewhere else got their wish ? What about those left twisting in the wind in the countries migrants are fleeing from ? Those too poor , too frail , too tied down , or even too afraid to make the move ? Assuming , as the left is prone to do , that all or even most migrants are ‘ good people , ’ does it negatively impact their countries of origin to lose so many ‘ good people , ’ people who , were they to take positive action where God placed them , could make their own country a better place ?
In truth , by creating a system whereby those strong enough , clever enough , or even wealthy enough to move somewhere else are encouraged to do so , proponents of mass immigration have actually caused the entire planet to become worse than it previously would have been . Not only are destination countries negatively impacted by the strain mass migration puts on social services , infrastructure , and social fabric , but origin countries are losing a significant slice of their best people , and thus face ever-declining prospects of a better life for those truly stuck there .
For us , what if the billion or so who would move if they could magically were placed inside their preferred destinations - always the ( hated ? ) West , of course . What if North America and Europe were filled to the brim with upwards of a billion people each ? How would our own lives improve ? Imagine sharing a country with three times the current population ? How long before North America and Europe began to resemble the pathologies of the migrants ’ countries of origin ?
Finally , what of the poor , the downtrodden , and the often-ignored populations of our own country ? Why , for example , is Austin ’ s liberal mayor so hellbent on bringing in more refugees when the streets of his own city are literally filled with homeless people ? I ’ m not saying we turn our backs on those in need in other countries . What I am saying , however , is that the true moral course of action is not to encourage migration , but to find effective ways to help them , and their countries , right where they are .
Some immigration proponents will dismiss articles like this by downplaying the numbers . “ Things would never reach that point , ” they will smugly say . “ We can take more than we are taking right now , ” they will insist , because our “ values ” depend on it , or something . Ask them for a number , when enough will be enough , and they will rarely if ever give an answer .
In an article titled “ GOP governors who embrace refugees deserve conservative support , ” the Washington Examiner ’ s Brad Polumbo took umbrage at the sentiments shared in my January 6 column accusing the GOP governors who asked for refugee resettlement of betraying both President Trump and their constituents . To me , they are “ RINO squishes all too happy to put foreigners over the citizens who elected them to office. ” To Brad , they are “ simply doing the right thing to help people fleeing tyrants and terrorists abroad . ”
Watch how Polumbo ‘ counters ’ the anti-refugee argument by first downplaying the current refugee numbers , then tips his hand by bemoaning - with a carefully inserted “ sadly ” - the fact that the numbers are indeed low :
“ First , we ’ re not talking about a wave of millions of refugees pouring into the country en masse … not even close , ” he wrote . “ The Trump administration has , sadly , limited the number of refugees the United States can accept to just under 20,000 . So , between the 17 Republican governors , not to mention all of their Democratic counterparts , they ’ re simply agreeing to each take on what , less than 1,000 refugees at most ? This is n't a very intimidating ‘ invasion. ’ And allowing a few thousand refugees , who aren ’ t even granted the right to vote , to enter red states will hardly mean ‘ America ceases to be America . ’ ”
True , 20,000 refugees alone won ’ t do it . But if establishment ‘ conservatives ’ like Cato Institute and leftist Democrats get their wish , a tipping point WILL someday be reached . Because when you combine the refugee numbers , vetted and screened though they may be , with the ‘ tired and poor ’ they would LIKE to bring in via an immigration system overhaul , it won ’ t be all that long before socialist-leaning voters vastly outnumber freedom-loving ones .
When that happens , America truly “ ceases to be America , ” and there ’ s no going back .