Members of a growing coalition of House conservatives say they ca n't support a bipartisan comprehensive immigration-reform bill in the Senate just to win over Hispanic voters .
`` You do n't sacrifice your principles for political expediency , '' said Republican Rep. Mo Brooks of Alabama . `` The Hispanics that I know in my community , they want people who understand the importance of the rule of law . ''
Brooks spoke at a Capitol Hill press conference on Tuesday with five other conservative House members who say they want their voice heard in the debate on immigration , and to stall any momentum that the Senate bill might be gaining .
The Senate Judiciary Committee is currently marking up a sprawling 844-page bill introduced by a bipartisan group of eight senators , and House leaders have publicly indicated that they are approaching the issue through several smaller bills .
`` There 's another viewpoint here , '' said Rep. Steve King , who recently told ███ that he would not seek the Republican nomination for the Senate in Iowa to focus on immigration in the House . `` It 's not the one being stampeded in the Senate , and likely stampeded in the House . ''
King said that unlike Obamacare — which the House will vote on repealing this week despite its weak chances of success in the Senate — granting amnesty to the estimated 11 million immigrants currently in the United States can not be undone in the future .
`` If this amnesty goes through there 's no undoing it , the genie is out of the bottle , '' King said .
Brooks , King , and other members attending the press conference said that they are opposed to the Senate bill largely because they believe it grants amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants , costs trillions of dollars , and does not sufficiently address border security .
`` I believe we need to tear this thing up and start from the beginning , '' said Rep. John Fleming of Louisiana . `` This bill is full of promises and contingencies when in fact we 're not properly enforcing the laws that we have today . ''
The other members of the group at the press conference were Reps. Steve Stockman and Louis Gohmert of Texas and Paul Gosar of Arizona .