Responding to the challenge that President Obama posed in his order last week to stop deporting some illegal immigrants , Mitt Romney declined to say on Sunday whether he would reverse the president ’ s decision if he takes up occupancy of the White House .
Although Mr. Romney said during the Republican primary debates that he would veto the Dream Act , which would provide a path to citizenship for some illegal immigrants , he was more equivocal about Mr. Obama ’ s order last week . It allows work permits and prevents deportation for as many as 1.4 million undocumented immigrants not more than 30 who were brought to the United States as children .
“ With regards to these kids who were brought in by their parents through no fault of their own , there needs to be a long-term solution so they know what their status is , ’ ’ Mr. Romney said on “ Face the Nation ” on CBS .
Echoing Republican lawmakers , Mr. Romney accused the president of a purely political move in issuing the order and bypassing Congress . “ If he felt seriously about this , ” Mr. Romney said , “ he should have taken action when he had a Democratic House and Senate , but he didn ’ t . ”
The president supported passage of the Dream Act in 2010 , but it was blocked by Republicans in the Senate .
Mr. Obama was in danger of losing the enthusiasm of Hispanics , a crucial voting bloc , over immigration policies that have focused on deportations .
The president put Mr. Romney on the defensive , and may have pre-empted him on a solution to illegal immigration that he was edging toward — an embrace of a Republican alternative to the Dream Act proposed by Senator Marco Rubio of Florida that would offer work visas to some immigrants , but not a path to citizenship .
Advisers to Mr. Romney had said in recent days that he was working on a platform that would include immigration policies , and they expected him to unveil them on Thursday when he speaks to the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials in Florida .
Ana Navarro , an adviser on Hispanic issues to Senator John McCain in 2008 , said in a Twitter message on Sunday : “ After Obama move , it ’ s time . Romney NALEO speech Thurs is I-Day . ’ ’
Mr. Romney , granting his first interview to a Sunday morning news show other than on Fox News , told Bob Schieffer of CBS that the president also failed to work in a bipartisan way on health care , and he said that he would bring a different spirit to the White House .
“ I ’ m really not a guy that ’ s going for the next step in my political career , ’ ’ he said . “ I am in this race because I want to get America back on the right track . I don ’ t care about re-elections , I don ’ t care about the partisanship that goes on . I want to get America right . ’ ’
Concerning another big news story of the day , the European economic crisis , Mr. Romney said he favored a hands-off approach . “ Well we ’ re not going to send checks to Europe , ’ ’ he said . “ We ’ re not going to bail out the European banks . ’ ’
He said the best economic defense for the United States was to strengthen its own economy and blamed the president for policies that have “ made it harder for our economy to reboot . ’ ’
Mr. Romney was skeptical about another round of monetary stimulus , known as QE3 , from the Federal Reserve , which is reported to be on the table for discussion when the Fed meets this week .
He reiterated economic proposals familiar from the primary season — lowering tax rates and cutting government from 25 percent of the economy to 20 percent , which he said would “ ignite growth . ’ ’
Pressed by Mr. Schieffer to cite tax deductions and exemptions that he would cut to maintain the progressivity of the tax code , which Mr. Romney has pledged , he said , “ Well , we ’ ll go through that process with Congress . ’ ’
Mr. Romney is midway through a six-state bus tour of small towns meant to connect him with everday Americans . Mr. Schieffer mentioned an alternative image of Mr. Romney from Saturday : the success of a dressage horse that his wife , Ann Romney , co-owns . The horse , Rafalca , won a berth on the United States Olympic team .
“ I joke that I ’ m going to send her to Betty Ford for addiction to horses , ’ ’ Mr. Romney said .