CLOSE 'Defend Our Immigrant Communities ' held a rally on Capitol Hill , with tens of thousands of immigrants , activists , and allies . ( Dec. 6 ) AP
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court ruled late Friday that the Trump administration does not have to turn over documents connected to its decision to end a program that protects immigrants brought to the United States as children from deportation .
It was the second time in four days that the court has sided with the administration against immigration advocates , following Monday 's order enabling Trump 's travel ban to go into full effect while challenges work their way through the courts .
The latest order reverses action by lower courts in California that had required the government to produce documents in the case by Dec. 22 .
The Supreme Court blocked an order by U.S. District Court Judge William Alsup in San Francisco requiring the government to turn over the documents . Instead , the court ordered opponents to respond next week to the administration 's refusal to turn over the documents .
The court 's four more liberal justices issued a 10-page dissent , contending that the administration 's arguments `` do not come close to carrying the heavy burden that the government bears in seeking such extraordinary relief . ''
`` Judicial review can not function if the agency is permitted to decide unilaterally what documents it submits to the reviewing court as the administrative record , '' Justice Stephen Breyer wrote . He was joined by Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg , Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan .
The fight over document production is the latest battle over the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , which President Obama initiated in 2012 so that children of illegal immigrants would not be deported . The program has helped about 800,000 young people remain in the country .
President Trump announced in September his decision to terminate the program , effective next March , unless Congress renews or changes it .