What kind of judges fill the ranks of the federal judiciary these days ? More often than not , unfortunately , it ’ s the kind who refuse to follow the law and the Constitution , and whose biases and personal views distort their decision-making .
Consider the multiple decisions enjoining President Donald Trump ’ s executive order that temporarily suspends travel from terrorist-safe havens in the Middle East and Africa .
As I have written on a number of occasions ( see here , here , and here , for example ) , the district-court and appellate-court judges in these cases have ignored the federal immigration-law provision that gives President Trump the authority to issue this order . They ’ re also ignoring prior precedents from the U.S. Supreme Court upholding the power of presidents to suspend the entry of aliens into the United States . And they have made unjustified findings that the order violates the establishment clause of the Constitution and was intended to discriminate on a religious basis .
But there are also some very good federal judges , and five of the best joined together in a stirring dissent released March 15 that explained in detail why the president has acted fully within the law and the Constitution . Their dissent should be required remedial reading for the federal judges assigned to all of these cases . It was filed in a Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals decision that denied en banc review ( review by the entire court ) of the astonishing recent decision by a three-judge panel ; the three judges refused to throw out the injunction issued against the original executive order by a district-court judge in Washington State .
In a dissent written by Jay Bybee and joined by Alex Kozinski , Consuelo Callahan , Carlos Bea , and Sandra Ikuta , the judges explain why the panel ’ s decision was full of errors that “ confound Supreme Court and Ninth Circuit precedent ” that will make it impossible for the district courts “ to know what law to apply in the future. ” Moreover , they note , the personal views of federal judges should be “ of no consequence. ” “ Whatever we , as individuals , may feel about the President or the Executive Order , the President ’ s decision was well within the powers of the presidency , and ‘ [ t ] he wisdom of the policy choices made by [ the President ] is not a matter for our consideration . ’ ”
The dissenters then proceed to do what the judges who have ruled against the administration have not done : They give a detailed explanation of the constitutional and federal statutory provisions that provide the authority for the president ’ s actions , as delegated to him by Congress , and the long string of court decisions upholding that authority — and not just U.S. Supreme Court decisions , but also prior decisions in the Ninth Circuit itself that were unashamedly ignored by the three-judge panel .
They point out that “ many presidents have invoked the authority of §1182 ( f ) to bar the entry of broad classes of aliens from identified countries , ” and they add a long footnote listing all of these executive orders by Ronald Reagan , George H. W. Bush , Bill Clinton , George W. Bush , and Barack Obama . For the full Ninth Circuit to not exercise its discretion to overrule the three-judge panel is “ a fundamental error ” because the panel “ neglected or overlooked critical cases by the Supreme Court and by our court making clear that when we are reviewing decisions about who may be admitted into the United States , we must defer to the judgment of the political branches. ” The panel ’ s faulty legal analysis “ conflicts irreconcilably with our prior cases. ” The dissenters proceed to list case after case after case that upheld the power of the executive branch to make these types of decisions .
Furthermore , the panel ’ s decision on the supposed due-process rights of aliens “ confounds century-old precedent. ” Its “ unreasoned assumption that courts should simply plop Establishment Clause cases from the domestic context over to the foreign affairs context ignores the realities of our world. ” The dissent sarcastically notes that the panel said that it is an “ uncontroversial principle ” that we “ owe substantial deference to the immigration and national security policy determinations of the political branches. ” However , that statement by the panel “ was both the beginning and the end of the deference the panel gave the President . ”
The dissent references a Supreme Court decision from 1972 , Kleindienst v. Mandel , as the precedent governing any actions by Congress and the executive branch “ affecting aliens who are outside our borders and seeking admission. ” That case severely limited the ability of courts to second-guess such decisions , holding that when the executive branch has exercised its authority to exclude aliens “ on the basis of a facially legitimate and bona fide reason , the courts will neither look behind the exercise of that discretion , nor test it by balancing its justification against the First Amendment interests of those who seek personal communication with the applicant. ” Yet the Ninth Circuit panel simply “ tossed ” this 1972 decision “ aside , ” and it did so for illegitimate reasons , because that case involved a decision by a consular officer , not the president .
How ridiculous was that legal analysis by the panel ? As the dissent says :
The panel ’ s declaration that we can not look behind the decision of a consular officer , but can examine the decision of the President stands the separation of powers on its head . We give deference to a consular officer making an individual determination , but not the President when making a broad , national security-based decision ? With a moment ’ s thought , that principle can not withstand the gentlest inquiry , and we have said so . See Bustamante v. Mukasey [ a prior Ninth Circuit decision in 2008 ] .
President Trump ’ s “ actions might have been more aggressive than those of his predecessors , but that was his prerogative. ” Considering prior precedent , they add :
Even if we have questions about the basis for the President ’ s ultimate findings — whether it was a “ Muslim ban ” or something else — we do not get to peek behind the curtain . So long as there is one “ facially legitimate and bona fide ” reason for the President ’ s actions , our inquiry is at an end .
That bona fide reason was provided in the president ’ s explanation of the terrorist activity in the countries targeted by his executive order and his assertion that we “ must be vigilant ” in light of “ deteriorating conditions in certain countries due to war , strife , disaster , and civil unrest . ”
The panel ’ s “ errors are many and obvious , ” according to the dissent , which is “ acutely aware of the enormous controversy and chaos that attended the issuance of the Executive Order. ” There is no question that many have “ contested the extent of the national security interests at stake ” and the “ value that the Executive Order added to our security against the real suffering of potential émigrés. ” But , as “ tempting as it is to use the judicial power to balance those competing interests as we see fit , we can not let our personal inclinations get ahead of important , overarching principles about who gets to make decisions in our democracy . ”
In their conclusion , the dissenters issue a warning about a fundamental principle of our democratic system that is being violated by too many judges and those challenging President Trump ’ s national-security decision as expressed in his executive orders :
For better or worse , every four years we hold a contested presidential election . We have all found ourselves disappointed with the election results in one election cycle or another . But it is the best of American traditions that we also understand and respect the consequences of our elections . Even when we disagree with the judgment of the political branches — and perhaps especially when we disagree — we have to trust that the wisdom of the nation as a whole will prevail in the end .
Above all , in a democracy , we have the duty to preserve the liberty of the people by keeping the enormous powers of the national government separated . We are judges , not Platonic Guardians . It is our duty to say what the law is , and the meta-source of our law , the U.S. Constitution , commits the power to make foreign policy , including the decisions to permit or forbid entry into the United States , to the President and Congress . We will yet regret not having taken this case en banc to keep those lines of authority straight .
The exclusion of aliens is a fundamental act of sovereignty . The power delegated to the president by Congress to make these decisions is extremely broad .
As these five judges have lucidly explained , the exclusion of aliens is a fundamental act of sovereignty . The power delegated to the president by Congress to make these decisions is extremely broad , and federal courts have extremely limited powers to question his judgments . This fundamental principle has been violated this year by federal judges in Washington , Hawaii , Maryland , and other states .
When this executive order finally gets to the Supreme Court , the justices could do no better than adopting this dissent in whole when they overrule these improper , erroneous , and plainly wrong court decisions that have obstructed the president ’ s ability to protect our country .