President Donald Trump visited a section of the U.S.–Mexico border in Yuma , Arizona , to celebrate 200 miles of newly built border wall .
“ I ’ m thrilled to be in Yuma … to commemorate the completion of more than 200 miles of powerful border wall , ” he said June 23 during a roundtable briefing on border security , before he visited the border wall . “ We ’ re on pace to complete 450 miles by the end of the year and 500 miles almost immediately thereafter .
“ The Army Corps of Engineers , I want to thank them , they ’ ve been incredible . ”
Trump said the new wall system has enhanced the capability of the United States to secure the southern border .
The wall has reduced drug and human smuggling , stopped criminals and gangs from coming into the country , and lowered violent crimes in U.S. cities , the president said .
“ This is border security , which is national security , ” he said .
Trump visited a section of the newly built border wall after a roundtable briefing with Arizona Gov . Doug Ducey , Sen. Martha McSally ( R-Ariz. ) , Rep. Debbie Lesko ( R-Ariz. ) , Yuma Mayor Doug Nicholls , and others .
He examined the border and signed a metal plaque attached to the structure marking 200 miles of construction .
In a statement after Trump ’ s visit , the U.S. Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) announced that they had constructed 216 miles of new border wall system .
“ Construction is underway for an additional approximately 339 miles of new border wall system and another approximately 183 miles are in the pre-construction phase , ” the agency stated .
“ Illegal drug and human smuggling activities have decreased in those areas where barriers are deployed . Illegal cross-border traffic has also shifted to areas with inferior , legacy barriers or no barriers at all , ” said acting CBP Commissioner Mark Morgan .
Trump ’ s visit came days after the U.S. Supreme Court rejected his bid to terminate the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program for now .
“ Good things will happen with DACA pretty soon , ” Trump said during the visit to the wall . “ Put your chin up , good things are going to happen . ”