The Obama administration ’ s decision to release some immigrants awaiting deportation back into the community has spawned a furious backlash from Congress , where stunned lawmakers have besieged the Homeland Security Department with questions .
Department officials have described the move as a cost-savings measure required by the budget sequesters , but two years ago one top official testified to Congress that detaining immigrants is usually cheaper than releasing them .
As the questions build , so does pressure on Homeland Security Secretary Janet A. Napolitano , who has not yet answered the requests , signed by dozens of Senate and House members , to detail who exactly has been released , why they were being held in the first place , and who gave final approval .
“ It is frankly irresponsible that your agency chose releasing detained immigrants as its first effort to control spending , ” a group of 37 House Republicans , led by Reps. Matt Salmon of Arizona and Duncan Hunter of California , said in a letter Friday .
On Monday , Sen. Daniel Coats , the ranking Republican on the Senate Appropriations Committee that oversees immigration , took to the Senate floor to say the department can not duck his questions . He speculated that the release has already spurred a new wave of illegal immigration .
“ I can see the traffickers pitching this to tens or hundreds of thousands of people , taking their money , getting them across the border , breaching the fence or tunneling under the fence or climbing over the fence , ” Mr. Coats said .
An internal ICE memo obtained and released last week by the House Judiciary Committee found that the agency contemplated releasing 1,000 immigrants a week — far more than the several hundred it said it released .
By the end of March , ICE would be detaining fewer than 26,000 immigrants , or 5,000 fewer than in mid-February . Congress has given ICE funding to detain about 34,000 on any given day , but the agency had been running at about 36,500 on the average day , meaning it was already over budget even before the sequesters .
ICE has blamed both the sequesters and “ fiscal uncertainty ” stemming from the 2013 appropriations process for the cuts . Congress only passed funding for half of the year , and must approve the other half by March 27 .
Administration officials said that while they have released immigrants , they pose little danger to the community , and all of them are still being supervised , either through electronic device or by a check-in requirement .
“ These decisions were made on a case-by-case basis , by career law enforcement officials in the field , in order to ensure that ICE maintained sufficient resources to detain serious criminal offenders and other individuals who pose a significant threat to public safety through the end of the continuing resolution , ” the agency said in a statement .
Among the questions Mr. Hunter , Mr. Salmon and their colleagues are asking is how many immigrants were reviewed but denied release , what other budget cuts the agency made before deciding to do releases , and what sort of tracking is being used on those who were released .
ICE has said it can not divide out which immigrants were released because of budget constraints versus other reasons .
But whether releasing immigrants saves money is now being called into question .
Two years ago , ICE Director John Morton testified to Congress that it was often cheaper to detain immigrants than to release and monitor them .
He said those who are released are usually lower-priority immigrants who don ’ t get deported as quickly , so they tend to stay in the system longer and therefore cost more in the long run .
“ It actually ends up being cheaper when people are in detention because they move much more quickly , ” he said .