Trump Travel Ban Blocked Nationwide By Federal Judges In Hawaii , Maryland
Hours after a federal judge in Hawaii issued a nationwide temporary restraining order against President Trump 's travel ban , U.S. District Court Judge Theodore D. Chuang , in Maryland , issued a nationwide preliminary injunction prohibiting the enforcement of the 90-day ban against travelers from Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen . Chuang 's order denies the plaintiffs ' request to block other parts of Trump 's March 6 executive order , including the temporary ban on refugees .
U.S. District Court Judge Derrick K. Watson has issued a nationwide temporary restraining order , preventing President Trump 's revised travel ban from taking effect at midnight Wednesday . Trump 's executive order would have temporarily halted the U.S. refugee program and travel from six Muslim-majority countries .
Trump , speaking at a rally in Nashville , Tenn. , called the restraining order `` unprecedented judicial overreach . '' He said , `` The law and the Constitution give the president the power to suspend immigration — when he deems — or she , fortunately it will not be Hillary , 'she ' — when he or she deems it to be in the national interests of our country . ''
He said he would fight all the way to the Supreme Court if necessary .
Department of Justice attorneys had argued that the ban was necessary to protect the nation 's security and that it had been revised to address legal concerns . State attorneys general and immigrant rights activists argued the travel ban amounted to an unconstitutional Muslim ban .
Justice Department spokeswoman Sarah Isgur Flores released this statement after the ruling :
`` The Department of Justice strongly disagrees with the federal district court 's ruling , which is flawed both in reasoning and in scope . The President 's Executive Order falls squarely within his lawful authority in seeking to protect our Nation 's security , and the Department will continue to defend this Executive Order in the courts . ''
After a federal district court and the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals blocked the first travel ban , the revised version temporarily suspended entry by travelers from six mostly Muslim countries , not seven , as the original did . ( Iraq was dropped from the list . ) And the new order made clear that it did n't apply to lawful permanent residents , also known as green card holders , or to people holding valid visas issued before the ban 's effective date .
It still suspended the U.S. refugee program for 120 days . It also cut the number of refugees the U.S. would accept this year by more than half , from 110,000 to 50,000 .
Refugees from Syria were no longer banned indefinitely . And the revised order dropped language that was intended to favor religious minorities , which Trump had signaled would apply to persecuted Christians from the Middle East .
Watson wrote that the state of Hawaii , challenging the executive order , has a strong likelihood of succeeding in pursuing the claims that the president 's action would violate protections against religious discrimination and would hurt state businesses and universities , as well as the tourism industry .
The judge concluded , based on the historical context of the travel ban and public statements made by the president , that `` a reasonable , objective observer ... would conclude that the Executive Order was issued with a purpose to disfavor a particular religion [ . ] ''
Lawyers for the Justice Department had argued that Trump acted within his powers to set immigration policy and protect national security . They also argued that Hawaii 's claims of harm were speculative .
But attorneys for Hawaii offered the case of Ismail Elshikh , the imam of a Honolulu mosque . His mother-in-law has applied for an immigrant visa from Syria . Elshikh said that she would be barred from the United States if the executive order were implemented .
Along with Hawaii , courts in Maryland and Washington state have heard challenges to the new revised travel ban .
Federal District Judge James L. Robart , who had blocked much of the White House 's first travel ban last month in Seattle , is also handling two cases challenging the new ban . One case involves four citizens or permanent residents who argue that access to visas for their family members would be disrupted . The other challenge comes from Washington Attorney General Bob Ferguson — along with his counterparts from Minnesota , New York , California , Maryland , Massachusetts and Oregon .
`` What we 're looking at is what Donald Trump said when he was running for president , '' Ferguson told NPR 's Morning Edition . `` He said he wanted to create a Muslim ban . '' Ferguson argues that 's `` strong evidence that the intent behind these executive orders was actually less about national security and more about a Muslim ban . ''
In a case before U.S. District Judge Theodore D. Chuang in Maryland , Department of Justice lawyer Jeffrey Wall argued that the executive order `` does n't say anything about religion '' and `` does n't send a religious message . ''
In that case , the plaintiffs are two refugee rights groups being helped by the American Civil Liberties Union and the National Immigration Law Center . They maintain the order is a Muslim ban , like Trump proposed on the campaign trail . Lee Gelernt of the ACLU tells NPR that the context of the order , including Trump 's campaign statements , should be considered and makes the order 's intent clear .
`` The purpose of this was to ban Muslims and we are hopeful that the judge , like other courts , will ... not turn a blind eye to what 's happening — that the administration just made certain tweaks to get around a court order but still has the same policy purpose , '' Gelernt said .
When the White House announced the second travel ban last week , Attorney General Jeff Sessions offered some new support for the temporary freeze on refugee resettlement . `` More than 300 people who came here as refugees are under FBI investigation for potential terrorism-related activities , '' Sessions said . But the Department of Justice declined to provide further information about the nature of those cases or which countries those refugees came from .
Refugee resettlement organizations argue that there 's no legitimate reason for the ban . They say it would cause lasting harm to them and the people they assist .
`` It 's not just about picking up refugees at the airport , '' said Mark Hetfield , CEO of HIAS , one of the nine major resettlement agencies and a plaintiff in the Maryland case . On a conference call with reporters , Hetfield said that agencies like his offer a range of services , such as help locating and furnishing apartments , finding a job and getting kids signed up for school . If the refugee program is suspended , Hetfield says , it will be `` very difficult to get things going again . ''
Lawyers for DOJ said a travel ban gives time to shore up vetting procedures for travelers from six countries that either are state sponsors of terrorism or have harbored terrorists .