Republican leaders spent three months studying their 2012 election defeat and on Monday announced they were beat on nearly every aspect of politicking , from money to message to manpower , and said one immediate change should be to embrace immigration reform — a lightning-rod issue that nearly tore the party apart under the George W. Bush administration .
Unveiling a 98-page election post-mortem , Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus promised a kinder , gentler GOP that will not write off any voters . That begins , the party said , with Hispanic voters and immigration reform .
“ By 2050 , we ’ ll be a majority-minority country , and in both 2008 and 2012 , President Obama won a combined 80 percent of the votes of all minority groups , ” Mr. Priebus said Monday . “ The RNC can not and will not write off any demographic , community , or region of this country . ”
The plan calls for the GOP to become a party that voters believe cares about them , beginning with a $ 10 million image makeover to attract minorities . The plan also includes nuts-and-bolts suggestions , such as shortening the presidential primary process and trying to take control of the debates , which are currently run by television networks .
Mr. Priebus ‘ review shies away from blaming any specific people for the 2012 election , which saw GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney lose a race many in his party thought winnable .
Instead , the report calls for better data on voters , better polling from Republican firms and more savvy use of campaign advertising money .
But it ’ s the call for immigration reform — a policy position — that is likely to stoke the most immediate debate .
At this past weekend ’ s Conservative Political Action Conference , the division on the issue was apparent , with some GOP leaders saying the party needs to embrace legalization in order to shed its mean image , and other conservative activists countering that that ’ s political suicide .
The debate continued Monday , with former RNC Chairman Mike Duncan , who led the party during part of Mr. Bush ’ s presidency , saying it ’ s been obvious for many years that the party has to broaden its coalition to be competitive on a national basis .
“ It ’ s the consistency of delivering a message with the right tone to Hispanic voters or other groups , ” said Mr. Duncan , who came up short in the race against Mr. Priebus for the chairmanship in 2011 . “ I think that ’ s the theme of this , as opposed to a specific policy . ”
But groups that favor an immigration crackdown said the GOP will not be able to outbid Democrats on the issue , and so they will not reap any political benefits .
Republican strategist Michael McKenna said it was curious that immigration was the one specific change called for by the party hierarchy .
“ It is ridiculous that the only policy statement is that we need to support comprehensive immigration reform , ” he said . “ You can support immigration reform for moral reasons , for philosophical reasons , or for economic reasons . But if you are a Republican and supporting it for political reasons , you are an idiot who can not read or understand survey data . ”
He said with the exception of immigration , the rest of the recommendations make sense — but without pointing to specific reasons why the party lost last year , it ’ s tough to move forward .
“ It is a little bit like someone going to the doctor with some non-specific symptoms , ” he said . “ The doctor recommends better diet , more exercise , more consistent sleep . All good things , but maybe not the right remedies for the illness . ”
Mr. Bush proposed immigration reform in 2004 and saw an immediate backlash from some party faithful who said they would boycott donating to the RNC .
But Mr. Bush won about 40 percent of the Hispanic vote in that year ’ s elections .
Since then , the party ’ s share slipped to 31 percent for Sen. John McCain in 2008 and 27 percent last year for Mr. Romney , who ran on the strictest immigration stance of any major party nominee in modern times .
Republicans on all sides of the ideological spectrum have faulted Mr. Romney , arguing he failed to connect with voters , changed his own positions too often , and misspent his money — though he did quite well in raising it .
Mr. Romney has said the drawn-out primary season didn ’ t help him , and one of the new report ’ s suggestions is to cut that short and move up the party ’ s nominating convention to June or July .
The plan also calls for cutting the number of primary debates in half , to about a dozen .
“ As [ the report ] makes clear , there ’ s no one reason why we lost , ” Mr. Priebus said . “ Our message was weak . Our ground game was insufficient . We weren ’ t inclusive . We were behind in both data and digital . And our primary and debate process needed improvement . So there ’ s no one solution . There ’ s a long list of them . ”