A federal appeals court rejected President Donald Trump ’ s request to reinstate his executive order on immigration , ruling Thursday that the president 's temporary ban on travelers from six Muslim-majority countries “ drips with religious intolerance , animus and discrimination . ”
The sharply worded ruling from the Fourth U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond , Va. , is one in a series of legal setbacks for the White House and sets the stage for the Supreme Court to resolve the matter .
Attorney General Jeff Sessions said late Thursday the administration plans to appeal to the high court . The president has said his order is necessary to help fight terrorism .
If the high court chooses to intervene , the case would mark a highly unusual test of presidential power less than a year into the new administration .
The case was considered by the full Fourth Circuit , with 13 judges participating . Ten of those judges ruled against the president , and three dissented .
The White House could try to seek emergency intervention from the Supreme Court in hopes of getting the justices to reinstate the travel restrictions quickly while the case continues . Such a request could provide an early indication of what the court thinks of the case , but the administration would have to meet a high legal burden to get such emergency relief .
Alternatively , the administration could petition the Supreme Court through the normal legal process , but the justices aren ’ t scheduled to hear oral arguments again until October unless the court agrees to make special accommodations .
Neither the White House nor the Justice Department indicated Thursday how quickly the administration plans to move in seeking high court intervention .
The Fourth Circuit ruling affirmed a Maryland judge ’ s decision in March that blocked the president from implementing a 90-day ban on travel for people from Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen .
Mr. Trump said the restrictions , signed March 6 , were needed to protect the country from terrorist threats while U.S. officials reviewed vetting procedures for travelers from those countries .
“ These clearly are very dangerous times , and we need every available tool at our disposal to prevent terrorists from entering the United States and committing acts of bloodshed and violence , ” White House spokesman Michael Short said after Thursday ’ s ruling .
Mr. Short said the administration is confident that the order is “ fully lawful and ultimately will be upheld . ”
Challengers to the executive order alleged the GOP president was attempting to make good on his campaign statements supporting “ a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the U.S. ” And they said the temporary ban laid the groundwork for a longer ban down the line .
“ The Constitution ’ s prohibition on actions disfavoring or condemning any religion is a fundamental protection for all of us , and we can all be glad that the court today rejected the government ’ s request to set that principle aside , ” said Omar Jadwat , a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union who argued the case on behalf of several individuals and organizations that opposed the president ’ s order .
Courts evaluating Mr. Trump ’ s order have been grappling with how much weight , if any , to give statements he made before he was elected and since .
When the president signed his initial , broader travel ban on Jan. 27—which he later withdrew because of adverse court rulings—he read the title of the executive order , Protection of the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry Into the United States , and said , “ We all know what that means. ” That comment has been subject to different interpretations .
Rudy Giuliani , a former New York City mayor who has served as a surrogate for Mr. Trump ’ s campaign , publicly said that the president had been looking for a legal way to effectuate his campaign promise to ban Muslims .
Mr. Trump ’ s public comments have been the central focus of the litigation . Even the president ’ s detractors concede his executive order would be on firmer legal ground without his earlier comments about Muslims .
The majority of Fourth Circuit judges concluded they couldn ’ t ignore Mr. Trump ’ s comments and those of his associates when evaluating the White House policy . Such statements suggest the purpose of the executive order “ is to effectuate the promised Muslim ban , ” Chief Judge Roger Gregory wrote .
The president has broad power to deny people entry to the U.S. “ but that power is not absolute . It can not go unchecked when , as here , the president wields it through an executive edict that stands to cause irreparable harm to individuals across this nation , ” the judge wrote .
Judge Gregory wrote that the president ’ s order “ speaks with vague words of national security , but in context drips with religious intolerance , animus and discrimination . ”
The Fourth Circuit moved swiftly in issuing the ruling , following a May 8 oral argument in which a majority of judges expressed concerns about the travel ban .
In recent years , the Fourth Circuit—based on judicial appointments by former President Barack Obama , a Democrat—has become a more liberal court . Most of the judges who considered the case were appointed by Democratic presidents . Three of the court ’ s more conservative judges , all Republican appointees , dissented .
Judge Paul Niemeyer , who was appointed by former President George H.W . Bush , wrote in Thursday ’ s dissenting opinion that the court ’ s ruling was particularly inappropriate on a matter of national security , adding that the president provided ample nonreligious justifications for his order . The court ’ s decision to base its ruling largely on Mr. Trump ’ s campaign statements “ is fraught with danger and impracticability , ” he wrote .
In their dissent , the judges appeared to invite Supreme Court intervention , writing the Fourth Circuit ’ s approach , unless overturned , “ will become a sword for plaintiffs to challenge facially neutral government actions , particularly those affecting regions dominated by a single religion . ”
Thursday ’ s ruling came in one of the two appeals on the executive order being pursued by Mr. Trump ’ s administration . The administration is also fighting a federal judge ’ s ruling in Hawaii that blocked the travel restrictions and halted Mr. Trump ’ s planned suspension of the U.S. program for admitting refugees .
That case is pending at the Ninth U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals in San Francisco . But Thursday ’ s decision ensures that the travel restrictions will remain on hold for now regardless of how the Ninth Circuit rules .
Mr. Trump ’ s first executive order on travel ran into trouble because judges determined the president didn ’ t accord proper due process to travelers , such as advance notice of the policy and a chance to challenge it .
The president ’ s current , revised order sought to address those concerns , while also narrowing the restrictions so they didn ’ t apply to people already in the U.S. legally , including green-card holders . The new version also removed an earlier provision that gave preference to Christian refugees from Muslim countries .
Court watchers thought the revisions could make it harder for courts to rule against the president , but that hasn ’ t been the case so far .