A Senate immigration deal is closer , but its architects still must iron out an agreement on visas for agricultural workers and sell the plan to skeptical colleagues .
Eight senators in a group negotiating the measure need to sign off on the language in a comprehensive bill that would strengthen border security , offer a path to citizenship for the 11 million illegal immigrants living in the U.S. and revamp a series of work-visa programs . The heaviest lift for those in the Senate group may still lie ahead .
After contentious negotiations , the AFL-CIO and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce agreed Friday evening on a new low-wage visa program—a major breakthrough in what had been the biggest stumbling block in Senate talks . But Sen. Marco Rubio ( R. , Fla. ) , a member of the Senate group that will be key to selling the plan to other Republicans , cautioned Sunday that a final deal still has n't been reached and any legislation it produces will be `` a starting point '' for broader discussions .
`` I 'm encouraged by reports of an agreement between business groups and unions on the issue of guest workers , '' Mr. Rubio said . `` However , reports that the bipartisan group of eight senators have agreed on a legislative proposal are premature . ''
The agreement between labor and business would allow between 20,000 and 200,000 immigrants to come to the U.S. each year to work in year-round , low-wage jobs ; the number would depend on economic conditions .
With senators already facing criticism from other lawmakers about how quickly they want to move legislation through the chamber , Mr. Rubio warned that rushing the process of committee hearings and offering amendments could jeopardize the bill 's fate .
Immigration Law in America Review legislative milestones and key shifts in immigration policy .
Other members of the Senate group struck a more positive tone Sunday . `` Every major policy issue has been resolved on the gang of eight , '' Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D. , N.Y. ) said on NBC Sunday . `` I am very , very optimistic that we will have an agreement among the eight of us next week . ''
The hurdles so far have been only a preview of the difficult path an immigration bill will face . Even if the Senate moves a bill , it would need to pass the more conservative House , where some members have been critical of a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants . A bipartisan group in the House is working on separate immigration legislation .
Immigration advocates and those familiar with the Senate talks have said Sens . Rubio and Robert Menendez ( D. , N.J. ) will be important players in selling the deal to GOP lawmakers and the Congressional Hispanic Caucus , since those two groups could potentially kill a bill they 're dissatisfied with . `` This is going to be a very tough battle , '' said Frank Sharry , executive director of immigration-advocacy group America 's Voice . Mr. Rubio is `` going to be one of many caught in the crossfire from the right and the left , '' he said .
`` It 's the beginning of the legislative journey , '' Mr. Menendez said in an interview . `` There are people who do n't want to see immigration reform , no matter what . They 'll try to throw obstacles in the way . ''
The senators still face some more minorpolicy obstacles before they can complete a bill . Farmworker unions and employers have n't agreed on how to structure an agricultural visa program .
Senate staffers have put together a proposal , but there is still disagreement over how big the program should be . Setting a minimum wage and a cap on the number of immigrant farm workers has proved contentious .
`` The cap is still an issue , '' said Kristi Boswell , director of congressional relations for the American Farm Bureau Federation . She said she was encouraged the Chamber and AFL-CIO agreed to cap a visa program for nonagricultural workers at 200,000 and said farm employers want the number of farm workers at least that high .
The AFL-CIO and Chamber 's proposal would be phased in over four years , after which the number of available visas would depend on labor shortages and other economic factors . Employers could tap the program if they first tried to recruit U.S. workers and if they offer worker conditions that wo n't `` adversely affect '' U.S. workers .
Workers would be allowed to switch employers after they arrive in the U.S. and would be able to apply for permanent legal status after one year .