Everyone has heard the phrase , “ Fool me once , shame on you . Fool me twice , shame on me. ” That ’ s precisely the predicament that Congress is in today with the Senate ’ s immigration proposal . Though perhaps well-intentioned , the Senate proposal repeats the mistakes of the past .
The Senate amnesty proposal is flawed for many reasons , but three in particular .
First , the Senate bill legalizes almost everyone in the country illegally before the borders are secure . It provides legalization first and enforcement later , if ever .
In 1986 , Congress gave amnesty to 3 million illegal immigrants . It was agreed to with the promise of increased immigration enforcement and enhanced border security . Though the amnesty was enacted , the enforcement never occurred .
Now , more than 25 years later , there are 11 million illegal immigrants in the United States . Clearly , the 1986 amnesty didn ’ t solve the problem of illegal immigration ; it made the situation worse .
No matter how they try to spin it , the Senate bill is amnesty for 11 million illegal immigrants . When you legalize someone who is in the country illegally , that is amnesty . The Senate bill gives legal status and , eventually , citizenship to millions of individuals who have disregarded our immigration laws .
The Senate plan makes promises of enforcement , but a closer look raises serious questions . For example , under the Senate bill , the Obama administration must come up with a way to achieve a 90 percent apprehension rate at “ high-risk ” areas of the border .
Why not secure 100 percent of the entire border ? Of course , by limiting the focus to only high-risk areas , the Senate proposal will just push illegal immigration to other parts of the border .
In 2010 , the nonpartisan Government Accountability Office found that only 6.5 percent of the southern border is under “ full control ” of the Border Patrol . Real border security would cover the entire border , not just high-risk areas that are determined by federal employees in Washington , D.C .
An administration that doesn ’ t want to enforce the law can easily game the system .
As we ’ ve seen in the past , amnesty without enforcement only leads to more illegal immigration . The Senate proposal issues an open invitation to enter the country illegally . Millions will do so before the border is secure .
Second , the Senate bill puts the interests of illegal immigrants ahead of American workers .
The proposal allows millions of illegal immigrants to work lawfully in the United States . That ’ s a great deal for those who came into the country illegally . It comes at a high price for American workers , though .
The proposal allows millions of illegal immigrants to compete with American workers for scarce jobs , displacing legal workers and depressing their wages . With millions of Americans and legal immigrants underemployed , why enable millions of others to compete with them ?
Over the past few months , we ’ ve heard a great deal about what ’ s best for illegal immigrants . However , advocates of the Senate bill hardly ever mention two words : American workers .
Third , the Senate proposal treats illegal immigrants better than legal immigrants who have played by the rules . Under the Senate plan , legalization leads to green cards , and green cards lead to citizenship .
Many individuals who followed the law have waited years to obtain lawful status . Amnesty for millions of illegal immigrants sends the message to would-be immigrants that there ’ s no benefit to following the rules . They can come illegally tomorrow , live and work in the United States , and sooner or later get amnesty .
Further , the assumption that we somehow owe amnesty to almost all individuals who are in the country illegally is misguided . America has the most generous immigration system in the world , admitting 1 million immigrants legally every year .
Though we are a nation of immigrants , we are also a nation of laws . We have the right to expect that individuals will respect our laws when coming to the United States .
Citizenship is the highest honor our country can bestow . It should be reserved for those who have followed the laws and come in the right way .
Rather than learning from the past , the Senate proposal again offers amnesty now and border security later , if at all . It would lead to reduced wages for American workers , and it would treat those in the country illegally better than those who have played by the rules and waited their turn .
Rep. Lamar Smith , Texas Republican , is the former chairman of the House Judiciary Committee and serves on the immigration subcommittee .