With momentum building toward the completion of a draft immigration bill , Republican lawmakers -- even one at the center of the talks -- are urging Senate leaders to slow the process down to avoid making `` fatal '' mistakes .
Advocates for a comprehensive immigration reform bill were jubilant over the weekend after representatives for big business and labor agreed on a framework for allowing low-skilled workers into the country .
Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , declared Sunday that `` every major policy issue has been resolved , '' and said he anticipates a bill on the floor as early as May .
It comes after Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy , D-Vt. , in a comment Republicans took as a signal the chairman intends to rush the bill through , stressed that his committee has already held dozens of hearings .
A program to bring tens of thousands of low-skilled workers into the country as part of a guest worker system .
A pathway to citizenship for 11 million illegal immigrants . The proposal would include a 10-year wait for a green card , and a total 13-year wait to apply for citizenship .
Strengthened border security , likely tied to the pathway to citizenship .
Requiring employers to use E-Verify to check immigration status of workers .
Overhauling the legal immigration system , authorizing more visas for high-skilled workers .
But top Republicans are worried mistakes could be made if leaders rush the bill to the floor .
Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , one of eight senators in the bipartisan group drafting the proposal , said Sunday that it `` will only be a starting point '' and other senators need to weigh in .
`` Eight senators from seven states have worked on this bill to serve as a starting point for discussion about fixing our broken immigration system , '' he said . `` But arriving at a final product will require it to be properly submitted for the American people 's consideration , through the other 92 senators from 43 states that were n't part of this initial drafting process . In order to succeed , this process can not be rushed or done in secret . ''
Rubio also wrote to Leahy on Saturday cautioning that `` excessive haste in the pursuit of a lasting solution '' is `` dangerous '' to the goals of immigration reform . He said a `` rush to legislate '' would be `` fatal to the effort of earning the public 's confidence . ''
Rubio 's back-to-back statements come after Leahy wrote in a letter to Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Ala. , that he was concerned about `` delays for delay 's sake '' weighing down the process . Leahy said he anticipates an `` open and transparent '' process with `` public proceedings , '' but also stressed that the committee has held dozens of hearings on the issue .
`` If any of the more junior senators need more time to get up to speed , I will look forward to them discussing their specific readiness problems with me directly , '' he wrote .
Sessions interpreted this as a signal the chairman does not want to hold new hearings .
Referencing the health care overhaul legislation -- which Republicans maintain was rushed through Congress -- Sessions said `` never again can Congress pass a far-reaching proposal only for the American people to find out what 's in it later . ''
Sessions said the immigration reform process , at the committee level alone , should take months , not weeks .
`` It is one thing to make promises , it is quite another to write a bill that actually works , '' Sessions said in a statement .
It 's unclear whether Democrats , who control the Senate , would agree to such a drawn-out timetable . Negotiators hope to introduce a bill , or the framework for a bill , later this month . President Obama has listed the legislation as a priority for his second term . As gun control legislation appears to falter , the White House and leading advocates for reform are likely to lean on the Senate to move the legislation forward .
At the same time , the bill will have to have enough bipartisan buy-in to make it attractive -- or at least acceptable -- to the Republican-dominated House .
Though Rubio has lately urged Democratic leaders to slow things down , Schumer said on NBC 's `` Meet the Press '' Sunday that he does n't think Rubio will `` walk away . ''
`` He is protecting some of the things that he thinks are very important in the bill . But I do n't think that 'll stand in the way in any way of any final agreement , '' Schumer said .