Almost 2,000 migrant children were separated from their families at the US border over six weeks , officials say .
Following a Trump administration crackdown on illegal border crossings from Mexico , adults are being detained , meaning the children with them are removed from their care .
The issue is causing a growing political storm in the US .
On Thursday Attorney General Jeff Sessions cited the Bible to defend the `` zero tolerance '' approach .
It means that those entering the US irregularly are criminally prosecuted , a change to a long-standing policy of charging most of those crossing for the first time with a misdemeanour offence .
As the adults are being charged with a crime and detained , the children that travel with them are being separated and classed as unaccompanied minors .
Figures from the US Department of Homeland Security show that 1,995 children were separated from 1,940 adults who are being held between 19 April and 31 May .
No information was given on the age of the separated children .
The children are passed into the care of the US Department of Health and Human Services . They are transferred to government detention facilities or foster care while officials try to resolve their case .
The United Nations has called on the US to immediately halt the separations .
Mr Sessions said having children would not shield border-crossing migrants from prosecution .
The attorney general quoted a verse from St Paul 's Letter to the Romans on obeying the laws of government .
Critics say that verse was once used to justify slavery .
The Trump administration policy is supported by some Republicans , but others have expressed misgivings .
Speaking to reporters on Thursday , House Speaker Paul Ryan , Congress ' highest-ranking Republican , said he was not comfortable with the tactics .
This week , House Republicans pitched draft immigration legislation that would end the separation of children and parents at the border .
Also in the proposal are provisions to protect 1.8 million Daca 'Dreamers ' , eliminate the diversity lottery , and add $ 25bn ( £18bn ) for border security .
The bill , a compromise between moderates and conservatives , is expected to be voted on next week . So will another , more hard line bill .
President Donald Trump said on Friday he would not sign the compromise bill , despite Republican lawmakers having said he supported it .
His remark sent legislators on Capitol Hill scrambling , but the White House later said the president had misspoken and he would back both measures .
The administration says it has selected a site in Texas to house the migrant children in tents .