Maria E. Enchautegui is a senior research associate at the Urban Institute .
The Center for Immigration Studies ’ report rekindles the debate over how immigration affects U.S.-born workers . Most research suggests that the effects are small or zero , but a few studies put some of those results into question — at the very least , showing that the issue is still complicated .
U.S.-born workers are getting more educated . More jobs require little education , and they are being taken by immigrants .
The C.I.S . notes that the employment gains of immigrants in the past few years have been large compared with the small gains by U.S. workers . I described similar trends in an earlier research brief .
But larger employment gains don ’ t necessarily mean that immigrants are displacing U.S.-born workers . Whether and how much immigrant workers are displacing U.S.-born workers depends on whether they are competing for the same jobs .
About half of all workers ages 18 to 64 without a high school diploma are immigrants . We know that many of these immigrants are unauthorized and do not speak English well . As such , they tend to work in different occupations than U.S.-born workers — often , occupations that require little interaction with the public , that do not require licensing , and that do not require supervisory skills . Giovanni Peri and Chad Sparber argue that immigration allows for an efficient sorting of workers , so displacement of U.S.-born workers by immigrants is unlikely .
The number of U.S.-born workers with no college education has declined by almost 5 million since 2007 , according to my analysis of Census data . That means fewer U.S. born workers are competing for jobs requiring less education , the kind immigrants generally get . So immigrants are replacing , not displacing U.S. born workers . This trend should continue . Of the top 10 occupations with the most projected employment growth , eight do not require a high school diploma , according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics .
Would granting temporary status to more than 4 million undocumented immigrants mean more competition with U.S.-born workers ? I would think so , unless the differences in skill levels are so large that these immigrants can ’ t take advantage of the ability to now apply for a wider range of jobs . But with less uncertainty about deportation , these deferred-action immigrants may decide to invest in new job skills , making them more likely to face competition from U.S.-born workers .