Yesterday during the one of two hearings on the new Gang of 8 illegal immigration overhaul , Immigration and Customs Enforcement Council President Chris Crane once again expressed frustration with how lawmakers have handled developing new legislation without law enforcement input , going so far as saying the Gang of 8 is one of the most hostile groups he 's ever tried to work with .
`` Law making in our nation has indeed taken a strange twist as Senators invite illegal aliens to testify before Congress and groups representing illegal aliens are brought into the development of our nation 's laws , but American citizens working as law enforcement officers within our nation 's broken immigration system are purposely excluded from the process and prohibited from providing input , '' Crane said . `` Never before have I seen such contempt for law enforcement officers as what I 've seen from the Gang of 8 . ''
Crane also said law enforcement agents including border sheriffs , interior sheriffs , deputies and immigration agents came to Washington D.C. with the hope the Gang of 8 would hear their concerns . They held two meetings on two separate days and according to Crane , not one member of the Gang of 8 bothered to show up . In fact , when Crane asked a question during a Gang of 8 press conference recently , he was escorted out by police .
Crane has said in the past the Gang of 8 plan does nothing to address the criminal alien and cartel element running rampant in the United States as a result of wide open borders and lawlessness . He has also said the Gang of 8 plan falls short when it comes to allowing ICE agents to enforce current immigration laws both on the border and on the interior of the United States .
`` We are n't even scratching the surface on the criminal illegal alien problem in the United States , '' Crane said during a phone call with reporters two weeks ago . `` That part [ cartels ] is absent from this discussion as are many parts of this .... we know that the drug cartels , that the lieutenants and the troops , the soldiers , they 're all within the interior of United States and they 're all conducting business as are many other criminal elements and criminal individuals . There are people coming here for this to be a land of opportunity and there are people coming here because the United States for them is a target of opportunity and we believe there is a very disproportionate number of criminals coming into the United States . That conversation is almost completely absent from this entire public conversation about what 's happening .... It 's just another part of this debate that gives us this concern that this is all about politics and not about really fixing the problems that we face within our broken immigration system and providing for what is best for everyone is best for America to include and most importantly , public safety . ''