President Barack Obama on Tuesday urged Congress to move forward on a comprehensive bill to overhaul the nation 's immigration system , saying the `` time is now '' to get it done .
During a speech in Las Vegas , Nevada , the president laid out some `` key markers '' he believes must be a part of immigration reform , including a pathway to citizenship for many of the 11 million undocumented immigrants living in the U.S . He said if Congress does not act swiftly , he would send his own bill to Capitol Hill and `` insist that they vote on it right away . ''
`` We need Congress to act on a comprehensive approach that finally deals with the 11 million undocumented immigrants who are in this country right now , '' he said before a raucous crowd at Del Sol High School .
While Obama gave an ultimatum to Congress , he sounded optimistic about lawmakers ' efforts to craft their own proposals .
On Monday , a bipartisan group of senators called the `` Gang of Eight '' unveiled their own outline for comprehensive reform . It contains a pathway to citizenship for the undocumented , increased border security , crackdowns on businesses that employ undocumented immigrants , and brings much-needed skilled immigrant workers to the United States .
The Senate framework is `` very much in line with the principles I 've proposed and campaigned on for the last few years , '' Obama said . `` So at this moment , it looks like there 's a genuine desire to get this done soon , and that 's very encouraging . But this time , action must follow . ''
Republicans mostly reacted cautiously to Obama 's speech . Sen. John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) , a member of the Gang of Eight , noted that there are `` some differences '' between him and the president .
`` I appreciate the president 's support for our bipartisan effort on comprehensive immigration reform , '' he said in a statement . `` The road ahead will be not be easy , but I am cautiously optimistic that working together , we can find common ground and move forward on this vitally important issue . ''
Passage of a comprehensive immigration reform bill in the House of Representatives could prove tougher . Yet House Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) did not rule out taking up a bill based on Obama 's comments .
`` There are a lot of ideas about how best to fix our broken immigration system , '' said Boehner spokesman Brendan Buck . `` Any solution should be a bipartisan one , and we hope the president is careful not to drag the debate to the left and ultimately disrupt the difficult work that is ahead in the House and Senate . ''
The president 's address stressed the similarities between his proposals and the Gang of Eight 's , but there are indications that the two may differ in key areas .
For example , the senators ' plan would allow undocumented immigrants to apply for legal status , but would not allow them to seek permanent legal residence until the border is deemed secure . In his speech , Obama did not specifically link border security to a pathway to citizenship .
`` For comprehensive immigration reform to work , it must be clear from the outset that there is a pathway to citizenship , '' he said .
Obama also said that under his principles , a pathway to citizenship would include going through a background check , paying fines and back taxes , learning English , and going to the back of the line , meaning that they could not obtain citizenship until backlogs of legal immigrants are cleared .
`` We all agree that these men and women should have to earn their way to citizenship , '' he said . `` It wo n't be a quick process , but it will be a fair process . ''
White House officials made it clear before the speech that the president is withholding judgment on the Senate 's plan until actual legislative language is drafted .
Obama did say that the government `` needs to stay focused on enforcement '' and any immigration reform bill should crack down on businesses that knowingly hire undocumented immigrants with stiffer fines and penalties .
But the president 's stance on a path to citizenship did not satisfy all Republicans working on an immigration reform plan .
Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) said in a statement he is , `` concerned by the president 's unwillingness to accept significant enforcement triggers before current undocumented immigrants can apply for a green card . ''
Earlier in the day on conservative talk radio host Rush Limbaugh 's show , Rubio implied that he could abandon any agreement that does not mandate border security enhancements .
`` I am not going to be part of a bidding war of who can create the most lenient path forward , '' he said .
According to a fact sheet released by the White House , the president also supports granting gays and lesbians the ability to `` seek a visa on the basis of a permanent relationship with a same-sex partner '' who is a U.S. citizen or permanent resident . Under current law , that provision only applies to heterosexual couples . The president did not mention the policy during his speech .
A temporary , guest-worker program also did not appear in Obama 's speech or fact sheet . Business groups and Republicans have called for the implementation of such a program for agricultural industries and other companies that rely on low-skilled immigrant labor . But labor unions have been hesistant to support such programs without strong labor protections .
Obama has drawn criticism from lawmakers in both political parties and Latino groups for failing to bring up a comprehensive immigration reform bill in his first term along while piling up record deportation numbers . But the president was received very warmly by the crowd inside Del Sol High School 's gymnasium . They chanted `` sí se puede ! '' during the speech .
There is no doubt the changing political landscape has sparked momentum for comprehensive immigration reform . In last November 's election , seven in 10 Latino voters backed Obama over Republican Mitt Romney , helping him win battleground states like Nevada , where the president spoke today .
But Obama said that immigration reform is about more than politics .
`` Remember that this is not just a debate about policy . It 's about people . It 's about men and women and young people who want nothing more than the chance to earn their way into the American story . And throughout our history , that 's only made our nation stronger , '' he said .