Senator Lamar Alexander Tennessee , said , “ The founders of our country did not want a king , and the American people do not want a president who acts like one. ” He called Mr. Obama ’ s decision a “ shameful presidential trick . ”
The delay also is angering Hispanic activists who have been pressing Mr. Obama for months to sidestep Congress . Leaders of several immigration groups said their members would be furious with the president for raising — and then dashing — their hopes . They criticized Mr. Obama for the delay , saying it breaks a solemn pledge to immigrants .
Arturo Carmona , the executive director of Presente.org , called the decision “ a betrayal ” of the Latino community and “ shameful. ” He said the president “ is once again demonstrating that for him , politics come before the lives of Latino and immigrant families . ”
And Mary Kay Henry , president of the Service Employees International Union , said : “ Today , we are deeply disheartened that the dreams of hard-working immigrant families who have long contributed to the fabric of the American life remain in jeopardy . The White House ’ s decision to delay executive action forces countless families to continue to wait in the shadows of fear . ”
The president ’ s decision on Saturday underscores the difficulties of his broader pledge to use the powers of his office to govern in the face of a gridlocked Congress . Those efforts have already sparked a Republican lawsuit alleging that the president has abused his authority and is building an “ imperial presidency. ” And he has faced intense political pressure from his Democratic allies to delay such actions .
The timing of an announcement had developed into a serious political problem for the president . By saying he would act on his own , Mr. Obama heightened expectations among Hispanics that he would finally address the deportation fears of 11 million illegal immigrants , many of whom have been in the United States for decades and have been law-abiding members of their communities .
Since Mr. Obama took office , his administration has significantly increased the number of deportations , especially along the border with Mexico . Immigration advocates have complained that families are being torn apart when parents or children who are in the country illegally are arrested and sent home .