This week , the Senate is debating a solution for DREAMers . Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , making good on his word , brought an empty bill to the floor , permitting both sides to try to round up 60 votes to fill in the text . Inauspiciously , the first day was consumed by a disagreement on where to start . McConnell wanted to begin with a vote on banning sanctuary cities . Chuck Schumer , speaking for the Democrats , demanded the Senate start with President Trump ’ s proposal . The dispute was particularly confusing because neither starting point has a remote hope of passage . An argument over which idea to reject first is very Senate 2018 .
But it ’ s worth zooming out . The public conversation around the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program has gotten confused , with everyone agreeing to pretend , for various self-interested reasons , that President Trump actually wants a DACA solution , and fast . Trump and the Republicans have adopted this posture because DREAMers are wildly popular — giving DREAMers legal status is about twice as popular as Trump himself . Meanwhile , Democrats have agreed to Trump ’ s framing of his position because they think it helps pressure Trump into a deal .
Negotiations on DACA have begun . Republicans want to make a deal and Democrats say they want to make a deal . Wouldn ’ t it be great if we could finally , after so many years , solve the DACA puzzle . This will be our last chance , there will never be another opportunity ! March 5th . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) February 13 , 2018
There is a deep strangeness to this rhetoric . Trump created a crisis for DREAMers — all this began when he unilaterally decided to end the DACA program — and then refused the obvious compromises that could have fixed it . Now he is threatening a veto of the likeliest bipartisan compromises in the Senate . He has taken 690,000 hostages and is now trumpeting the wonderful opportunity everyone has to pay his policy ransom in order to free them , and he is doing all of it while insisting he desperately wants to free them too .
The truth is , Trump doesn ’ t want a DACA solution . He is willing to accept a DACA solution in return for other things he wants — notably , heavy investments in border security and a large cut in legal immigration — but within the negotiations , a DACA fix is the thing Trump is treating as a concession on his part , not the thing he is trying to make happen . If it were the thing he was trying to make happen , it would have happened already .
Right now , the fate of the DREAMers doesn ’ t depend mainly on Democrats . It depends on Republicans . If McConnell and Paul Ryan want a deal , they could have one in moments . If Trump wants to save DREAMers , he could do so , and get money for his wall and other border enforcement and immigration changes , tomorrow . But what he actually wants is a suite of restrictionist changes to immigration that are noxious not just to Democrats , but to DREAMers themselves , and he is trying to hide that unpopular agenda behind pro-DREAMer rhetoric , even as he ’ s holding DREAMers hostage to pass it .
This shell game works until it doesn ’ t . If there ’ s no deal , and the Trump administration begins deporting DREAMers over Democratic objections , his real position will become very clear , very quickly .
If the Senate passes a DREAMer deal , will the House vote on it ?
Which bring us back to Congress . My conversations with both Democratic and Republican staffers , both inside and outside of leadership , have ended in unanimous shrugs . No one knows what , if anything , can actually pass the Senate . And the difficulty of that question pales in comparison to the difficulty of what , if anything , can pass the House . Ryan has said he will not bring a bill to the floor that doesn ’ t have Trump ’ s blessing , and so it is entirely possible that the Senate will pass a deal that never sees a House vote .
If that happens , Democrats have little recourse . They ’ re in the minority in both the House and the Senate , and after passing last week ’ s spending deal , they no longer have the threat of shutting down the government .
This is something I got wrong in my initial reaction to the shutdown deal . In preserving the option to shut the government down in the future , I argued , there was no real loss for Democrats , as they hadn ’ t abandoned any of their leverage . What I didn ’ t appreciate immediately was how much the shutdown had spooked Senate Democrats — after shutting down the government , they realized they had no strategy for winning the shutdown , and they certainly had no strategy for forcing Trump to fold amid the kind of high-stakes cable news showdown he lives for . So while the shutdown deal held open the option of a future shutdown , in fact , that option had closed , because Senate Democrats had lost faith in it . Now it ’ s gone entirely .
Over the past week , I ’ ve been asking Senate Democrats what leverage they have on immigration given that they can no longer shut down the government . The answer , universally , is what leverage exists comes from the issue itself . DREAMers are popular , and deporting them is unpopular . But Donald Trump is the president of the United States , Mitch McConnell is the majority leader of the US Senate , and Paul Ryan is the speaker of the House . They control the process , and they control the outcome .