A federal judge in San Francisco on Tuesday temporarily blocked the Trump administration from ending the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program that protects certain immigrants from deportation .
Judge William Alsup said the Obama-era program must remain in place while litigation over Trump ’ s decision to end the program plays out . In a court ruling , Alsup said the Department of Homeland Security 's `` decision to rescind DACA was based on a flawed legal premise . ''
As a result , DACA recipients who failed to renew their status by last year ’ s deadline will have a chance to submit renewal applications . The decision does not , however , allow new applications to be submitted .
`` America is and has been home to Dreamers who courageously came forward , applied for DACA and did everything the federal government asked of them , '' Becerra added . `` They followed DACA 's rules , they succeeded in school , at work and in business , and they have contributed in building a better America . We will fight at every turn for their rights and opportunities so they may continue to contribute to America . ''
President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE announced in September that he would rescind the program , which allows certain immigrants who arrived in the U.S. illegally as children to stay and work without fear of deportation .
DACA was among the issues discussed at a bipartisan immigration meeting on Tuesday .
Trump indicated he would support what those in the room came up with , adding that he was willing to “ take the heat ” to back a bipartisan deal .
Trump at one point said he wants a “ bill of love ” to address DACA , and in another instance appeared to voice support for Sen. Dianne Feinstein Dianne Emiel FeinsteinOvernight Energy : USDA unable to release reports after researchers leave | Trump officials spent over M in fees to keep parks open during shutdown | Green groups sue Trump over vehicle emissions rule Feinstein requests probe into Trump EPA threat to withhold California highway funds ███ 's 12:30 Report : Pelosi attacks Barr over Ukraine call MORE 's ( D-Calif. ) suggestion of a clean DACA bill while dealing with other issues , like border security , later .
House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyOcasio-Cortez blasts McCarthy as a 'bumbling , sloppy , dishonest mess ' over Trump defense ███ 's Morning Report - Dems to hit gas on impeachment GOP senators attack whistleblower 's credibility MORE ( R-Calif. ) quickly clarified the Feinstein comment , reminding Trump of the need to implement border-security measures in exchange for DACA .