Donald Trump said the Republican party will lose elections if it reforms the nation ’ s entitlement programs and will hand Democrats 11 million votes if Congress grants citizenship to illegal immigrants , likening the reform efforts to a “ suicide mission . ”
Mr. Trump also said that the United States should “ take ” $ 1.5 trillion worth of oil from Iraq to pay for the cost of the war and give $ 1 million to each of the families that lost someone in the effort — sparking applause from the thousands gathered Friday for the American Conservative Union ’ s 40th annual Conservative Political Action Conference ( CPAC ) .
“ As Republicans , if you think you are going to change very substantially for the worse Medicare , Medicaid and Social Security in any substantial way , and at the same time you think you are going to win elections , it just really is not going to happen , ” Mr. Trump said , adding that polls show that tea partyers are among those who don ’ t want their entitlements changed . “ What we have to do and the way we solve our problems it to build a great economy . ”
Mr. Trump has been a fierce critic of the Obama administration and established himself as a voice in Republican ranks when he badgered Mr. Obama to release his long-form birth certificate to prove that he was born in the United States . More recently , Mr. Trump has taken aim at the administration ’ s decision to halt White House tours because of the automatic budget cuts , known as sequesters , that kicked in earlier this month .
Without naming them , Mr. Trump criticized GOP consultant Karl Rove from not getting a better return on the hundreds of millions of dollars he invested in the 2012 campaign , and Louisiana Gov . Bobby Jindal for urging the GOP to “ stop being the stupid party ” after the election .
“ The Donald ” also weighed into the thorny issue of immigration .
“ The fact is 11 million people will be voting Democratic . You can be out front . You can be the spearhead . You can do whatever you want to do , but everyone of those 11 million people will be voting Democratic , ” he said . “ It is just the way it works . ”
“ You have to be very , very careful , because you could say that to a certain extent the odds aren ’ t looking so great for Republicans , that you are on a suicide mission , ” he said . “ You are just not going to get those votes . ”