Sen. Marco Rubio is getting some support for going out on a political limb in support of the comprehensive immigration reform bill , making its way through Congress , that has angered some grassroots conservatives .
The New York Times reported Tuesday that the conservative Action Network is running a television ad in Florida that urges viewers to call Mr. Rubio to “ Thank him for keeping his promise and fighting to secure the border . ”
Others are coming to the defense of Mr. Rubio , a likely 2016 GOP presidential contender , after he played a vital role in ushering a bill through the Senate last week that would legalize most of the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants living here and grant a path to citizenship for many of them .
The bill received the support of all 54 lawmakers in the Democratic caucus and 14 Republicans . The proposal waits on action from the GOP-controlled House .
Former Mississippi Gov . Haley Barbour ’ s group , Americans for Conservative Direction , is also running television ads in Iowa , which kicks off the presidential nomination process , that calls on viewers to “ stand with Marco Rubio to end de facto amnesty , ” The Times also reported . ( Mr. Rubio has argued that the current system amounts to de facto amnesty . )
The Americans for Prosperity Foundation , the Koch brothers ’ political advocacy group , also tapped Mr. Rubio to keystone its annual conference , which has been moved from Washington to Orlando .
Coming out of the 2012 election , the GOP has been waging a civil war over whether embracing a comprehensive immigration bill that offers a path to citizenship to illegal immigrants would help — or hurt — Republicans going forward .
Immigration is sure to play a key role in the 2016 presidential election , where Mr. Rubio and a number of the party ’ s rising stars will be forced to take a stand on the thorny issue .
“ I think we have a great bench , ” Carlos Gutierrez , who was commerce secretary under President George W. Bush and leads the “ super Pac ” Republicans for Immigration Reform , told The Times . “ It ’ s whether we can stop becoming our own worst enemy . ”