While traveling in Guatemala to perform pro-bono eye surgeries , Sen. Rand Paul , Kentucky Republican , blasted President Obama for failing to secure the border and called upon the Senate to bring the House-passed immigration reform bill to a vote .
In a closed-door meeting with Guatemalan President Otto Perez Molina on Wednesday , Mr. Paul said that the main problem behind the continuing crisis at the border lies in the White House .
“ I told him , frankly , that I didn ’ t think the problem was in Guatemala City , but that the problem was in the White House in our country , and that the mess we ’ ve got at the border is frankly because of the White House ’ s policies , ” Mr. Paul said in an interview with Breitbart.com .
Mr. Paul said he supported the House bill to end Mr. Obama ’ s deportation relief program for Dreamers and said the legislation would “ go a long way to fixing the problem . ”
“ But like everything else , nothing good has happened because Sen. [ Harry ] Reid has decided that he ’ s not going to allow any votes on any bills this year because he ’ s protecting his members who are vulnerable in the election — he ’ s protecting them from any kinds of votes , ” Mr. Paul said .
The potential contender for the 2016 GOP presidential nomination , condemned Mr. Obama for not doing enough to secure the border , and said without a real solution at the border , there can be no reform .
“ It comes from the president basically offering unilaterally , without congressional approval , beacons or magnets without securing the border , ” Mr. Paul told Breibart.com .
“ He seems to be doing this again because he doesn ’ t have what it takes to get Congress to pass legislation , ” he said . “ So it all starts , as many conservatives say , you can ’ t have immigration reform without first having a secure border . But I think what ’ s happened at the border is all squarely at the president ’ s lap . The problem and the solution aren ’ t in Guatemala . The problem and solution reside inside the White House . ”
Mr. Paul , a former ophthalmologist , has been performing sight-restoring eye surgeries in the rural Guatemalan town of Salama over the past week .
Democrats shot back at Mr. Paul , calling his trip to Guatemala a campaign farce .
“ While everyone should commend Paul for his aid work , it ’ s unfortunate he turned a trip organized by a well-respected eye center into a crass campaign photo op , ” Michael Czin , national press secretary for the Democratic National Committee , wrote in a memo .
Mr. Czin blasted Mr. Paul for condemning the president in the presence of a foreign leader , saying , “ Regardless of political party , we do not go abroad and slam our own because of policy differences . We are better than that . ”
In the memo , Mr. Czin pointed out that Mr. Paul voted against Democratic immigration reform legislation and opposed an emergency supplemental package to address the border crisis .
“ America deserves better from our elected officials — especially those who want to seek the highest office in the land , ” Mr. Czin wrote .