Chicago ’ s immigrant communities are preparing for anticipated widespread immigration arrests by federal authorities starting this Sunday as part of week-long raids in major cities around the country .
Local activists , organizers and elected officials are taking precautionary steps as several reports say as many as 2,000 families in up to 10 U.S. cities — including Chicago , Houston , Miami and Los Angeles — could be targeted in pre-dawn raids by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents at the direction of President Donald Trump .
Trump warned of the series of raids , called the “ family op , ” in a pair of Tweets earlier this week in which he said millions of undocumented immigrants would be deported .
ICE officials did not respond to a request for comment .
Ald . Rossana Rodriguez Sanchez ( 33rd ) and Ald . Carlos Ramirez-Rosa ( 35th ) handed out “ know your rights ” cards with instructions written in both English and Spanish at a CTA Brown Line station during Friday evening ’ s rush hour in Albany Park . The two aldermen said they fear the Northwest Side neighborhood , home to many immigrants , could be targeted in the raids .
“ We need to take this seriously , ” Rodriguez Sanchez said . “ We ’ re scared . We don ’ t want to make people panic , but we do want to make sure that people are prepared in case something actually happens . ”
Rodriguez Sanchez and Ramirez-Rosa encouraged residents to lock their doors ; avoid signing documents they didn ’ t understand or answering questions ; and , if arrested by ICE , have a family member call the Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights ( ICIRR ) support hotline at 855-435-7693 .
Several activist groups and organizations , including ICIRR and the National Immigrant Justice Center , have mobilized to prepare communities for the possible raids .
Chicago police , meanwhile , will not take part in the raids , said spokesman Anthony Guglielmi .
“ At the direction of [ Mayor Lori Lightfoot ] , no city data — including all CPD law enforcement data and records — will be shared with federal Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents , ” Guglielmi wrote in a statement . “ Supt . Eddie Johnson has also ordered CPD not to participate in any deportation raids . ”
Lightfoot said in her own statement that she has spoken with top ICE officials in Chicago and “ voiced my strong objection to any such raids . ”
“ Chicago will always be a welcoming city and a champion for the rights of our immigrant and refugee communities , and I encourage any resident in need of legal aid to contact the National Immigrant Justice Center , ” Lightfoot said .
Andrew Alvarado , a 22-year-old Albany Park resident , hadn ’ t heard about the reported raids until he saw Rodriguez Sanchez and Ramirez-Rosa at the station . After taking a “ know my rights ” card , Alvarado — who is Ecuadorian American — called his family to let them know .
“ Personally , I am afraid for my family members and friends who are undocumented , ” Alvarado said . “ Whether friends or co-workers , there ’ s always a chance that someone might go missing , and that ’ s obviously something that ’ s really scary to think about .
“ I think a lot of people just end up in seclusion . They do their best to stock up on stuff and stay hidden . And that ’ s the saddest part of that whole ordeal . You don ’ t imagine this kind of thing happening in Chicago . People think of this place as a safe haven . ”