Democrats dug in their heels Sunday on President Trump ’ s threat to shut down the government unless he gets money for his border wall , saying if the president makes good on his demand , the American people will suffer .
But the White House contends American citizens are already suffering — with or without a shutdown — because of the rise in illegal immigration .
The two sides showed no sign of willingness to compromise Sunday , with just four days left to broker an agreement before the federal government partially shuts down .
“ We should not let a temper tantrum — threats — push us in the direction of doing something even our Republican colleagues know is wrong , ” Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer told NBC .
The New York Democrat said Republicans in Congress “ have to have the guts ” to tell the president he ’ s wrong for refusing to fund the government unless he gets $ 5 billion for his border wall .
“ President Trump should understand there are not the votes for the wall in the House or the Senate . He is not going to get the wall in any form , ” he said .
And the top Democrat on the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee Rep. Elijah Cummings , Maryland Democrat , said voters want the government to help them , not hurt them , suggesting a shutdown will politically damage Republicans .
“ Whenever I hear a president say to the American people at Christmastime , ‘ I am going to shut down your government , ’ it pains me because I know it ’ s going to make a bad Christmas for a lot of people , ” he told CNN .
But White House adviser Stephen Miller said Mr. Trump will do “ whatever is necessary ” to get the money to build the border wall .
“ They can either choose to fight for Americans — working class — or to promote illegal immigration . You can ’ t do both , ” Mr. Miller said of Democrats in an interview Sunday with CBS .
Congress is running up against a Friday deadline to finish funding the government , with several news reports suggesting they may look to a short-term “ continuing resolution ” that funds the government at current levels to get them past the holidays and into the new year .
Sen. Susan Collins , Maine Republican , told ABC she wants to see lawmakers take up a proposal that provided $ 2.5 billion this year and over the next 10 years for border security , which would fund a border fence , increase technology and patrol agents along the southern border .
“ There is absolutely no excuse to shut down government on this issue or any issue . I have suggested we revisit a compromise proposal we brought forward earlier this year , ” she said on Sunday , breaking with her party ’ s leader .
House Minority Leader Rep. Nancy Pelosi and Mr. Schumer have offered Mr. Trump two other options , and they both include some money — roughly $ 1.3 billion — for the wall .
But it remains unclear whether the president will accept any compromise after his televised stand off with the two Democratic leaders in the Oval Office last week , where he demanded the $ 5 billion and claimed he isn ’ t afraid to shut down the government .
“ I am proud to shut down the government for border security , ” Mr. Trump said .