The following is an excerpt from Blaze Media 's daily Capitol Hill Brief email newsletter :
The Trump administration has introduced a new `` public charge '' rule to cut down on legal immigrants who are unlikely to support themselves without government welfare .
Section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act ( INA ) states that prospective visa and green card holders are inadmissible if the individual `` at the time of application for admission or adjustment of status , is likely at any time to become a public charge . '' Before that , Conservative Review 's Daniel Horowitz lays out , America had a long history of prudentially restricting immigration based on the potential that a newcomer might not be self-sufficient once admitted .
While the Trump administration has already been cracking down on potential immigrant welfare recipients , the updated version of the rule rolled out Monday morning will incorporate more types of public benefits that will be considered in the process and is an effort to `` better ensure '' that legal immigrants to the United States are `` self-sufficient , '' per a DHS news release .
`` For over a century , the public charge ground of inadmissibility has been part of our nation 's immigration laws , '' USCIS acting Director Ken Cuccinelli said in a statement . `` Throughout our history , self-sufficiency has been a core tenet of the American dream . Self-reliance , industriousness , and perseverance laid the foundation of our nation and have defined generations of hardworking immigrants seeking opportunity in the United States ever since . ''
Immigration lawyer David Leopold , however , told The Washington Times that the move is `` a flimsy pretext to close America 's door to middle and working-class immigrants . ''
The regulations do not apply to vulnerable populations seeking asylum or refugee status in the United States , victims of severe human trafficking , or victims of domestic violence applying for green cards under the Violence Against Women Act , per a USCIS fact sheet .
Under the new rule , applicants denied solely on public charge grounds will be able in some circumstances to post a bond along with their application .
The rule will be dated Aug. 14 in the Federal Register and will go into effect 60 days later .