The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of ███.com .
The Democrats aren ’ t going to get away with holding the federal government hostage to their radical open-borders agenda . Not again .
The Democrats know that they got the Republicans to cave during the previous budget impasse , which produced a bloated $ 1.3 trillion Omnibus spending bill that didn ’ t fund construction of the border wall . President Trump reluctantly signed that bill , but he did so with a vow that he would never again put his signature on such a bad piece of legislation .
“ As a matter of National Security I 've signed the Omnibus Spending Bill . I say to Congress : I will NEVER sign another bill like this again , ” the President declared in March . “ To prevent this omnibus situation from ever happening again , I 'm calling on Congress to give me a line-item veto for all govt spending bills ! ”
He made his position even more clear in July , pledging to fix the country ’ s broken immigration system even if it requires a shutdown .
“ I don ’ t care what the political ramifications are , our immigration laws and border security have been a complete and total disaster for decades , and there is no way that the Democrats will allow it to be fixed without a Government Shutdown , ” he tweeted . “ Border Security is National Security , and National Security is the long-term viability of our Country . A Government Shutdown is a very small price to pay for a safe and Prosperous America ! ”
Prior to the last budget impasse , President Trump offered congressional Democrats a surprisingly generous deal , offering to accept legal status for nearly a million DACA recipients in exchange for funding of the border wall . True to form , though , the obstructionist Democrats rejected the President ’ s good-faith overture , even though the $ 5 billion he requested for the wall would have accounted for less than 0.004 percent of the amount Congress ended up appropriating .
Now , with a partial government shutdown looming if a deal to fund seven government agencies can ’ t be concluded by December 21 , President Trump has a perfect opportunity to follow through on his pledge while finally getting the border wall funding he has sought since the beginning of his presidency .
Senate Democrats insist that they will not accept more than $ 1.6 billion for border security , and they ’ re threatening to punish the Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) , which includes Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) , if the President doesn ’ t capitulate .
In order to get their way , the Democrats will do everything in their power to portray a potential partial government shutdown as a national catastrophe , but that ’ s just more fearmongering intended to manipulate the public and the press .
In reality , about two-thirds of the federal government is already funded through a budget deal reached earlier in the year , so a partial shutdown would not affect most federal employees , including those serving in the armed forces . In fact , it ’ s entirely possible that the showdown will only involve DHS funding because of the political drama over immigration , since Congress could fund the other six agencies separately .
Even if DHS were temporarily left without funding , though , it would not materially impact border security , because Border Patrol and ICE agents would almost certainly still be required to report for work . They would not be able to receive paychecks until a funding deal could be reached , but history shows that this would only be a temporary problem , since Congress has always appropriated back pay for employees affected by previous shutdowns .
The Democrats are a party of con artists and fear mongers , but President Trump is no fool . He knows that a border wall is essential to our national security , and he ’ s not going to give up on that urgent priority in the interest of political expediency .
Harlan Hill is a political advisor , media commentator , and an advisory board member of the Donald J. Trump for President , Inc .