Vowing that they have learned the lessons from the 1986 amnesty , the Senate on Thursday approved the biggest changes to the immigration system in a generation , promising this version will prevent another wave of illegal immigrants while granting a pathway to citizenship to most of the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants already in the country .
The 68-32 vote , in which 14 Republicans joined all 54 of the chamber ’ s Democratic caucus members in support , is likely the high-water mark for immigrant rights advocates , who held prayer vigils and packed the public viewing galleries during the vote , anticipating good news for illegal immigrants who have been waiting , in some cases for years , for legal status .
“ This bill is not perfect , but it ’ s a really good solution , in my view , to a very difficult problem , ” said Sen. Lindsey Graham , a South Carolina Republican who was part of the bipartisan “ Gang of Eight ” senators who wrote the bill and managed to fend off every major challenge to it .
Now the fight shifts to the Republican-led House , where Speaker John A. Boehner once again insisted that the Senate bill is dead on arrival .
“ The House is not going to take up and vote on whatever the Senate passes , ” the Ohio Republican said flatly at his weekly news conference before attacking the Senate version as too weak on border security .
Instead , Mr. Boehner seemed to sketch out a path that would put a series of smaller bills on the chamber floor , rather than the broad approach the Senate took , which mixes legal immigration , enforcement and the status of 11 million illegal immigrants into a 1,200-page bill .
SEE ALSO : Senators ’ votes on immigration were linked to personal experiences
Senate supporters of legalization said they hoped Mr. Boehner would rethink his strategy , though they fell just shy of the 70-vote threshold that they said would create the momentum to force the House to act .
President Obama , traveling in Africa , issued a statement praising the Senate vote while warning that it still faces an uncertain future .
“ Now is the time when opponents will try their hardest to pull this bipartisan effort apart so they can stop common-sense reform from becoming a reality , ” Mr. Obama said . “ We can not let that happen . ”
Sen. John McCain , Arizona Republican , said other Republicans supported the bill but didn ’ t vote for it , though he didn ’ t say who they were . But he said getting to 68 was a major accomplishment .
“ The day we announced this legislation , we were a long , long way from 68 votes , ” he said .
He and his fellow Gang of Eight members did a masterful job of holding together and expanding their coalition , in part by denying senators the chance to amend the bill .
Of more than 550 amendments filed , only about a dozen were put to votes , and just one was a major change that passed .
A last-minute effort to approve other changes failed when Republicans objected .
Senators gave the final vote the full pomp of landmark legislation . Majority Leader Harry Reid , Nevada Democrat , asked that senators vote from their desks — a formality reserved for the biggest issues , such as the 2009 vote on Mr. Obama ’ s health care act . Vice President Joseph R. Biden presided over the session and read out the final vote totals .
“ It ’ s historic , ” said Mr. Reid , who is one of the chief reasons the legislation has advanced this year .
It was Mr. Reid ’ s re-election in 2010 and Mr. Obama ’ s re-election in 2012 — both aided by strong Hispanic support — that helped put immigration back to the fore of the political conversation .
Since Mr. Obama ’ s November victory , congressional Republicans have held a fierce internal debate over whether they need to pass a legalization bill in order to compete for Hispanic voters .
The crux of the Senate bill is a deal to offer quick legal status to illegal immigrants , but withhold full citizenship rights until some conditions are met . Backers said they didn ’ t want to repeat the experience of the 1986 immigration law , when millions of illegal immigrants were granted citizenship but the government never followed through on enforcement , leading to millions more illegal immigrants .
This time , they said , they would tie future citizenship rights to checking off boxes on border security .
But the key point of contention has been over how strict to make those conditions . Democrats have said they don ’ t want to do anything that would interfere with the path to citizenship , and they have succeeded in beating back amendments to make the citizenship path contingent on provable success . Instead , the Senate bill relies on measures of spending and having infrastructure and manpower in place .
The one major amendment that passed , proposed by Republican Sens . Bob Corker of Tennessee and John Hoeven of North Dakota , called for adding 20,000 Border Patrol agents to the Southwest and would push the Homeland Security Department to build an additional 350 miles of pedestrian fencing .
Mr. McCain said the staffing , infrastructure and technology are the guarantees he needs to be certain the failures of 1986 aren ’ t repeated .
“ I can tell you from 30 years of being on the border , this bill secures the border , and anyone who says it doesn ’ t does not understand our security needs , ” the senator said .
But the National Border Patrol Council , which represents Border Patrol agents , said it had “ serious concerns ” about the boost in staffing .
“ Unless we ’ re going to form a human chain from Brownsville to Imperial Beach , I ’ m not sure this is going to be the cure that everybody thinks it will be at the border , ” said Shawn Moran , a vice president at the council . “ We don ’ t have money for gas or ammunition or uniforms , and that ’ s at 21,000 agents . I ’ m not sure how we ’ re going to be able to handle 40,000 agents . I don ’ t know where we ’ re going to put them . ”
The council had a different proposal to reform agents ’ pay , which Mr. Moran said would have put more agents into the field and would have been the equivalent of a 5,000-agent boost over the course of a year . But that proposal got held up along with the hundreds of other amendments that never were put to a vote .
In addition to Mr. McCain , Mr. Corker , Mr. Graham and Mr. Hoeven , the Republicans supporting the legislation were Sens . Lamar Alexander of Tennessee , Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire , Jeff Chiesa of New Jersey , Susan M. Collins of Maine , Jeff Flake of Arizona , Orrin G. Hatch of Utah , Mark Kirk of Illinois , Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Marco Rubio of Florida .