Lesser politicians merely exaggerate or spread fear about what the opposing party would do if they took power in Congress . President Donald Trump is inventing specific pieces of legislation .
Trump ’ s now rallying supporters by warning them that if Democrats take back the Senate , they ’ ll pass a bill written by Sen. Dianne Feinstein ( D-CA ) called the “ Open Borders Bill . ”
Here ’ s what Trump told a rally audience in Topeka , Kansas , on Saturday :
Today ’ s Democrats have embraced radical socialism and open borders . If you don ’ t have borders , you don ’ t have a country , folks , you don ’ t have a country . Every single Democrat in the US Senate has signed up for the Open Borders — and it ’ s a bill ! It ’ s called the Open Borders Bill ! What ’ s going on ? And it ’ s written by — guess who — Dianne Feinstein .
Here is the part of Trump ’ s riff about Democrats that is correct : There is , in fact , a bill that Feinstein has written that every Democrat in the Senate has signed on to .
It is , of course , not called the Open Borders Bill , because it ’ s not actually about opening the borders at all . It ’ s called the Keep Families Together Act ; it was written in June , during the height of the family separation crisis at the US-Mexico border , to stop the administration ’ s “ zero tolerance ” policy of criminally prosecuting parents who crossed into the US illegally and sending their children into the care of the Department of Health and Human Services .
Feinstein ’ s bill — probably by mistake — would have prevented parents from being arrested for serious crimes by the FBI , not just from getting separated at the border . But the good-faith critiques of the bill snowballed into an assertion on the right that Democrats were going to open the borders — and , furthermore , that that was the point .
How the Keep Families Together Act became the Open Borders Bill
On June 7 , Feinstein introduced the Keep Families Together Act . Within days , it had been co-sponsored by every Democrat in the US Senate . The bill went nowhere — Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R-IA ) made no effort to move it through the Senate Judiciary Committee — and it existed mostly as a foil for Republican proposals to end family separation by allowing the government to keep families in immigration detention indefinitely .
The point of Feinstein ’ s bill was to end “ zero tolerance ” by prohibiting agents from separating parents from children , except in cases of abuse or endangerment .
As written , though , it didn ’ t apply just to Border Patrol officers ’ apprehension of families or to the prosecution of parents for misdemeanor immigration violations . Under the bill , no agent of the Department of Homeland Security , the Department of Health and Human Services , or the Department of Justice would be able to separate a parent from children anywhere within 100 miles of a US border .
In other words , as Gabriel Malor pointed out in an article for the Federalist , “ The proposed law would apply with equal force to , say , FBI agents ( part of DOJ ) , Secret Service agents ( part of DHS ) , and Centers for Disease Control officers ( part of HHS ) in the exercise of their everyday duties . ”
That includes arresting people for serious crimes , since adults can ’ t be taken into criminal custody with their children . ( This was the whole reason “ zero tolerance ” led to family separation to begin with ) . And the 100-mile zone legally defined as the “ border ” encompasses nearly two-thirds of the US population .
It ’ s impossible to recognize an accurate critique — that Democrats had ( probably accidentally ) written a bill that would protect parents from federal arrest in much of the US — in Trump ’ s attacks on the “ Open Borders Bill. ” But there was a seed of truth inside a snowballing exaggeration about what the bill would do , and what Democrats ’ intention was in drafting it . Here ’ s a timeline of that evolution :
June 18 : Sen. Susan Collins ( R-ME ) , asked about Feinstein ’ s bill on “ Face the Nation , ” says that while she appreciates Feinstein ’ s compassion , “ Her legislation is not the answer . It is far too broad . It would essentially prevent arrest within 100 miles of the border , even if the person has committed a serious crime or is suspected of terrorist activity. ” Collins ’ s brief answer didn ’ t specify that it only applied to parents or that it prevented arrest only where arrest required family separation — in other words , that it didn ’ t stop immigration agents from apprehending families and detaining them briefly together .
Sen. Susan Collins ( R-ME ) , asked about Feinstein ’ s bill on “ Face the Nation , ” says that while she appreciates Feinstein ’ s compassion , “ Her legislation is not the answer . It is far too broad . It would essentially prevent arrest within 100 miles of the border , even if the person has committed a serious crime or is suspected of terrorist activity. ” Collins ’ s brief answer didn ’ t specify that it only applied to parents or that it prevented arrest only where arrest required family separation — in other words , that it didn ’ t stop immigration agents from apprehending families and detaining them briefly together . June 19 : Malor ’ s piece is published at the Federalist , with the headline “ Democrats ’ Border Separation Bill Would Let Nearly All Parents Who Commit Federal Crimes Get Off Scot-Free ” — slightly exaggerating the scope of the bill from two-thirds to “ nearly all , ” and from prohibiting criminal custody to prohibiting any punishment . Malor says the bill could have been “ the consequence of extremely careless and hurried drafting , ” but could also have been deliberate — in a “ monstrous attack on law and order . ”
Malor ’ s piece is published at the Federalist , with the headline “ Democrats ’ Border Separation Bill Would Let Nearly All Parents Who Commit Federal Crimes Get Off Scot-Free ” — slightly exaggerating the scope of the bill from two-thirds to “ nearly all , ” and from prohibiting criminal custody to prohibiting any punishment . Malor says the bill could have been “ the consequence of extremely careless and hurried drafting , ” but could also have been deliberate — in a “ monstrous attack on law and order. ” June 19 : Breitbart publishes a blog post that presents Malor ’ s article and Collins ’ s statement as two separate critiques of the bill — and says Feinstein ’ s bill would “ effectively prevent authorities from arresting illegal aliens within 100 miles of the U.S. border. ” The argument ( which appears to be a further interpretation of Collins ’ s comments ) is now in the realm of the definitively untrue . Because family detention facilities do exist ( as do procedures for apprehending unauthorized immigrants without lengthy detention ) , Feinstein ’ s bill wouldn ’ t prevent immigration agents from apprehending any unauthorized immigrants .
Breitbart publishes a blog post that presents Malor ’ s article and Collins ’ s statement as two separate critiques of the bill — and says Feinstein ’ s bill would “ effectively prevent authorities from arresting illegal aliens within 100 miles of the U.S. border. ” The argument ( which appears to be a further interpretation of Collins ’ s comments ) is now in the realm of the definitively untrue . Because family detention facilities do exist ( as do procedures for apprehending unauthorized immigrants without lengthy detention ) , Feinstein ’ s bill wouldn ’ t prevent immigration agents from apprehending any unauthorized immigrants . June 19 : The GOP writes a blog post , “ They Should Have Read The Fine Print , ” attacking red-state Democrats from signing onto Feinstein ’ s bill . They , too , quote Collins ’ s claim that the bill “ would essentially prevent arrest , ” in addition to pasting the full text of Malor ’ s article . It doesn ’ t make any claims about whether the Democrats meant to write such a broad bill .
The GOP writes a blog post , “ They Should Have Read The Fine Print , ” attacking red-state Democrats from signing onto Feinstein ’ s bill . They , too , quote Collins ’ s claim that the bill “ would essentially prevent arrest , ” in addition to pasting the full text of Malor ’ s article . It doesn ’ t make any claims about whether the Democrats meant to write such a broad bill . June 20 : The GOP tweets out a link to the blog post , but the text of the tweet goes further than the blog post itself — asserting that the intent of the bill is “ open borders. ” “ The Dem Senators who signed this bill should just be honest with the American people and admit they support an open border policy , ” the tweet says .
From there , Trump ’ s only innovation was to lie about the name of the bill . In doing so , of course , he cemented both the idea that Feinstein ’ s bill would actually “ open the borders ” ( i.e. , prevent apprehension of any unauthorized immigrant entering the US ) and the idea that this was intentional .
It fits ever so neatly into Trump ’ s closing electoral argument , that he and Republicans are the only thing standing between America and mob rule . But thanks to the game of attack-ad telephone , Trump ’ s claims bear so little resemblance to reality that it almost feels academic to point out their distant ancestor in truth .