 WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama said Friday that his administration would let many young illegal immigrants legally live and work in the U.S. , sidestepping Congress after years of stalemate over the nation 's immigration policy .
Under the new rules , an estimated 800,000 young people brought to the U.S. as children could apply for work permits and enjoy a safe haven from deportation . Unlike with the Dream Act , a bill backed by Mr. Obama that has stalled in Congress , they would n't be eligible for citizenship .
The rules , which Mr. Obama announced Friday from the Rose Garden , may inject a needed jolt of enthusiasm for his campaign among Hispanic voters , who overwhelmingly support him but often turn out in smaller numbers than other groups .
President Obama was interrupted by Neil Munro of the Daily Caller during an announcement about his administration 's new immigration policy . Photo courtesy of Associated Press .
Many Republicans criticized the rules as an amnesty for law breakers , an overreach of administrative authority and an election-year pander to Hispanics .
The new rules may complicate GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney 's efforts to find a more nuanced position to appeal to Hispanics after a primary campaign in which he said he would veto the Dream Act .
Some Republicans have worked to soften the party 's immigration approach , including Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida , who is pitching an alternative to the Dream Act that resembles the new Obama policy . But it is n't likely Mr. Romney will want to endorse an approach so close to Mr. Obama 's .
The new policy was celebrated by young illegal immigrants and by many Democrats , who said it would provide overdue relief . In Los Angeles , more than 100 students cheered the announcement in front of downtown 's federal building , waving signs that said , `` Right to Dream . ''
`` These are young people who study in our schools , they play in our neighborhoods , they 're friends with our kids , they pledge allegiance to our flag , '' Mr. Obama said Friday . `` They are Americans in their heart , in their minds , in every single way but one : on paper . ''
Mr. Romney , speaking to reporters in Milford , N.H. , on Friday , criticized the president 's action as a short-term fix that could be `` reversed by subsequent presidents , '' but he did n't respond to questions about whether he would do that .
He offered softer rhetoric than he did during the Republican primaries , saying that he wanted to help `` people who come into this country through no fault of their own by virtue of the action of their parents . '' But he did n't say what policies he would support .
Sen. Dick Durbin ( D. , Ill. ) , author of the Dream Act , called the announcement a `` historic humanitarian moment . ''
`` We 're going to come out of the shadows , '' said Jaime Rivera , 20 years old , who said his parents fled to the U.S. from conflict in Honduras .
But House Judiciary Committee Chairman Lamar Smith ( R. , Texas ) , a leading opponent of immigration liberalization , called the move `` a breach of faith with the American people . '' He said the new policy could hurt unemployed Americans looking for work and `` violates President Obama 's oath to uphold the laws of this land . ''
Hispanic support is critical in several swing states in November , including Nevada , Colorado and Florida . The president 's move came after a couple of rough weeks for his candidacy , including signs of a slowing economic recovery .
The new Obama rules apply to people under age 30 who came to the U.S. under the age of 16 , have been here for at least five years , have n't committed a major crime and have either a high-school degree , equivalency certificate or have served in the military . They will be eligible for a renewable two-year period of `` deferred action , '' during which they may apply for work permits and would n't be deported .
One tricky question for young people will be whether and when to apply for the relief , which involves presenting themselves to the government as illegal residents .
Ricki Campos , a 23-year-old undocumented immigrant from El Salvador , addresses a crowd of Obama supporters in front of the White House on Friday . Andrew Seidman/The Wall Street Journal
It is n't clear what would happen to them if a future president opted to reverse the policy .
`` There is a political and legal risk that what Obama giveth , Romney will taketh , '' said Stephen Yale-Loehr , immigration professor at Cornell University .
Unlike the Dream Act , those affected would not be on a path to citizenship , and they would have to renew their new status every two years .
But Dream Act backers concede there is little chance any immigration legislation will pass this year .
Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said the immigration laws `` are not designed to be blindly enforced without consideration given to the individual circumstances of each case . '' Associated Press
The last push for the Dream Act came in late 2010 , when it won 55 votes in the Senate , short of the 60 needed overcome a filibuster threat .
Since then , a growing number of Republicans have voiced concern that the party is pushing away the Latino electorate with rhetoric opposing illegal immigration and the Dream Act .
On Friday morning , ahead of the Obama announcement , former Mississippi Gov . Haley Barbour said people in the U.S. illegally should qualify for work permits . Former Florida Gov . Jeb Bush has also suggested a softer approach .
Both House Speaker John Boehner ( R. , Ohio ) and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R. , Ky. ) were silent Friday , offering no response to the Obama move .
Sen. Rubio has proposed a modified version of the Dream Act that would offer young illegal immigrants a status similar to that put forth by Mr. Obama : a safe haven but not U.S. citizenship .
On Friday , Mr. Rubio issued a statement saying the country has to address the plight of these young people without encouraging future illegal immigration . `` Today 's announcement will be welcome news for many of these kids desperate for an answer , but it is a short-term answer to a long-term problem , '' he said .
The announcement culminates the long evolution of the Obama 's administration 's deportation policy .
Early in Mr. Obama 's term , his administration deported a record number of illegal immigrants , prompting anger from a Hispanic community already frustrated by lack of action on their legislative priorities .
As a result , the administration first said it would prioritize criminals in its deportations . Then , last year , it said it would use prosecutorial discretion and would n't target for deportation those who would qualify for Dream Act relief .
Advocates , including Mr. Durbin , pushed the administration to go further , but Obama aides questioned whether they had that authority . Mr. Obama himself made that point in a letter last year to Rep. Luis Gutierrez ( D. , Ill. ) . He said the administration would grant limited , case-by-case relief , but `` it is inappropriate to use this authority in a categorical way to protect Dream Act students or any other group , no matter how compelling . ''
On Friday , an administration official said that the new policy does not grant `` categorical '' relief , as Mr. Gutierrez was seeking , but will in practical terms accomplish the same goal .
The surname of Sen. Richard Durbin of Illinois was misspelled as Durban in an earlier version of this article .