LUBBOCK , Texas — A leaked intelligence analysis from the Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) reveals the exact numbers of illegal immigrants entering and attempting to enter the U.S. from more than 75 different countries . The report was obtained by a trusted source within the CBP agency who leaked the document and spoke with Breitbart Texas on the condition of anonymity . The report is labeled as “ Unclassified//For Official Use Only ” and indicates that the data should be handled as “ Sensitive But Unclassified ( SBU ) . ”
The numbers provided are in graphics and are broken down into “ OFO ” and “ OBP. ” The Customs and Border Protection agency is divided into the Office of Field Operations ( OFO ) and the Office of Border Patrol ( OBP ) . The OFO numbers reflect anyone either turning themselves in at official U.S. points of entry , or anyone caught while being smuggled at the points of entry . The OBP numbers reflect anyone being caught or turning themselves in to Border Patrol agents between the points of entry , or anyone caught at interior checkpoints by Border Patrol agents . The “ OFO Inadmissible ” designation to any individual from a nation other than Mexico or Canada means that U.S. authorities took the individuals into custody . Whether they were deported or given a Notice to Appear is unknown . It is important to note these numbers do not include data from U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) . The unavailable ICE data are in addition to these numbers .
The report reveals the apprehension numbers ranging from 2010 through July 2014 . It shows that most of the human smuggling from Syria and Albania into the U.S. comes through Central America . The report also indicates the routes individuals from North Africa and the Middle East take into the European Union , either to illegally migrate there or as a possible stop in their journey to the United States . The data are broken down further into the specific U.S. border sectors where the apprehensions and contact occurred .
Among the significant revelations are that individuals from nations currently suffering from the world ’ s largest Ebola outbreak have been caught attempting to sneak across the porous U.S. border into the interior of the United States . At least 71 individuals from the three nations affected by the current Ebola outbreak have either turned themselves in or been caught attempting to illegally enter the U.S. by U.S. authorities between January 2014 and July 2014 .
As of July 20 , 2014 , 1,443 individuals from China were caught sneaking across the porous U.S. border this year alone , with another 1,803 individuals either turning themselves in to U.S. authorities at official ports of entry , or being caught attempting to illegally enter at the ports of entry . This comes amid a massive crackdown by Chinese authorities of Islamic terrorists in the Communist nation .
Twenty-eight individuals from Pakistan were caught attempting to sneak into the U.S. this year alone , with another 211 individuals either turning themselves in or being caught at official ports of entry .
Thirteen Egyptians were caught trying to sneak into the U.S. this year alone , with another 168 either turning themselves in or being caught at official ports of entry .
Four individuals from Yemen were caught attempting to sneak into the U.S. by Border Patrol agents in 2014 alone , with another 34 individuals either turning themselves in or being caught attempting to sneak through official ports of entry . Yemen is not the only nation with individuals who pose terror risks to the U.S. that the report indicates travel from . The failed nation of Somalia , known as a hotbed of Islamic terror activity , was also referenced in the report . Four individuals from Somalia were caught trying to sneak into the U.S. by Border Patrol agents in 2014 . Another 290 either turned themselves in or were caught attempting to sneak in at official ports of entry . This reporter previously covered the issue of illegal immigration into the U.S. from Somalia and other nations in the Horn of Africa .
Follow Breitbart Texas Managing Director Brandon Darby on Twitter @ brandondarby .