Five dozen immigration rights activists picketed outside Rep. Frank R. Wolf ’ s Herndon office Wednesday , demanding he vote for a bill that would extend citizenship rights to 11 million illegal immigrants — a scene that is being repeated outside countless Republican congressional district offices this summer .
With chances for a bill seemingly slipping in Washington , the activists have vowed to take their fight to lawmakers at home during the congressional recess . They have vowed to hold meetings , stage protest marches and make themselves heard by lawmakers and the voters who elected them .
As activists exert external pressure , proponents inside the Beltway try to negotiate tricky legislative roadblocks . In a major concession Wednesday , Sen. Charles E. Schumer , the New York Democrat who wrote the broad Senate legalization bill , said he is willing to accept House Republicans ’ strategy to split the issue into pieces .
“ We would much prefer a big comprehensive bill , but any way that the House can get there is OK by us , ” he told CNN , though he also said one of the components must be a specific path to citizenship for current illegal immigrants , which has proved to be a sticking point for many House Republicans .
Mr. Wolf , a 17-term Republican from Northern Virginia , said citizenship is a nonstarter for him , just as it was in 1986 when he bucked President Reagan and voted against amnesty for illegal immigrants .
“ If there ’ s amnesty leading to citizenship , I ’ m going to vote against it again , ” Mr. Wolf told The ███ in a telephone interview .
Mr. Wolf told The Times he has met with immigrant rights groups several times and has more meetings planned , and said he is ready to listen . But he also said he won ’ t be intimidated into voting against his principles .
“ When members of Congress can really be intimidated on how they vote , the whole thing has changed , ” he said .
Immigration rights advocates have vowed to make lawmakers feel political heat back home this summer . More than 40 activists were arrested for blocking Independence Avenue outside Congress last week , and the protests continued in districts across the country .
This weekend , activists will rally in Colorado to pressure Republican Reps. Scott R. Tipton , Mike Coffman and Cory Gardner to back citizenship .
Next week , California activists will launch what they expect to be a caravan of 1,100 cars from Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles to Bakersfield to pressure House Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy , the third-ranking Republican in the House .
In one colorful move , activists are delivering cantaloupes to House Republicans ’ offices as a way of striking back after Rep. Steve King , Iowa Republican , said that for every top-student illegal immigrant , “ there ’ s another 100 out there who weigh 130 pounds , and they ’ ve got calves the size of cantaloupes because they ’ re hauling 75 pounds of marijuana across the desert . ”
The pressure back home is forcing lawmakers to take a stand .
In Florida , Rep. Daniel Webster told the Orlando Sentinel that he will support a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants only after the Border Patrol can show it is stopping at least 90 percent of those trying to enter the U.S. illegally . He also wants to empower state and local authorities to help with immigration enforcement , the Sentinel said .
In Illinois , Rep. Aaron Schock said at a recent town hall that he supports a path to citizenship but only after conditions are met , such as a secure border . He also said illegal immigrants would have to pay back taxes and must have a clean criminal record , according to the Chicago Sun-Times .
Mr. Wolf said that in addition to rejecting citizenship , other objectives must be met for him to vote for a bill , including control of the borders . He said voters have little faith that the Homeland Security Department can do protect the border , so he would want independent observers , such as Southwestern governors , to be part of the certification process .
All those approaches are at odds with the massive bill that the Senate passed in June on a 68-32 vote . It grants eventual citizenship rights to most illegal immigrants , requires more money to be spent on border security and rewrites the legal immigration system to let in more guest workers and employment-based immigrants .
House Republicans have declared that bill dead . Instead , GOP leaders have signaled they that they would take up pieces of the issue , including border security , interior enforcement , guest-worker programs and at least one legalization bill that would apply to so-called Dreamers , the illegal immigrants brought to the U.S. as minors by their parents and carry the most sympathy in the debate .
Activists say that if the House doesn ’ t pass broad legalization , Republicans will be labeled anti-immigrant and anti-Hispanic . Luis Aguilar , an activist with Casa en Action who was protesting outside Mr. Wolf ’ s suburban office , said citizenship is not negotiable .
“ In my case , I ’ ve been here 15 years . There are people who ’ ve been here over 20 years , ” said Mr. Aguilar , 25 , one of those who got tentative legal status under President Obama ’ s non-deportation policy for young illegal immigrants . “ We won ’ t stand for anything other than citizenship . ”
The five dozen activists who marched alongside him chanted slogans mostly in Spanish , though the signs they held were mostly in English .
“ Wolf , escucha , estamos en la lucha , ” they chanted , which translates roughly as “ Wolf , listen up , we are in the struggle . ”
Among the signs was one posing the political question “ GOP — RIP ? The choice is yours . ”
“ The demographics are changing in this district , ” Mr. Aguilar said of Mr. Wolf ’ s seat , which stretches from the inner Washington suburbs to West Virginia . “ He should be aware that he can not continue with the same voting patterns . ”