Washington ( CNN ) - If there were any doubts that comprehensive immigration reform efforts were dead on Capitol Hill this year , House Speaker John Boehner eliminated them on Wednesday .
Boehner repeated his long standing opposition to the Senate-passed immigration bill and his pledge the House would never vote on it , but he went a step further , drawing a bright line : `` I 'll make clear we have no intention ever of going to conference on the Senate bill . ''
Last week the third ranking House Republican , GOP Whip Kevin McCarthy , R-California , told immigration reform advocates that there was n't enough time left this year for the House to take up immigration reform . The House is in session 15 days between now and the end of the year .
After Republicans lost the presidential election in 2012 and Hispanic voters voted overwhelmingly for President Obama , Boehner said it was time for Congress to pass major immigration reforms .
`` I think a comprehensive approach is long overdue . And I ’ m confident that the president , myself , others can find the common ground to take care of this issue once and for all , '' Boehner said in an interview with ABC News the week after the election .
Facing sharp divisions inside his conference on the issue , Boehner insists he still wants action but says any legislation has to be done in pieces .
`` I want us to deal with this issue but I want to deal with it in a common sense step by step way , '' he said Wednesday .
A series of targeted immigration bills have passed the House Judiciary Committee - mostly focused on border security and enforcement - but GOP leaders have not scheduled any floor votes on any of them .
A significant bloc of House conservatives is adamantly opposed to any measure that provides a path to citizenship or legal status for the 11 million undocumented workers in the United States . So far , none of the House GOP proposals addresses that issue , but opponents worry that any negotiation with the Senate would ratchet up pressure on House Republicans to deal with questions of citizenship .
Boehner 's statement Wednesday declaring no talks with the Senate on its bill was designed to put those concerns to rest .
The Speaker brushed aside a question of whether House GOP leaders were avoiding the divisive debate on immigration reform to focus on problems with the implementation of Obamacare .
`` This is about trying to do this in a way that the American people and our members can absorb , '' Boehner said , adding immigration reform is too complicated to rush .
`` There are hundreds of issues involved in dealing with immigration reform , and we 've got to deal with these in a common sense way where our members understand what we 're doing and their constituents understand . ''