Washington ( CNN ) President Donald Trump on Friday repeated his threat to close down the border between the United States and Mexico , but this time he noted he would act next week if Mexico does n't step up .
`` If Mexico does n't immediately stop ALL illegal immigration coming into the United States throug ( sic ) our Southern Border , I will be CLOSING the Border , or large sections of the Border , next week , '' he tweeted .
Trump , in Florida on Friday afternoon , said he could close the border to trade for a `` long time '' and insisted the US had run out of detention space for undocumented immigrants .
`` We have the weakest , most pathetic laws , '' the President said , threatening to close the border if two current caravans of migrants cross into the US .
`` We have run out of space . We ca n't hold people anywhere . Mexico can stop it so easily , '' he added .
Trump 's comments follow a period in which the Department of Homeland Security and border officials have said their resources have become strained .
Earlier this week , Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAleenan said the `` breaking point has arrived '' for the US immigration system .
Over the last two weeks , Customs and Border Protection announced that they will be releasing migrants in Arizona , as well as the Del Rio sector and Rio Grande Valley region of Texas . And more people are expected to be apprehended at the border in March than any month since 2008 , CBP says .
JUST WATCHED Trump supporter : We need to 'close the borders ' Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump supporter : We need to 'close the borders ' 00:38
So far , the plan Department of Homeland Security says it will commit to is pulling some officers from legal ports of entry to help with the influx of migrants crossing illegally . This plan will not fully close ports on the southern border as of now .
In a Friday statement announcing the move , Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said there is a `` cascading crisis '' at the border and `` the system is in free fall . ''
The Department of Homeland Security is moving officers from its ports to help with the mission between ports , which will result in slow downs , a senior Department of Homeland Security official told reporters .
But the official said full closure of ports of entry is `` on the table . ''
`` It 's short at the moment of full closure of any port , we will continue to operationally assess what is needed . But I think what the President is making clear , is with these numbers , if we have to close ports to take care of all of the numbers who are coming , we will do that , so it 's on the table , '' the official said . `` But what we are doing is a very structured process based on operational needs to determine how many additional personnel we can pull from other duties to address the crisis between the ports . ''
The official said the Department of Homeland Security is `` looking at it from an operational perspective '' and that the Department of Homeland Security secretary will make a `` recommendation accordingly to the President . ''
The Justice Department declined to comment on the legality of closing the border or any portion of it , as described in the President 's tweet . The Justice Department also declined to comment on whether the Office of Legal Counsel has issued an opinion .
Though border closures are rare , they 're not unprecedented . For example , in 1985 , the abduction of a Drug Enforcement Administration agent and subsequent threats against customs agents prompted then-President Ronald Reagan , in agreement with the Mexican government , to close nine border crossings on the southern border .
Will closing the border stem the flow of migrants illegally crossing into the US ?
The Department of Homeland Security official said collaboration with Mexico and shifting resources might start to stem the flow .
However , part of the crisis at hand appears to be the number of individuals and families seeking asylum in the US . Often times , asylum seekers will cross illegally into the US awaiting to be found and processed by a border agent . More personnel between ports of entry may allow more visibility to catch these migrants once they 've crossed , but it 's unclear whether their presence will make them more likely to avoid crossing in the first place .
It 's also unclear whether the closure be limited to individuals crossing into and out of the US . If it includes cross-national trains and trucks importing and exporting goods with Latin America , a closure could pose a major threat to international commerce .
Robert Perez , deputy commissioner for Customs and Border Protection , told `` CNN 's Right Now with Brianna Keilar '' on Friday that the closure of ports of entry would have `` pretty severe '' consequences .
`` It 's Customs and Border Protection at every port of entry . Nearly 400 million travelers a year , $ 2.3 billion worth of trade , nearly 30 million trucks , rail cars and cargo containers every year , '' Perez said . `` And so , there ( will be ) a severe impact and this is important to understand because ... what is so important to understand is that the crisis is so severe right now , we are literally trying to save lives . ''
The President seems to be hinting at news to come during a border press event in the coming weeks , at least that 's what he told Fox News host Sean Hannity earlier this week .
`` In two weeks , I 'm going to a location , it 's going to be in California . Believe it or not , they were begging us to build in San Diego , begging us to build a wall . And we 're just in the process of completing a major stretch of many miles of wall . And we 're going to have a news conference there just to show people that ... it 's really good stuff , '' Trump said .
He also teased the visit at a rally in Michigan on Thursday .
But Trump has threatened to close the southern border prior to Friday 's ultimatum , and he has n't exactly followed through with it .
Trump tweeted in December that the US will be `` forced to close the Southern Border entirely if the Obstructionist Democrats do not give us the money to finish the Wall & also change the ridiculous immigration laws that our Country is saddled with . '' But he did n't close the border then .
And last November , a major US-Mexico border crossing in San Diego was closed for hours after a group of hundreds of migrants on the Mexican side rushed the border area , leading US Border Patrol agents to fire tear gas at the group .
The President said at the time that `` if we find that it 's uncontrollable '' or it gets to a point where `` our people are going to start getting hurt , we will close entry into the country for a period of time until we can get it under control . ''
`` The whole border . I mean the whole border , '' Trump said .
But again , he did n't make good on the threat at the time .