Felix Diaz was born 13 years before Donald Trump and millions of dollars and thousands of miles away , but in his story is the reason Trump will never be president of the United States .
Felix Diaz grew up on the wrong side of the Union Pacific railroad tracks in the town of Victorville , California . Victorville is in the Mojave Desert , 100 miles or so from Los Angeles . His father—Porfirio—worked in the cement plant and Carmen , his mother , sewed the family ’ s clothes . Felix was the youngest of four brothers , and the smallest , the last in line . The shirts he wore to school were hand-me-downs made of cement sacks .
The parents were in the U.S. illegally and every move they made , most of their adult lives , was weighed against the chance of being discovered and deported . The school was called Eva Dell Elementary and Felix ’ s third-grade teacher—Miss Appleberry—was 40 or so , but new to teaching , unsure of herself around kids , unsure of herself around Mexicans , and maybe because of that , or partly because of that , she yelled a lot . Maybe she was just a natural yeller . Here is how Felix remembers it :
At work then , as now , is the prevalent idea that anyone who doesn ’ t speak fluent American is at least a little slow . This idea was part of Miss Appleberry ’ s thinking , even though most of the students in her class were growing up in homes where little English was spoken . Miss Appleberry , in turn , spoke no Spanish . Felix Diaz—who turns 82 this July—remembers this like last week .
There was one white pupil in the entire student body at Eva Dell—a sixth-grader named Sylvia whose father owned the junkyard . It ’ s a cliché , of course , to be born on the wrong side of the tracks but it happens . And in Victorville—as in most places in America—the citizens did not mingle .
Not to make excuses , because there are none for this , but teaching kids who do not speak English requires patience—rope—and Miss Appleberry came to the end of hers early . Not far into the school year she brought out a paddle , and announced a spelling test . “ I ’ m sick of you Mexicans not spelling properly , ” she said .
There were 35 students in her class that year—a combination of third grade and fourth—and the spelling test was 10 words . If you misspelled one word , you got smacked with the paddle once . If you missed seven words , like Felix ’ s friend Raul , you got hit seven times .
Now Felix , it ought to be mentioned , was an angry , tough little kid . He would fight anybody—fourth-graders , fifth-graders , girls . This in spite of his size . He had spent 10 months of the previous year—his seventh—in a county hospital with tuberculosis , a disease he ’ d contracted from a neighborhood man named Mr. Riles , who , like Felix ’ s father , worked at the cement plant .
Like everybody else , Mr. Riles walked to work . He smoked two cigarettes on the way there , every afternoon . The first one he lighted as he left his house . He walked halfway to the plant , lit his second cigarette off the first one , and dropped the butt on the ground . Felix collected Mr. Riles ’ butts and made cigarettes of his own . And it was from those cigarettes he got tuberculosis .
The Mexicans—and the much smaller number of blacks in town—shared a single ward for TB patients . Felix Diaz remembers that just hours before a tubercular patient died the nurses would say , “ He ’ s hemorrhaging , ” and put up a screen to hide the spray of blood coming up out of the dying man ’ s mouth . That was the way Mr. Riles died and the way Felix expected to die , too . No one ever took the few minutes to explain to him what was going on , and when a doctor and a nurse came in one morning and told him they were all set to take out his tonsils that afternoon , Felix , who didn ’ t know what tonsils were , thought the operating room was where they took you to die .
The long stay in bed due to tuberculosis and a later diagnosis of polio stunted the boy ’ s growth . An average-sized kid at 7 , he would eventually stop growing at about 5-feet-6 and 110 pounds . Smaller than his brothers and his friends , but also harder .
And so the morning we were talking about he sat at his desk as Miss Appleberry announced each student ’ s scores , and took them one at a time into the hallway , closed the door and hit them with her paddle . Boys and girls alike . Felix remembers the flooring in the hallway was all wood and the sounds of the paddle , followed by the sounds of the 7- or 8-year-olds crying out , echoed clearly in the room . Thirty-five kids , sitting in terror or pain .
And then came Felix . He had missed three words and Miss Appleberry said it was his turn in the hallway . “ You come take your punishment , Felix , ” she said to him , holding the paddle at her hip .
Felix shook his head no . Everyone else had gone with the teacher—and it is worth mentioning here that to this day teachers are held in higher regard in Latin cultures than they are in others . They are often called maestro or maestra —revered almost like priests .
Miss Appleberry began to scream , and in seconds whatever sweet authoritarian revenge she was enjoying in the hallway disappeared . She grabbed him , trying to jerk him out of his desk . But the desks in those days were attached to the chairs , and the chairs were bolted to the floor , and Felix and his desk did not move . Miss Appleberry shook him , still screaming , her hard , narrow face balled up like a fist , but he would not let go . She had long fingernails and she scratched his arms and they bled . But he clung to the chair .
And unlike the parking lot at a Trump rally , in the end there was a compromise . She let go of the paddle , he let go of the desk , and Miss Appleberry dragged him down the hall to the school principal , Mr. Mullen . Eva Dell Elementary did not have much money and the principal had to teach a class of his own , too . Miss Appleberry brought Felix into his classroom and announced he ’ d refused to take his punishment .
Felix sat in that classroom—older kids—for the rest of the day , the object of curiosity , but probably not pity . Sixth grade is not the place for pity , but maybe miracles . Overworked , Mr. Mullen seemed to forget , and at the end of the school day Felix left Eva Dell with everybody else .
It was not over , though . His arm was scabbing where it had bled and he knew his father would want to know what happened . He took his friend Leo along , knowing that his father would never take his word against a teacher ’ s . As mentioned , teachers were almost like priests .
Porfirio listened to his son ’ s story and did not want to believe it . A confrontation at the school could lead to confrontation with other authorities ; city cops , which inevitably lead to immigration cops . Which—the daily fear—could lead to deportation . But Felix had brought Leo .
Porfirio took Leo aside , and Leo swore Felix was telling the truth . Felix remembers what his father said then : “ If you are lying to me , you will never be welcome in this house again . ”
And after that there was no more talking . Down to the school , Porfirio Diaz walked .
What he found at the front office was something like a mob scene . Parents crowded into the office , yelling , many more of them outside . These were not protesters in search of a cause . Most of them had just finished a long shift at the cement plant , or something else just as hard . None of them spoke English .
The principal recognized Felix ’ s father—maybe from the arrangements they ’ d made while Felix was in the hospital—and begged him to intercede with the crowd . To explain for him that he understood what happened and promised they would never see Miss Appleberry again . And good to his word , in the morning she was gone , and nobody at Eva Dell Elementary ever saw her again . Even Felix Diaz does not know what happened to her afterward .
That was Southern California , 1942 , and this is the repeating lesson of American history . Which is this : Dismissing people wholesale might give you free reign to bring out the paddle , but it doesn ’ t mean that some of those people won ’ t cling to the chair .