“ I continue to listen to folks at home , ” said Senator John Barrasso of Wyoming , a member of the Republican leadership . “ Their concerns are to stop the flow , and the way you do that is to treat these children humanely and send them back home . ”
At the moment , the request for more border money and resources is bogged down in Congress , and it is unlikely that the House and Senate will reach any agreement before departing on their August recess , leaving all sides frustrated and unhappy . As Cubans poured into Key West beginning in April 1980 , Florida was overwhelmed , and Mr. Graham and other state officials pressed the Carter administration and Congress for help . Since Florida did not have the facilities to house all those arriving , the federal government began dispersing them around the country — as it is doing today with the unaccompanied minors . One of the locations was Fort Chaffee , Ark. , where a series of disturbances by the refugees caused injuries and damage and alarmed nearby residents .
Governor Clinton pressed the Carter administration to stop sending refugees to his state and seemed to win a commitment . But President Jimmy Carter , struggling in his re-election effort , informed Mr. Clinton in August that the government was going to be forced to close camps in Wisconsin and Pennsylvania — important presidential electoral states . The refugees there would be sent to Arkansas , creating a political nightmare for Mr. Clinton in the final weeks of his re-election campaign .
Mr. Clinton recalled the tense conversation in his book “ My Life. ” He said he had told Mr. Carter , unsuccessfully , “ Send them to a fort in some warm place out West you ’ re not going to win in November anyway . ”
Mr. Clinton ’ s Republican opponent , Frank White , turned pictures of the disturbances at Fort Chaffee into an effective television advertisement against Mr. Clinton by suggesting the incumbent governor cared more about helping President Carter than the people of Arkansas . Mr. Clinton went on to lose that race , and Mr. Carter was also badly hurt by his handling of the Cuban refugee crisis , contributing to his loss as well . Mr. Graham , who did not face re-election until 1982 , was credited for his management of the boatlift response and went on to win another term as governor and three as senator .
Immigration advocates say the nation can contend with the current crisis as well .
“ We can deal with this , ” said Representative Joe Garcia , the Florida Democrat who now represents Key West . “ This is manageable . ”
Mr. Garcia noted that such influxes can produce unexpected results , recounting the story of one Cuban youth named Melquíades who came to Florida on his own as a teenager in the 1960s as part of a humanitarian effort overseen by the Roman Catholic Church .
“ Melquíades grew up to be Mel Martinez , ” Mr. Garcia said , referring to the prominent Florida Republican , “ senator , cabinet member and head of his party . ”