Construction workers replace a section of the Mexico-U.S. border at Tijuana , Mexico , June 28 , 2018 . ( Jorge Dunes/Reuters )
A wall or fencing is relatively mild as far as immigration enforcement goes .
It ’ s a wonder that Democrats haven ’ t staked out a negotiating position demanding the destruction of already-existing barriers along the U.S.-Mexico border .
Their opposition to President Donald Trump ’ s border wall ( or , more properly , his so-called wall ) is now so total as to be nearly indistinguishable from opposition to any serious infrastructure at the border at all .
The partial government shutdown is fueled by a clash of visions over , ultimately , the legitimacy of borders and , proximately , physical barriers to make our southern border more secure .
Trump has the better part of the argument , but his lurch into the shutdown with no discernible strategy and his scattershot pronouncements make it unlikely that his view will carry the day .
Obviously , a 2,000-mile-long border wall rivaling the best work of the Ming Dynasty never made any sense and was never going to happen . Nor , short of Trump finding a latter-day Gen. Winfield Scott to go occupy Mexico City , was Mexico going to suffer the humiliation of funding a Yanqui border wall .
This was all lurid fantasy , and Trump has conceded as much , although he will , at times , deny having conceded as much . His ambitions are now much more reasonable , involving the kind of up-to-date bollard or “ steel slat ” fencing that already exists in places . But he ’ s running into an opposition that is much less reasonable .
Triggered as always by Trump , and growing more dovish on immigration almost by the hour , Democrats are treating the notion of a wall as practically a human-rights abuse . President Barack Obama routinely droned people without generating as much high dudgeon as Trump does asking for $ 5 billion to better fortify our southern border .
Chuck Schumer calls the wall “ medieval. ” It ’ s true that the core idea — a physical barrier to impede the movement of people — isn ’ t a new technology . The basic concept proved out so long ago that there hasn ’ t been any need to revisit it .
Nancy Pelosi deems the wall “ immoral. ” She sounds like West Berlin Mayor Willy Brandt condemning the Berlin Wall as the “ Wall of Shame ” — when the East Germans built their border barrier to keep people in , whereas we only want to keep illegal entrants out .
If a wall is immoral , what standing does the current 350 miles of primary fencing have ? Isn ’ t it just as hateful as what Trump proposes ? The $ 5 billion the president wants wouldn ’ t even match what we already have — it would construct about 150 miles of new barriers where none currently exist .
A wall or fencing is relatively mild as far as immigration enforcement goes . It doesn ’ t involve deporting anyone . It doesn ’ t separate families . It doesn ’ t prosecute and detain anyone . It doesn ’ t deny any illegal immigrant currently working in the United States a job . All it does is seek to avoid getting in a situation where these other things are necessary in the first place .
A wall doesn ’ t close down the border , or close us off to the world . There are still ports of entry . People can still travel to and from Mexico . People can still , for that matter , fly to Paris . It just diminishes illegal entry at certain strategic points .
Robust fencing made an enormous difference in stopping illegal crossings in Yuma , Arizona . The area had only about 5 miles of fencing in the mid-2000s , then saw the extent of its fencing increase tenfold . Illegal crossings plummeted .
Yuma got that additional fencing thanks to the passage of the Secure Fence Act in 2006 on a bipartisan basis , prior to the Democratic Party becoming unsettled by the prospect of putting physical barriers in the way of illegal entrants .
The wall isn ’ t the most important immigration enforcement measure . Requiring employers to verify the legal status of their employees would be much more consequential . But the wall has taken on great symbolic significance . What it denotes , perhaps more than anything else , is the growing irrationality of the Democrats on immigration .