The effectiveness of the Anduril system in pilot programs so far , and the administration ’ s deepening commitment to the technology , raises an obvious — if awkward — question for homeland security officials as Trump spends billions of taxpayer dollars to speed up his border wall project . If the Anduril system can spot migrants and smugglers from miles away and guide U.S. agents right to them , what is the point of building a costly physical barrier in isolated border areas where there are few crossings ?
In their opposition to Trump ’ s physical border barrier , many Democrats have promoted “ smart ” border technology as a more effective and cheaper alternative to the $ 15 billion concrete-and-steel version Trump is racing to install and which he is promoting on the campaign trail .
The CBP contract announced Thursday designates the Anduril system as a “ program of record , ” meaning a technology so essential it will be a dedicated item in the homeland security budget . While it does not specify a dollar amount , Anduril executives said the agreement is worth several hundred million dollars .
CBP said in a statement Thursday that it plans to deploy 200 “ Autonomous Surveillance Towers ” by 2022 . It says agents can set up an individual such system at a location along the border in just two hours .
“ These towers give agents in the field a significant leg up against the criminal networks that facilitate illegal cross-border activity , ” Border Patrol Chief Rodney Scott said in the statement , which does not mention Anduril by name . “ The more our agents know about what they encounter in the field , the more safely and effectively they can respond , ” Scott said .
Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden has criticized Trump ’ s border wall plans and said he will not spend money on physical barriers . If elected , he will face intense pressure to repudiate Trump ’ s signature project and bring the bulldozers and excavators to a halt .
Anduril ’ s contract leaves the company in a position to benefit regardless of the outcome in November , with an artificial-intelligence system that could reinforce the president ’ s physical wall or develop into the kind of virtual wall Democrats have said they prefer .
“ No matter where we go as a country , we ’ re going to need to have situational awareness on the border , ” Matthew Steckman , Anduril ’ s chief revenue officer , said in an interview . “ No matter if talking to a Democrat or a Republican , they agree that this type of system is needed . ”
Anduril ’ s founder , 27-year-old Palmer Luckey , sold his previous company , Oculus , to Facebook for $ 3 billion in 2014 . He was forced out at Facebook in 2017 after a donation to a pro-Trump group angered co-workers .
Luckey , who grew up in Southern California ’ s Orange County , cultivates a nerd-warrior image , dressing in flip-flops and Hawaiian shirts while running the company he named after a sword from “ The Lord of the Rings. ” Venture capital firms recently poured another $ 200 million into Anduril , which is now valued at nearly $ 2 billion , the company said Wednesday .
Steckman , who previously worked for Pentagon contractor Palantir , said Anduril ’ s broader goal is to compete in the larger , more lucrative defense contracting market . The deal with CBP allows Anduril to showcase its artificial-intelligence system , Lattice , as an all-seeing shield that can protect U.S. military bases and other strategic sites .
Anduril also has developed aerial drones that can be deployed to feed the Lattice system , but the company said it is not planning to use that equipment for its contract with CBP and will rely instead on the tower-mounted mobile cameras .
Border security experts and Anduril executives say the Lattice system is a breakthrough in border technology . The company claims the artificial-intelligence software is capable of distinguishing between an animal and a human with 97 percent accuracy , reducing the number of times agents respond to sensors triggered by cattle , deer , peccary and other large mammals wandering the borderlands .
The system does not use facial recognition or other personal-identification technology , minimizing the privacy concerns typically associated with the deployment of powerful government surveillance equipment across large open spaces . It is designed primarily for use in remote border regions with few people , not urban areas with more crossings , to provide agents with what the company calls “ wide area understanding . ”
From the beginning of Trump ’ s presidency , CBP officials embraced , and modified , his original vision for a Great Wall-style edifice along the border , resulting in the see-through steel bollard design now under construction . CBP officials say the barrier is the physical anchor of a broader “ wall system ” that includes layers of surveillance technology , including cameras and sensors .
The Anduril system can be deployed in steep , mountainous areas where barrier construction is not feasible , or as a secondary layer with a panoramic view of new border fence .
CBP ’ s previous , billion-dollar attempt to build a virtual wall ended in failure a decade ago , and in recent years Trump has often mocked Democrats ’ preference for such systems while touting his version .
“ They ’ d say , ‘ No , no , we don ’ t need a wall . We can have airplanes flying above . We can have . . . people taking pictures . We can have drones , ’ ” Trump said last month during a trip to the border in Arizona to commemorate the completion of 200 linear miles of new steel barriers . “ I say , what are you going to do ? Take pictures of everyone flowing across ? ”
“ Walls are the greatest technology , ” the president said . “ They work . ”
An irony of CBP ’ s contract with Anduril is that during the past three years that the Trump administration has spent billions of dollars to put up a physical barrier , technological advances have finally made a virtual wall system feasible . The Lattice system relies on some of the same chip technology developed by Tesla and other companies for driverless cars , Steckman said .
CBP officials for years have been eager to develop more-advanced surveillance systems , and they credit higher interdiction rates in recent years with improvements in their detection abilities , or “ situational awareness . ”
“ The desire of the Border Patrol for quite some time has been complete situational awareness for all the territory between ports of entry , but it ’ s never been achieved because it was never invested in , ” said Ronald Vitiello , a 30-year Border Patrol veteran who served as acting director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement until Trump abruptly removed him last year .
Vitiello said he is skeptical a Biden administration will be willing to invest in Anduril because the Democratic Party ’ s base is so intensely opposed to Trump ’ s immigration policies . “ I don ’ t think the political winds will allow him to advocate for stronger border security or even smarter investments , ” Vitiello said . “ I just don ’ t see it because the conversation around border security right now is so skewed . ”
Adam Isacson , a security analyst at the Washington Office on Latin America ( WOLA ) , said the Anduril system “ fits right into Democratic Party rhetoric about having smart border technology instead of a fifth-century wall . ”
But he cautioned it could clash with “ post-George Floyd-era concerns about law enforcement having too much power , ” a reference to the black man whose death sparked national protests on race and police violence .
“ It ’ s hard to gauge where the Democratic Party is , ” Isacson said . “ And some of the folks who were for border technology in the past may be less trusting , if given this new ability , of a law enforcement agency like the Border Patrol that has aligned itself so much with Trump . ”
Luckey ’ s reputation as a Trump supporter could also hurt the company , Isacson added .
Department of Homeland Security officials say they remain on track to complete 450 miles of new barriers by the end of 2020 . To add miles as quickly as possible , the Trump administration has been digging , blasting and bulldozing through national forests , wildlife preserves and other protected areas in western states where the federal government already controls the land .
Environmental groups and traditional ranching families along the border have watched with alarm as Trump ’ s barrier bisects desert ecosystems , erases archaeological sites and cuts across stream channels and rivers . The Anduril system offers a low-impact , impermanent , greener alternative that appeals to landowners along the border .
William McDonald , a fifth-generation rancher in southern Arizona and lifelong Republican who has denounced the wall as destructive and wasteful , said “ smart ” border technology is nonintrusive and effective . “ It ’ s already working where it ’ s in place , ” he said . “ It has a low impact on the environment and wildlife movement . It targets illegal crossers , period . ”
Large physical barriers are considered most effective in more urban areas of the border , where agents have less time to interdict someone and prevent them from getting into a vehicle . In more remote areas where agents are sparse , smugglers and border crossers can breach or climb over barriers to advance northward , but the nearest road may be several miles away , giving Border Patrol a time advantage . Their biggest challenge is detection .
In 2010 , then-DHS Secretary Janet Napolitano ended a CBP contract with Boeing to build a virtual wall system , SBInet , that was gathered information from electronic sensors along U.S. borders .
CBP officials say the government pulled the plug amid frustrations that agents were flooded with raw data and sensor input that didn ’ t mesh with their existing enforcement tools and techniques .
Since then , Israeli defense contractor Elbit Systems has deployed sophisticated cameras in towers along the border , but its equipment is more expensive and less mobile than Anduril ’ s , current and former CBP officials say . The Anduril towers have a smaller footprint and can be moved around easily , so they also help CBP avoid some of the land-use conflicts that arise when the company requests access to tribal land , private property and environmentally sensitive areas .
Former CBP commissioner Kevin McAleenan , who resigned as acting DHS secretary last fall , established a “ CBP Innovation Team ” in 2016 to pair experienced border security officials with technology firms . The agency began working with Anduril when the company was being formed .
McAleenan said he is not aware of any other security firm developing a federal program of record so quickly .
“ We took a company and technology solution from initial concept , to pilot , to widespread deployment in less than four years , ” McAleenan said in an interview . “ That ’ s unprecedented . That ’ s how it should work . ”
The system Anduril has developed in concert with CBP is worth installing regardless of whether border wall construction goes forward , the company ’ s Steckman said , because U.S. agents need surveillance capabilities with or without a physical barrier .
“ You can get those eyeballs through people or with an autonomous system , ” he said . “ I would argue that because of the massive labor and cost reduction in not using people , this is a pretty good way to put eyes on whatever you need to put eyes on . ”
Steckman said the Lattice system is not built to capture personal information , only categories of moving objects .
“ We know at a distance whether it ’ s a person , it ’ s a cow , it ’ s a vehicle , it ’ s an aircraft , it ’ s a ship , ” Steckman said . “ We don ’ t know anything below that level , but for border security , especially in rural locations , that ’ s enough to make a decision . ”
“ Instead of a having a person ’ s brain be the sensor fusion engine , ” he said , “ the software surfaces information up to the point that a decision can be made , so the user can then go and do something about it . ”