Historically , the House has stuck to small-bore immigration fixes . | JAY WESTCOTT/███ House group nears immigration deal
A small , bipartisan House group is nearly finished with its immigration reform plan , which it hopes to announce the week of April 8 when Congress returns from recess .
But lawmakers and leadership are carefully eying several significant lingering technical issues to bring it across the finish line .
The key issues causing concern are fears about the price tag of immigration reform , the pathway to citizenship for the nation ’ s 11 million illegal immigrants and the process by which a slow-moving House Republican Conference might introduce and vote on a bill that would overhaul the system .
These items — described by several sources involved in the secret talks — are under active consideration by the group and the senior members of the Republican leadership as the House group readies for its roll-out when Congress returns from a two-week long break .
That the House is this far along is significant because of the deep partisanship that has slowed legislative action on the issue over the last three years . Historically , the House has stuck to small-bore immigration fixes , like securing the border , instead of comprehensive reform . Talks have progressed to the level that both Democratic and Republican leadership are being kept in the loop .
The elements of the plan , which were described by multiple sources , are very fluid and subject to change .
Sources describe the House plan as not differing to starkly from a compromise being drafted by the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight , a bipartisan group that is also nearing the finish line . Business and labor interests reached a deal Saturday on a long-thorny issue regarding visas for low-skilled workers , which significantly increases the chances of an overall deal in the Senate .
But the GOP-controlled House has always been seen as a less hospitable place for full-scale immigration reform . Nonetheless , the recent progress made by the House group is promising . Among Republicans , Reps. Raul Labrador of Idaho and Mario Diaz-Balart of Florida are seen as key .
One is cost — the price of securing the border is steep . People involved in the talks are hopeful that the cost can be offset with increased visa fees . But Republicans are more concerned about the burden undocumented workers could put on the nation ’ s entitlement structure — that is , the massive cost that are absorbed officially into the nation ’ s newly implemented health care system . The GOP is considering demanding that language be inserted into any bill to make it clear that 11 million new immigrants can not get plopped onto the nation ’ s social safety net .
Sources describe the House GOP plan for a pathway to citizenship as more of an obstacle course — people involved in the negotiations prefer to call it a “ pathway to status. ” The plan does eventually lead to citizenship , according to sources familiar with it , but such a step could take roughly two decades .
Under the House plan , it would take more than 10 years to get a green card , and will require paying back taxes , a hefty penalty , sources say . Undocumented immigrants would have to gain proficiency in English and make some sort of admission that the law was broken . Some negotiators have floated the idea of having an undocumented immigrant “ plead guilty ” to breaking immigration laws , according to sources involved , . The lengthy time it would take for undocumented immigrants to get a green card and citizenship will also help lower the cost of the bill , since the Congressional Budget Office assesses budgetary impact in a 10-year period , the sources said .