Acting U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services Director Ken Cuccinelli on Monday defended a controversial Trump administration rule that would link an immigrant 's ability to secure green cards to their use of certain public programs .
Cuccinelli told reporters at the White House that the `` public charge '' change promotes “ the ideals of self-sufficiency and personal responsibility . ”
`` We certainly expect people of any income to be able to stand on their own two feet . If people are not able to be self-sufficient , then this negative factor is going to bear very heavily against them in a decision about whether they ’ ll be able to become a legal permanent resident , '' he said .
“ A poor person can be prepared to be self-sufficient . Many have been through the history of this country . Let ’ s not look at that as the be all and end all , it ’ s not the deciding factor . Which is why we continue to use the totality of circumstances test . ”
Under the rule set to be published in the Federal Register on Wednesday , receiving benefits like food stamps , Medicaid or housing subsidies will count negatively against a noncitizen 's chance of getting a green card or visa . The `` public charge '' designation previously only singled out noncitizens receiving cash subsidies . Immigration advocacy groups have expressed concerns that expanding the designation could discourage immigrants from seeking necessary assistance .
Cuccinelli 's mention of a `` totality of circumstances test '' refers to the holistic evaluation immigration officials will make over public charge designation , which also includes age and health .
One reporter asked whether the rule change signals a shift from the promise on the Statue of Liberty to welcome `` your tired , your poor . ''
`` I ’ m certainly not prepared to take anything down off the Statue of Liberty . We have a long history of being one of the most welcoming nations in the world on a lot of bases , '' Cuccinelli responded . `` Whether you be an asylee , whether you be coming here to joining your family , or immigrating yourself . ''
Cuccinelli was also pressed on criticism that the rule change targets Hispanic communities in particular .
`` First of all , this is 140-year-old legal structure , '' he said . `` We ’ re dealing with the most recent iteration of it , but this is not new . This was the same question might have been asked when my Italian immigrant ancestors were coming in , and all through that 140 years . ''
When asked again about the majority of those likely to be affected being Hispanic , Cuccinelli said that `` if we had been having this conversation 100 years ago it would ’ ve applied to more Italians . ”