In 2012 , the Republican Party stood for the ancient biblical proposition that the sins of the father should be visited upon the son . Mitt Romney captured its presidential nomination while vowing to veto the Dream Act , which would allow immigrants brought here illegally as children to gain citizenship .
Not coincidentally , Romney lost the election while getting just 27 percent of the Latino vote . Many Republicans concluded they had no choice but to revamp their policies on issues of particular concern to Hispanics . As prominent conservative blogger Erick Erickson so bluntly put it , `` The fastest growing demographic in America is n't going to vote for a party that sounds like that party hates brown people . ''
The new statement of `` principles on immigration '' issued by congressional Republicans does not sound hateful toward brown people . In fact , it flatly contradicts Romney on the Dream Act . `` It is time to provide an opportunity for legal residence and citizenship for those who were brought to this country as children through no fault of their own , those who know no other place as home , '' it declares .
That 's not the only change . The 2012 party platform heaped scorn on `` any form of amnesty for those who , by intentionally violating the law , disadvantage those who have obeyed it '' and promised steps to force what Romney winningly called `` self-deportation . ''
But this outline agrees , a bit grudgingly , that `` these persons could live legally and without fear in the U.S. '' if they meet certain requirements , like paying back taxes , passing background checks and learning English . Only a `` special path to citizenship '' is categorically rejected .
On the latter point , the Republicans disagree with President Barack Obama , who wants to create a new avenue for the undocumented to be naturalized . But Republicans do n't rule out eventual citizenship , and they do address the most pressing concerns of the people here illegally : ending their fear of deportation and letting them work legally .
It 's a major change , which makes it significant but also risky—not because of the response it may draw from Hispanics but because of the reaction it may provoke among Republicans . Many of them see unauthorized migrants as an affront to the rule of law , an alien cultural influence and a political threat .
The House GOP leadership has the thankless task of changing the minds of these conservatives—or at least keeping them from a revolt that would derail legislation and further alienate Latino voters . The need to appease tea partiers explains why the blueprint contains so many tough but ill-considered demands .
`` We must secure our borders now and verify that they are secure , '' it says , which is like saying we must eradicate all criminal activity or ensure that every childhood is happy . Our borders will never be made secure as long as large numbers of poor foreigners see America as the end of the rainbow . They will find ways to get in .
Republicans generally oppose burdensome regulations of business , and many of them are leery of giving the federal government more power to monitor law-abiding citizens . But somehow they are infatuated with E-Verify , which would require the federal government to confirm the employment eligibility of every new hire in America .
This system , endorsed in the new statement , is billed as a weapon against foreigners who break our laws . But it would apply equally to native-born Americans who have never so much as missed a dental checkup . When the federal employment verification system makes mistakes , as it does , businesses are forced to postpone hiring and applicants end up cooling their heels .
`` Every tyranny silences opponents by controlling their ability to earn a living , '' wrote economist John Cochrane of the University of Chicago and the Hoover Institution in The Wall Street Journal . `` How is it that so many supposedly freedom-loving , small-government Republicans want to arm our nation 's politicized bureaucracy—fresh from the scandals at the IRS and elsewhere—with the power to do just that ? ''
The good news is that these GOP members grasp the need to moderate their policy . They also offer an authentic compromise : granting legal status to millions of people but not assuring them eventual citizenship . The bad news is that the statement perpetuates the fantasy of wiping out illegal immigration by empowering government .
But the congressional Republicans are halfway toward reality , which represents big progress . And who knows ? Maybe in time they 'll realize that reality is n't going to meet them in the middle .