Senators voted Thursday to allow illegal immigrants to get legal status before the border with Mexico is fully deemed secure , marking the first vote on changes to the immigration bill and signaling that the core of the deal is holding .
The 57-43 vote saw five Republicans join with 52 Democrats to back the crux of the immigration bill , which grants quick legal status to illegal immigrants , giving them the right to live and work in the U.S. without fear of deportation , but withholding citizenship rights for more than a decade while the government works on border security .
Sen. Charles E. Grassley , Iowa Republican , tried to amend the bill to require that border security come before any legalization . Mr. Grassley , a veteran of the 1986 immigration law that gave amnesty to 3 million illegal immigrants but never followed through on security , said delaying legalization will pressure Homeland Security Department officials to follow through on better border protection .
“ Border security first , like promised , legalize next , ” Mr. Grassley said . “ If the bill passes as is , the secretary only needs to submit two plans before processing people through the legalization program . ”
As written , the bill calls for more money to be spent before illegal immigrants can get their full path to citizenship . But they could still get immediate legal status and work permits , and there are no hard border security metrics in the bill before citizenship can be achieved .
The bill ’ s authors have said that is by design . They argue the only way to make illegal immigrants come forward is to guarantee them citizenship rights at the end of the path .
SEE ALSO : Obama to meet with Democratic senators Thursday , keep pushing immigration reform
“ What do we do for five , six years until the border is fully secure ? It ’ s going to take awhile to do it . We need to bring equipment there , we need to build fences there , ” said Sen. Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat .
While Mr. Grassley ’ s amendment was blocked , a bigger border security fight is still looming on an amendment by Sen. John Cornyn , a Texas Republican whose proposal would still allow illegal immigrants to get immediate legal status , but would require stiff border security before they get green cards .
In Thursday ’ s vote , the five Republicans who backed the immigration deal included four who helped write the bill and whose votes were assured . The other Republican was Sen. Lisa Murkowski , Alaska Republican , whose vote signaled she is ready to sign on to the deal .
Two Democrats — Sens . Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Mark Pryor of Arkansas — voted for the border security provision , signaling they are unlikely to support any final bill without major changes to it .