In the wake of the 2010 midterm elections , Republicans were energized . Their perception was that President Obama , in his first two years in the Oval Office , shunned bipartisan cooperation and intentionally aggravated Republicans in an effort to get his progressive policies enacted into law . Now that the GOP had control of some small percentage of the federal government , Obama would have to at least attempt to reach across the aisle .
That 's how the argument went . But the reality has fallen far short of that . The Obama Administration has decided that , instead of reforming laws that are on the books , they 'd simply not enforce them . From DOMA to the DREAM Act to No Child Left Behind , Obama has used executive power rather than going through Congress .
“ We we work to achieve our policy goals in the most effective and appropriate way possible , ” the [ White House ] official said . “ Often times Congress has blocked efforts ( ie [ No Child Left Behind ] and DREAM ) and we look to pursue other appropriate means of achieving our policy goals . On gay rights , too , the administration has asked agencies to do less . In February 2011 the Justice Department announced it would not defend DOMA against court challenges — an unusual step for the agency , which typically defends legal challenges to laws on the books . The tactic has its start in the earliest days of the administration . In October 2009 , the DOJ announced it would not prosecute medical marijuana users or suppliers in states where it ’ s legal , despite the state laws contradicting federal law .
This is a shocking expansion of executive power that Congress-loving progressives used to abhor . It turns out , though , that when the President has a D next to his name , progressives are in favor of unprecedented expansions to executive power .
Jonathan Turley , a constitutional scholar that Friess quotes , notes that `` President Obama has fulfilled the dream of an impreial presidency that Richard Nixon strived for ... this is a President who is now functioning as a super legislator . '' He 's right . Progressives should be careful what they wish for . They 've cheered President Obama 's unilateral power expansions every step of the way - from drone strikes that kill American citizens to recess appointments done without a recess , they should stop to think what would happen if these powers were possessed by `` the other side . ''
Imagine , a legal expert writes , that a Republican president simply announces that his Environmental Protection Agency is going to halt enforcement of pollution regulations . Or that a Republican 's IRS is n't going to enforce the Obamacare mandate .
When George W. Bush was in power , progressives were outraged at his expansion of executive power . President Obama has largely kept every executive power that Bush claimed and expanded the executive 's power even further .