ELIZABETH , N.J. ( ███ ) - Democratic lawmakers joined protesters outside immigration detention facilities in New Jersey and Texas on Sunday for Father ’ s Day demonstrations against the Trump administration ’ s practice of separating children from their parents at the U.S.-Mexico border .
“ This must not be who we are as a nation , ” said Representative Jerrold Nadler , one of seven members of Congress from New York and New Jersey who met with five detainees inside a facility in Elizabeth , New Jersey , including three who said they had young relatives removed from their care after seeking asylum at the border .
The events came as news stories highlighting the family separations intensified political pressure on the White House , even from some of President Donald Trump ’ s fellow Republicans .
U.S. officials said on Friday that nearly 2,000 children were separated from adults at the border between mid-April and the end of May .
In May , U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a “ zero tolerance ” policy in which all those apprehended entering the United States illegally , including those seeking asylum , would be criminally charged , which generally leads to children being separated from their parents .
Administration officials have defended the tactic as necessary to secure the border and suggested it would act as a deterrent to illegal immigration .
But the policy has drawn condemnation from medical professionals , religious leaders and immigration activists , who warn that some children could suffer lasting psychological trauma . The children are held in government facilities , released to adult sponsors or placed in temporary foster care .
In South Texas on Sunday , several Democratic lawmakers , including Senator Jeff Merkley , visited a Border Patrol Processing Center in McAllen to call attention to the policy , while Representative Beto O ’ Rourke , who is running for the U.S. Senate in Texas , led a protest march to a temporary detention facility for immigrant children set up near El Paso .
O ’ Rourke told the demonstrators they had to bear the burden of “ what we now know to be happening . ”
“ I want that burden to be so uncomfortable for so many of us that it forces us to act , it places the public pressure on those in positions of public trust and power to do the right thing for our country , ” O ’ Rourke , who is seeking to unseat Republican Senator Ted Cruz , said to applause .
Some moderate Republicans have also called on Trump to stop the separations . Senators Susan Collins and Jeff Flake wrote to White House officials on Saturday seeking more information on the policy .
People participate in a protest against a recent U.S. immigration policy of separating children from their families when they enter the United States as undocumented immigrants , outside the Tornillo Tranit Centre , in Tornillo , Texas , U.S. June 17 , 2018 . ███/Monica Lozano
“ It is inconsistent with our American values to separate these children from their parents , ” Collins said on CBS ’ “ Face the Nation ” on Sunday .
Trump has sought to blame Democrats , saying their support for passage of a broader immigration bill would end the separations .
White House adviser Kellyanne Conway said on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” on Sunday : “ As a mother , as a Catholic , as somebody who has got a conscience . ... I will tell you that nobody likes this policy . ”
“ You saw the president ( say ) on camera that he wants this to end , ” she added .
A spokeswoman for Melania Trump told CNN on Sunday that the first lady “ hates to see children separated from their families ” and hopes lawmakers from both parties can agree on immigration reform .
In an opinion piece in the Washington Post , former first lady Laura Bush , wife of the previous Republican president , George W. Bush , said she lives in a border state and appreciates the need to enforce and protect the U.S. borders .
“ But this zero-tolerance policy is cruel . It is immoral . And it breaks my heart , ” Bush wrote , adding the images were “ eerily reminiscent of the Japanese American internment camps of World War II , now considered to have been one of the most shameful episodes in U.S. history . ”
Democrats have accused the president of effectively turning the children into political hostages to secure stricter immigration measures , such as funding for a U.S.-Mexico border wall .
“ Stop lying to the American people . This is your policy , ” Democratic U.S. Representative Hakeem Jeffries said in New Jersey .
Democrats in the U.S. House of Representatives will introduce legislation this week aimed at stopping separations , mirroring a similar Senate bill sponsored by Democrat Dianne Feinstein . But neither bill has much hope of securing enough support in the Republican-controlled Congress , let alone surviving Trump ’ s veto pen .
Roy Garcia , 43 , attended the New Jersey protest with his wife , Linda , and their sons , 8-year-old Julian and 11-year-old Sebastian .
“ It ’ s hard for me to enjoy Father ’ s Day knowing what ’ s happening to other children and families , ” he said . “ It ’ s heartbreaking . ”