During a media briefing Tuesday , Vice President Mike Pence made a stunning revelation about who 's funding the massive caravan of migrants currently headed for the southern U.S. border .
Prompted by President Donald Trump , Pence stepped up and said , `` I spoke to President [ Juan Orlando ] Hernandez of Honduras . He told me that the caravan that ’ s now making its way through Mexico headed for the southern border was organized by leftist organizations and financed by Venezuela . '' Read more on this development here .
On Wednesday 's episode of `` The Glenn Beck Radio Program , '' Glenn reacted to the vice president 's announcement .
`` Have you noticed that the press is not concerned at all about this caravan ? '' Glenn asked . `` They say the caravan 's not going to make it up to the United States , that it 's just nonsense and why are they talking about it . Really ? ''
Glenn noted that the 7,000-person-strong migrant caravan seems to be both a political message and a weapon .
`` We know that this migrant invasion force was organized in Honduras by the leftist political party looking to embarrass the current right-wing government , '' Glenn said . `` We know that . But you 're not going to hear that on television . You 're not going to hear that from the leftist mainstream news . You wo n't hear it because that hurts their case . They want everybody to look like they 're just weak , and helpless , and children making a 2,500-mile march . Wow ! That seems pretty strong to me . This entire charade has indeed been one giant political stunt . ''
Glenn pointed out that moving more than 7,000 people across 2,500 miles is incredibly expensive . Who is paying for the food , water , medical care , transportation and more that these migrants are obviously receiving ?
`` Who is writing the check for all of this ? '' Glenn asked . `` If you ’ re Venezuelan President Maduro and you want to attack the United States , but barely have enough money to buy any toilet paper , how do you do it ? Well , you do n't use conventional means . You reach out to your allies , your revolutionaries , your Marxist zealots in South America and you organize and fund thousands of people to flood the U.S . border . ''
`` It 's a pretty inventive way to strike back , '' Glenn continued . `` Not only is it a form of economic warfare , but it also destabilizes the U.S. political structure . And that ’ s not to mention how many criminal elements might be tagging along . How many Venezuelan or Cuban spies are using this as cover to enter the country ? How many terrorists might be riding along with the intention of attacking U.S . targets ? ''
Watch the video clip above to hear more from Glenn .
To find the full episode , subscribers can tune-in anytime on-demand at TheBlaze TV . Not a subscriber ? Sign up for a FREE trial here .
Want more Glenn ? Visit “ The Glenn Beck Radio Program ” or listen live on TheBlaze weekdays 9 a.m.–noon ET . You can also check him out on Facebook , Twitter , and YouTube .