EXCLUSIVE : A sudden influx of illegal immigrants from Mexico requesting asylum is overwhelming immigration agents in San Diego , forcing agencies to rent hotel rooms for some undocumented families and release others to cities around the U.S .
Documents obtained exclusively by ███ show Immigration and Customs Enforcement has been paying for hotel rooms for dozens of recently arrived families to relieve overcrowding inside the San Ysidro and Otay Mesa , Calif. , processing centers . Some ICE employees are working overtime and others have been asked to volunteer to work weekend shifts . “ Duties include intake , placements , transports and release of family groups and unaccompanied minors , ” according to a memo obtained by ███ .
The surge has raised suspicions about what is driving the influx , amid claims that illegal immigrants have learned they can attempt to get asylum by using a few key words -- namely , by claiming they have a `` credible fear '' of drug cartels .
“ This clearly has to have been orchestrated by somebody , ” said former U.S. Attorney for Southern California Peter Nunez . “ It 's beyond belief that dozens or hundreds or thousands of people would simultaneously decide that they should go to the U.S. and make this claim . ”
Sources say one day last week , 200 border-crossers came through the Otay Mesa Port of Entry claiming asylum while and as many as 550 overflowed inside the processing center there and in nearby San Ysidro .
“ People were sleeping on floors – they had nowhere to put them , ” said one source , a long-time border agent and supervisor . “ This shouldn ’ t be happening . Unless there is an immediate and well-publicized policy change , this situation will become another debacle . ”
At a hotel near San Diego -- which ███ agreed not to identify for security reasons -- ICE vans arrived several times over the weekend with immigrant families . They were escorted to the second floor by two armed , uniformed agents . Two border agents secured the entrance and side door .
Documents obtained by ███ show that recently on a single day , dozens of illegal immigrants were being transferred to an area hotel where rooms cost $ 99 a night . Others were released to addresses in Texas , Florida and even Brooklyn , N.Y .
ICE sources say the addresses are almost always bogus . When they don ’ t show up for court , they are removed by an immigration judge in absentia .
Most of the immigrants came from Mexico , but others listed their native country as Haiti , Romania , Guatemala and Iraq . Some were over age 50 , others were under a year old . Thirty were transported to a hotel . Seventy were released around the country .
███ spoke to four agencies responsible for the San Diego situation last week . All deferred to the Department of Homeland Security press office in Washington , D.C. , which issued this statement :
“ Credible fear determinations are dictated by long standing statute , not an issuance of discretion . The USCIS officer must find that a 'significant possibility ’ exists that the individual may be found eligible for asylum or withholding or removal .
“ If the credible fear threshold is met , the individual is placed into removal proceedings in Immigration Court . The final decision on asylum eligibility rests with an immigration judge . ”
It is during this time – during removal proceedings – when illegal immigrants are released . Many do n't show up , as 91 percent of asylum claims from Mexico are denied .
Asylum claims from Mexico are highly unusual and critics say this is an orchestrated sham – it 's not about getting asylum , they say , but about overwhelming the system and getting a free pass into the U.S. and a court date for which no one will show up .
“ Hundreds of thousands of people have never returned and the list of people for whom warrants are outstanding is phenomenal , ” said Nunez . “ We have a long history of people absconding from immigration hearings of one sort of another , they just blend back into the community . ”
ICE sources say an estimated 600,000 to 800,000 illegal immigrants a year do not show up for their court date and disappear into the U.S .
The number of asylum claims is on the rise , almost tripling the last four years . Most come from Chinese , Egyptian and Ethiopian immigrants . Fewer than 200 a year come from Mexico , let alone 200 in a day . However , by claiming they have a “ credible fear of persecution ” if returned to Mexico , the immigrant is entitled to a series of interviews , hearings , proceedings and appeals that can drag on for years .
The initial evaluation usually is done in the border processing center by an asylum officer employed by USCIS .
Officials stress that meeting the `` credible fear '' standard is not a tentative asylum approval . It 's simply a step in the process .
An immigration spokesman said last week : `` The legal threshold for ‘ credible fear ’ is broad and low to ensure individuals who may face a 'significant possibility ' of persecution ... have the opportunity to have their case heard before an immigration judge . ''
Last week , an asylum officer heard the claims of the `` Dream 9 , '' nine Mexican nationals brought to the U.S. as children . Even though seven of the nine lived , worked and went to school in Mexico without incident , they were granted asylum . Most thought they would be deported .
“ The orders from Washington are to simply turn these people loose , ” said Ira Mehlman , a spokesman for the Federation for American Immigration Reform . “ All you have to say is you qualify for the Dream Act and/or you intend to apply , and they ’ re instructed by their higher-ups to simply turn these people loose , to set them free and let them pursue any path they want . ”
There are 57 immigration courts and 231 immigration judges . Immigration courts handle 280,000 proceedings each year -- an average of 1,243 per year per judge , or four decisions per day .
Asylum can be granted if the applicant has suffered past persecution or has a `` well-founded fear of persecution '' on account of race , religion , nationality , membership in a social group , or political opinion in their native country .