The Trump administration is probing several high-profile companies ’ use of guest-worker visas to see if they are using them to skirt the intention of the law and replace Americans with foreign workers , officials confirmed in a letter to Congress this week .
U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services also said it ’ s preparing new rules to govern the H-1B visa program , which is supposed to be open to high-skilled workers . That will include a request for Congress to pass new laws cracking down on abuse of the program .
The H-1B visa was a particular target of President Trump ’ s during the campaign , and now in office he ’ s taken early steps .
Last month he signed an executive order demanding an update to the program ’ s rules .
In the meantime , USCIS said in a letter to Sen. Charles E. Grassley , chairman of the Judiciary Committee , that agency officials have looked at cases involving Disney , Northeast Utilities and the University of California-San Francisco , which stand accused by employees of outsourcing jobs to H-1B visa holders .
In some cases the American workers were told to train their foreign worker replacements .
The H-1B program is attractive to many technology companies , and demand for the 85,000 visas — 20,000 of which are reserved for holders of high-level degrees — is extreme . All visas were accounted for this year in the first week of the application period .
Mr. Trump ’ s wife , Melania , used the H-1B to work in the U.S. as a fashion model in the 1990s .
But in recent years companies have been accused of trying to duck hiring American workers , and particularly computer scientists , by using the program to bring in foreign coders .
Mr. Grassley said that was an abuse of the intent .
“ Congress created the H-1B program to help American companies fill labor gaps when there aren ’ t enough American workers , ” he said . “ We need to get this problem fixed soon so no more Americans are unfairly displaced because a company chooses to abuse this program . ”