Even in an era where partisanship is on the rise , demographic changes exert a gravitational pull on policy and politics and are occasionally enough to overcome political divisions . What is more remarkable than President Obama ’ s decision on Friday to suspend deportations of some illegal immigrants is Republicans ’ relatively passive reaction to it .
Although some Republicans , like Rick Santorum and Alberto Gonzales , have denounced Mr. Obama ’ s decision , others have had a more equivocal response — unusually so in an election year in which both parties have responded to the smallest gaffe or the slightest opening with jaded and hyperbolic critiques .
A few influential Republicans , like William Kristol , have praised Mr. Obama ’ s decision outright . Others like Marco Rubio have pushed back on the circumstances of the decision , but less so its substance .
The presumptive Republican presidential nominee , Mitt Romney , has so far taken an ambiguous stand on Mr. Obama ’ s decision , largely avoiding questions about it . This is despite Mr. Romney having run to the right of his Republican adversaries on immigration during the primaries , often having used the issue to assert his conservative credentials .
If Mr. Romney eventually comes closer to a lukewarm acquiescence of Mr. Obama ’ s decision , he may be accused of flip-flopping . But candidates sometimes flip-flop when they conclude that the alternative might be more costly .
In the years leading up to the 2008 presidential election and the months immediately following it , a number of mostly liberal-leaning scholars proposed a theory called the “ emerging Democratic majority , ” which pointed out that some groups that were more favorably inclined toward Democrats were becoming more plentiful as a share of the American population .
The theory relies heavily on Hispanic voters , who represented about 9 percent of voters in the 2008 election , according to exit polls . Hispanics represented just 2 percent of the turnout in the 1992 presidential election , but the percentage has risen slowly but steadily since then .
A critique of the theory , and one which I mostly find persuasive , is proposed in various forms by analysts like Sean Trende of Real Clear Politics and Jamelle Bouie of The American Prospect .
Mr. Trende and Mr. Bouie make a number of arguments , but a simple one is that “ permanent ” majorities are usually an illusion . Instead , demographic and cultural changes produce shifts in public opinion , and the parties respond to them by changing their positions accordingly , in such a way that they gravitate toward splitting the electorate about 50-50 .
This may be an example of exactly the sort of adaptation that Mr. Trende and Mr. Bouie describe . Republicans , like any political party , are often guilty of prioritizing short-term tactical goals over long-term strategic ones . But many of them seem to see the writing on the wall on the immigration issue . The Republican nominees in 2000 , 2004 and 2008 , George W. Bush and John McCain , took relatively moderate stances on immigration , and it would not be surprising if Mr. Romney softened his position as well .
From 2009 to 2011 , about 2 million people became naturalized citizens of the United States . Few of these new citizens ( about 13 percent ) represented demographic groups like Europeans or Canadians that would traditionally be considered white . Instead , about 40 percent came from Asia , and 35 percent came from Latin America .
It would be a mistake to conclude that Hispanic and Asian-American voters care solely about immigration , as news media accounts sometimes suggest . Instead , a survey in December by the Pew Hispanic Center found that only about one-third of Hispanic registered voters listed immigration as an extremely important issue , whereas close to 50 percent said the same of jobs , education and health care .
Still , most Latinos in the Pew survey had disapproved of Mr. Obama ’ s handling of deportation policy , and most were aware that deportations had increased during Mr. Obama ’ s time in office .
In the Pew survey and in others , Mr. Obama ’ s approval ratings have not always been outstanding among Hispanic voters . But relatively few have said that they plan to vote for Mr. Romney .
The danger for Democrats was that these voters , unenthusiastic about both choices , might not have turned out to vote at all . Historically , Hispanics have not been as likely to register to vote as other groups , in part a reflection of the fact that a fair number of them are not United States citizens . However , voting participation has been relatively low , even among those Hispanics who were registered to vote .
Mr. Obama ’ s decision could motivate some additional turnout among these voters . If , for instance , Hispanic turnout increases by 5 percent , and 5 percent of Hispanics who might otherwise have voted for Mr. Romney now vote for Mr. Obama instead , it would swing a net of about 1 percentage point in support to Mr. Obama . That is hardly a game-changer , but it could matter in an election that could be very close .
If Mr. Romney treads softly on the issue , it may be to return the focus more to the economy . Many Hispanics were hit hard by the recession , and they are more of a swing vote than they are given credit for . The percentage of Hispanics voting for Democrats has varied in recent elections , from as low as 53 percent in 2004 to as high as 73 percent in 1996 . A charge of flip-flopping on immigration policy might be the lesser of evils for Mr. Romney if he wants to maximize his competitiveness among these voters .