House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and a number of other Democrats plan to fill the House gallery with illegal aliens when President Trump delivers his first State of the Union address on Tuesday .
ABC News reports at least 24 House Democrats plan to bring illegals -- the so-called `` Dreamers '' -- to watch the Tuesday night speech from the House gallery .
Click here for a free subscription to Todd 's newsletter : a must-read for Conservatives !
The illegal aliens will be sitting in seats that in previous years were meant for brave military heroes , law-abiding taxpayers and America 's best and brightest .
The sad truth is that Democrats would rather align themselves with foreign invaders who violated our national sovereignty , thumbed their nose at the rule of law , and pillaged and plundered taxpayer-funded resources .
Fox News presents the Todd Starnes Radio Show podcast - click here for a free copy !
And now , Pelosi has decided to turn the U.S. Capitol into a sanctuary - a safe haven - for people who are living in our nation illegally .
In response , President Trump should fill the remainder of the House gallery with Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents .
Imagine the message he could send to the world if he directed ICE agents to arrest every illegal alien in the House chamber - live on national television .
Just last week , an angry horde of illegals stormed the office of Senator Thom Tillis , R-N.C .
Other `` Dreamers '' staged a mock funeral in the Senate and hurled racial insults at Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , Breitbart News reported .
There are millions of immigrant Dreamers who want to come to the United States legally , but the Democrats have decided a rampaging mob of profane illegals would make better citizens .
So , if President Trump truly wants to demonstrate a no-nonsense , `` America First '' policy , he should round up every illegal alien attending the State of the Union address and put them on school buses with a one-way ticket back across the border .
And if it 's not asking too much , perhaps the Justice Department could launch an investigation to determine if Pelosi and the other Democrats broke federal law by harboring illegal aliens .
California has already been overrun by the foreign invaders . New York City waved the white flag without so much as a fight . We must not allow the Democrats to surrender Capitol Hill .