As the fight over the federal government shutdown entered the new year , President Trump on Tuesday expressed his desire to “ make a deal ” with House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi over funding for his border wall .
“ Border Security and the Wall ‘ thing ’ and Shutdown is not where Nancy Pelosi wanted to start her tenure as Speaker ! ” Trump tweeted . “ Let ’ s make a deal ? ”
Pelosi is poised to become speaker of the House when Democrats officially take back control of the chamber on Thursday . Trump ’ s comments come amid the news that House Democrats plan to introduce a legislative package to re-open the government on Thursday – though it is unclear whether Trump or Republicans in the Senate will go along with it .
███ has learned there is a briefing at the White House on Wednesday for the top two leaders of each party from each chamber for the new Congress to discuss the impasse .
The House Democratic plan will include one bill to fund the Department of Homeland Security at current levels through Feb. 8 , with $ 1.3 billion for border security . It does n't include money for the president 's desired wall on the border .
Whether the Republican-led Senate , under Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , will consider the bills — or if Trump would sign either into law — was unclear . McConnell spokesman Donald Stewart said Senate Republicans wo n't not take action without Trump 's backing .
`` It 's simple : The Senate is not going to send something to the president that he wo n't sign , '' Stewart said .
Even if only symbolic , the passage of the bills in the House would put fresh pressure on the president .
Republicans and Democrats have been at a standstill over President Trump 's demands for $ 5 billion to fund the border wall . Earlier Tuesday , the president ripped into Democrats for insisting they won ’ t fund a border wall .
“ One thing has now been proven , ” Trump tweeted . “ The Democrats do not care about Open Borders and all of the crime and drugs that Open Borders bring ! ”
Negotiations over the partial government shutdown stalled over the holidays .
“ Our negotiations are at an impasse at the moment , ” Sen. Richard Shelby , R-Ala. , the chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee , said on CBS ’ `` Face the Nation '' on Sunday . “ I wish it were not so . ”
Funding for a slew of federal agencies lapsed at midnight on Dec. 22 – just days before Christmas -- after Congress and the White House failed to pass a spending package . Nine of 15 Cabinet-level departments and dozens of agencies have closed , affecting about a quarter of the federal government .
With no resolution in sight , the shutdown is forcing hundreds of thousands of federal workers and contractors to stay home or work without pay . Museums and galleries popular with visitors and locals in the nation 's capital will close starting midweek if the partial shutdown of the federal government drags on .