Cards Against Humanity accurately advertises itself as `` a party game for horrible people . '' Yet , its latest promotional stunt — a sick burn on President Donald Trump 's border policies — reveals that it very well may be a force for good .
`` Donald Trump is a preposterous golem who is afraid of Mexicans . He is so afraid that he wants to build a twenty-billion dollar wall that everyone knows will accomplish nothing , '' Cards Against Humanity explained on its website . `` So we ’ ve purchased a plot of vacant land on the border and retained a law firm specializing in eminent domain to make it as time-consuming and expensive as possible for the wall to get built . ''
Customers buying into the company 's new promotion will each become property owners of a sliver of this land , making a government takeover of it that much more difficult .
There is , naturally , a commercial angle here . For customers who were willing to spend $ 15 , the company offered five other `` America-saving surprises '' that would be shipped to them throughout the month of December . The past tense is used here , as the offer has already sold out . Indeed , the effort has already raised $ 2 million to fight the border wall .
The company would n't elaborate on the nature of the surprise gifts , saying instead that `` The nature of a surprise is that it surprises you when it occurs . '' Fair enough . Still , it assured customers that the surprises would `` contain no sexual content , graphic violence , or footage of Donald Trump watching Russian prostitutes urinate on a bed Obama slept in . '' Good to know .
As well , its website included a promotional video that followed very much the mold of `` American Experience '' documentaries , adding regular PBS narrator Peter Coyote for flair . Featuring images of the far-right Charlottesville demonstrators , global warming , Trump 's bad hair ( with Jimmy Fallon obsequiously tousling it ) and anti-Black Lives Matter protests , it captures with nostalgia of the moment Cards Against Humanity `` saved America , '' in the past tense .
Trolling Trump is n't new for the company . Past expansion decks and products have been themed to highlight his many faults and , during the 2016 election , Cards Against Humanity funneled proceeds from the sales of similar packs to Hillary Clinton 's campaign .
While it 's Trump 's legislative incompetence that makes it rather unlikely that he 'll ever actually be able to build his much-touted wall and not the company 's strategy , it is still theoretically possible that Cards Against Humanity 's decision to purchase border land could become more than just a gimmick . Fingers crossed on that .