Sen. Marco Rubio is a main Republican point man on immigration reform , not to mention trying to get Hispanics to vote GOP for a change . And he was all over the TV news shows Sunday – seven venues ( two Spanish language ) – which may be a record – touting the points he ’ ll make when legislation is taken up this coming week .
But first he had a message for rapper Jay-Z , who went to Cuba recently on a trip with his wife , pop singer Beyoncé , that conservative critics saw as propaganda for a repressive country .
`` If Jay-Z was truly interested in the true state of affairs in Cuba , he would have met people that are being oppressed , including a hip-hop artist in Cuba [ jailed rapper Angel Yunier Remon Arzuaga ] who is right now being oppressed and persecuted and is undergoing a hunger strike because of his political lyrics , '' Senator Rubio said on ABC 's “ This Week . ”
`` Jay-Z needs to get informed , '' Rubio said . `` One of his heroes is Che Guevara . Che Guevara was a racist . Che Guevara was a racist that wrote extensively about the superiority of white Europeans over people of African descent , so he should inform himself on the guy that he ’ s propping up . ''
But aside from Cuba – a minor issue in immigration reform but important to Floridians like Rubio , whose parents emigrated from there – Rubio ’ s stance and now outspokenness on immigration could be risky for him and the Republican Party .
“ The gambit could pay off in spades by crowning a leading presidential contender in 2016 , or it could permanently damage the Republican ’ s brand with conservatives , ” writes Manu Raju at Politico .
Rubio is one of the bipartisan “ Gang of Eight ” senators who ’ ve taken the lead on immigration , but he has remained a bit of a wild card , pressured from both directions .
On Friday , the president of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement union called on Rubio to step down from the Gang of Eight , charging that proposed legislation “ offers legalization , or amnesty , before enforcement . ”
Sen. Jeff Sessions ( R ) of Alabama , a senior member of the Senate Judiciary Committee but not a member of the Gang of Eight , hammered the same point in a press release Sunday .
“ This proposal offers immediate legalization with unfulfilled promises of enforcement in the future , ” Senator Sessions said . “ This is contrary to the commitment … made to the American people and raises the same core problem as the 2007 proposal that was rejected by the American people . ”
“ The guest worker program in this proposal represents only a fraction of the increase in legal foreign workers that will be rapidly introduced , ” Sessions added . “ Including those illegal immigrants that are legalized , this bill , over 10 years , will result in at least 30 million new foreign workers – more than the entire population of Texas . ”
“ While this may mean lower wages for the business lobby , and more political power for AFL-CIO leadership , it will be bad for American workers – union and nonunion , ” he said . “ And it will expose taxpayers to enormous long-term costs , including trillions in unfunded liabilities for Medicare and Social Security from which low-wage foreign workers will draw more benefits than they pay in . ”
But such concerns seem unlikely to kill the bipartisan package in the Senate , although it could change certain elements through the amendment process .
In his interview appearances Sunday , Rubio appeared all in with the Gang of Eight proposal , pronouncing himself “ optimistic ” that reform legislation can be won .
“ I think this bill answers all of the questions that people raise , ” he told CBS ’ s Bob Schieffer on `` Face the Nation . '' “ That 's why it 's taken so long . That 's why we spent so much time on it . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ This bill does three things that are fundamentally important for our country , ” Rubio said . “ It modernizes our legal immigration system – something we need to do no matter what . It puts in place the toughest enforcement measures in the history of the United States , potentially in the world . And it once and for all deals with the issue of those that are here illegally , but does so in a way that is fair and compassionate but does not encourage people to come illegally in the future , and is n't unfair to the people that have done it the right way . ”
“ It will be a long process , hopefully a very open process , ” he said . “ And I think it will take some time but I believe we can get there . ''