President Obama said Tuesday that `` now 's the time '' for immigration reform , using an address in Las Vegas to try and energize renewed talks in Congress toward comprehensive legislation .
`` I 'm here today because the time has come for common-sense comprehensive immigration reform , '' Obama said .
The president , setting out to achieve an immigration overhaul where many before him have failed , was running into trouble even before he gave his address . Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , one of four Republican senators involved in a bipartisan effort to craft immigration legislation , earlier in the day blasted Obama for opposing a requirement to shore up border security before legalizing up to 11 million illegal immigrants .
Obama 's speech , and a separate fact sheet handed out by the White House , made clear that the administration does not want to link the path to citizenship to border enforcement .
The president said Tuesday that in order for immigration reform to work , `` It must be clear from the outset that there is a pathway to citizenship . ''
The comment , albeit subtle , was an apparent reference to a provision in the Senate blueprint that would not let illegal immigrants seek citizenship until border security is strengthened . Obama said that his conditions would only involve the illegal immigrants themselves -- he said that they would have to submit to a background check , pay back taxes and fines , learn English and get in the back of the line in order to apply .
Obama claimed a `` broad consensus '' was emerging on the issue itself , calling the plan outlined by Rubio and others `` very much in line '' with his own -- aside from the path-to-citizenship provision . `` For the first time in many years , Republicans and Democrats seem ready to tackle this problem together , '' he said , calling legislation `` within our grasp . ''
He said any plan should include the path to citizenship , but also a crackdown on employers who knowingly hire undocumented workers -- and a better system for verifying the status of those workers . He also called for streamlining the legal immigration system , providing visas for foreign entrepreneurs and retaining sought-after science and math graduate students .
The president has run into complaints from conservatives that his plan is tantamount to `` amnesty . ''
But the most problematic objection so far has come from Rubio -- a prominent Hispanic conservative who is vital to the bipartisan effort on Capitol Hill .
Speaking on ███ on Tuesday , Rubio insisted that illegal immigrants not be allowed to obtain green cards -- let alone citizenship -- `` until the enforcement stuff is in place . ''
`` I think that would be a terrible mistake , '' Rubio told ███ . `` We have a bipartisan group of senators that have agreed to that . For the president to try to move the goalposts on that specific requirement , as an example , does not bode well in terms of what his role 's going to be in this or the outcome . ''
He said : `` If that 's not in the bill , I wo n't support it . ''
Obama stressed Tuesday that if Congress can not move forward `` in a timely fashion , '' he will submit a proposal drafted by the White House .
Amid the exchanges , Republicans congressional leaders expressed a willingness to debate the issue while cautioning against Obama getting too involved .
`` There are a lot of ideas about how best to fix our broken immigration system , '' House Speaker John Boehner said in a statement . `` Any solution should be a bipartisan one , and we hope the president is careful not to drag the debate to the left and ultimately disrupt the difficult work that is ahead in the House and Senate . ''
The issue of immigration reform was put on the back burner during Obama 's first term -- overtaken by debate over health care legislation and economic measures . But along with gun control , it is one of the top items on his second-term domestic agenda .
The eight U.S. senators got ahead of him Monday , unveiling a blueprint that calls for , among other things , a path to citizenship for the 11 million illegal immigrants already in the United States .
But White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said the president `` welcomes '' the proposal , saying it represents the `` bipartisan support coalescing '' behind certain principles of immigration reform .
Despite the difference over the path to legal status , an Obama administration official told ███ the senators ' plan is on a trajectory that mirrors Obama 's immigration plan in many ways , and that the White House is willing to let the group take the lead .
Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , one of the eight senators , called the new proposal a `` major breakthrough '' and said he hopes to turn it into legislation by March -- with the goal of passing something out of the Senate `` by late spring or summer . ''
Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz. , standing beside him , claimed 2013 is the `` best chance '' lawmakers will have to tackle immigration for years .
Even so , the proposed pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants drew immediate criticism from others on Capitol Hill .
`` No one should be surprised that individuals who have supported amnesty in the past still support amnesty , '' Rep. Lamar Smith , R-Texas , said . `` By granting amnesty , the Senate proposal actually compounds the problem by encouraging more illegal immigration . ''
The eight senators who unveiled the new principles are Democrats Schumer , Dick Durbin of Illinois , Robert Menendez of New Jersey and Michael Bennet of Colorado ; and Republicans McCain , Lindsey Graham of South Carolina , Rubio of Florida and Jeff Flake of Arizona .
The Senate framework would also require those here illegally to pass background checks and pay fines and taxes in order to qualify for a `` probationary legal status '' that would allow them to live and work here -- but not qualify for federal benefits -- before being able to apply for permanent residency , a critical step toward citizenship . Once they are allowed to apply they would do so behind everyone else already waiting for a green card within the current immigration system .
Senators also want to reform the legal immigration system , including awarding green cards to immigrants who obtain advanced degrees in science , math , technology or engineering from an American university .
The principles released Monday are outlined on just over four pages , leaving plenty of details to fill in .