Border Patrol agents apprehend undocumented migrants after they crossed the U.S.-Mexico border in Mission , Texas , April 9 , 2019 . ( Loren Elliott /Reuters )
It can ’ t be that the only respectable position on immigration , safe for the general public , is whatever the Democrats ’ center of gravity on the issue is at any given time .
President Donald Trump ’ s immigration agenda has always been considered exclusionary and prejudiced by progressives ; now they consider it tainted by mass murder .
The El Paso massacre , carried out by a white nationalist waging a lunatic war against Hispanic immigration , is being used as a bludgeon against Trump , and immigration restriction more broadly .
After years spent trying to rule immigration restriction out of bounds , the Left is doubling down on ruling immigration restriction out of bounds .
It can ’ t be that the only reason for protecting the border , rejecting bogus asylum-seekers , reorienting the legal immigration system toward skills rather than family unification , and reducing overall numbers is rank hatred bordering on homicidal malice .
It can ’ t be that the only choice is between extremely latitudinarian policies that allow asylum-seekers into the country , often never to be seen again , or mass murder .
It can ’ t be that the only respectable position on immigration , safe for the general public , is whatever the Democrats ’ center of gravity on the issue is at any given time ( always in flux and always moving left ) .
First , let ’ s stipulate that Trump ’ s words on immigration often are crude and inflammatory . Yet nothing he ’ s ever said could possibly justify indiscriminately shooting people . Trump is not a terrorist , a supporter of terrorism , or an enabler of terrorism .
The El Paso shooter ’ s apparent manifesto overlaps with some of Trump ’ s rhetoric , but what defines the document is its apocalyptic argument that slaughter is the way “ to reclaim ” the country .
The gulf between that view and Trump ’ s — that Congress should build a wall and change some highly technical asylum rules — is vast . It is the difference between justifying criminality and advocating legislation , between quitting on America and calling for policies to solve one of its problems .
Much is made of Trump ’ s use of the word “ invasion , ” which also features in the manifesto . This is a loaded term best avoided . It speaks to a hostile intent among immigrants who , by and large , come here to improve their lives .
But , again , the impulse to gun down these supposed invaders shopping at Walmart and the impulse to exclude them from entry , or quickly and safely return them home once here , don ’ t exist in the same moral universe .
For all that the language police profess to care deeply about words , they aren ’ t very careful about rendering Trump ’ s . No one notes that in his Florida rally where a rallygoer notoriously yelled “ shoot them ” and Trump shook his head , smiled , and said “ only in the Panhandle , ” the president was in the midst of saying of border agents , “ Don ’ t forget , we don ’ t let them , and we can ’ t let them , use weapons . ”
The discrediting of views that show up in the manifesto only works one way . The shooter expresses a fear of automation and support for the universal basic income . Should we hold that against Andrew Yang ? The shooter fears we ’ re on the verge of an environmental disaster . Should Jay Inslee tone it down ?
When a member of Antifa was shot dead by police while attacking an Immigration and Customs Enforcement facility in Washington state , Democrats weren ’ t made to answer for their harsh attacks on immigration enforcement .
It ’ s even a count against Trump that the shooter , too , says that Democrats favor “ open borders. ” If it ’ s going to be unacceptable to use the term “ open borders ” of a party that is getting closer and closer to embracing a policy of open borders , we might as well shut down the immigration debate now .
Which is , of course , part of the point . What much of the Left won ’ t acknowledge is that restrictionists have a sincere belief that secure borders and a reformed legal immigration system would be better for our laws , our economy , and our cultural cohesion .
If Trump is a flawed tribune for this point of view , he ’ s not culpable of murder , either . The charge that he somehow is is yet another symptom of our rapidly degrading public debate rather than a call to elevate it .