Mitt Romney on Thursday offered what he called a strategy for “ bipartisan and long-term immigration reform ” in an address to a convention of Latino elected officials in Florida .
In the speech , which also touched on the economy , Mr. Romney dropped the confrontational tone he took on immigration during the Republican primary . Instead , he promised to work in a series of areas to help immigrants and their families while discouraging people from coming to the country illegally .
Interactive Video Feature Mitt Romney ’ s Positions on Immigration An interactive video feature examines how Mitt Romney has had to finesse his position on illegal immigration as he pivots towards the general election . Go to Feature »
“ Immigration reform is not just a moral imperative , but an economic necessity as well , ” Mr. Romney said . “ We can find common ground here , and we must . We owe it to ourselves as Americans to ensure that our country remains a land of opportunity – both for those who were born here and for those who share our values , respect our laws , and want to come to our shores . ”
But Mr. Romney , who has refused to say whether he would overturn a policy announced last week by President Obama that would stop the deportation of some illegal immigrants who were brought to the country as children , again sidestepped that question .
“ Some people have asked if I will let stand the president ’ s executive action , ” he said . “ The answer is that I will put in place my own long-term solution that will replace and supersede the president ’ s temporary measure . ”
Even as he started speaking , Mr. Romney ’ s campaign released an outline of his plan , which would include giving green cards to immigrants who earn advanced degrees at American universities ; providing a path to legal status for illegal immigrants who serve in the military ; and cutting red tape .
“ As president , I will stand for a path to legal status for anyone who is willing to stand up and defend this great nation through military service , ” Mr. Romney said .
The nearly twenty-minute speech was met with tepid applause and moments of pointed silence . He seemed to hit his stride near the middle of his remarks , when he talked about balancing the budget , giving parents a choice of where to send their children to school , and providing a path to legal status for immigrants who have served in the military . At the end , about half the room stood up to applaud .
Jeb Bush , the former governor of Florida , said that the fact that Mr. Romney addressed the conference was a meaningful gesture .
“ It was a great speech , I was real impressed with it and I ’ m glad he came , ” Mr. Bush said . “ I think he was received respectfully and warmly . ”
Democrats criticized Mr. Romney on immigration issues even before the speech was delivered .
In a memo to reporters , Bill Burton , a founder of Priorities USA Action , a “ super PAC ” backing Mr. Obama , wrote that Mr. Romney was attempting to hide his real views on the issue from voters .
“ Mitt Romney ’ s speech in Florida today will be an attempt to cover up the divisive rhetoric and draconian policies he has espoused for years on immigration , ” Mr. Burton wrote . “ Today ’ s slick speech will not change the fact that Romney has repeatedly used divisive language to propose an extreme immigration policy . ”
The issue of immigration is shaping up as a critical one in the presidential election . Mr. Romney trails President Obama by wide margins among Hispanic voters , a gap which could provide the difference in important swing states like Colorado , Nevada , Florida and Virginia , where Latino populations are growing .
Mr. Obama is scheduled to speak to the same group on Friday . But for now , the pressure is on Mr. Romney to increase his appeal among Hispanic voters .
Advisers inside and outside Mr. Romney ’ s campaign have urged him to shape a positive message to Hispanics on immigration and dispel the harsh image he created during the primaries .
“ Ultimately what we ’ re talking about here is the tone is what has hurt Republicans in the past , not the policies , ’ ’ said Alberto Martinez , an adviser and spokesman for the campaign on Hispanic issues .
But that effort is likely to run headfirst into some of Mr. Romney ’ s conservative supporters . Many in the Republican base believe that any solution that lets illegal immigrants remain in the country is unacceptable . During the primary race Mr. Romney courted these voters with talk of “ self-deportation ” and his approval of Arizona ’ s harsh immigration law .
In two previous addresses to Hispanic groups , Mr. Romney ignored immigration . On Wednesday the Romney campaign abruptly cut short a telephone press conference when all the questions were about immigration – and the campaign wanted to talk about the economy .
“ The reason that immigration is important is not because it ’ s the priority issue but because it ’ s the issue that can turn Hispanics off , ’ ’ said Ana Navarro , a Florida-based adviser to Senator John McCain ’ s presidential campaign in 2008 . “ If a candidate has the wrong tone and the wrong rhetoric on immigration , Hispanics won ’ t listen to any of his proposals on anything else .
Ahead of the Florida speech on Thursday , Mr. Romney ’ s campaign promised to forge “ lasting solutions ” to what he called the “ nation ’ s broken immigration system. ” He said he would work with both parties to pass immigration reform .
But the brief outline did not say how he would overcome the gridlock that has blocked comprehensive immigration reform in the Congress for more than a decade .
Senator McCain , Republican of Arizona , also promised to work with Democrats on illegal immigration reform . He abandoned that effort in 2007 in the face of intense opposition by conservatives .
Mr. Obama also pledged during the 2008 campaign to pursue comprehensive changes to the immigration system in the country . The president increased border enforcement , but faced similar opposition among Republicans in Congress to pursuit of a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants already in the country .