Last week , Miriam Pallares boarded a bus in Oklahoma City with her six-year-old daughter and rode through the night to El Paso , Texas for a three-minute hug with family she hadn ’ t seen in years .
The mother and daughter were among 2,500 people participating in a rare event in which US Customs and Border Protection opens a gate in the fence separating El Paso from Ciudad Juárez , Mexico , allowing families to briefly reunify . Hugs Not Walls , or Abrazos No Muros , was started in the spring of 2016 by non-profit Border Network for Human Rights . It takes place roughly twice a year , when the water flow of the Rio Grande is cut to a trickle . Families on either side of the border wait in line for hours to embrace for three minutes in the dry riverbed .
For many , the event marks the first—and last—time they will have physical contact with family members for years .
By 7:00 a.m. , hundreds of participants had formed a line that curled around El Paso ’ s unassuming Chihuahuita Park . Over blue shirts required for participation , they bundled in coats and blankets , some toting folding chairs and coolers of lunch . Kids ran around the playground , blue shirts reaching their knees . 800 feet away—across train tracks , the soaring border fence and the shallow Rio Grande—corresponding families gathered at an intersection in Juárez , wearing white shirts .
Miriam , a 27-year-old with bright pink lipstick and an impeccable ponytail , had been anticipating this day ever since she learned about the event on Facebook a couple years ago . “ I really want to see my sister—it ’ s been four years since I saw her , ” she explained in Spanish . “ She can ’ t come here because she hasn ’ t been able to get her visa , and I still haven ’ t gotten my asylum . I ’ m fighting to get it . ”
At 8:00 , the line in the park began to move . Some pushed wheelchairs or strollers as they made their way towards a dirt opening next to the border fence . There , participants waited for hours on plastic chairs : Only 20 families could enter through the gate at a time . Miriam was number 82 .
As she sat , Miriam exchanged texts and photos with her sister , aunts , and nieces , who waited in Juárez . Her daughter Mairim , a bubbly first grader , danced , collected rocks , and eagerly took our microphone and played reporter , asking about our family members : What are their names ? Where do they live ?
Miriam and Mairim ( “ Miriam ” spelled backwards ) left Juarez four years ago after receiving threats from a drug cartel . They settled in Oklahoma City , where Miriam sells burritos and tacos out of a food truck .
At 10:30 , when families 81 to 100 were called on a loudspeaker , Miriam and Mairim lined up next to the border fence . Behind them was a woman who , with the exception of last year ’ s Hugs Not Walls , hadn ’ t seen her 36-year-old son in more than a decade . Ahead of them was mom with blotchy cheeks and teary eyes who hadn ’ t seen her own mother in eleven years . Mairim played with other kids in line , reaching small hands through the border fence and trying to spot family on the other side . She couldn ’ t recall meeting the relatives in person , but recognized them from years of video calls .
Hugs Not Walls is a logistical jigsaw puzzle , requiring sign-off from CBP , the International Water Commission , local law enforcement , and federal police in Mexico . It ’ s also subject to changes in the political climate : Last May , as the number of migrants at the border reached a record high , the event was abruptly cancelled . “ Every time we do this , it could be the last one , ” explained Fernando Garcia , director of the Border Network for Human Rights . “ Having children in cages like that—or in a makeshift detention camp—under a bridge , all of that situation created a very tense relationship with CBP , ” he added .
Mario Escalante , a US Border Patrol spokesperson , explained that the agency wasn ’ t able to support last May ’ s event . Still , Border Patrol maintained a light presence on Saturday , with just a couple of officers on site but with surveillance cameras looking over the event . “ For us it ’ s business as usual : Maintain border security , ” said Escalante . A similar event has been taking place at the border between Tijuana and San Diego since 2013 .
After what felt to Miriam like an eternity of waiting , volunteers led the group down a concrete levy to the river . Mairim held her mother ’ s hand as she walked , waving enthusiastically to relatives walking down the levy ’ s south side . Miriam captured the moment on Facebook live .
One by one , those in blue shirts crossed a narrow , dusty plywood bridge into the dry riverbed on the Mexican side . They were assigned to line up as if starting a race , blue-shirted shoulder to blue-shirted shoulder , waiting for a man with a loudspeaker to tell them to hug . Ten feet away , those with white shirts did the same . Seeing her aunt just steps away , Mairim exclaimed , “ Tía ! ” and broke into a run before the organizer instructed , “ Not yet ! ” For a few tense seconds , the families stood looking at each other , separated only by a bit of cracked dirt .
When the organizer yelled , “ Hug ! ” the wailing was immediate . Families collapsed into each others ’ arms . Mairim would later say that she was “ so excited to get hugging. ” But in the moment , she stood in the middle of a group embrace , weeping . Feet away , other families went through the same routine of hugs , selfies , more hugs , more crying . Cameramen zoomed in on sobbing faces . Along the levy , stoic Mexican police officers looked on . Mairim ’ s aunt picked her up and wiped the tears from beneath her niece ’ s pink glasses , joking that she had finally made it to Mexico .
At 10:53 , the organizer yelled , “ Time ’ s up ! ” and , after final hugs , lines formed again . Blue shirts walked up the levy walkway to El Paso as white shirts walked up the levy to Juárez . Many participants looked gutted and dazed , like they had just run a marathon . “ Bye , Tía ! ” Mairim yelled as she wearily waved to her family . “ I love you ! ”
A few hours later , the mother and daughter would board a bus for Oklahoma City . But first , the pair sat once again on the plastic chairs , waiting for permission to leave . Miriam couldn ’ t stop smiling . She wished she had more time with family , she said , but she was thankful for those three minutes . Sitting next to her mom , a resigned Mairim stared down at her lap , lips quivering .