Hundreds of African migrants who crossed into the United States through the southern border earlier this month have quickly dispersed to more than a dozen U.S. cities after government officials allegedly failed to follow standard procedures .
About 300 Congolese and Angolan citizens who crossed the border on June 4 near the south-central Texas towns of Eagle Pass and Del Rio have since been bussed to various cities across the U.S. , according to the Washington Examiner .
After the migrants crossed the Rio Grande , they surrendered to Border Patrol agents and claimed political asylum . However , the agency did not place the migrants in the custody of Immigration and Customs Enforcement , a standard procedure of immigrant detainment at the border .
Instead , it released families onto the streets of Eagle Pass and Del Rio , according to two government and nongovernment officials with first-hand knowledge of the matter . The African migrants then bought bus tickets to either San Antonio or Austin , according to San Antonio Interim Assistant City Manager Colleen Bridger .
`` If — a family , the sponsor — it 's been 24-48 hours and they ca n't buy the [ bus ] ticket , then we 'll buy it , '' Elizabeth Nemeth , executive director of Catholic Charities ' west side center , told the Washington Examiner Thursday . For a family of five to seven looking to travel by bus to New York , it will cost $ 2,000 , she said .
The majority of the migrants traveled to Portland , Maine , where there is a growing community of African migrants , while others went to Boston , Chicago , New York City , among a dozen other cities .
Christina Higgs , spokeswoman for Catholic Charities of the San Antonio region , explained to The Examiner that migrants spend six or seven months traveling to Brazil before making the journey north to the U.S .
Migrants `` hedge their bets '' on this method because many believe the refugee route will not work , she said .
Officials believe African migrants will continue to surge the border in the coming months . The problem is becoming so bad that San Antonio needs French and African dialect speakers to help with the migrant surge .