House Republicans will find a solution for legalizing the 11 million undocumented immigrants in the U.S. , but it won ’ t be a straightforward path to citizenship and it won ’ t bar these people from achieving legalization through existing channels , a leading Republican advocate of immigration reform said .
“ It ’ s a path to legal status that makes no mention of citizenship , ” says Tamar Jacoby , president and CEO of ImmigrationWorks USA , a national federation of small-business owners with a mission to advance better immigration law . “ It doesn ’ t bar citizenship , but this is the key point , it doesn ’ t create a new or direct or special path for people who broke the law . So , a path to citizenship , but not a special path for them . ”
Jacoby was a part of a panel hosted by the progressive think tank New Democrat Network on Tuesday . The only problem then , she says , is whether Democrats will accept such a compromise . After all , Jacoby sees that as the way forward since there ’ s no optimism the House will put the Senate-passed bill for a floor vote , and the prospect of a comprehensive immigration reform bill itself is just as unlikely .
Even given all that , Jacoby says immigration reform is not dead .
“ The conventional wisdom out there [ is ] that this is dead , ” she says . “ I think it is undue alarmism . ... No one in the House has decided not to do this . What ’ s happened is the climate and context has changed . ”
Overhauling what lawmakers describe as a broken immigration system has gone from a high priority earlier in the year to a maybe as lawmakers find themselves brushing up against fiscal deadlines that , left unchecked , could cause a government shutdown and possibly trigger a default by the U.S. on its debt .
Republicans have often been criticized as the hurdle to overcome in order to push reform forward . However , GOP leaders have come out either batting for the pro-reform team , like Rep. Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , or acknowledging that finding the appropriate legal status for the undocumented needs to be a priority , like Rep. Bob Goodlatte , R-Va .
The problem is they don ’ t know what a bill doing these things would look like .
But for Frank Sharry , executive director of the nonprofit America ’ s Voice , the argument has already been won . His nonprofit is advocating for a path to citizenship for the undocumented .
“ If House Republicans come forward with a commonsense approach to deal with the 11 million , I think we can get across the finish line this year , ” Sharry said .
Sharry said he is less troubled about how the House gets to a negotiation with the Senate than what they bring to the mix . He believes there ’ s a way to deal with immigration reform in a step-by-step process so long as there is a “ comprehensive solution . ”
“ We ’ re not interested in the blame game , ” he said . “ We ’ re interested in results . ”