In Congress ’ standoff over immigration policy , Republicans seem to be battling not only President Barack Obama but their own rhetoric on government spending .
Immigration riders attached to the Homeland Security spending bill by the House GOP turn out to actually widen the budget deficit over the next 10 years , according to the Congressional Budget Office . As a result , the $ 39.7 billion measure will need a supermajority of 60 votes under Senate budget rules , even if Republicans get past the Democratic filibuster .
Faced with a Feb. 27 deadline and the Presidents Day recess next week , time is short . And the CBO report never addressed an added cost implicit in the Republican position : How much would it cost for the government to deport all the undocumented workers who stand to benefit from Obama ’ s most recent executive order ?
That could be upward of $ 20 billion to $ 25 billion , according to the best estimates collected by ███ .
It ’ s a sum hard to find these days , given the Republican-backed spending caps imposed on the House and Senate appropriations committees . Indeed , just last week , the GOP leadership ridiculed Obama ’ s proposal to amend the law to increase discretionary funding — including money for DHS — above the freeze set for fiscal 2016 .
The president ’ s critics on immigration , like Sen. Jeff Sessions , argue that the fight is not about dollars but the will to enforce the law . “ Has the Obama administration ever asked for the resources necessary for the task of enforcing the law ? Of course not , ” said a spokesman for the Alabama Republican .
But what ’ s most striking is how each side has invoked Congress ’ power of the purse to bolster its arguments in the immigration fight .
Republicans are employing their constitutional power to deny funding to the executive agencies that would carry out the president ’ s November order , as well as a 2012 order which deferred deportations for young undocumented immigrants . But Obama essentially makes the same argument in reverse to justify himself : He says Congress left him with this discretion precisely because it failed to give him the money to fully enforce the immigration laws .
“ The proposed policy is designed to respond to the practical reality that the number of aliens who are removable under the [ Immigration and Naturalization Act ] vastly exceeds the resources Congress has made available to DHS for processing and carrying out removals , ” reads the 33-page opinion from the Justice Department ’ s Office of Legal Counsel . “ The resource constraints are striking . … DHS has informed us that there are approximately 11.3 million undocumented aliens in the country but that Congress has appropriated sufficient resources…to remove fewer than 400,000 aliens each year , a significant percentage of whom are typically encountered at or near the border rather than in the interior of the country . ”
For all the political stakes , it ’ s surprisingly difficult to get an estimate of how much it costs the government to deport an individual . But money appears to make a difference . Tables compiled by DHS show that the number of annual removals has risen more than 80 percent in the past decade , while enforcement and detention appropriations have doubled in inflation-adjusted dollars .
███ published its own calculations in November after comparing 10 years of appropriations with the number of annual removals listed by DHS . There were spikes and dips along the way , but the results showed a relatively consistent pattern of about $ 7,200 — plus or minus $ 1,000 — for each removal .
When shown these numbers , DHS ’ s Immigration and Customs Enforcement came back with its own estimate that the agency ’ s average “ life cycle ” cost for each removal it completed in fiscal 2013 was about $ 8,661 .
Jennifer Elzea , a spokeswoman for ICE , explained that the agency “ does not track the average cost of removal for an alien , but rather the average life cycle cost per alien . … This cost is inclusive of the Immigration Enforcement Lifecycle including all costs necessary to identify , apprehend , detain , process through immigration court , and remove an alien . ”
If the government greatly ramped up the number of deportations , that figure might come down . Then again , that number may understate the full costs since the immigrant population affected by Obama ’ s order is relatively difficult for ICE to identify : individuals who have lived peacefully in the U.S. interior for years and become part of their communities .
But taken together , the numbers from ███ and ICE indicate that removing 3 million immigrants could cost the government between $ 20 billion and $ 25 billion .
Immigration rights advocates say 3 million is roughly how many people could seek temporary work permits under Obama ’ s November order , out of a total eligible population pegged at more than 4 million .
CBO ’ s analysis is more cautious and assumes that just 1.5 million adults will have come forward and been approved as of 2017 , the year Obama ’ s presidency ends .
Since the House amendments seek to overturn Obama ’ s 2012 order as well , CBO adds about 750,000 young people who have already been granted temporary status or will become eligible by 2017 . The total then is about 2.25 million people affected by the House amendments . And in estimating future Medicaid and education costs , CBO factors in the likelihood that more children will be born in these families and qualify for assistance .
In truth , Obama is doing more than simply deferring deportations for lack of resources from Congress . His November order establishes a process for individuals to get temporary work permits and qualify for government benefits — going well beyond deciding who gets prosecuted and who does not .
The Justice memo concedes as much . It says : “ The conferral of deferred action does not represent a decision not to prosecute an individual for past unlawful conduct ; it instead represents a decision to openly tolerate an undocumented alien ’ s continued presence in the United States for a fixed period .
“ This difference is not , in our view , insignificant , ” the memo adds . “ But neither does it fundamentally transform deferred action into something other than an exercise in enforcement discretion . ”
But the key word is “ tolerate. ” Led by Texas , 26 states are hitting hard on this same point in a lawsuit challenging Obama before a federal judge in Brownsville . Sessions ’ office argues too that CBO fails to count the added costs that Obama ’ s order will impose on state and local governments .
At the federal level , CBO estimates that two-thirds of the increased government outlays stemming from Obama ’ s executive orders would consist of cash payments under the Earned Income Tax Credit . As of now , the migrants don ’ t qualify because the EITC is not available to low-income workers who lack Social Security numbers .
The House-passed amendments , by overturning Obama , would save the government a total of $ 14.85 billion from 2015 to 2025 , CBO says , of which an estimated $ 10.25 billion is from the increased earned-income credit payments . Other costs include nutrition and health-care benefits .
Whatever the outcome of the current debate , Sen. Charles Grassley ( R-Iowa ) hopes to trim the EITC payments with legislation prohibiting the protected workers from applying retroactively for earned-income credits once they obtain Social Security numbers .
The Internal Revenue Service typically allows taxpayers to amend their past filings for the three prior years after getting a Social Security number . But Grassley argues that this ought not to apply here since the earned-income credit is meant to encourage work , which in this case was illegal employment prior to Obama ’ s order .
Early estimates by the Joint Tax Committee indicate that up to $ 1.7 billion could potentially be saved if Grassley makes this change .
Yet the same coin has another side : All these calculations show that this is a migrant population that is working — albeit in low-paying jobs — and generating substantial payroll taxes that would only grow under Obama ’ s plan .
This pattern has been seen before in disputes over child tax credits going to migrants who are not required to have Social Security cards . In 2010 , for example , Treasury inspectors found that 2.18 million filers with only individual taxpayer identification numbers collected about $ 4 billion in child credits . But the same workers generated payroll taxes totaling more than $ 7 billion — more than matching the tax credits ’ cost to the government .
In the case of Obama ’ s executive orders , CBO estimates that $ 22.3 billion in potential revenues would be lost from 2015 to 2025 if the House amendments were to prevail , including about $ 17.1 billion at the expense of Social Security . When all the puts-and-takes are counted , the net result is that the deficit would be $ 7.5 billion wider as a result of the House amendments . [
Obama ’ s new budget takes this logic a big step further by assuming that more comprehensive immigration reform would translate into $ 158 billion in deficit reduction over the next 10 years . The numbers draw on CBO ’ s analysis of the Senate bill adopted in the last Congress and again reflect a 3-to-2 ratio between improved receipts and higher costs .
Conservatives argue that this is illusory , given that the tide will inevitably turn once the newly legalized immigrants reach retirement age . But in Senate testimony last week , Stephen Goss , the chief actuary for the Social Security Administration , said the net cash flow for the trust funds would be positive for 30 years — and that even over 75 years , the cumulative impact of the president ’ s executive order would be a modest improvement for Social Security .