BISMARCK , N.D. — Reuben Panchol was forced to leave war-torn Sudan decades ago as a child , embarking on an odyssey that eventually brought him to the American Midwest and left him eternally grateful to the country that took him in .
“ I am an American citizen , a North Dakotan , ” said Panchol , a 38-year-old father of four . “ And without North Dakota , I couldn ’ t have made it . ”
Panchol hopes to share his story on Monday with members of a local commission who are set to vote on whether their county will stop accepting refugees . If they vote to bar refugees , as expected , Burleigh County - home to about 95,000 people and the capital city of Bismarck - could become the first local government to do so since President Donald Trump issued an executive order making it possible .
The county postponed a vote last week when more than 100 people showed up and overflowed the commission ’ s normal meeting space . Monday night ’ s meeting will be held in a middle school cafeteria to accommodate public interest that Chairman Brian Bitner said is the most intense he ’ s seen in more than a decade on the commission .
Though he declined to predict which way the commission would go , Bitner said he would vote against accepting additional refugees .
“ The overwhelming public opinion is so clear to me , that I think if you vote for it , you ’ re not going to be reelected if you choose to run again , ” he said .
Trump ’ s executive order this fall came as he had already proposed cutting the number of refugees next year to the lowest level since Congress passed the Refugee Act of 1980 . He declared that refugees should be resettled only in places where the state and local governments - counties - gave consent . Since then , many governors and counties around the country have declared that they would continue taking refugees .
Republican Gov . Doug Burgum said last month that North Dakota would continue accepting refugees where local jurisdictions agreed , and his spokesman said the governor saw it as a local decision . Soon after , Cass and Grand Forks counties , which are home to the state ’ s largest city , Fargo , and third-largest city , Grand Forks , respectively , declared they would continue taking refugees . Fargo Mayor Tim Mahoney said refugees were needed to boost the city ’ s economy , and that 90 % were fully employed within three months of resettling in his city .
But the idea was quickly opposed in more conservative Burleigh County . Among the opponents was Republican state Rep. Rick Becker , of Bismarck , an ultraconservative who took to social media to criticize the program as unrestrained and a possible drain on social service programs , schools and law enforcement , though the county said it doesn ’ t track any costs directly related to refugees .
“ This isn ’ t about skin color , ” said Becker , a plastic surgeon and former gubernatorial candidate . “ In the past , nobody had any say whatsoever . Now we have something that should have been in place decades ago .
“ Now , if they want to accept them , they can , and if they don ’ t want to they shouldn ’ t , ” he said .
Bismarck Mayor Steve Bakken said the city government has no say in the matter , but he sides with those who want to stop taking in more refugees .
“ Right now it ’ s a blank check and that equates into a lot of questions , ” Bakken said of the number of refugees that could be placed in the area . “ We have burgeoning school enrollment , veterans ’ needs , homeless needs , and Native American needs .
“ This isn ’ t about heartstrings , this is about purse strings , ” he said .
Shirley Dykshoorn , a vice president for Lutheran Social Services , which handles all of North Dakota ’ s refugee resettlement cases , said her agency used to handle about 400 cases per year , but that number dropped to 124 in fiscal 2019 , which ended in September . The program has been in existence in North Dakota since 1948 .
LSS settled 24 refugees in Bismarck in fiscal 2019 , after settling 22 in fiscal 2018 . Dykshoorn said Burleigh County had been projected to get no more than 25 refugees annually in the coming years .
“ We always look at the capacity of a community to handle these , ” she said .
“ I ’ m trying to understand the basis for believing how 25 people will dramatically change the fabric of a community , ” she said . “ What does it say to the rest of the country when a county where your capital city is located would choose not to participate ? ”
For decades , North Dakota considered any population gain a good thing . Its population declined by more than 21,000 between 2000 and 2007 until an oil boom sparked a rush of workers into the state . Many jobs remain unfilled even though the state has added nearly 100,000 residents in the past decade . Though many new arrivals work in the oil patch , many are also attracted to Fargo , which has a burgeoning tech industry , and Grand Forks , which is an aviation hub .
Burgum , who has said he ’ ll seek a second term , acknowledged that Burleigh County ’ s vote could be seen as unwelcoming in a state that has about 30,000 more jobs than takers .
“ It sends a very negative signal ” if Burleigh County refuses refugees , he said .
The Lutheran Immigration and Refugee Service , which works with Lutheran Social Services , is one of three national organizations that is suing to block Trump ’ s executive order . The group ’ s president and chief executive , Krish O ’ Mara Vignarajah , said her organization has closely tracked the response and is aware of no other local government that has voted to reject refugees .
Panchol , the father of four , moved to North Dakota in 2001 as one of the “ Lost Boys , ” Sudanese orphans who fled thousands of miles on foot during the civil war that ravaged his country . His path wound through Ethiopia and Kenya before he ended up in Fargo and later in Lincoln , a small community outside of Bismarck .
“ I ran from bullets every day , ” he said . “ We moved from country to country not to disturb anyone ’ s life but to stay alive . ”
Since moving to the state , he has earned degrees from North Dakota State University in Fargo and the University of Mary in Bismarck . He works now at the state Department of Environmental Quality , heading its underground storage tank program , and has become enough of an Upper Midwesterner that he occasionally drops a “ You betcha ” into the conversation .
Panchol said he understands the reservations that people may have about new arrivals , but he believes any fear is more politically driven than reality .
“ Honestly , North Dakotans have been very welcoming to me and I give North Dakota credit for helping people like me better their lives , ” he said . “ It wasn ’ t my choice to come to North Dakota , but I ’ m glad I did . Big time . ”