( CNN ) – Mitt Romney , the presumptive Republican presidential nominee , wouldn ’ t say Sunday whether he ’ d repeal President Barack Obama ’ s decision to stop deporting certain young illegal immigrants .
In an interview , Romney would say only that his administration would seek longer-term solutions to the problem of illegal immigration , and that Obama ’ s new directive , announced Friday , was temporary fix .
“ He was president for the last three-and-a-half years and did nothing on immigration , ” Romney said on CBS ’ “ Face the Nation. ” “ Two years he had a Democrat House and Senate , did nothing of a permanent or long-term basis . What I would do , is I ’ d make sure that by coming into office I would work with Congress to put in place a long-term solution for the children of those that have come here illegally . ”
Pressed whether that meant he would reverse Obama ’ s decision , Romney said only that the directive would be rendered void by new , longer-term rules .
“ It would be overtaken by events if you will , by virtue of my putting in place a long-term solution , with legislation which creates law that relates to these individuals such that they know what their setting is going to be , not just for the term of a president but on a permanent basis , ” Romney said .
The GOP candidate added that he would assess whether or not to repeal Obama ’ s rule while new his new law was moving through the legislative process .
“ My anticipation is I ’ d come into office and say we need to get this done , on a long-term basis , not this kind of stop-gap measure , ” Romney said .
The rule change , which came during a Rose Garden announcement Friday , will allow people younger than 30 who came to the United States before the age of 16 , pose no criminal or security threat , and were successful students or served in the military to apply for a two-year deferral from deportation .
Romney said the timing of the shift , coming less than five months ahead of November ’ s general election , pointed to political motives on the part of the president .
“ I think the timing is pretty clear , if he really wanted to make a solution that dealt with these kids or with illegal immigration in America , then this is something he would have taken up in his first three-and-a-half years , not in his last few months , ” Romney said .
Asked by host Bob Schieffer if he made the change “ for politics , ” Romney said , “ That 's certainly a big part of the equation . ”
Speaking on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union ” Sunday , White House Senior Adviser David Plouffe said the immigration rule change was “ not a political move . ”