Immigrants in the U.S. illegally would not gain green cards under a bipartisan Senate bill until law-enforcement officials are monitoring the entire southern border and stopping 90 % of people crossing illegally in certain areas , according to people familiar with the plan .
The border-security proposal , part of a broader immigration bill being written by eight senators , sets several goals that would have to be met before any of the estimated 11 million immigrants in the U.S. illegally could apply for permanent legal residency , also known as a green card , according to the people familiar with the Senate talks . Meeting all the goals is expected to take 10 years .
In a major change for businesses , all employers would be required after a five-year phase-in period to use the government 's E-Verify system , which screens for illegal workers . E-Verify now is largely voluntary , though some states require it . Some 409,000 employers had enrolled in the program as of last year , the federal government says , a tiny fraction of the estimated six million private U.S. employers , many of which have only a handful of employees .
Along the U.S.-Mexican border , 100 % of the border would have to be under surveillance , and law enforcement would have to catch 90 % of those who cross the border illegally at `` high risk '' sections—a term that people following the Senate talks did not define . In 2010 , the Department of Homeland Security reported that only 44 % of the border was under operational control , meaning officials had the ability to detect and block illegal activity there .
In addition , the government would have to create an electronic system to monitor everyone who exits from the U.S. through airports or seaports , in an attempt to identify people overstaying their visas . People who overstay visas account for a large share of illegal immigrants , as much as 40 % by some estimates .
Once all of those measures are met , immigrants could begin qualifying for green cards . In the meantime , the legislation would grant probationary status to illegal immigrants who passed a criminal-background check , paid a fine and met other conditions . The legislation , which would also set special rules for agricultural workers , is not fully drafted and has not yet been released publicly .
Setting tougher border-security measures as a prerequisite to offering legal status to illegal immigrants could ease the way for many lawmakers , particularly Republicans , to support the immigration-law overhaul . Many Republicans have said the border must be secure before they would consider any change in the status of illegal immigrants .
Immigration Law in America Review legislative milestones and key shifts in immigration policy .
Meanwhile , advocates for immigrants and some Democrats worry that stringent border-security requirements would create an indefinite delay for illegal immigrants seeking legal status . Frank Sharry , executive director of the group America 's Voice , said the Senate plan seemed poised to include the `` toughest border-security requirements ever . ''
`` It raises the question of whether it 's actually achievable , and whether it will end up thwarting the path to citizenship for 11 million people , '' he said . `` I think there will be a lot of heartburn when the bill is released . ''
The measures laid out in the Senate plan are similar to a border-security bill unveiled Tuesday by Sen. John Cornyn and House Homeland Security Committee Chairman Michael McCaul , both Texas Republicans .
How to determine whether the border is secure is a contentious issue in the debate over overhauling the nation 's immigration laws . President Barack Obama and other Democrats have argued that border security has already improved , but the Senate plan would push the Department of Homeland Security to go further .
Republicans say they want to prevent another wave of immigrants from entering the U.S. illegally . Many in the GOP cite a 1986 immigration law legalizing millions without , they say , adequately improving border security .
Mr. Cornyn , who has been skeptical of immigration-overhaul efforts , said he would be pleased if the eight senators writing the new legislation adopted security measures similar to ones he put forward . `` I would be favorably impressed if they embraced this , '' Mr. Cornyn said . But his bill could also offer an alternative to GOP lawmakers who want to sign on to a measure boosting border security without offering legal status to illegal immigrants .
How tough the security measures prove to be will depend on the details of the legislation . Lawmakers will have to define , for instance , `` high-risk '' areas subject to the 90 % apprehension requirement . The border-security targets will also depend on how lawmakers define requirements for surveillance , also known as border `` awareness . ''
The standards could change over time or prove to be subjective . The Department of Homeland Security would be charged with collecting the data .
The 90 % apprehension rate , technically referred to as the effectiveness rate , includes people who turned back after entering the U.S. , as well as people detained . The Border Patrol estimates the total number of illegal crossings based on agent sightings , camera monitoring and referrals from other credible sources .
It is hard to know if apprehension rates are tallied accurately , said Thad Bingel , partner at Command Consulting Group and a former Customs and Border Protection official . `` You can detect something and not know for certain if it turned back or if it got past you . That 's what makes it a really tough challenge . '' He said that even if the U.S. has full surveillance and control of the border one day , that may not hold true a month later .
`` The bad guys are sophisticated , too , '' he said . `` You may one day have 100 % awareness , and then they 'll figure out where your holes might be . ''
In recent years , illegal border crossings have fallen as a result of the tepid U.S. economy , stronger border enforcement and other factors , several studies have found . The federal Government Accountability Office said apprehensions fell in fiscal 2011 , mirroring a decrease in estimated illegal entries .
The Senate plan lays out three steps aimed at meeting the security goals , people familiar with the proposal said . Homeland Security officials would be required to report to Congress within six months about what resources and technology are necessary to meet the 90 % apprehension rate and where additional border fencing should be installed . After that report , the 11 million illegal immigrants in the U.S. would become eligible for provisional legal status .
If border-security targets were n't met after five years , a commission of border-state officials—potentially governors or attorneys general—would make recommendations to meet the 90 % apprehension goal . The legislation designates money to implement the commission 's recommendations .
Illegal immigrants would be able to apply for green cards after 10 years only if the border-security targets had been met and the visa exit and full E-Verify systems have been implemented , according to the two people familiar with the plan .
`` Twenty years could pass by , and if there 's no E-Verify , not one person is going to get their green card , '' said one of the people familiar with the plan .
The price tag for the additional security measures is unclear , but it is likely to be costly . The U.S. government spent $ 18 billion in fiscal 2012 on federal immigration enforcement , more than all the other main federal law-enforcement agencies combined , according to the nonpartisan Migration Policy Institute .
Senators are hoping to offset some security costs with additional revenue from fines and fees .
`` We do not intend to have the proposals that we are enacting be additional costs to the taxpayers of America , '' said Sen. John McCain ( R. , Ariz. ) , a member of the Senate group working on immigration .