President Trump is suddenly on a surprising winning streak when it comes to immigration .
With his border wall , where the Supreme Court has cleared the way to begin construction under his emergency declaration , and negotiations with Latin American neighbors , Mr. Trump in the past weeks has finally begun to make headway on a number of major items on his immigration checklist .
The court and foreign policy victories were coupled with some policy moves within the administration that could further constrain the surge of migrants , including guidance issued Friday telling asylum officers to make sure migrants are fleeing state-sanctioned violence before they are granted asylum .
“ The Trump administration is trying to throw everything it can at this problem , ” said Jessica Vaughan , policy studies director at the Center for Immigration Studies .
The big moves last week included an agreement signed with Guatemala that will allow the U.S. to send any asylum-seekers who cross that country ’ s territory en route to the U.S. back to Guatemala to ask for asylum there instead .
Given Guatemala ’ s strategic geographic location — it lies on Mexico ’ s southern border , and land travelers must cross it during their journey north — the agreement could allow the U.S. to deny tens of thousands of asylum-seekers the chance to ask for status before they reach the border .
“ We ’ ve long been working with Guatemala , and now we can do it the right way , ” Mr. Trump said in the Oval Office after signing the deal with Guatemalan Interior Minister Enrique Degenhart .
Hours later , the president received news of another win : The Supreme Court , in a 5-4 ruling , had cleared the way for him to use his emergency border declaration to use Pentagon money to build more of his wall .
The Republican-appointed justices ended a lower-court blockade of his budgeting moves , limits that a federal district judge in California and later an appeals court had imposed while the case was being argued on the merits .
The high court didn ’ t reveal its reasoning , but the ruling is a major victory at a crucial time .
Mr. Trump ’ s attorneys told the justices they were racing a Sept. 30 deadline . If they didn ’ t obligate the money by then , they would lose the chance to spend it on the wall .
The immediate effect of the ruling is to let the administration tap several billion dollars within the Pentagon ’ s budget and direct it toward building the wall , which was Mr. Trump ’ s most visible 2016 campaign promise .
Opponents said they will continue to fight , including pressing lower courts to speed up the arguments on their broader challenge to the emergency declaration ’ s constitutionality .
“ This is not over , ” said Dror Ladin , an attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union .
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , said the Supreme Court ruling “ undermines the Constitution . ”
Mr. Trump expressed his enthusiasm in his unique system of uppercase letters on Twitter : “ Big WIN for Border Security and the Rule of Law ! ”
The two victories for Mr. Trump last week follow on his success in June , when he used the threat of tariffs to force Mexico to the bargaining table . Mexico agreed to do more to head off migrants crossing its territory and to take back more Central American asylum-seekers , making them wait in Mexico while their cases proceed through the U.S. immigration courts .
The effects of the Mexico deal were already having some effect .
Acting Homeland Security Secretary Kevin McAleenan told “ Fox Business Sunday ” that the number of illegal immigrants nabbed at the U.S.-Mexico border fell 28 % in June and is down another 20 % in July .
In May , Customs and Border Protection encountered 4,650 unauthorized migrants a day . The number now is 2,600 , he said .
The emergency border spending bill that Mr. Trump won from Congress a month ago has also helped ease overcrowding at border facilities .
At its peak in early June , CBP had 19,000 people in custody . That number is now 7,200 , Mr. McAleenan said .
One of Mr. McAleenan ’ s top lieutenants took yet another step Friday to try to reduce the flow of migrants by ordering asylum officers to cast a dim eye on some asylum claims .
“ Private violence ” doesn ’ t cut it , said Ken Cuccinelli , acting director of U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services . While conditions may be rough , he said , there just isn ’ t enough “ pervasive ” violence in El Salvador , Honduras and Guatemala to automatically grant asylum to people fleeing those countries .
Mr. Trump started winning immigration fights after he revamped his team , shuffling the leaders of the Homeland Security Department and each of the three agencies that handles immigration . The department and all three agencies are now headed by temporary officers .
The administration ’ s moves will continue to face scrutiny in the courts .
Several activist groups have vowed to challenge the Guatemala asylum agreement . Critics said that country isn ’ t safe enough nor capable enough to provide asylum to others crossing its territory .
“ Such an arrangement would make a mockery of the notion that those fleeing persecution in Central America have any recourse , ” said Eric Schwartz , president of Refugees International .
Ms. Vaughan , though , said the Guatemala agreement was proof that the U.S. does have leverage with foreign countries that previous administrations hadn ’ t used .
“ What remains to be seen is which message comes through stronger in Central America ( and around the world now ) — do they hear that the risk of failure is much higher now because Trump and the other governments are cracking down , or do they hear that American judges are blocking his efforts ? ” she said .
She said the Trump administration must be prepared to fend off those legal challenges .
“ Now that Trump has come to realize that Congress isn ’ t going to be much help , and that he needs to go at this problem from all angles , with every immigration agency involved , it looks like we are finally starting to see results , ” she said .