President Trump on Friday slammed the verdict in the Kate Steinle case , blamed Democrats and argued that his border wall is a priority now more than ever .
“ The Kate Steinle killer came back and back over the weakly protected Obama border , always committing crimes and being violent , and yet this info was not used in court . His exoneration is a complete travesty of justice . BUILD THE WALL ! ” Mr. Trump tweeted .
“ The jury was not told the killer of Kate was a 7 time felon . The Schumer/Pelosi Democrats are so weak on Crime that they will pay a big price in the 2018 and 2020 Elections , ” he added .
On Thursday , a California jury acquitted the illegal immigrant who killed Ms. Steinle while on a walk with her father on the San Francisco pier in 2015 .
Jose Ines Garcia Zarate , 54 , had admitted to fatally shooting Ms. Steinle but said it was an accident . He was found guilty of lesser gun charges in a case .
Garcia Zarate is an illegal immigrant who had a criminal history and had already been deported five times . He was protected from another deportation by San Francisco ’ s sanctuary policy restricting cooperation with federal immigration authorities .
On Thursday , Mr. Trump tweeted that it a “ disgraceful verdict . ”
Mr. Trump , then a presidential candidate , made the case a top issue of his campaign , which led in part to arguably his most famous campaign promise to build wall on the U.S.-Mexico border .
A disgraceful verdict in the Kate Steinle case ! No wonder the people of our Country are so angry with Illegal Immigration . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 1 , 2017
The Kate Steinle killer came back and back over the weakly protected Obama border , always committing crimes and being violent , and yet this info was not used in court . His exoneration is a complete travesty of justice . BUILD THE WALL ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 1 , 2017
The jury was not told the killer of Kate was a 7 time felon . The Schumer/Pelosi Democrats are so weak on Crime that they will pay a big price in the 2018 and 2020 Elections . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 1 , 2017