New York Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer offered a compromise Sunday with House Republicans who say they can not pass immigration reform legislation for fear President Obama won ’ t enforce the related laws -- pass the legislation now and enact it when the president leaves office .
`` Let 's enact the law this year , but simply not let it actually start until 2017 , after President Obama 's term is over , ” he told NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press . ”
Schumer , who helped lead his chamber last summer in passing comprehensive reform legislation , dismissed the argument that Obama would not enforce tighter border security law and other related laws , as House Speaker John Boehner suggested last week .
“ There 's widespread doubt about whether this administration can be trusted to enforce our laws , and it 's going to be difficult to move any immigration legislation until that changes , '' Boehner said Thursday , after months of saying he wanted to move ahead with reform and releasing a set of principles in late January outlining such a bill . ”
He and other Republicans point in part to the president ’ s recent vow to use executive orders to sidestep Congress , making recent changes to the Affordable Care Act and creating a program two years ago that defers deportation for roughly a half-million young people brought to the United State illegally as children .
“ I think that the rap against him -- that he wo n't enforce the law -- is false , ” Schumer continued Sunday . “ He 's deported more people than any other president . But you could actually have the law start in 2017 without doing much violence to it . ”
How serious Schumer was about the proposal was unclear Sunday .
Missouri GOP Rep. Roy Blunt told “ ███ Sunday ” that the House reluctance has a lot to do with the “ president 's constantly talking about how he can use his pen and his telephone ” to work around Congress .
The Democrat-controlled Senate last year passed a comprehensive immigration reform bill that includes a 13-year path to citizenship for some of the estimated 11 million people now living illegally in the United States . The Republican-led House has instead proposed tighter border security first , then only legal status for illegal immigrants .