Coming into 2013 , immigration reform looked promising , but now it 's stuck in the House . | AP Photos Immigration hurdle : Obamacare
The flawed rollout of the Affordable Care Act has endangered another of President Barack Obama ’ s top agenda items : Immigration reform .
It ’ s forcing the White House and its allies to confront a basic , but politically potent , criticism . If the government can ’ t build a website , how can it be trusted to correctly process millions of undocumented immigrants and require every employer to verify the status of their workers ?
The Obamacare struggles and the government shutdown sidetracked White House plans for a fall immigration campaign . And House Republicans have been able to avoid a major political hit for sitting on the Senate-passed bill in part due to their ability to draw attention to Obama ’ s broken promises on health care .
Coming into 2013 , immigration reform looked promising — Obama and Democrats were pushing ahead , and Republicans wanted to move on after losing the Hispanic vote . But the legislation remains stalled in the House , where Speaker John Boehner has claimed immigration reform is “ absolutely not ” dead but has yet to say when it would come to the floor .
That the public may be more skeptical of the federal government ’ s capacity to run big programs effectively and efficiently is something conservatives will surely hold up as a reason not to expand the government ’ s footprint well into the future — setting up another hurdle for reform advocates to clear .
“ There ’ s a loss of confidence in the government ’ s ability , ” former Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa , a Democrat who backs the immigration bill , said at an event sponsored by the public relations firm Edelman this month . “ Clearly , the last few months , our experience with Affordable Care Act does not help when you look at other big things like immigration reform . ”
The Senate bill would beef up border enforcement , expand the nation ’ s temporary worker program , and create legalization pathways for the estimated 11 million people who are in the country illegally . That may be now too much for Congress to handle , said Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) , both a lead co-sponsor of the Senate bill and leading Obamacare critic .
“ It ’ s going to make it harder to sell big deals , ” Graham said . “ People are now saying , ‘ So you ’ re gon na do immigration . You ’ re gon na let the same people manage the immigration system that ’ s managed Obamacare ? ’ ”
Boehner spokesman Brendan Buck said the rocky Obamacare rollout “ validated our warnings against jamming one massive bill that few have read and even fewer fully comprehend . ”
“ If the Obamacare train wreck has any lesson , ” Buck said , “ it ’ s that big policy challenges should be addressed deliberatively and one step at a time . ”
Still , President Barack Obama and his allies have yet to adjust their strategy to fit a new reality that politicians on both the right and the left say has taken hold in the debate .
“ If people are looking for an excuse not to do the right thing on immigration reform , they can always find an excuse — we ’ ve run out of time , or this is hard , or the list goes on and on , ” Obama said at a news conference last month . “ But my working assumption is people should want to do the right thing . ”
His press secretary , Jay Carney , said the real comparison is in the public benefit of Obamacare and immigration .
“ These are different systems , ” Carney said Monday . “ I would point to the extraordinary effort that ’ s gone into fixing the problems on HealthCare.gov , acknowledging the shortcomings — the serious , significant shortcomings , taking ownership and responsibility for them and acting to fix the problem . Because in the end — and this would be true of immigration reform as it is of HealthCare.gov or the ACA — the issue isn ’ t in the end how the process is ; the process is performed in service of the legislation and the goal . And in this case , in immigration reform , it ’ s in service of a bill that would provide , when implemented , the benefits that we ’ ve described and that outside analysts have described . ”
Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) said his private conversations with Republicans , as well as Boehner ’ s strike against tea party groups last week over the budget , make him believe that prospects for passage are brightening . Boehner ’ s recent hire of Rebecca Tallent , a former immigration aide to Sen. John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) , has also fueled speculation that he ’ s preparing to make a move on immigration next year , possibly after the Republican primary season .
“ I think the chances for immigration reform over the last month or two have only gotten better , ” Schumer said .
But the clear danger is that conservative Republicans will make it politically difficult for their moderate counterparts to vote for a federal overhaul of the immigration system by raising the Obamacare experience . The ACA is now Exhibit A — a tangible item of evidence — in the argument .