THE MORNING after President Obama 's State of the Union address , Politico had a story on how Republicans had responded to one contentious issue . The headline : `` Priebus struggles to explain GOP immigration messages . ''
That would be Reince Priebus , the Republican Party chairman . His `` struggle '' was to clarify why Iowa 's new senator , Joni Ernst , said nothing at all about immigration in her 10-minute reply to the president , whereas Florida Representative Carlos Curbelo , in a Spanish-language version of the GOP response , urged Obama to work with Republicans `` to create permanent solutions for our immigration system , to secure our borders , [ and ] modernize legal immigration . '' Good thing Priebus was n't asked about the formal Tea Party response to the president 's speech , delivered by another Florida Republican , Rep. Curt Clawson , or he 'd have had still more reason to squirm . Speaking in English and Spanish , Clawson called pointedly for `` embracing … legal immigrants , and the millions waiting in line legally to begin their own American Dream . ''
Then there was Iowa Representative Steve King 's rude Twitter slam against Obama for inviting `` a deportable '' to sit in the House gallery as a guest of the First Lady . That was a reference to 20-year-old Ana Zamora , a Texas student who was brought illegally to the United States as an infant , and who benefited from Obama 's 2012 executive order indefinitely extending legal status to thousands of similarly situated immigrants .
Though King 's tweet was n't an official GOP statement , it created some instant awkwardness for the Republican presidential hopefuls heading to Iowa for a Saturday `` freedom summit '' hosted by … King . When one of those hopefuls , Senator Marco Rubio , was asked about King 's nasty tone , his answer was careful : `` We have to always remind ourselves that we 're talking about human beings with hopes and dreams and families . ''
Plainly , the clearest element of the GOP message on immigration is that the GOP has no clear message on immigration . The subject was barely mentioned in the president 's address , but that did n't stop the loyal opposition from once again getting into an intramural tangle over it .
For any large political party , a boisterous battle over policy and principle is a sign of fitness , not feebleness . While `` diversity '' is a sacred cow on the left , it is on the right where real diversity — diversity of ideas and viewpoints — has most often been showcased . In the 1970s , Ronald Reagan famously debated William F. Buckley Jr. on whether the United States should relinquish the Panama Canal . In the 1980s , Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich fiercely clashed over supply-side tax cuts . More recently , Republicans have gone at each other over war in Iraq , education reform , and `` enhanced interrogation . ''
However disconcerting in the short run , the right 's current rumble over immigration policy is heartening , especially when the argument focuses on ideals and values , and reflects a thoughtful interest in crafting wise , not merely popular , public policy . In a new monograph from Encounter Books — `` Open Immigration : Yea & Nay '' — Mark Krikorian of the Center for Immigration Studies and Alex Nowrasteh of the Cato Institute provide a brief yet splendid example of how uplifting the debate over immigration can be .
Each lays out his case in prose that is clear , quick , factual , and respectful .
Krikorian , a well-known immigration restrictionist , argues that while mass immigration may have suited the United States in the 19th-century , it is harmful in the 21st-century . It poses security and economic threats , undermines assimilation , and retards productivity gains by flooding the market with cheap labor . `` A modern society does n't actually need any immigration , '' he writes ; his proposal would slash the annual influx from 1 million to about 400,000 — `` still higher than any other nation in the world . ''
Nowrasteh , by contrast , wants more legal immigration . America is n't being swamped with newcomers — far from it . As a fraction of our population , immigrant inflows are small compared to most developed countries . Every policy generates stresses and strains , he notes , but there is no question that immigration enlarges the US economic pie . `` A freer immigration system would not only be economically beneficial to the United States , '' Nowrasteh argues . `` It would also be consistent with our principles of limited government , free markets , and individual liberty . ''
These dueling essays are a pleasure to read . Each advocate strengthens his case , paradoxically , by granting that the other side raises serious challenges and attempting to meet them . To be sure , Krikorian and Nowrasteh are n't politicians , ravenous for votes and approval ratings . But their debate exemplifies what is possible even on such an incendiary issue .
It 's true : Republicans and others on the right , battling it out over immigration , seem awfully fractious and confused these days . For those who take their ideas seriously , that 's often how the democratic process works .