`` Our agents did everything they could as soon as these children manifested symptoms of illness to save their lives , ” said Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAleenan . | Andrew Harnik/AP Photo Immigration Border chief : Agents 'did everything they could ' to prevent child migrants ' deaths
President Donald Trump ’ s Border Patrol chief on Sunday called the deaths of two Guatemalan children who perished while in government custody this month “ absolutely devastating ” and said immigration enforcement agents “ did everything they could ” to prevent the tragedies .
“ Just absolutely devastating for us on every level . It ’ s been over a decade since we ’ ve had a child die anywhere in our processes , ” Customs and Border Protection Commissioner Kevin McAleenan said on ABC ’ s “ This Week . ”
“ What I can tell you about these two cases — and I ’ ve looked at our operation reporting , the initial investigative reporting , I looked at the fathers ’ statements and interviews — is that our agents did everything they could as soon as these children manifested symptoms of illness to save their lives , ” McAleenan said .
Seven-year-old Jakelin Caal crossed the border with her father and a group of migrants on Dec. 6 before surrendering to Border Patrol personnel near Lordsburg , N.M. After she began experiencing seizures , Caal was flown to a hospital in El Paso , Texas , where she died two days later . The Washington Post reported that Caal died of dehydration .
Eight-year-old Felipe Gomez Alonzo was arrested with his father by immigration agents in El Paso on Dec. 18 . He died late Christmas Eve at a New Mexico hospital after suffering coughing , vomiting and a fever , according to law enforcement . New Mexico authorities say an autopsy revealed the boy had the flu , according to The Associated Press .
McAleenan on Sunday said he and Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen have directed border officials to perform medical checks of children ages 17 and under who are entering the immigration process , as well as those already in government custody .
“ That ’ s not a capacity we ’ ve had in the past , ” McAleenan said .
“ We ’ re also trying to — to really change the system so that we have the capacity — either with doctors , physicians assistants , paramedics — to do an initial intake check so that we know if a child is healthy as they arrive at the border and then make sure they can get medical care if they need it , ” he added .
McAleenan also said he has already allocated increased agency funding toward “ medical care and mental health care for children entering our custody . ”