The immigration debate comes at a critical moment for Sen. Chuck Schumer . Senate Dems divided on immigration
Sen. Chuck Schumer ’ s pitch to find 70-plus votes for a sweeping immigration overhaul is running into skeptics from his own party – Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and Majority Whip Dick Durbin .
The top two Senate Democrats believe that the push to win more GOP senators could significantly water down the measure , arguing their party should instead focus on the more achievable goal of securing the 60 votes needed to break an expected Republican filibuster . The Democratic leaders don ’ t believe they should make major concessions to conservatives — mainly on issues such as border security — in order to inflate the vote tally .
But Schumer argues that if Democrats win only a handful of Senate Republicans , the House will balk at the Senate ’ s approach , imperiling the push for a comprehensive bill in this Congress .
The differences between the three Senate Democratic leaders underscore the delicacy of the negotiations as the Senate launches debate this week on the hot-button issue for the first time in six years . And their divisions center on the question : What will it take for the more conservative House to consider a bill similar to the Senate plan ?
In the Senate , Reid and Durbin are convinced that a forceful posture toward Republicans will force the House GOP to buckle since the party acknowledges it must right its standing with Hispanic voters after last year ’ s losses at the polls . They believe that courting Republicans will only weaken the bipartisan bill even before they can negotiate a compromise with the House , arguing instead to focus on securing the minimum of 60 votes that would still require some GOP support .
“ I want to get as many votes as we can , but not at the expense of the basic agreement , ” Durbin told ███ . “ When some of my friends announce 70 votes , they create an incentive for Republicans to dream up things that they either needed in this bill or outside of it . And we need to temper that . ”
Asked how , Durbin simply said : “ Make sure we get 60 . ”
When asked Tuesday about the 70-vote goal , Reid simply said : “ I want to have a bill that adheres to our principles and gets as many votes as we can , ” Reid said . “ I ’ m not going to be talking about specific numbers . ”
But Schumer ’ s main fear is that jamming through a bill with only limited Republican support will embolden GOP opponents of immigration reform in both chambers into derailing the legislation he ’ s painstakingly worked to produce . And he ’ s vowing not to unravel the core of the bill as he negotiates with Republicans over the next three weeks of floor debate .
The immigration debate comes at a critical moment for Schumer , a 14-year Senate veteran , who cut his teeth as the party ’ s chief political tactician when he led the Democratic charge to win the Senate majority in 2006 and 2008 . And in the previous Congress , Schumer was Democrats ’ chief partisan messenger , leading the Democratic Policy and Communications Committee and consistently lobbing bombs against Republicans over the budget , taxes and the economy .