Chuck Schumer says some are using Boston as an excuse . Boston echoes in immigration debate
The fallout from the Boston bombings continues to complicate an already thorny congressional debate over reforming the nation ’ s immigration laws .
One week afterward , some Republican lawmakers and immigration reform critics pointed to the bombings as a reason to hit pause on reform . Democrats who have long championed reform accused Republicans of exploiting the attacks . And one senator briefly lost his temper at a colleague , clearly frustrated by accusations that he was trying to use the bombings to derail reform .
“ I do not want to see comprehensive immigration reform fall victim to entrenched , partisan opposition , ” Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick Leahy ( D-Vt. ) said Monday . “ Let us continue to work together to make this bill better , rather than making sure that nothing can get done . ”
But opposition to moving the Gang of Eight ’ s immigration bill grew Monday , as Sen. Rand Paul ( R-Ky. ) wrote to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) that Congress “ should not proceed ” with immigration reform until lawmakers had a clearer picture of the Tsarnaev brothers ’ background .
The Tsarnaev brothers legally emigrated with their family to the United States as children , and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev — the younger brother who is hospitalized in serious condition — is a naturalized U.S. citizen , according to authorities . Tamerlan , who was killed early Friday during the massive citywide manhunt for the suspects , was a greencard holder .
“ Why did the current system allow two individuals to [ emigrate ] to the United States from the Chechen Republic in Russia , an area known as a hotbed of Islamic extremism , who then committed acts of terrorism ? ” Paul asked Reid in his letter . “ Were there any safeguards ? Could this have been prevented ? Does the immigration reform before us address this ? ”
Monday ’ s daylong hearing hosted more than 20 witnesses , including immigration activists , security experts , religious leaders and former elected officials . It was the second on immigration reform since the so-called Gang of Eight unveiled its bill last week .
Janet Napolitano , secretary of Homeland Security , is scheduled to testify before the panel on Tuesday .
Some witnesses urged lawmakers to train a more critical eye on immigration reform in light of the Boston attacks .
Mark Krikorian , the director of the Center for Immigration Studies , questioned whether the background checks required in the Senate legislation of undocumented immigrants to become legalized would be sufficient , considering an FBI investigation into Tamerlan Tsarnaev did not find any terrorist activity — domestic or foreign .
“ The Boston bombing is not an excuse for delay of considering this immigration bill , but it is an illustration of certain problems that exist with our immigration system , ” testified Krikorian , whose group supports less immigration .
“ The background checks in this bill are insufficient to prevent a terrorist from getting amnesty , ” added Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach , who helped draft Arizona ’ s strict immigration law .
Leahy opened the hearing by denouncing reform critics ’ use of the Boston bombings as a way to slow down immigration reform , calling that tactic “ cruel . ”
“ If you have ways to improve the bill , offer an amendment when we start markup in May and let ’ s vote on it , ” added Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , a key immigration negotiator . “ I say that particularly to those who are pointing to what happened , the terrible tragedy in Boston as — I would say excuse — for not doing a bill or to delaying it many months or years . ”