WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - President Donald Trump on Wednesday aligned himself solidly with conservative Republicans on immigration , criticizing a proposed bipartisan deal as “ horrible ” on U.S. border security and “ very , very weak ” on reforms for the legal immigration system .
U.S. President Donald Trump speaks during an interview with ███ at the White House in Washington , U.S. , January 17 , 2018 . ███/Kevin Lamarque
The Senate proposal - aimed at addressing Democrats ’ demands for protections for young adults brought to the United States illegally as children and dubbed “ Dreamers ” - fell far short of what most Republicans believe needs to happen , the president said .
“ It ’ s the opposite of what I campaigned for , ” Trump told ███ in an interview .
The plan was presented to Trump last week by Republican Senator Lindsey Graham and Democratic Senator Dick Durbin .
Trump drew international condemnation after reports emerged that he had questioned the value of taking immigrants from Africa and the Caribbean nation of Haiti during a closed-door meeting with lawmakers at the White House last Thursday , referring to them as “ shithole ” countries .
Trump has denied using that word . Trump in the interview on Wednesday declined to say what specific words he used .
“ I ’ m not going to get into what I said , but I will tell you , it was a tough meeting , ” Trump said .
Many Democrats have said they will not vote for spending legislation to keep the federal government funded past a Friday deadline without an immigration deal , and Republicans will need at least some Democratic votes to pass the funding extension in the Senate .
Trump said he thinks a deal on immigration is still possible . “ Time is running out , ” he said .
Democrats said the negotiated plan addressed Trump priorities , including $ 2.7 billion for additional border security funding .
“ The president can ’ t seem to take yes for an answer and is heading toward a shut down , which would fall squarely on his back , ” Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer said in a statement emailed to ███ .
Trump said a federal government shutdown “ could happen ” at the end of the week , insisting Democrats would be blamed if that occurs even though Republicans control both chambers of Congress and the White House .
The White House has said it backs a short-term spending measure by a Friday deadline to prevent a shutdown .
Trump in September announced he was ending the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program that protects the Dreamers , which was begun by his Democratic predecessor Barack Obama , effective in March . The program currently protects roughly 700,000 people , mostly Hispanic young adults , from deportation and provides them work permits .
Trump has said he is open to finding a solution to help the Dreamers . But he said he became unhappy when Graham and Durbin , who had told him they had a compromise on the Dreamers issue , presented the details .
But Ben Marter , a spokesman for Durbin , said on Friday that following an initial telephone conversation with Trump about the deal , the senator had been “ encouraged ” by Trump ’ s reaction and had expected further progress on the legislation at a White House meeting that day .
Trump said he had called Republican Senators Tom Cotton and David Perdue and Republican Representative Bob Goodlatte to join that meeting at the White House , describing them as “ smart guys , with more of a conservative bent , more of a bent like I have . ”
As Graham and Durbin began describing the deal , Trump said , it was immediately clear it would be unacceptable to most Republicans .
“ It ’ s horrible for the security of our country , ” Trump said , noting there was not enough funding for the wall he has promised to build on the U.S.-Mexican border , a project opposed by Democrats .
The proposal was “ very , very weak ” on curbing visas for extended family members of immigrants , and failed to end a diversity visa lottery program .
“ Lindsey - he meant well - but I said , ‘ Well , how many Republicans agree with this ? ’ ” Trump said .
Trump blamed Durbin for leaking the language he used in the meeting , a disclosure that prompted critics to denounce Trump as a racist , an accusation he denied .
Trump campaigned for president in 2016 promising a hard line on immigration , including deporting all of the roughly 11 million illegal immigrants already in the country and a “ total and complete shutdown ” of the entry of Muslims into the United States . As president , he has signed three orders banning entry of most people from several Muslim-majority countries as well as rescinding DACA .