Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio dismissed arguments Sunday that the Senate immigration bill offers amnesty for illegal immigrants and said border security is not the only key issue -- amid scrutiny from some fellow conservatives and the union that represents immigration enforcement agents .
Rubio told “ ███ Sunday ” that anybody living illegally in the United States and attempting to get a visa would face a long list of qualifications , which includes paying taxes , a fine and an application fee as well as having a job and waiting for at least 10 years .
“ That is not amnesty , ” said Rubio , a Cuban-American considered a key member of the so-called bipartisan Gang of Eight . “ Amnesty is the forgiveness of something . ”
The Senate group has been working on comprehensive immigration reform since January and is expected to release the legislation Tuesday , ahead of a hearing later this week in the Senate Judiciary Committee .
Rubio also argued Sunday that achieving citizenship through the new plan would be harder than under the existing plan .
“ It will be cheaper , faster and easier for people to go back home and wait 10 years than it will be to go through this process that I 've outlined , ” Rubio told Fox .
The Rubio-backed plan faces increasing scrutiny from such fellow Republican senators as Ted Cruz , of Texas , and Alabama 's Jeff Sessions , as well as the National ICE Council , the union representing thousands of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement employees .
“ I know Sen. Rubio 's heart is exactly right , '' Sessions told ABC ’ s “ This Week. ” `` And I really respect the work of the Gang of Eight . But they have produced legislation ... that will give amnesty now , legalize everyone that 's here effectively today . And then there 's a promise of enforcement in the future . ''
Union President Chris Crane said Friday an outline of the legislation shows legalization before border enforcement , which means Rubio has not followed through on his “ commitment to the American people ” and that he should leave the bipartisan group .
Rubio also said Sunday that tracking illegal immigrants in and out of the U.S. and improving the employee-verification system , known as E-Verify , are equally important .
“ All three work together , ” he told Fox . “ All three have to happen . ”
Though Rubio made clear that securing the border is only part of the plan , he said a 90 percent border-apprehension rate within the next five years is a “ trigger ” for permanent residence .
“ The Department of Homeland Security will have five years to meet that goal , ” said Rubio , who appeared on all five major Sunday talk shows to garner support for the legislation .
He was also booked on the Spanish-language networks Telemundo and Univision
If the agency fails to meet apprehension and surveillance goals , a commission , which includes officials from states along the U.S.-Mexico border , would intervene .
There are roughly 11 million illegal immigrants now living in the U.S .
The proposal is available only for those who arrived in the U.S. before Dec. 31 , 2011 . Anyone who came after that date would be subject to deportation .
As a potential 2016 Republican presidential candidate , Rubio will be careful not to appear weak on border security or create political problems among the conservatives who have great sway in picking the party nominee .
Other lawmakers helping to write the legislation acknowledged the political challenges of the issue .
`` A lot of my conservative colleagues have significant questions , and they 're legitimate , '' Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz , said on CNN 's `` State of the Union . '' `` This is the start of a process . ”
Sessions and others are also concerned about the legislation ’ s long-term impact on taxpayers once illegal immigrants become eligible for major entitlements and low-income assistance programs .
“ Please list all federal benefits and aid programs former illegal immigrants become eligible for once granted green cards or permanent residency , ” Sessions , along with fellow Republican Sens . Pat Roberts and Chuck Grassley , said in an April 10 letter to the eight senators .
The measure to put millions on a path to citizenship also would allow tens of thousands of new high- and low-skilled workers into the country with new visa programs .
The legislation also is expected to include a new emphasis on merit-based immigration over family ties .
`` This is a very balanced bill , '' New York Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer told ABC . “ The American people have told us to do two things : one , prevent future flows of illegal immigration . Then come up with a common-sense solution for legal immigration . And that 's what our bill does . ''