A conservative think tank estimated Monday that granting citizenship to 11 million people in the U.S. illegally would cost taxpayers trillions of dollars , a conclusion that split the Republican Party and added a new level of complexity to efforts in the Senate to overhaul immigration laws .
The analysis from the Heritage Foundation concluded that the net cost would be at least $ 6.3 trillion in inflation-adjusted terms as immigrants gaining legal status would receive $ 9.4 trillion in government benefits and services over their lifetimes while paying $ 3.1 trillion in taxes .
The Senate bill would `` take a really bad , broken system and make it much more expensive and much worse from the taxpayer 's perspective , '' said Robert Rector , a senior research fellow at Heritage and the report 's lead author . In contrast , he said , the more-limited benefits illegal immigrants now receive carry a tab of about $ 1 trillion over their lifetimes .
`` It 's a big deal , '' said Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions , a Republican skeptic of immigration changes . `` It 's a dramatic finding that clearly makes it more difficult for the sponsors to win support . ''
In contrast , former Mississippi Gov . Haley Barbour , also a Republican , called it a `` political document '' that `` is designed to try to scare conservative Republicans into thinking the cost here is going to be so gigantic that you ca n't possibly be for it . '' He and other supporters of the Senate bill believe it would boost economic growth and help cut the deficit over the long haul .
The rift among Republicans , and the broader debate over the immigration proposal , is sure to persist this week as the Senate Judiciary Committee begins considering the legislation , which was crafted by a bipartisan group of eight senators .
Heritage , which is skeptical of an immigration overhaul , released a similar report in 2007 that many in the GOP believe helped derail an effort to rewrite immigration laws at the time .
The Heritage report tallied the fiscal impact of changes to immigration law , according to a summary , but did n't assess the impact of any macroeconomic benefits , also known as `` dynamic '' scoring , which Republicans have long preferred . That approach would assess changes to worker and employer behavior , and to the broader economy , that could result from new immigration laws .
`` By ignoring that the economy will be a lot bigger and more productive as a result of immigration , they massively undercounted the benefits of immigration reform , '' said Alex Nowrasteh , immigration policy analyst at the libertarian Cato Institute .
Sen. Sherrod Brown ( D. , Ohio ) also disagreed with the study : `` Immigration creates wealth—it 's not that it 's a cost . It 's clear over time that it 's new energy that creates jobs and wealth and businesses . ''
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office , which will calculate the bill 's official cost if it survives a committee vote , said last week that it would include a supplemental study gauging the economic impact . When the CBO did that for a failed immigration push during the Bush administration , it found the bill could have helped reduce the deficit by as much as $ 160 billion over 10 years . A separate CBO analysis that did n't take into account all economic benefits concluded an unsuccessful bill would have added $ 18 billion to the deficit over a decade .
The CBO usually limits its estimate of a bill 's costs to a decade . But with major legislation , such as the immigration proposal , it can offer longer estimates . The Heritage calculation used a 50-year horizon for the estimated remaining life span of the typical unauthorized immigrant already living as an adult in the U.S .
`` A number of people in Congress do not want to consider the cost , '' said Jim DeMint , the Heritage president and a former Republican senator from South Carolina . `` They play their normal tricks of trying to push some of the expenses outside the 10-year window . ''
Under the proposed Senate plan , most unauthorized immigrants would n't be eligible for government benefits for at least a decade . During that time , their tax payments would total more than any benefits they receive , according to the Heritage report . It estimated the brunt of the bill 's cost would come once they became eligible for programs such as welfare and food stamps , and eventually for Social Security and Medicare . The Heritage study also assessed the cost of immigrants using parks , roads and courts and the cost of educating their children .
On average , a household of currently unauthorized immigrants would receive $ 592,000 more in government benefits than it paid in taxes over the course of a lifetime , the report estimated . Mr. Rector 's conclusions are based on the assessment that a large share of immigrant households are headed by people with low levels of education , who have lower incomes and are likely to use government-benefits programs .