Last year we published a blog summarizing the research on how immigrants affect the crime rate in the United States . There are two major types of studies that examine this question .
The first uses Census data of the institutionalized population to investigate immigrant versus native incarceration rates . Although the Census evidence isn ’ t perfect because of potential issues with reporting immigration status and different types of incarceration , these studies show that immigrants are less likely to be incarcerated than similarly-aged natives . The second type is a macro-level or area study that looks at the crime rates in places that have experienced large waves of immigration . These generally find that immigration either lowers or has little effect on crime rates . The research on unauthorized immigrant crime rates is poor .
A few recent papers recently extended these findings . The first by David Green seeks to determine whether immigrants affect violent and drug-related crime in the United States on the state-level . It looks at state-level rates of violent crime and drug arrests pooled for the 2012-2014 years against pooled statistics on foreign-born and Mexican nationals by immigration status , specifically legal versus unauthorized immigrants . Green finds no association between immigrant population size and increased violent crime . However , he does find a small but statistically significant association between unauthorized immigrant population size and arrests for drug offenses .
The second by criminologists Biana Bersani and Alex Piquero investigated whether immigrants are less crime-prone than natives because immigrants are less likely to report crimes . If it was true that immigrants were less likely to report crimes and most of the victims of immigrant-crime were other immigrants , then the real immigrant crime rate could be much higher than the data is revealing due to a lack of reporting . This would also increase their relative crime rates compared to second-generation and other U.S.-born Americans who are more likely to report crimes .
On its surface , this theory has some appeal because immigrants are generally weary of dealing with government authorities that subjected them to this bureaucratic monstrosity – especially if they are unauthorized . Bersani and Piquero analyzed data from a 7-year longitudinal study called Pathways to Desistance that logged the respondents ’ immigration status , age , self-reported criminal and arrest records , and official criminal and arrest histories . They found no systematic difference between the self-reported and official criminal and arrest histories of the respondents by immigrant generation . Although not conclusive , this should strongly bias us against the notion that the low-levels of reported immigrant criminality are not based on reporting differences . The evidence of low immigrant criminality continues to grow .