Last week , New York City 's Commission on Human Rights declared that using the term `` illegal alien '' pejoratively to describe an undocumented person violates laws designed to protect employees and tenants from discrimination , and could result in fines of up to $ 250,000 . But the city 's interpretation of the law is so broad that it may very well be unconstitutional under the First Amendment .
Perceived immigration status has long been a protected category under the New York City Human Rights Law , and the commission has now issued guidance that `` use of the term 'illegal alien , ' among others , when used with intent to demean , humiliate , or harass a person , is illegal under the law . ''
It 's important to note that this guidance does not affect all kinds of speech : The law covers workplace harassment , tenants ' rights , and public accommodation . Merely calling someone an illegal alien on the street , or threatening to call Immigration and Customs Enforcement on them , would not be illegal .
The courts have , of course , held that anti-discrimination ordinances can survive scrutiny , even if they appear to limit the free speech rights of employers and landlords . But NYC is going further here . The 30-page guidance notes , for instance , that `` the severity or pervasiveness of the harassment is only relevant to damages . Even an employer 's single comment made in circumstances where that comment would signal discriminatory views about one 's immigration status or national origin may be enough to constitute harassment . ''
That 's a problem , and one that might push the guidance into unconstitutional territory . Government decrees to prohibit free speech in the name of anti-harassment or anti-discrimination must come with certain limiting conditions to survive a First Amendment test .
`` The Supreme Court requires that conduct be not just unwelcome , but also severe or pervasive enough to make the work environment both subjectively and objectively hostile , before it is legally considered harassment under federal law , '' wrote Hans Bader , an attorney and former official in the Department of Education 's Office for Civil Rights . `` Even the 'severe or pervasive ' standard found in federal law is not sufficiently protective of speech , so it is alarming that New York City has eliminated that modest limit on liability . ''
Bader 's entire post on the subject is worth reading in full . The government can not simply prohibit people from making politically incorrect statements about undocumented people—it must limit the scope of anti-discrimination mandates in order to satisfy the broad free speech guarantees enjoyed by all people .