Thousands of protesters marched in the streets of cities across America to protest the nation ’ s immigration policies and call for the reunification of parents and children who were separated at the U.S.-Mexico border , according to published reports .
More than one week ago , President Donald Trump signed an executive order to end the practice , but many families still remain separated as the government sorts through their cases .
In all , an estimated 600 protests were scheduled in cities spanning from New York City to Los Angeles . The marchers included open-border advocates as well as conservatives who say families should not be separated .
The total number of protesters could rise to hundreds of thousands , according to some reports . Social media was flooded with photos of those participating and watching the demonstrations .
“ Thousands ” also turned out in New York City , Boston , Washington , El Paso , Los Angeles , San Francisco , and Albuquerque , New Mexico , according to an Associated Press running tally of the protests .
In New York City , protesters shouted “ Shut detention down , ” a reference to demonstrations held at ICE offices across the country .
Barry Hooper of San Francisco told the Associated Press he attended the protest with his wife and two daughters to “ let the president know that this is not acceptable . ”
Liliana , his 7-year-old daughter , held a sign she made that read , “ Stop the separation . ”
Protesters in San Francisco carried flags and signs with with slogans that read , “ Deport Trump , ” and “ I Really Care , Do You ? ” – a jab at the words written across a jacket the first lady during a visit to an immigrant detention center . Amid a global furor over the immigrant crisis , Melania Trump wore a jacket with the words , “ I really don ’ t care , do u ? ” written across the back in large white letters .
Trump later said the message on his wife 's jacket was directed at the “ Fake News Media . ”
Celebrities and politicians who oppose Trump were among those participating in a demonstration in Los Angeles , according to the Associated Press .
California Democrats who turned out for the event included Rep. Maxine Waters ( D-Calif. ) and Sen. Kamala Harris ( D-Calif. ) Migrant children taken from their parents will suffer lifelong trauma , Harris said .
A rally near the city hall in Portland , Maine was so large that police shut down streets as a reported 2,000 people “ chanted , cheered and prayed , ” the wire service reported .
In downtown Denver , an estimated 4,000 people attended a boisterous rally . Some of the protesters wore foil blankets , a symbol of similar blankets they gave to children separated from their parents at the U.S.-Mexico border .
Others carried signs that included the messages : “ Keep the kids , deport the racists ” and “ Break walls , build families . ”
Elsewhere , smaller groups banded together in city parks and downtown squares in virtually every state . Some carried tiny white onesies with the words , `` What if it was your child ? '' and `` No family jails , '' according to reports .
The rallies were funded by the American Civil Liberties Union , MoveOn.org , the National Domestic Workers Alliance , and The Leadership Conference , Fox News reported .
Local organizers did most of the planning and coordination efforts . Many of them used informal networks that formed during the worldwide women 's marches that happened on Trump 's inauguration and its anniversary , the report stated .
As the protests were underway , Trump doubled-down on the immigration issue through a series of tweets , including :