PHOENIX — As supporters of stricter immigration policies cheered the sweeping set of federal immigration-enforcement guidelines issued Tuesday , panic and confusion intensified among undocumented immigrants in Arizona , with many calling the protocols an `` attack '' and a threat to human rights .
The enforcement procedures , outlined in a pair of Department of Homeland Security memos , implement President Trump 's Jan. 25 immigration executive orders , putting most of the nation 's 11 million undocumented immigrants at risk of deportation .
The memos , among other things , give local police the ability to help with immigration enforcement , call for the hiring of thousands more immigration agents and increase the number of immigrants who could be deported under `` expedited removal , '' a process that generally denies individuals a chance to speak with an immigration judge .
Federal officials `` are doing everything in their power to ensure the immigrant community is under attack — not only people who are undocumented but also people with asylum , '' said founder Reyna Montoya of Aliento , an organization that uses art to comfort youth affected by the immigration and detention systems .
`` I think the general feeling right now is that they want to terrorize our communities , '' Montoya said . `` People think these ( guidelines ) are going to make America safe again , when really it 's going to push undocumented people who are victims of crimes not to report them . ''
Student activist Randy Perez works with refugees and recipients of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , known as `` dreamers , '' at Arizona State University . He said the guidelines sparked flashbacks to the arrival of Senate Bill 1070 , Arizona 's controversial 2010 immigration law .
The bill requires law enforcement to determine the immigration status of someone arrested or detained if officers have reason to suspect the person entered the country illegally . The law ignited protests , boycotts and a rash of legal challenges after opponents contended it encouraged racial profiling
`` What came out today is scary but , unfortunately , not surprising to anyone in Arizona , '' Perez said . `` I do n't think all of this is going to hold up in court . ''
Brian Garcia , a legal advocate for immigrant youth , said the `` change in policy places a priority on hurting families '' who `` come to the U.S. to work , pursue an education and contribute to our economy . ''
Phoenix immigration attorney Daniel Rodriguez called the memos an `` all-out attack on immigrants , legal or otherwise . ''
White House spokesman Sean Spicer denied the new policy is a green light for mass deportations .
`` The priority that the president has laid forward ( is ) the people who have committed a crime or pose a threat to our public , '' he said .
Though federal officials also said the new guidelines will spare dreamers , immigrant-rights advocates were n't convinced .
Several pointed to the Feb. 10 arrest of Seattle `` dreamer '' Daniel Ramirez Medina . Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents said they detained the 23-year-old because of a gang affiliation , despite lawyers repeatedly denying that claim and stressing Ramirez 's clean record .
Thomas Kim , an ASU law student and DACA recipient from South Korea , said he worries giving additional power to local law-enforcement agencies will `` lead to racial profiling , the separation of families and a breakdown of community trust '' without `` actually anything substantive in the way of public safety , which is what these memos are supposedly all about . ''
DACA recipient Belen Sisa agreed , saying the enforcement protocols will make the immigrant community newly distrustful of law enforcement after years of gradual inroads toward cooperation .
`` In the eyes of the government , anyone who is undocumented is a criminal if our presence alone is already seen as a threat , '' Sisa said , calling the guidelines `` xenophobic . ''
`` This is not only a plan to mass-deport our community , but a human-rights violation not to give us the opportunity to defend ourselves in court , '' she said .
Migrant-rights groups began preparing immigrants for an enforcement crackdown after Trump issued his executive orders last month . Advocates said they will continue to hold informational sessions as long as they are needed .
Puente Arizona was set to begin a three-day `` deportation-defense class '' Tuesday evening to teach attendees about their rights when approached by immigration agents , how to prepare personal and legal documents , and `` measures that can be taken right now in response to Trump 's executive orders . ''
Aliento has scheduled March trainings , informational meetings , conference calls and retreats to inform and organize immigrants and allies .