A massive anti-deportation infrastructure has emerged to try to protect illegal immigrants from President Trump ’ s crackdown , with advocacy groups coaching potential deportees on how to massage encounters with police , and lawyers and judges working to shield them from charges that would make them priorities for deportation .
A video released Monday by a coalition of advocates instructs illegal immigrants not to open the door to federal agents , what proof to demand if they are being arrested and what to say if accosted outside their homes .
Meanwhile , attorneys are working to lower charges from some illegal immigrant criminals , hoping to blunt their crimes so they don ’ t show up as high-priority deportation targets .
The latest instance was in California , where an immigrant from India was accused of abusing his wife . The Santa Clara prosecutor told The Daily Beast that he reduced a felony assault charge to a felony accessory after the fact charge in order to spare the man a sentence that would have made him a deportation risk .
Attorney General Jeff Sessions lashed out at the prosecutor last week , calling his action a perversion of the criminal justice system .
“ Think about the message that sends : If you are an alien and you commit domestic violence , prosecutors will charge you with a lesser crime so you can stay in the country , ” said Mr . Sessions , calling for an end to the practice . “ Enough is enough . ”
Even when prosecutors aren ’ t cooperating , defense attorneys have come up with guidance for trying to plead down charges or make alternative pleas that will keep major convictions off their records . One piece of advice from the National Lawyers Guild is to agree to pleas for two lesser misdemeanors from the same incident rather than admit to a single more serious misdemeanor that would make an illegal immigrant ineligible for special consideration .
“ This is absurd , ” said Jessica Vaughan , policy studies director at the Center for Immigration Studies . “ The possibility of immigration consequences should not affect someone ’ s sentencing or the consequences they face . ”
The desire to thwart deportations has grown in the months since Mr. Trump won the presidency , vowing to enforce immigration laws as written .
But even under President Obama , who took a far more lenient approach , activists were searching for ways to game the system to aid illegal immigrants .
One tactic universities used was to schedule overseas trips for illegal immigrant students who had been approved under Mr. Obama ’ s 2012 deportation amnesty , the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , or DACA . Under a provision of immigration law , permission to travel outside the U.S. for approved reasons can earn students advance parole , meaning that immigrants could get a shortcut to a path to citizenship upon their return .
Public institutions in California were particularly eager to put that to use for DACA students . Ms. Vaughan pointed to one Chicano studies professor at California State University , Long Beach , who took dozens of students to Mexico for school trips , giving them the pretext that they needed to earn advance parole .
Ms. Vaughan said the desire to thwart immigration law has become epidemic .
“ They just don ’ t believe that immigration enforcement is legitimate or a worthy goal , ” she said . “ They ’ ve romanticized illegal immigration and have come to believe that illegal immigrants need to be protected from our laws . They ’ ve lost sight of the fact that immigration laws protect Americans . ”
The activists counter that illegal immigrants have rights under the U.S. Constitution and that those rights need to be respected . Knowledge of those rights needs to be reinforced , activists say .
The video released Monday was aimed at children of illegal immigrants who are hoping the youngsters would help educate the adults on their options .
“ If they come here , to the house , don ’ t open the doors . ‘ No abran las puertas , ’ ” the Informed Immigrant coalition said in its seven-minute training video .
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers said they are already seeing far fewer people willing to open doors to them as warnings take hold .
The video does warn illegal immigrants against driving if they don ’ t have a license , urges them not to carry false papers and repeatedly cautions against attempting to flee authorities .
But it does offer strategies for encounters . If illegal immigrants have children who are U.S. citizens , they are encouraged to mention them in the hope that it would sway agents to leave the family alone .
Those who have children in the country illegally are advised not to mention them . Otherwise , the video says , the children could become targets for deportation .
“ Don ’ t carry papers from another country with you , such as a foreign passport . Such papers could be used against you in the deportation process , ” the video says .
ICE officers usually carry administrative warrants authorizing arrests for deportation purposes . They are not criminal warrants signed by a judge , and the video says they do not carry the same force of law — so illegal immigrants do not have to let officers inside or even open the door for them .