`` Give me your tired , your poor , Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free , ” may soon have to be changed to “ Don ’ t even think about crossing that line , ” if some Republicans get their way .
Now that the GOP controls all levers of power in Washington the sugar-coated rhetoric employed during Congress ’ last immigration debate is giving way to a raw anti-immigrant stance that critics argue reveals rank hypocrisy and growing nationalistic tendencies in the party .
Jeff Sessions was viewed by many as the loudest anti-immigrant voice in the Senate , but now that he ’ s the new head of the Department of Justice – where he ’ ll be able to wield an extraordinary amount of power over immigration enforcement – there seems to be a new southern sheriff on Capitol Hill .
Freshman Sen. Tom Cotton ( R-Ark . ) is one of the Senate ’ s new breed . The Harvard-educated Iraq and Afghanistan veteran came to the upper chamber after serving in the boisterous House of Representatives and has shown he isn ’ t afraid to throw bombs in the formerly austere Senate .
Cotton ’ s the senator who convinced 46 Republicans to break longstanding protocol and send a letter directly to “ leaders of the Islamic Republic of Iran ” that attempted to undercut President Barack Obama ’ s nuclear agreement with the nation .
The 39-year-old is often seen pushing his baby around the Capitol in a stroller , but that ’ s about where his soft side ends . While many in the GOP have been ducking immigration questions since President Donald Trump ’ s botched rollout of his non-Muslim-Muslim-ban , Cotton came out swinging .
The southerner unveiled one of the first immigration proposals in this Congress and it has a distinctly Trumpian tone to it : Reforming American Immigration for Strong Employment Act ( or the RAISE Act ) . Its aim is simple : cut legal immigration into America in half over the next decade .
The RAISE Act isn ’ t about keeping illegal immigrants out ; it ’ s about keeping legal immigrants out .
While trying to attract skilled workers , the legislation would end the current preferences for relatives of legal U.S. citizens , like adult parents of U.S. citizens , unmarried adult children of U.S. citizens , adult siblings of U.S. citizens , among other categories .
“ Once you get here , you have a green card and you can open up immigration not just to your immediate family , but your extended family , your village , your clan , your tribe , ” Cotton told reporters this week . “ I don ’ t think it works for American workers . ”
The legislation would also eliminate the 50,000 visas passes out annually through the visa lottery , which receives more applicants from impoverished African nations and war torn countries than from anywhere else in the world . Cotton ’ s also proud the bill would cap America ’ s refugee program at 50,000 permanent residents per year .
“ There ’ s no denying this generation long surge in low skilled immigration has hurt blue collar wages . It ’ s pulling the rug out from underneath them and unless we reverse this trend we ’ re going to create a near permanent underclass for whom the American dream is always just out of reach , ” Cotton continued .
The bill includes a caveat that U.S. citizens could apply for a temporary visa for sick , elderly parents . But , “ the parents are not permitted to work , can not access public benefits , and must be guaranteed support and health insurance by their sponsoring children , ” according to text provided by Cotton ’ s staff .
When a reporter questioned if the bill ’ s intent was to scare potential immigrants away from the United States , Cotton got defensive .
“ I think the premise of your question is looking at it from the wrong way : It looks at it from what ’ s good for the foreigner – not what ’ s good for American citizens , ” Cotton replied . “ I feel for my fellow man , but I serve my fellow citizen . And our current immigration system simply does not serve our citizens very well . ”
This is all new to immigration watchers though . Back in 2011 Cotton , like most Republicans , adhered to that day ’ s conservative rhetorical orthodoxy , at least in public statements on the issue .
“ Finally , amnesty is unjust and immoral because it favors those who broke our laws over those standing in line at embassies hoping to immigrate legally – exactly the kind of immigrants we should want , ” according to Cotton ’ s campaign website during the 2012 campaign cycle ( which was helpfully copied by Project Vote Smart ) .
That ’ s a stark contrast to his new bill to keep low skilled immigrants , refugees and family members of U.S. citizens out of the country . What ’ s changed in the past few years to bring about this evolution ? Critics argue Cotton and others in the GOP have been taken over by the new nationalism that was born out of the ashes of the 2016 election .
“ They say , ‘ We ’ re in jeopardy of losing our identity ’ – our identity as a country which is majority white . That ’ s what they ’ re really talking about and they express it , ” Rep. Luis Gutierrez ( D-Ill. ) told The ███ . “ It ’ s part of their xenophobia , it ’ s partly their anti-immigrant and it ’ s showing their real colors . ”
Democrats charge Cotton and others with hypocrisy for the about face , but the senator and his staff disagree .
“ How is it hypocritical ? ” Cotton ’ s communications director , Caroline Rabbitt emailed The ███ . “ There is no contradiction between , on one hand , not wanting to reward illegal immigrants at the expense of legal immigrants , and on the other hand , wanting to reduce the levels of immigration to better fit the needs of our economy . .. [ H ] e ’ s simply prioritizing those immigrants who are coming here to reunite with their nuclear families or contribute to our economy . ”
One of the next items on Republican leaders list is to pay for Trump ’ s roughly $ 15 billion wall between the U.S. and our brown , I mean , southern neighbors . Party leaders have also said they want to invest more money in enhancing the nation ’ s employment verification system , in order to keep undocumented workers from employment .
“ They ’ re going to continue to go piecemeal , but it ’ s all going to be one kind of piecemeal : It ’ s all going to be very aggressive , anti-immigrant enforcement legislation , ” Gutierrez continued before he added the GOP ’ s trying to scare immigrants out of the U.S. “ We have sat down with them in the past – you can not deport your way out of this problem . ”
Components of this new stand alone , America First-immigration reform model have made it into comprehensive immigration reform in the past , but the so-called Gang of Eight also created a new visa category to bring in 200,000 low skilled workers annually .
Many Democrats argue the new GOP tone is sending a chilling message across the globe .
“ To me it ’ s dangerous . We ’ re in a global community and we need to recognize the fact that the risk factors of participating globally are minimal , ” Sen. Ben Cardin ( D-Md . ) told The ███ . “ Where America is deficient , and deficient we are , is we need broad immigration reform . ”
“ So part of our problem in fighting the wrong parts of nationalism , ” Cardin added . “ There ’ s nothing wrong about rooting for America . I ’ m rooting for America , and that means maintaining our values . ”