Brushing aside Democrats ’ warnings of permanent political doom , House Republicans voted Thursday to cancel President Obama ’ s deportation amnesties , casting it as an effort to undo a runaway White House untethered either to the Constitution or its own words and promises .
In a debate freighted with political , symbolic and constitutional significance , House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican , read 22 quotes from Mr. Obama denying he had powers to act unilaterally to halt deportations . The president claimed the powers last year when he announced an amnesty for more than 4 million illegal immigrants , granting them tentative legal status and work permits to compete legally for jobs .
“ We do not take this action lightly , but there is simply no alternative , ” Mr. Boehner said from the well of the House . “ This is not a dispute between parties , or even branches of government . The president ’ s overreach is an affront to the rule of law and the Constitution itself . ”
Democrats , no less strenuous in their defense of Mr. Obama , accused Republicans of mean-spiritedness with a series of votes to roll back Mr. Obama ’ s November amnesty and a smaller 2012 amnesty for Dreamers , or young adults brought to the U.S. as children .
“ As a country , we ’ re better than this . Shame on you , ” said Rep. Linda T. Sanchez of California , chairwoman of the House Hispanic Caucus .
The vote to cancel the November amnesty was 237-190 , with seven Republicans joining Democrats in opposition . The vote to cancel the amnesty for Dreamers was less popular , passing on a 218-209 vote with 26 Republicans joining all Democrats in opposition .
White House officials and immigrant rights advocates feared the votes could send illegal immigrants back into the shadows .
But Cecilia Munoz , Mr. Obama ’ s domestic policy director , said the White House will make it clear to illegal immigrants that the president won ’ t be daunted .
“ At the end of the day , we are confident we are going to be implementing these executive actions , ” she said .
The courts could have a final say , however . Several challenges have been filed , including one in Texas , where 25 states have sued , arguing that they will have to fund billions of dollars worth of services to illegal immigrants if the president ’ s plans are allowed to stand .
A judge will hold a hearing Thursday on the states ’ request for an injunction .
Wednesday ’ s fight was part of the debate on a bill to fund the Homeland Security Department and its immigration enforcement mission through the end of the fiscal year . That bill cleared the House on a 236-191 vote .
Mr. Obama has vowed to veto the bill because it includes the provisions canceling his amnesties , and Senate Democratic leaders said they will lead a filibuster to prevent the bill from even reaching the president ’ s desk .
That would leave homeland security funding in limbo , with a Feb. 27 deadline looming , and rank-and-file House Republicans acknowledged Wednesday that they aren ’ t sure about the next step .
“ I don ’ t know that there is a Plan B , ” said Rep. Peter T. King , a New York Republican who voted for the amendment to cancel the November amnesty but against the plan to scrap the Dreamer amnesty . “ It ’ s a work in progress . ”
Mr. King said there are six weeks to go before the deadline , which gives all sides a chance to work out an agreement .
House and Senate Republicans will gather Thursday and Friday in Pennsylvania for a policy retreat , where immigration is bound to take up much of the discussion .
Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart , a Florida Republican who opposed both amnesty amendments , said the effort was a waste because Republicans don ’ t have the votes to override a presidential veto .
“ I wish that wasn ’ t the case . I wish President Obama was not in the White House . But that ’ s the reality , ” he said .
All sides said Wednesday ’ s votes were momentous political statements and served as a signal of how much the immigration debate has changed over the past year .
House Republicans entered their annual policy retreat last year with Mr. Boehner announcing principles for tackling immigration , including legalizing the Dreamers and figuring out a solution for the rest of the illegal immigrant population . This year , Mr. Boehner led the charge to cancel the amnesty for Dreamers and to step up enforcement of immigration laws .
Republicans said the moves should be seen as statements on the Constitution and separation of powers , not as attacks on immigrants .
Democrats , though , said Hispanic voters won ’ t see it that way .
Rep. Luis V. Gutierrez , an Illinois Democrat who has been a staunch advocate for legalizing illegal immigrants , chided Republicans for backtracking on Mr. Boehner ’ s stance to legalize Dreamers .
“ One year later , you want to take away from 600,000 Dreamers their right to live in this country . What happened ? What happened ? ” Mr. Gutierrez said .
He vowed to make sure Hispanic voters punish Republicans for the votes : “ The fruits of your action today will ultimately anger and outrage and [ mobilize ] the immigrant community throughout this nation . ”
Democrats pointed to missives from the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops , the AFL-CIO and Hispanic rights groups who all blasted the amendments . The bishops said deporting illegal immigrants would fracture families , and labor unions said the moves were “ anti-immigrant . ”