Immigrant-headed households in the U.S. use welfare at a much higher rate than their native-born counterparts and that trend holds true for both new and long-time immigrant residents , according to a new study .
According to a report released Wednesday from the Center for Immigration Studies , 51 percent of immigrant-headed households ( both legal and illegal ) reported using at least one welfare program during the year in 2012 . Thirty-percent of native-headed households meanwhile used at least one welfare program .
The CIS report analyzed welfare data from the Census Bureau ’ s Survey of Income and Program Participation ( SIPP ) . Included in the center ’ s definition of welfare is Medicaid , cash , food , and housing programs .
“ If immigration is supposed to benefit the country , then immigrant welfare use should be much lower than native use , ” Steven Camarota the CIS ’ s Director of Research and the report ’ s author said . “ However two decades after welfare reform tried to curtail immigrant welfare use , immigrant households are using most programs at higher rates than natives . ”
Camarota noted that the skill and education level of many current immigrants is contributing to their welfare use .
“ The low-skill level of many immigrants means that although most work , many also access welfare programs . If we continue to allow large numbers of less-educated immigrants to settle in the country , then immigrant welfare use will remain high , ” he added .
While welfare use among both new and old immigrants is high — with 48 percent of immigrants in the U.S. for more than 20 years reporting welfare use — the rates vary based on region of origin .
In 2012 , 73 percent of immigrant-headed households from Central America and Mexico reported using one of more welfare program . Households from the Caribbean used welfare at a rate of 51 percent , African immigrants were at 48 percent , South America at 41 percent , East Asia 32 percent , Europe 26 percent , South Asia 17 percent .
The report further highlights that while immigrant-headed households use welfare at a higher rate than natives they also pay taxes at a lower rate .
“ On average , immigrant-headed households had tax liability in income and payroll taxes in 2012 that was about 11 percent less than native households , or about 89 cents for every dollar native households pay , based on Census Bureau data . Immigrant households have lower average incomes ( from all sources ) than native households and are a good deal larger , giving them more tax deductions . As a result , their average income tax liability is less than native households , ” the report reads