In addition , people from the countries in Trump ’ s crosshairs have certainly committed acts of terrorism in the United States ; a Somali refugee injured several people in an attack at Ohio State University just this fall . Asylum-seekers have also recently been implicated in terrorist plots in Europe .
But after sifting through databases , media reports , court documents , and other sources , Alex Nowrasteh , an immigration expert at the libertarian Cato Institute , has arrived at a striking finding : Nationals of the seven countries singled out by Trump have killed zero people in terrorist attacks on U.S. soil between 1975 and 2015 .
Six Iranians , six Sudanese , two Somalis , two Iraqis , and one Yemeni have been convicted of attempting or executing terrorist attacks on U.S. soil during that time period , according to Nowrasteh ’ s research . ( Nowrasteh focused on plots against the U.S. homeland , which presumably Trump cares most about , rather than other terrorism-related offenses , like supporting a foreign terrorist group or trying to join a jihadist organization overseas . ) Zero Libyans and zero Syrians have been convicted of doing the same . “ Foreign-born terrorism is a hazard , ” Nowrasteh argues , “ but it is manageable given the huge economic benefits of immigration and the small costs of terrorism . ”
As for refugees , Nowrasteh writes , Trump ’ s action “ is a response to a phantom menace. ” Over the last four decades , 20 out of 3.25 million refugees welcomed to the United States have been convicted of attempting or committing terrorism on U.S. soil , and only three Americans have been killed in attacks committed by refugees—all by Cuban refugees in the 1970s .
Zero Americans have been killed by Syrian refugees in a terrorist attack in the United States .
Between 1975 and 2015 , the “ annual chance of being murdered by somebody other than a foreign-born terrorist was 252.9 times greater than the chance of dying in a terrorist attack committed by a foreign-born terrorist , ” according to Nowrasteh .
Nowrasteh has listed foreign-born individuals who committed or were convicted of attempting to commit a terrorist attack on U.S. soil by their country of origin and the number of people they killed . As in any exercise like this , the statistics are rough and directional rather than precise . For example , the San Bernardino attacker Tashfeen Malik , who was born in Pakistan but lived in Saudi Arabia most of her life , is counted as originating from Saudi Arabia . In the case of attacks perpetrated by multiple terrorists , like 9/11 , each terrorist is assigned an equal number of victims .
Still , it ’ s worth noting that the countries at the top of the list , including Saudi Arabia and Egypt , are not included in Trump ’ s ban . I ’ ve bolded the countries included in Trump ’ s executive order .
The 9/11 attacks were carried out by 19 men—from Saudi Arabia ( 15 ) , the United Arab Emirates ( 2 ) , Egypt ( 1 ) , and Lebanon ( 1 ) . The incident remains influential in how Americans think about the nature of terrorism ; Trump ’ s executive order cites 9/11 as a prime example of the U.S. visa process catastrophically breaking down . But it ’ s misleading as a guide to where today ’ s terrorists come from .