LAS VEGAS— Hillary Clinton , bidding to maintain Democratic dominance among Hispanic voters , said Tuesday she would work to expand President Barack Obama ’ s executive actions protecting people in the U.S. illegally from deportation , and push for legislation including a path to citizenship .
She said GOP proposals for legal status , which some Republicans have embraced , fall short of what ’ s needed . “ We can ’ t wait any longer for a path to full and equal citizenship , ” she said . She said not a single Republican candidate has consistently supported that policy . “ When they talk about ‘ legal status , ’ that is code for second-class status . ”
Republicans Jeb Bush , a former Florida governor , and Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida both once supported a path to citizenship but have modified their positions . Other Republicans oppose any legalization , saying it would reward lawbreaking .
Mrs. Clinton said she would extend the Obama executive action , strongly opposed by Republicans as an abuse of presidential power and parts of which are being challenged in court . The Obama policy gives parents of U.S. citizens as well as young people brought to the U.S. illegally as children the chance for work permits . He said he adopted it in the face of congressional inaction on the issue .
Mrs. Clinton said she would consider expanding that program , known as deferred action , to allow parents of these young people to apply for deportation deferrals . Mr. Bush has said he would roll back the deferred action program , and Mr. Rubio has said he would keep only part of it .
Negative views of Hillary Clinton have risen in the past month amid news of controversial fundraising practices by her family 's charitable foundation , a new WSJ/NBC News poll shows . How should her supporters interpret the new numbers ? WSJ ’ s Jason Bellini has # TheShortAnswer .
Mrs. Clinton also said she would support changes to make immigration enforcement and detention “ more humane , more targeted and more effective . ”
Together , her comments amounted to a full-throated embrace of much of the agenda being pushed by the immigration-rights movement . She made her comments in a presidential swing state , where 18 % of eligible voters are Hispanic , at a high school with a student body that is about 70 % Hispanic .
The event reflected the growing importance of Hispanic voters , who have helped deliver the White House to Democrats two elections in a row . In 2012 , Mr. Obama lost badly among white voters but won re-election because of his strong support from Hispanics and other minorities .
Democrats are particularly fearful that Mr. Bush , who speaks fluent Spanish and talks about immigration with warmth , could attract substantial support from Hispanic voters . Mrs. Clinton ’ s comments were aimed in part at casting him as on the wrong side of the issue .
Mrs. Clinton has been on record in favor of a path to citizenship for people in the U.S. illegally since at least 2004 , but she occasionally has rankled immigration activists .
In 2007 , when running for president for the first time , she waffled about whether to support driver ’ s licenses for undocumented residents . Last summer , she upset some by saying unaccompanied children crossing the border illegally should be sent back to their home countries . Mrs. Clinton also declined last year to urge Mr. Obama to use his executive authority to protect people from deportation .
More recently , Mrs. Clinton supported driver ’ s licenses for illegal immigrants and she made it clear that she supported Mr. Obama ’ s executive actions after he took them last November .
A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll released this week suggests Mrs. Clinton begins the race as a prohibitive favorite among Latino voters . In head-to-head tests against four potential rivals , she led by as much as 45 percentage points among Latinos . The closest , Mr. Rubio , still trailed her by 31 points .
Still , immigrant activists say Mrs. Clinton would be mistaken to take their votes , or those of Hispanic voters , for granted . Frank Sharry , who leads the advocacy group America ’ s Voice , said there is lingering wariness about Mrs. Clinton . “ She came of age politically…when immigration was viewed as a wedge issue that should be avoided , ” he said . On Tuesday , she delivered the speech he was hoping for . “ I ’ m over the moon , ” he said .
Javier Palomarez , president and CEO of the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce , said his group had been in touch with the Clinton camp and urged her to make a commitment to getting a comprehensive immigration bill through Congress in her first 90 days in the White House if she is elected—one with a path to citizenship as an essential element .
Mr. Palomarez said he saw progress among Republicans ’ views on the issue , and his group is talking with presidential candidates in both parties .
As a whole , Republicans have moved from the nearly uniform hard line GOP candidates took in 2012 , when the eventual nominee , Mitt Romney , said illegal immigrants should “ self deport ” back home .
At the same time , the 2016 GOP presidential field is displaying a range of positions on immigration . Former Arkansas Gov . Mike Huckabee , who announced his candidacy Tuesday , said , “ We need to address the immigration issue , but not with amnesty. ” Mr. Bush talks about granting legal status to illegal immigrants , though he hasn ’ t pushed for citizenship in recent appearances .
Mr. Bush ’ s work to appeal to Latinos was on display Tuesday , when he released a video wishing Hispanics a happy Cinco de Mayo . “ My wife Columba was born in Mexico . My family has always had strong ties with Mexico , and I have great respect and affection for our neighboring country , ” he said in the video , speaking in Spanish .