An unprecedented number of unaccompanied migrant children are at risk of spending the rest of their childhoods in federal custody , ███ learned in an exclusive interview with the head of the Office of Refugee Resettlement ( ORR ) , the agency that cares for these children .
The federal government is required to pursue `` prompt and continuous efforts toward family reunification '' of unaccompanied migrant children , according to a landmark court settlement , but for thousands of kids in ORR care , that reunion may never happen .
`` Unfortunately , I have well over 4,000 of those children in my care at this time at the Office of Refugee Resettlement , '' the director , Jonathan Hayes , told ███ in June . `` So conceivably someone could come into our care at 15 years old and not have an identifiable sponsor in the United States and remain with us for a few years . ''
On their 18th birthdays , many of the children will be taken from ORR 's youth holding facilities , referred to as shelters , to adult detention centers operated by Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) .
The number of children in this group has risen sharply in recent years , an `` alarming '' and `` deeply concerning '' trend , according to three former agency officials who spoke with ███ .
Children in ORR custody are labeled internally as belonging to one of four groups : Category One children have an identified parent or legal guardian — referred to as a sponsor — in the U.S. ; Category Two kids may end up with a relative ; Category Three children have potential sponsors who identify as distant family or close family friends .
The children who may be stuck in federal custody — Category Four — have no identifiable sponsor , according to the government .
As of June , Category Four children represented roughly one-third of all kids in ORR care , a far greater portion than in past years , according to former ORR Director Bob Carey , who served during the last two years of the Obama administration .
`` It 's deeply concerning . It 's a significant increase from what we saw during the Obama administration . I think the numbers were really small , I would think under 10 percent , '' said Carey , who is now a policy adviser at the nonprofit Exodus Institute .
A February 2016 report by the Government Accountability Office called the use of Category Four designations `` rare . ''
Another former ORR official , who asked not to be named , called the sudden change troubling . `` Having a third of kids be CAT 4 , there 's something that 's strange about that , '' the former ORR official said . `` That 's alarming to me , particularly because the system was never designed for long-term care . ''
A landmark 1997 court settlement known as the Flores Agreement requires the federal government to try to unite unaccompanied migrant children with relatives as quickly as possible . However , those efforts may be harder to fulfill than in previous years , according to Mark Greenberg , former Acting Assistant Secretary of the Administration for Children and Families , which oversees ORR . Greenberg said potential sponsors may be too afraid to come forward , a view shared by Carey and the other former ORR official .
All three said they 've long feared that the Trump administration 's immigration policy changes would have a `` chilling effect '' on potential sponsors . They cited the `` zero tolerance '' initiative that separated children from parents and a now-scrapped 2018 rule mandating that all members of a sponsors ' household be fingerprinted , as well as talk of raids by ICE .
Agency statistics show in fiscal year 2018 there was a dramatic drop in the percentage of children released from ORR care compared to previous years .
Texas attorney Ricardo de Anda represents a 9-year-old former Category Four boy who was separated from his father in May 2018 as a result of `` zero tolerance . '' They fled Guatemala after the father , an Evangelical Christian , had been `` brutally attacked and tortured by members of ( the 18th Street Gang ) because of ... preaching against a life of crime , '' according to a federal court complaint filed by de Anda .
The father was sent back to Guatemala and is in hiding , but has had maintained contact with U.S. attorneys . With no other family in the U.S. , the boy was classified as Category Four . During the next nine months he would be moved to four different ORR facilities , breaking his leg along the way , according to de Anda .
De Anda located a family who wanted to take the boy in , and introduced the boy 's parents to them through a series of video conferences and phone calls . The father signed forms at the U.S. Embassy in Guatemala agreeing to designate the family as the boy 's sponsor .
ORR rejected the request , according to court documents . `` Per policy , we are not able to reunify any child with people that are not known by the family , '' the agency wrote to de Anda . That policy is known as the `` pre-existing relationship '' rule .
The boy sued and was allowed to go live with the sponsor family . ORR did not respond to questions about the boy 's case .
De Anda thinks more kids should get the opportunity afforded his client . He says the government should get rid of the Category Four classification altogether .
`` The reason children are stacking up in in these detention camps is because ORR does not allow qualified American families to take these children in , '' de Anda said . `` I know for a fact , just from my practice , how many Americans are willing to open their doors to take these children in . But the door is absolutely closed to them . And as a result these children are stacking up and they 're languishing . ''
For many kids in long-term ORR care , life can be particularly unstable , said attorney Neha Desai , Director of Immigration at the nonprofit National Center for Youth Law .
`` A couple of kids I can think of off the top of my head have been in our custody literally for years , bouncing up and down ( between various facilities ) , '' Desai said .
She said kids are often beholden to the case workers tasked with vetting their sponsors .
`` A case worker that is actively and creatively exploring options for a youth may be able to pursue a potential sponsor that another less zealous case manager may have never identified in the first place , '' Desai said .
Some Category Four children end up in ORR 's foster care system , but the majority remain in ORR 's network of nearly 170 shelters , some of which have been the subject of withering widespread criticism . The largest such shelter , in Homestead , Florida , was criticized in May by some of its own child residents in the form of testimonials filed in court . Children there described fear and anxiety over punishment for breaking seemingly small rules — showering too long , or hugging a sibling in violation of a no-touching policy .
An Amnesty International report released July 17 found at least 97 Category Four children in Homestead . The facility 's director said that for children without sponsors , the preference is for them to be `` repatriated , '' or deported , rather than risk that they remain in a non-relative 's home where trafficking could be a risk .
`` Amnesty International is alarmed by this rationale , which could result in children being unlawfully returned to harm in the countries that they fled , '' the report 's authors wrote .
As attorneys , advocates and former ORR officials track similar cases , they question how the system could be both seemingly overflowing with unplaceable kids , while also apparently becoming more efficient by the day .
Agency statistics show the average length of care for migrant children dropping from a high of 93 days in November 2018 to as low as 45 days in June .
`` I 'm not sure how those numbers are being calculated , because it does n't really make sense if some children are not being released to sponsors and they 're staying in our care , '' Carey said .
He and others said they want the agency to release statistics that differentiate between the average length of care for children who have been released , and the average length of care for all children currently in ORR custody .
ORR did not reply to questions seeking average statistics that differentiate between the average length of care for children who are released , and the average length of care for the agency 's entire population , including those who remain in custody .
ORR statistics show the overall population of unaccompanied migrant children has decreased from more than 13,000 in June to 10,100 as of Tuesday , amid an annual summertime decrease in immigration across the southern border . It is not clear if the number of children labeled Category Four has also decreased during that time .
`` They could be indefinitely in our custody which is not a healthy situation for children , not knowing what their future is , not having access to recreation , education , being separated from their family members . And these children are for the most part already traumatized , '' Carey said .