CAMBRIDGE , Md.—House Republican leaders released a long-awaited set of principles Thursday to guide the chamber 's debate on immigration , a balancing effort aimed at drawing a majority of Republicans without alienating Democrats who also would be needed to pass a bill .
The move comes seven months after the Senate passed a broad-based immigration bill , which many saw as dead amid opposition from House conservatives . But House Speaker John Boehner ( R. , Ohio ) appears determined to at least test whether there is sufficient support to move forward on a bill .
`` I believe these standards represent a fair , principled way for us to solve this issue , beginning with securing our borders and enforcing our laws , '' Mr. Boehner told Republicans when opening the discussion at a private retreat on Maryland 's Eastern Shore , according to a person in the room .
As expected , the GOP outline called for a path to citizenship for young people brought to the U.S. as children and granting a form of legal status allowing many other immigrants now in the U.S. illegally to stay here .
It also would make changes to the visa system for high-tech and agriculture workers , improve border security and mandate the use of a biometric system—using markers such as fingerprints—for visitors exiting as well as entering the U.S .
Many Republican leaders believe the party must back some kind of immigration overhaul to draw Hispanic voters , even as many GOP lawmakers are wary of any measure that appears to reward people who broke the law .
But legislators gathered here reacted positively to the fundamental concepts .
`` Point by point it was very well received , '' Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R. , Fla. ) said of the draft . House GOP aides said some lawmakers expressed concern about the timing of when to dive into the issue and risk shifting attention away from the health-care law and the economy . Others were wary of entrusting the president to enforce any law fairly , said Mr. Diaz-Balart .
Mindful of the distrust , the document emphasized that none of the provisions would take effect until after enforcement is in place . To gain legal status , adults would have to admit guilt in breaking U.S. law , pass background checks , pay fines and support themselves without public assistance . It also makes clear there will be `` no special path to citizenship , '' but does n't preclude immigrants accessing existing paths , an idea the GOP is working to put into legislation .
The House 's next step on immigration is n't yet clear and it is uncertain what will advance in the chamber this year .
Also Thursday , House GOP leaders said they soon would make the politically risky move of passing their own health-care plan and exposing it to scrutiny in an election year , a shift in strategy after months of focusing on President Barack Obama 's troubled health law . Majority Leader Eric Cantor ( R. , Va. ) pledged that the chamber would vote this year on a GOP alternative to the Affordable Care Act .
Democrats will be sure to flag whether the GOP plan offers insurance coverage to fewer Americans or takes away popular elements of the 2010 law . A GOP health proposal would divide the party 's base and become `` a major issue , '' in the elections , said Rep. Steve Israel ( D. , N.Y. ) , chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee .
Republicans have yet to settle on the contents of their health-care plan . In a closed-door presentation Thursday , Mr. Cantor indicated one possibility would be to pull common elements from several GOP proposals . Those could include allowing the sale of health insurance across state lines , a boost for health-savings accounts , high-risk pools to cover those with existing conditions and an overhaul of medical-liability laws , according to a senior House GOP aide .
`` There are a lot of really good things that we stand for , '' said Rep. Steve Scalise ( R. , La . ) , chairman of the conservative Republican Study Committee .
Earlier this week , three GOP senators unveiled a proposal that would offer tax credits to lower-income Americans to help them buy coverage , funded by restrictions on tax breaks workers get on their employee benefits .
Doug Holtz-Eakin , a Republican economist , played down the political risks of pursuing a GOP health bill . `` That comes with the territory , '' he said . `` It 's appropriate to put forward a positive alternative versus just being against something . ''