CLOSE Protesters at the `` Families Belong Together '' march in Washington , D.C. explain why they are joining the movement . ███
WASHINGTON — Hundreds of thousands of people turned out from coast-to-coast Saturday in `` Families Belong Together '' rallies to protest the Trump administration 's `` zero tolerance '' immigration policy and implore their fellow citizens to turn out to vote in November 's midterm elections .
While the thrust of the near 750 marches and rallies was to defend the 2,000 children separated from their parents at the U.S.-Mexico border , the tone was decidedly political .
In Atlanta , Rep. John Lewis , the civil rights icon who once marched with the Rev . Martin Luther King Jr. , was blunt : `` We 've got to get out and vote like we never voted before , '' he said , prompting chants from the crowd , '' Vote ! Vote ! Vote ! ''
He roused the crowd by imploring them : `` Do n't give up , do n't give in — keep marching . ''
In Dallas , where hundreds turned out downtown to call for a clear plan to reunify families separated by the administration policy , one sign said simply : “ November is coming . ”
In the nation 's capital , thousands poured into Lafayette Square , across from the White House , to chant “ We care ” and “ No Trump , No KKK , No Fascist USA . ”
Protesters waved signs in English and Spanish . One sign , sounding like a mother 's stern rebuke , read in Spanish , “ Trump te calmas o te calmo. ” Translation : `` Calm down , Trump , or I will calm you down . ''
Another sign said , “ Melania & Ivanka , stop the child abuse . ”
While President Donald Trump and first lady Melania Trump avoided the chants in Washington , the protests followed them to their weekend retreat in Bedminster , New Jersey .
Only a few miles from Trump National Golf Course , more than 100 protesters lined the side of a major New Jersey highway , waving anti-Trump signs and chanting , “ Where are the children ! ”
Jack Gavin , of West Caldwell , New Jersey , handed out miniature copies of the U.S. Constitution , “ Facts Matter ” pins and cold drinks . He said he also planned to attend rallies in Newark and Clifton , New Jersey .
In Washington , Shelley Kohl , a retired business owner from Johnson City , Tennessee , said she does not usually engage in politics , but the images of children being separated from their parents motivated her to travel here for the protests .
Estimated 1,500 take part in “ Families Belong Together ” rally at the foot of PDN Port of Entry pic.twitter.com/nyhW62eCye — Rudy Gutierrez ( @ EPShoot01 ) June 30 , 2018
“ Kids don ’ t belong in cages . Families don ’ t belong in cages , and kids absolutely don ’ t belong being removed from their families , ” Kohl said .
In New York City , protesters at a Manhattan park chanted `` shame ! '' and `` shut detention down '' as they geared up to march across the Brooklyn bridge to Cadman Plaza , near the federal courthouse .
Episcopalian Chaplain Jenifer Gamber , 52 , said she hoped to send a strong signal to elected officials about the public 's opinions on immigration .
`` I am appalled at the Trump administration ’ s treatment of people seeking asylum in the United States that criminalizes asylum-seeking and separates families , '' Gamber said .
Organizers in the Families Belong Together Coalition included the National Domestic Workers Alliance , the ACLU , Leadership Conference and MoveOn.org .
In El Paso , several hundred people took part in a rally at the front of the Paso del Norte international bridge downtown . `` America will be defined by its borders ... not by Trump and not by walls , '' Fernando Garcia , executive director of the Border Network for Human Rights , one of the rally organizers , told the crowd from the back of a white pickup truck .
`` We are so tired of the racist , anti-immigrant agenda of this administration , '' he said . `` This administration is putting ( immigrant ) families in danger .
`` Immigrants helped build our nation . Now , they come through the new Ellis Island , '' he said as he pointed to the international port of entry behind him , drawing cheers from the crowd .
In Boston , the “ Rally Against Family Separation ” began with a morning march from City Hall to Boston Common , where a large rally took place . The protest was meant to oppose Trump ’ s ban on travelers from certain Muslim-majority nations .
Sen. Elizabeth Warren and Rep. Joe Kennedy III , both Massachusetts Democrats , were in attendance , with the senator telling the crowd , “ This is about children held in cages. ” Warren recently visited a Border Patrol processing center in McAllen , Texas .
Organizers demanded that local government agencies stop cooperating with federal immigration authorities .
Some 700 rallies were mounted in all states , ranging from cities like Austin , Nashville and San Francisco , to Fort Myers , Florida , and the Milwaukee suburbs .
— In Louisville , Ky. , protesters sought refuge from the sweltering heat around Metro Hall . Art Baltes stood out from the crowd , pacing back and forth under the sunshine with a banner in hand : “ Immigrants and Refugees Welcome . ”
Baltes , of Louisville , said his Catholic faith spurred him to attend the rally . “ That ’ s exactly where it starts — our faith , ” he said . “ We just want people to know that people in this town support immigrants and refugees . ”
— In Nashville , Abigail Taylor , a 37-year-old mother of three , said she “ can ’ t in good conscious pretend like nothing is happening and have my family go about like nothing is wrong . ”
“ The idea of someone taking them from me without saying goodbye , and them thinking I abandoned them , breaks my heart , '' she said .
— In York , Pennsylvania , John Terlazzo sat cross-legged wearing a sign bearing a quote from Buddha that said , `` Hatred never ceases by hatred . '' Asked why he was attending the rally , he said , “ Because I ’ m sane.This whole regime is an atrocity . And I don ’ t care who you are , you don ’ t mess with children . ”
— In Ithaca , New York , about 500 people turned out on the Ithaca Commons to protest Trump 's `` zero tolerance '' immigration policies and family separation .
Among the signs was one reading : `` Nazi 's separated families . We shall not . ''
— In Denver , where 4,000 people turned out for a boisterous rally , Joan Culwell of Littleton , Colorado , said she had never been to a protest but decided to go after first lady Melania Trump recently wore a coat that read , “ I really don ’ t care , do u ? ” while traveling to visit migrant children .
— In Onancock , Virginia , an Eastern Shore town with a population of under 1,300 , some 60 people turned out for a march and a `` Rally for the Children '' protest organized by a grassroots committee .
Karen Mallard , former Democratic candidate for Congress , told the crowd : `` We 're in this mess because citizens have n't been paying attention . So , this is how America becomes great again — we all get involved ; we all march , and marching is just the beginning . ''
The nationwide rallies were in response to a widespread desire among many Americans to take action against Trump 's crackdown on immigration , said Lorella Praeli , ACLU director of immigration policy and campaigns .
`` This is our country , and if there is something happening that takes us in the wrong direction , we can ’ t stay silent , '' Praeli said . `` It ’ s on us to hold our elected officials accountable , to hold our president accountable and to demand action . So silence in this moment is complicity . ''
After Trump signed an executive order last week ending the family separations , a California judge ordered the Trump administration Tuesday evening to reunite the migrant families it had separated .
There are 2,047 children that must be placed in the same facility as their parents within the next two to four weeks . But U.S. law and a series of court rulings that limit the amount of time minors can be held in detention will further complicate those reunions .
More : As thousands prepare to rally , here 's where things stand on immigration
A June 18 CBS News poll showed 67 percent of Americans found separating undocumented immigrant children and parents at the border `` unacceptable . ''
In Columbus , Ohio , at least one person was arrested when protesters blocked a downtown street after about 2,000 people attended a two-hour rally outside the Statehouse .
The Columbus Dispatch reported that police initially tried to shepherd the protesters from the intersection Saturday . A woman was taken away by police after a scuffle .
Contributing : Nick Muscavage , in Bedminister , N.J. ; Jordyn Pair , in Nashville ; Shannon Hall , in Louisville ; Matt Steekcer , in Ithaca , N.Y. , Carol Vaughn in Onancock , Va. , and Samantha Ruland , in York , Pa. , ███ Network ; The Associated Press