Close Family Ties , Job Offers Considered 'Bona Fide ' As Trump Travel Ban Takes Effect
The Trump administration outlined Thursday how it will implement its modified travel ban , following the Supreme Court 's decision on Monday lifting a stay on the executive order imposed by two lower courts .
The Supreme Court ruled Monday that the modified ban can not be applied to `` foreign nationals who have a credible claim of bona fide relationship with a person or entity in the United States . ''
Senior U.S. officials who briefed reporters on a conference call but would not allow themselves to be identified , told reporters that the order will allow travelers from Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen to enter the U.S. if they have close family ties . Those ties are defined as a parent , including parent-in-law ; spouse ; child ; adult son or daughter , including son-in-law or daughter-in-law ; and sibling , including half and step siblings .
However , the administration 's definition does not include grandparents , grandchildren , aunts , uncles , nieces , nephews , cousins , brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law , fiances and other extended family members .
Under the administration 's interpretation of the high court 's ruling , people who have accepted job offers in the U.S. or an invitation to lecture at a U.S. university may also receive visas .
The modified order also bars refugees from entering the U.S. for 120 days , although refugees already scheduled to be resettled in the U.S. through July 6 will be allowed in . And , in keeping with the high court 's order , refugees who can show a `` bona fide relationship '' will be allowed entry . But that does not include refugees without qualifying family members in the U.S. , even if they have established relationships with resettlement agencies , under the Trump administration 's interpretation of the high court 's ruling .
In at least a partial victory for the president , the Supreme Court lifted the stay , issued by federal courts in Maryland and Hawaii , that had prevented the order from taking effect , while the justices consider whether the ban is constitutional . During the course of litigation over the revised ban , the president directed his administration to begin implementation `` 72 hours after all applicable injunctions are lifted or stayed , '' which would be Thursday .
As NPR reported earlier this week , the initial version of the travel ban , issued Jan. 27 , `` caused chaos at airports across the country until it was blocked by a federal judge in Washington state '' on Feb. 3 , a ruling that was upheld by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit . That prompted the administration to craft a revised version in March that omitted references to religion and specifically exempted green card holders . But that order , too , was challenged by lawsuits . It was blocked by lower courts in Maryland and Hawaii , decisions also upheld by appeals courts , and never took effect .
The State Department said Wednesday that once the order is implemented , it will process visa applications for nationals of affected countries `` as directed by the Executive Order and in full compliance with the Supreme Court 's decision . ''
The administration has said the order will be implemented `` in a professional , organized and timely way . ''
Various advocacy groups have been seeking guidance as to what constitutes `` a bona fide relationship '' with a person or entity in the U.S .
In a statement , Muslim Advocates , a civil rights group , questioned the wisdom of the administration 's approach . The State Department guidelines `` are extremely disappointing and troubling , '' the group said . `` Defining close family to exclude grandparents , cousins , and other relatives defies common sense ; it also directly goes against the intent of the Supreme Court 's order . ''
The group 's statement also said it will have a presence at Dulles International Airport outside Washington , D.C. , Thursday night to ensure that travelers `` do n't get ensnared by this still unconstitutional policy . ''