With business and labor now in agreement , a bipartisan group of senators has resolved all major issues in a pending deal to overhaul the immigration system and aims to unveil it after Congress reconvenes in the second week of April , key lawmakers said on Sunday .
The lawmakers said that while there was no final deal yet , they hope and even expect there to be one soon after the measure is put into legislative language so all eight senators in the group can review it .
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce , the biggest business group , and the AFL-CIO , the largest labor federation , reached an elusive agreement on a guest-worker program on Friday , clearing the way for the writing of a full bill .
The bill will include an earned pathway to U.S. citizenship for an estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants , bolstered border security and ways for business to meet the need for both high-skilled and low-skilled workers .
`` With the agreement between business and labor , every major policy issue has been resolved , '' said Senator Charles Schumer , a New York Democrat and a member of the so-called Gang of Eight , which has four Democrats and four Republicans .
`` We 've all agreed that we 're not going to come to a final agreement until we see draft legislative language and we agree on that , '' Schumer told NBC 's `` Meet the Press . ''
But Schumer added : `` I do n't think any of us expect there to be problems . ''
Republican Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona , another member of the group , also appeared on `` Meet the Press , '' and said : `` We 're committed to this if we can get the language right . ''
Republican Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina , another member of the group , said : `` I think we 've got a deal . ''
`` There are a few details yet , '' he said on CNN 's `` State of the Union '' program . `` But conceptually we have an agreement between business and labor , between ourselves that has to be drafted . It will be rolled out next week . ''
Graham voiced confidence that the bill would eventually be approved by the Democratic-led Senate and Republican-led House of Representatives - provided President Barack Obama , as expected , actively rallies support for it .
The Gang of Eight had initially planned to have a bill by the end of March but now plans to unveil it in the week of April 8 , when Congress returns from a two-week recess .
Republican Senator Marco Rubio of Florida , another member of the Gang of Eight and a potential 2016 White House contender , said the senators had made `` substantial progress '' on a deal , but were not yet finished .
`` I 'm encouraged by reports of an agreement between business groups and unions on the issue of guest workers . However , reports that the bipartisan group of eight senators have agreed on a legislative proposal are premature , '' Rubio said in a statement issued by his office .
Still , Rubio said : `` I believe we will be able to agree on a legislative proposal that modernizes our legal immigration system , improves border security and enforcement and allows those here illegally to earn the chance to one day apply for permanent residency contingent upon certain triggers being met . ''
Rubio , the son of Cuban immigrants , made it clear that he expects a lengthy legislative process .
`` We will need a healthy public debate that includes committee hearings and the opportunity for other senators to improve our legislation with their own amendments , '' he said .
Republicans have complained that a pathway toward U.S. citizenship would amount to `` amnesty '' and attract even more undocumented immigrants into the United States .
But members of the Gang of Eight have voiced confidence that the `` earned pathway '' toward citizenship that they drafted , which includes a requirement that immigrants pay a fine , pay back taxes and learn English , will attract Republican support .
`` I hope that we can pull some Republicans our way . I think a number of them are with us already , '' Flake said .
Schumer served as a mediator in a conference call on Friday between the head of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , Tom Donohue , and the president of the AFL-CIO , Richard Trumka , a source said .
A guest-worker program has been a major stumbling block to the Gang of Eight , which has been working to try to reach a deal since December . The thorny issue has derailed other immigration-reform efforts over the years .
Labor unions have argued against such a program , worrying that a flood of low-wage immigrant laborers would take away jobs from Americans . The agreement covers pay levels for low-skilled workers and provides labor protections for American workers .
A new `` W visa '' would be created for employers to petition for foreign workers in lesser-skilled , non-seasonal non-agricultural occupations . This could include jobs in hospitality , janitorial , retail , construction and others .
The W visa would not be considered a temporary visa , as workers would have the ability to seek permanent status after a year , according to details of the agreement released by the AFL-CIO .
The program would begin on April 1 , 2015 , unless there is a need to extend the start date by six months .
At the beginning , 20,000 visas would be permitted and the figure would rise to 35,000 the next year , 55,000 in the third year and 75,000 in the fourth . Under the agreement , the number of visas permitted in any year can never be less than 20,000 or more than 200,000 .
The Gang of Eight began forming a day after the November 2012 elections , which saw Hispanics , the fastest growing voter bloc , heavily favor Democrats over Republicans .
The election experience has made Republicans realize that for their own political good they need to get behind immigration reform , something that has been primarily embraced by Democrats .