Seven states that sued to block the DACA program couldn ’ t demonstrate that permitting it to continue was causing irreparable harm , a federal judge said on Friday , declining to halt the Obama-era policy that protects young illegal immigrants from deportation .
U.S. District Judge Andrew Hanen , who has previously ruled against DACA-related programs , argued that the states waited too long to seek a preliminary injunction .
`` Here , the egg has been scrambled , ” Hanen wrote in his ruling . “ To try to put it back in the shell with only a preliminary injunction record , and perhaps at great risk to many , does not make sense nor serve the best interests of this country . ”
Still , Hanen said that he thinks the program , which stands for Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , is unconstitutional . `` If the nation truly wants to have a DACA program , it is up to Congress to say so , '' Hanen wrote .
`` As the Justice Department has consistently argued , DACA is an unlawful attempt to circumvent Congress , and we are pleased the court agreed today , '' Justice Department spokesman Devin O'Malley said .
On Friday , Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton said he was confident the courts would ultimately find DACA unconstitutional . He said an injunction was denied only because the states waited too long to request it .
Texas was joined in filing the lawsuit by Alabama , Arkansas , Louisiana , Nebraska , South Carolina and West Virginia . The states argued that former President Barack Obama never had the authority to create a program like DACA because it circumvented Congress .
WHAT IS DACA AND WHAT DOES THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION WANT TO DO WITH IT ?
The states filed the lawsuit in Texas , hoping Hanen would stop DACA recipients from continuing to renew their enrollment . That would have triggered a conflict with three federal orders that have required the U.S. government to keep accepting DACA renewals , even after President Trump tried to end the program last year .
The DACA program was formed through executive action by Obama in 2012 and allowed certain people who came to the U.S. illegally as minors to be protected from immediate deportation . Recipients , called Dreamers , were able to request “ consideration of deferred action ” for a period of two years , which was subject to renewal .
███ ’ Kaitlyn Schallhorn and The Associated Press contributed to this report