Conservatives are pushing for what they consider improvements to the bill ’ s language . New immigration fight : Assimilation
But it is another flash point for conservatives when it comes to comprehensive immigration reform : how to make newly naturalized immigrants fit in better in America .
These conservatives prefer the term “ assimilation ” for the provisions in the current Senate bill described as “ integration. ” Although the bill requires immigrants to learn English and civics to get a green card , conservatives are angry about the lack of emphasis on patriotic principles and the cost . They ’ re pushing for what they consider improvements to the bill ’ s language .
Those assimilation requirements were a big part of the immigration bill that faltered under President George W. Bush , and conservatives want the Gang of Eight ’ s bill to be much stricter on the issue . That bill will hit the Senate floor this week and could bring some of the most sweeping changes to immigration reform in decades .
In a closed-door meeting with Sen. Marco Rubio last month , conservative groups and think tanks shared their concerns and pushed the Florida Republican to do more on the issue .
Following the meeting , several conservative leaders — including Alfonso Aguilar , executive director of Latino Partnership for Conservative Principles ; Al Cardenas , chairman of American Conservative Union ; Carlos Gutierrez of Republicans for Immigration Reform ; and Grover Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform — signed a statement , saying they were ready to support reform given certain conditions . Fostering assimilation was listed as one of them .
Of particular concern to conservatives is a nonprofit foundation created by the Senate bill to promote integration of immigrants . Many feel that the foundation should be funded solely by private-sector grants instead of a partnership that calls for federal grants . They also want any assimilation language to focus on patriotic principles instead of programs related to workforce training , and access to health care , legal help and youth education , which they argue sound more like entitlements .
Some prominent conservatives even take issue with the use of the word “ integration ” rather than “ assimilation , ” which was used by Bush and the late Sen. Ted Kennedy , because assimilation implies an expectation from immigrants to accommodate to the dominant host culture while integration has a multicultural connotation .
“ I can guarantee that the language the way it is will never pass in Congress , ” Aguilar , former chief of the U.S. Office of Citizenship appointed by Bush , said of the integration provision .
Aguilar said he is supporting the Senate ’ s efforts but improvements still need to be made to gather GOP support on issues other than border security .
“ Six years ago , assimilation was an important issue because President Bush made it [ so ] . … My concern with this bill is that it seems they are defining integration as access to material well-being for immigrants . The main effort should be developing patriotic immigrants who don ’ t feel left out and marginalized . Gone are the words ‘ assimilation ’ from the bill . ”
Along with key topics such as border security , earned citizenship and a guest worker program that remain contentious today , Bush included “ encouraging immigrants to assimilate , learn English and become informed about U.S. history and civics ” in his five-point plan for comprehensive reform .
The 2013 Senate bill calls for a task force , state and local councils and a new foundation to facilitate integration through $ 100 million in appropriations over five years for grants to organizations that work with immigrants .
Another group that was invited to the meeting with Rubio , TheTeaParty.Net , has also pushed the senator and other lawmakers on the issue of assimilation . The group is circulating its own draft of principles on immigration reform on Capitol Hill . Assimilation is a key component .
“ We ’ re pushing assimilation in our set of immigration principles because it ’ s almost like a yin and yang , ” said Niger Innis , chief strategist of the group . “ I think it ’ s problematic that it ’ s not being discussed . You always hear that we ’ re a nation of immigrants . But what is often not said is that we ’ re a nation of assimilated immigrants . ”