Conservative Republicans said Wednesday that they don ’ t believe their chamber will tackle an immigration bill this year , saying that while they welcomed the House GOP leaders ’ principles as a start to a conversation , it ’ s premature to try to pass a bill .
Speaking at a Heritage Foundation event , Republican House members said they don ’ t trust President Obama enough to follow through on the strict security measures the GOP would write into any bill , and said that must come first .
Rep. Raul Labrador , an Idaho Republican who last year was part of a group working on a broad immigration bill but who dropped out , scuttling the effort , said Mr. Obama should spend this year proving himself and then Republicans will act in 2015 if they win control of the Senate .
“ We need to have the trust with this administration and that trust is not there , and until we have that trust there will be no immigration reform and it would be a mistake for leadership to push that , ” Mr. Labrador said .
House Speaker John A. Boehner last week released principles that called for more security but also called for illegal immigrants getting legal status , and for young adult illegal immigrants to have a specific pathway to citizenship .
But Mr. Boehner himself said Tuesday that Republicans still haven ’ t decided whether to move forward with a bill this year .
Rep. Joe Barton , Texas Republican , said that while it ’ s not the right time to actually move a broad bill , the principles themselves are helpful to “ begin a dialogue with the Hispanic community on conservative principles . ”
The Senate passed a broad bill in June that includes citizenship rights for most illegal immigrants , clearing the measure on a bipartisan 68-32 vote . But even that legislation has run into problems .
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell , Kentucky Republican , who voted against the Senate bill , said Tuesday that he doesn ’ t think there ’ s any way to match that legislation up with what the House is talking about .
“ I don ’ t see how you get to an outcome this year with the two bodies in such a different place , ” he said .
Democrats had hoped the release of the principles would pave the way for an agreement this year .
But the two sides are still far apart on big questions .
House Republicans have insisted the issue be tackled in a series of bills , while the Senate passed one massive measure . House Republicans also have insisted border security must come first , while the Senate bill grants quick legal status to most illegal immigrants while concurrently working to add more manpower and technology to the border .
The biggest sticking point , however , is the questions of citizenship . The Senate bill would offer a new specific pathway that would let most illegal immigrants get citizenship in about 13 years . House Republicans ’ principles call for illegal immigrants to get some form of legal status , but only specifies a path to citizenship for young illegal immigrants , the so-called Dreamers brought to the U.S. by their parents , who are considered the most sympathetic cases .