With the Senate rejecting a House spending bill that included money for President Trump ’ s border wall , the federal government looks headed for a shutdown at midnight .
The Senate declined to even vote on a short-term spending package containing $ 5 billion of wall funding that the House passed Thursday , knowing it could not get the 60 votes needed . President Donald Trump ’ s sudden refusal to sign anything without wall funding has thrown Congress into a tailspin with just hours to go until a shutdown .
The president sent a series of confrontational tweets on Friday morning urging Mitch McConnell to hold a vote on a funding bill sure to fail . Then he urged the Senate Majority Leader to “ go nuclear ” and abandon Senate rules to get it done , an idea McConnell rejected .
At issue is Trump ’ s red line on $ 5 billion for a border wall , something Democrats universally oppose . The Republican-controlled House passed a bill that includes the $ 5 billion , but the Senate , which needs Democrats and Republicans to pass anything needing 60 votes , is set to reject it . The Senate has already passed a bipartisan “ clean ” bill to fund the government into February — without the border money attached .
Democrats take control of the House in less than two weeks , after which it would be much harder for Trump to get his money approved .
Trump had previously supported the clean-bill plan , but did an about-face on Thursday after pressure from conservatives . With no clear direction on what Trump would be willing to sign , Congressional leaders are essentially going back to the drawing board .
“ There is no path forward for the House bill , ” Sen. Jeff Flake ( R-AZ ) said on the Senate floor Friday night . “ What I wanted to do with not proceeding is demonstrate that not all Republicans would be for the House bill either . ”
Republican and Democratic leaders of both chambers will now have to hash out a deal with Trump , the person who created the two-day long crisis by going back on his word that he would sign a short-term spending bill even if it didn ’ t contain funding for his wall . Trump is staying in DC for the holidays , but we don ’ t yet know how long these negotiations will take .
What we do know is the government is definitely shutting down — at least for some period of time .
On Friday afternoon , the Senate voted on a motion on whether to take up the House bill including the $ 5 billion in funding for Trump ’ s border wall . But they never made it to the final vote .
Senators of both parties spent Friday scrambling to find a solution to the impasse . At one point , Vice President Mike Pence , incoming Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney , and senior adviser Jared Kushner paid a visit to Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer and then to House Republicans to try to strike a deal . Ultimately , it was to no avail .
The Senate passed a short-term spending bill on Wednesday which kept border security funding at current levels , but the House passed a different version that added in the $ 5 billion in border wall funding the president wanted .
Trump had seemed to be willing to sign the Senate ’ s “ clean ” spending bill earlier this week , but sharply changed course . The result is that parts of the government are set to shut down at midnight unless there is a dramatic breakthrough . ( This bill impacts 25 percent of the government , the other 75 percent is already funded . )
On Friday morning , Trump blamed Democrats for the potential government shutdown and said it could “ last for a very long time . ”
The Democrats , whose votes we need in the Senate , will probably vote against Border Security and the Wall even though they know it is DESPERATELY NEEDED . If the Dems vote no , there will be a shutdown that will last for a very long time . People don ’ t want Open Borders and Crime ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 21 , 2018
The president ’ s focus on Senate passage of the border wall money has even prompted him to call on the upper chamber to use the “ nuclear option , ” which would blow up Senate rules so that the spending bill would only require a simple majority to pass , instead of the current 60 votes that it needs . ( Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has already rejected this idea . )
The working assumption that if the government shuts down , it will one day reopen .
At the very least , Democrats will retake the House in January and could pass a new version of the clean Senate bill , which Trump would be forced to sign or veto .
Schumer and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( who is poised to become the next speaker ) have made it clear they won ’ t agree to $ 5 billion of border wall funding . The question now is whether they will consider a lower sum for border security , potentially in exchange for a deal on immigration reform .
Right now , the number being thrown around is $ 1.6 billion in border security , but negotiations will likely keep going tonight and possibly through the weekend .
Because whatever bill comes up to the Senate needs 60 votes , which means some Democrats need to support it . Democrats know they have leverage here , and they will surely demand some concessions ( like they have in the past regarding protections for DACA recipients ) in exchange .
And Trump has motivation to get this done before January 3 , when the House will change hands and a new Democratic majority that will not cater to his whims takes power .
Since roughly three-quarters of the government has been funded by existing bills , many services are set to remain intact in the case of a partial shutdown . Other programs that have been classified as “ essential ” will keep running as well , although some government entities like museums could see wholesale closures .
Hundreds of thousands of government employees could also be furloughed for the duration of the shutdown , though they would likely receive back pay after the fact . Here ’ s a list of what will and won ’ t be affected :
Social Security , Medicare , and Medicaid are all slated to keep up their operations uninterrupted . All three programs fall under “ mandatory spending ” that the federal government has committed to and are not affected by the annual appropriations process . ( Medicaid also relies , in part , on state spending . )
New applicants for these programs might face a wait , however .
Post offices will remain operational and mail delivery will continue . As Rachel Wolfe has written for ███ , the USPS is funded by independent sources of revenue , including the sales of products and services — so it ’ s not impacted by any kind of shutdown .
The Department of Veterans Affairs has already secured its funding , so veterans hospitals will maintain their routine operations .
Veteran disability pay and GI Bill benefits are funded by their own legislation separate from the annual appropriations bills , so those would stay consistent , according to Military.com .
People will still be able to get food stamps and subsidized lunches , at least in the short term . But it depends on how long the shutdown lasts : In the past , the Department of Agriculture has only had limited funding to maintain them without newly approved appropriations .
Active-duty members of the military are exempt from shutdown furloughs , according to a contingency plan for the Department of Homeland Security . In the past , Congress has needed to pass separate legislation to ensure that members of the military are paid in a timely fashion during shutdowns . Otherwise they could potentially see delays in their pay depending on if the shutdown extends past a certain payment cycle .
While special counsel Robert Mueller ’ s investigation into Russian election interference and the Trump campaign is under the purview of the Department of Justice , it will not be affected by any appropriations stalemate since it has its own permanent source of funding , CNN reports .
Border security is at the heart of the shutdown fight , and a key chunk of the staffing for it is on track to remain intact even in the face of a partial shutdown involving DHS funding . US Customs and Border Protection is classified as an “ essential ” service , so a majority of its employees are exempt from furloughs during the shutdown — though they could encounter lags in pay .
As Bloomberg reports , “ the overwhelming majority of border patrol , emergency management and immigration enforcement staff would be able to keep doing their jobs , though with their pay delayed . ”
Air traffic controllers , who fall under the jurisdiction of the Federal Aviation Administration ( which is under the Transportation Department umbrella ) , are deemed “ essential ” and will keep working during a partial shutdown .
Similarly , Transportation Service Administration agents are also considered “ essential , ” so airline travel is not expected to see disruptions on this front , according to USA Today .
The judiciary is able to maintain operations for a short period of time after funding runs out by using money it ’ s gathered from various courts-related fees including “ funds derived from court filings , ” according to the Congressional Research Service .
In 2018 , the judiciary said it had the wherewithal to keep its operations open for about three weeks , notes CRS .
The city now has more autonomy over its budget and should be able to maintain most of its services , despite ties to federal appropriations .
During the 2013 shutdown , city officials had to scramble to ensure that DC had the money it needed to remain operational , but since then , Congress has approved measures to insulate the impact on the city in the event of a shutdown .
Every agency has its own contingency plan set up in case of a shutdown , and there are a couple of key bodies , including the IRS and National Parks , that could see some pauses or breaks in service . Additionally , as MarketWatch points out , the president has the ability to determine whether any service is “ essential ” or not — so it ’ s possible he could try to shut down a key government function like air traffic control if he really wanted to make a point .
National parks , which are funded as part of the Interior Department , have long been one of the most visible government entities affected by a shutdown and that could happen again this time around . During last January ’ s shutdown , many national parks were still open to visitors , but they had limited staffing and closed access to various park facilities , including restrooms . It ’ s possible we could see a repeat of this arrangement .
Smithsonian museums and the National Zoo have previously been closed during shutdowns and would likely be shuttered again since they derive their funding from the Interior Department .
A key body under the Treasury Department , the IRS has indicated that it plans to furlough a significant fraction of its workers under a contingency plan , since tax season has yet to get underway .
People will still be able to obtain passports and visas , although the State Department could stop issuing them if those services are offered in buildings run by another agency that is shut down , Bloomberg reports .