Arizona is still targeting illegal immigration , but this time , almost no states are following .
Not long after President Obama decided in 2012 to `` defer action '' on the deportation of many young undocumented immigrants – allowing them to stay in the country legally for two years – Arizona Gov . Jan Brewer ( R ) fired back . She announced that none of the people protected by Mr. Obama 's decision would be eligible for driver 's licenses in her state .
On Sept. 17 , she doubled down on that decision , saying that those granted `` deferred action '' for other reasons – such as domestic violence and human trafficking – would also be refused driver 's licenses , though they had been granted them in the past .
Two years ago , when Arizona passed a `` show me your papers '' law that allowed law-enforcement to inquire about a resident 's immigration status during routine traffic stops , a number of states followed suit . But the state stands mostly alone in making driver 's licenses the next frontier in the fight against illegal immigration .
Only Nebraska has joined Arizona in withholding driver 's licenses from candidates eligible for the Obama administration 's Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program . Others such as Michigan and North Carolina have considered similar ideas , but a larger number of states are actually going in the opposite direction : opening driver 's licenses for more residents regardless of legal status .
The willingness of states to increasingly accommodate drivers who lack legal status portends a changing political climate , says Audrey Singer , senior fellow at the Brookings Institution 's Metropolitan Policy Program .
Young men and women who were brought into the country as minors have generated strong support , and `` the last presidential election put a lot of pressure on the Republican Party to get serious about changing the immigration policy of the country , '' she adds .
Arizona 's latest effort to keep unauthorized immigrants from obtaining a driver 's license surfaced in federal court documents as part of a lawsuit against Governor Brewer . The lawsuit alleges that her driver 's license stance is discriminatory . Brewer argues that the state , not the federal government , has the authority to determine who gets a driver 's license .
Mr. Obama 's deferred action program , which took effect in August 2012 , grants eligible immigrants a work permit . Through July 2013 , more than half a million people under age 31 who came to the United States before they turned 16 have applied for deferred action , according to Citizenship and Immigration Services . The agency has approved 430,236 applications .
The federal program prompted many states to review their rules for issuing driver 's licenses . This year , lawmakers in some 25 states took up the subject in the context of immigration , according to the National Conference of State Legislatures ( NCSL ) .
Before 2013 , immigrants could obtain driver 's licenses or special driving certificate only in New Mexico , Washington , and Utah regardless of legal status , says Ann Morse , a spokeswoman for the NCSL .
But earlier this month , California passed legislation that allows those in the country illegally to get a driver 's license . The state is home to the largest number of immigrants in the country – including more than 2.6 million who lack legal status , according to the University of Southern California 's Center for the Study of Immigrant Integration .
Illinois , Colorado , Connecticut , Oregon , Maryland , Nevada , and Vermont also have created laws expanding access to licenses or driving certificates irrespective of legal status . Those laws will take effect between November and January 2015 .
Meanwhile , a National Immigration Law Center review in June concluded that some 45 states issue licenses to DACA recipients .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
That 's not to say all states were quick to embrace the idea of granting driver 's licenses to the young immigrants . In the midst of a lawsuit , Michigan rescinded its decision to not issue licenses , and as criticism mounted , North Carolina abandoned a plan to mark the licenses with pink stripes , though a `` no lawful status '' designation remains .
In Arizona , a campaign by Citizens for a Better Arizona is underway to try to change the governor 's stance .