Homeland Security Secretary Janet A. Napolitano is not a fan of a key provision of the federal program that allows state and local police to enforce federal immigration laws — but until Thursday her department ’ s website hadn ’ t gotten the message .
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement , the part of her agency that handles the so-called “ 287 ( g ) agreements ” with states and localities , had a Web page dedicated to success stories from the program , pointing to the many dangerous criminal aliens who had been taken off the streets after local authorities nabbed them for another offense .
But after Rep. Bob Goodlatte , Virginia Republican , pointed out the contradiction during a House Judiciary Committee hearing Thursday , Ms. Napolitano wasted little time in removing it .
“ I would tell the people who are working on the website , take it down , ” she said during the hearing . And even before the hearing gaveled to a close , the page was gone .
The 287 ( g ) program has two parts : task-force agreements , which give state and local police the power to process suspects for immigration violations ; and the jail model , which only gets local authorities involved after someone has been booked into a jail or prison .
Ms. Napolitano said the task-force model costs 10 times as much per deportation as does the jail model or “ Secure Communities , ” another program designed to check prison populations for potentially deportable immigrants .
Hours after the Supreme Court last month upheld the part of Arizona ’ s law empowering local police to question immigration status of those they believe to be in the country illegally , Ms. Napolitano canceled the seven task-force agreements her department had with Arizona law enforcement agencies .
At Thursday ’ s hearing , Mr. Goodlatte tried to find out why — and pointed to the list of success stories on ICE ’ s website .
“ Why are you touting them if they ’ re success stories in a program that you think is otherwise flawed ? ” he said , adding that the program has proved to be popular with departments in his own state of Virginia .
“ There may be some success stories , ” Ms. Napolitano replied , but said they were switching to the more cost-effective models .
“ It doesn ’ t work . The program is expensive , and it doesn ’ t work the way Congress intended , ” she said .
She and President Obama have taken steps recently to try to restrict the classes of illegal immigrants eligible for deportation , making it less likely that average illegal immigrants will be deported and instead focusing on those who have criminal records or have committed multiple immigration violations .
The Homeland Security secretary sparred with a number of Republicans on the panel throughout the morning over that decision , with Ms. Napolitano at one point rejecting a point-blank request from one GOP lawmaker to rescind the president ’ s move .
“ This unprecedented decision ignores the rule of law that is the foundation of our democracy , ” said Judiciary Committee Chairman Lamar Smith , Texas Republican , in his opening remarks . While “ the executive branch does have the power of prosecutorial discretion on a case-by-case basis , but this authority can not be used to systematically dismantle our immigration laws , ” Mr. Smith added .
• This article is based in part on wire service reports .