Fifty years ago today , Ted Kennedy began changing the face of the United States by ushering the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act through Congress . That legislation resulted in the fundamental transformation of the demographic , economic , social , and political landscape of nation , exactly the opposite of what its supporters promised .
The Kennedy immigration law abolished the national origins quota system , which had favored immigrants from nations with a similar heritage to our own , and opened up American immigration visas to the entire world .
While about nine in ten of the immigrants who came to the United States during the 19th and 20th century hailed from Europe , the 1965 law inverted that figure . Today about 9 out of every 10 new immigrants brought into the country on green cards come from Latin America , Africa , Asia or the Middle East .
The size of the numbers also grew exponentially as well . According to Pew Research Center , 59 million immigrants entered the United States following the Act ’ s passage . Including their children , that added 72 million new residents to the U.S. population .
In 1965 , according to Pew , the country was 84 percent white , 11 percent black , 4 percent Hispanic and less than 1 percent Asian .
In 2015 , as a result of Kennedy ’ s immigration law , the country is now 62 percent white , 12 percent black , 18 percent Hispanic and 6 percent Asian .
Pew projects that in forty years time , “ no racial or ethnic group will constitute a majority of the U.S. population , ” as “ whites are projected to become less than half of the U.S. population by 2055. ” Therefore , by 2065 , the nation would be 46 percent white , 24 percent Hispanic , 14 percent Asian and 13 percent black .
Moving forward , Pew projects , births to current Americans will be vastly outnumbered by new arrivals unless Congress hits the “ pause ” button on issuing new green cards . If that doesn ’ t happen , Pew projects an immigration flow so large that nine-tenths of all new residents will be immigrants or their children . In a 2012 report , the Center for Immigration Studies observed that : “ if the level of immigration the Census Bureau foresees in 2050 were to continue after that date , the U.S. population would reach 618 million by 2100 — double the 2010 population . ”
Those numbers could go even higher as many politicians , most notably Senator Marco Rubio , are pushing to dramatically expand the number of green cards , foreign workers and refugees . These limitless immigration expansions are sought by donors who want to keep workers ’ salaries as low as possible .
Today , after five decades of large-scale immigration , real average wages are lower than they were in 1973 , shortly after the green card gusher began .
Because foreign workers do jobs for such low pay , their incomes are padded with welfare . A census data report authored by the nonpartisan Center for Immigration Studies recently found that “ immigrant households use welfare at significantly higher rates than native households , ” with more than half of U.S. immigrants on welfare .
Manhattan Institute scholar Heather Mac Donald has observed foreign-born Hispanics and their American-born children use welfare at rates which vastly exceed those of native-born whites . “ Native-born Hispanics collected welfare at over twice the rate as native-born whites , ” Mac Donald writes .
Moreover , the Hispanic population accounted for almost the entire increase in poverty from 1990 to 2004 . As Washington Post columnist Robert Samuelson has reported :
The number of Hispanics with incomes below the government ’ s poverty line [ rose ] 52 percent ; that [ represents ] almost all ( 92 percent ) of the increase in poor people , ” Samuelson writes . “ Among children , disparities are greater . Over the same period , Hispanic children in poverty [ rose ] 43 percent ; meanwhile , the numbers of black and non-Hispanic white children in poverty declined 16.9 percent and 18.5 percent , respectively .
The impact of the Kennedy-backed bill is also evident on the nation ’ s education system . After five decades of providing visas to poor nations , a majority of public school students are minorities , a majority of students now qualify for subsidized school lunches , and U.S. test scores have plummeted . As the liberal-website Vox recently observed :
The results for last year ’ s SAT test-takers are in , and they ’ re not good : the lowest on record in the last decade… The pool of test takers is more likely to include poor and nonwhite students than before… SAT-takers have become more racially diverse , largely because a greater share of test-takers are Hispanic now than in the past . The share of students from poor families and those who learned English as a second language have increased… as the pool of test-takers has gotten more diverse and poorer than in the past , the average score has fallen slightly from year to year . To some extent , that ’ s to be expected .
Increased spending , combined with race-based affirmative action policies , have been widely instituted to try to equalize the results between white and soon-to-be-majority students . But the “ achievement gap ” remains .
California , with one-quarter of the nation ’ s immigrants and its greatest concentration of Mexicans and Central Americans , is the bellwether state for all things relating to unbridled Hispanic immigration , including crime . The Children of Immigrants Longitudinal Study , conducted by sociologists Alejandro Portes of Princeton and Rubén G. Rumbaut of the University of California , Irvine , followed the children of immigrants in San Diego and Miami from 1992 to 2003 . A whopping 28 percent of Mexican-American males between the ages of 18 and 24 reported having been arrested since 1995 , and 20 percent reported having been incarcerated—a rate twice that of other immigrant groups . Anyone who speaks to Hispanic students in immigrant-saturated schools in Southern California will invariably hear the estimate that 50 percent of a student ’ s peers have ended up in gangs or other criminal activities .
Indeed , many of the nations ’ violent gangs would not exist in the United States but for immigration . In a Business Insider article perhaps somewhat misleadingly entitled “ 13 American Gangs That Keep the FBI Up At Night , ” eleven of the thirteen listed gangs are in the country solely as a result of immigration .
“ The 18th Street Gang is considered the largest street gang in California… [ the gang ’ s ] reach extends across 32 states from Maryland to Hawaii. ” The gang “ Florencia 13 works closely with the Mexican Mafia… [ and ] is part of a terrifying gang war scene that has turned L.A. into one of the most dangerous counties in the country. ” The gang “ Los Aztecas work with the Juarez cartel and Los Zetas running drugs , smuggling illegal aliens and murdering consulate officials. ” The “ Latin King Nation is said to be the largest Hispanic street gang in the country… The gang ’ s influence stretches to 34 states. ” “ Somali gangs are becoming more prevalent across the country…Strangely , the biggest pockets of Somali gangs can be found in states like Minnesota , Washington , and Missouri. ” “ Trinitarios… The predominantly Dominican gang… is notorious for recruiting in high schools throughout New York and New Jersey , and is said to be behind a number of teen shootings and machete deaths. ” “ Pistoleros Latinos , was born in , and now dominates , Texas ’ correctional facilities . Outside , the Hispanic group owns the streets of Laredo. ” “ The Mexican Mafia is the oldest , most powerful prison gang in the U.S. ” “ The Mongols [ formed by Hispanics ] battle with brass knuckles , pipes and steel-toed boots. ” The Vagos Motorcycle Club “ are notoriously ruthless with their enemies and have declared war on law enforcement. ” And the Salvadorian gang Mara Salvatrucha ( or MS-13 ) “ is perhaps the most dangerous gang in the country. ” As the Washington Post writes , MS-13 “ was formed in Los Angeles in the 1980s by immigrants from war-torn El Salvador . The gang spread beyond Los Angeles and California in response to anti-gang efforts and a demand for low-skilled workers across America. ” The gang has become notorious for its penchant for gruesome violence : “ the gang has been linked to shootings , baseball bat beatings , the stabbing of a pregnant teenager who was a federal witness , and the removal of four fingers from a 16-year-old boy ’ s hands using a machete . ”
But an even newer kind of violence has arrived on U.S. shores . Muslim immigrants are the fastest growing group of newcomers . In 2013 , the U.S. imported more than 280,000 migrants from predominantly Muslim countries ( this figure includes immigrants that were permanently resettled within the U.S. , as well as temporary workers , refugees , and foreign students ) .
As a result of Muslim immigration , Equality Now recently issued a report documenting how half a million U.S. girls are at-risk of the gruesome practice of female genital mutilation .
The 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act has similarly had a revolutionary impact on the political landscape as well . As ███ reported , Republican voters in Virginia are increasingly finding their conservative ballots disenfranchised by the arrival of newcomers who are voting to impose bigger government on the state ’ s longtime residents .
Scholars have documented that incoming immigrants overwhelmingly favor big government policies .
As Latino Decisions writes , “ At their core , Latinos are progressives . That is , across a wide array of policy questions , Latinos on average sit significantly to the left of white Americans . More importantly , when queried about their core beliefs regarding government , its role , size and growth , Latinos ( and other minorities ) regularly offer views that are left of center and left of Anglos . ”
The group ’ s findings led it to conclude that , “ anticipation of a large movement of minorities into the GOP camp is very likely to be in vain . If , for a moment , we can stereotype GOP ideology as ‘ market good , government bad , ’ that spending should be cut and taxes never increased , it ’ s just crystal clear that super-majorities of minority Americans do not agree . ”
Yet many prominent Republicans are locking-arms with Democrats to push the numbers even higher . Republican publications , including National Review , have even boosted the candidacy of Marco Rubio , who has done more than anyone in the country to try to expand mass immigration .
But it was no less than National Review who published a magazine special in 1997 declaring that , if it was not shutdown , mass immigration would bring about the end of America ’ s unique conservative flourishing – and all it has to offer to future Americans . The cover story , Electing A New People , written nearly two decades ago , warned :