Obama on Trump 's DACA decision : 'To target these young people is wrong '
CLOSE Protesters gather outside the White House in response to the Trump Administration 's announcement they will phase out Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA program . ( Sept. 5 ) AP
Former president Barack Obama on Tuesday criticized President Trump 's decision to end the immigration program designed to protect undocumented immigrants who were brought to the U.S. as children .
In a Facebook post , Obama asserted that the move was a `` political decision , and a moral question . ''
`` To target these young people is wrong — because they have done nothing wrong , '' he said . `` It is self-defeating — because they want to start new business , staff our labs , serve in our military , and otherwise contribute to the country we love . And it is cruel . ''
The former president said he had asked Congress to send him an immigration bill . When that bill never came , the Obama administration decided to act by creating the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program .
`` We did so based on the well-established legal principle of prosecutorial discretion , deployed by Democratic and Republican presidents alike , because our immigration enforcement agencies have limited resources , and it makes sense to focus those resources on those who come illegally to this country to do us harm , '' he said .
As young people stepped forward and deportations of criminals went up , `` America grew stronger as a result , '' he wrote .
Now that the issue has been punted back to Congress , Obama called on its members to `` protect these young people and our future . ''
`` Ultimately , this is about basic decency , '' he said . `` This is about whether we are a people who kick hopeful young strivers out of America , or whether we treat them the way we 'd want our own kids to be treated . It 's about who we are as a people — and who we want to be . ''
More : Trump winds down DACA program for undocumented immigrants , gives Congress 6 months to act
As Trump rescinds DACA , GOP lawmaker plans to force vote on bill to protect DREAMers