The House of Representatives has passed a bill that would stop President Obama from letting millions of unauthorized immigrants apply for protection from deportation . The bill passed 216-197 , with seven Republicans voting against it ( and three Democrats voting in favor ) . The bill is almost certainly not going to become law . Democrats wo n't bring it up in the Senate before the end of this Congress , at the end of the month . Republicans may bring the bill up again next year , when they control both chambers of Congress . But the administration has already promised to veto it , and Republicans wo n't have large enough majorities to override the veto . The bill might also end the US ' current policy toward Cuban immigration , which allows for essentially unlimited migration to the US .
The bill the House just passed would ban the Department of Homeland Security from giving relief from deportation , or work permits , to any `` category '' of immigrants who are here unlawfully , or who come unlawfully . The government could still issue protections from deportation — but they would have to be on a case-by-case basis .
according to the administration , the bill would n't ban anything the president is actually doing
Republicans believe that this would prevent President Obama from implementing the executive actions he announced last month , which would allow about three and a half million unauthorized immigrants to apply for protection from deportation and work permits . But here 's the problem for Republicans : the Obama administration maintains that its new program is `` case-by-case , '' not categorical . So according to the administration , even if the bill somehow passed into law — which it 's extremely unlikely to do — it would n't actually ban anything the president is actually doing .
Are Republicans trying to take away protections from unauthorized immigrants who 've already gotten them ?
There are over 600,000 unauthorized immigrants who 've already gotten temporary protection from deportation and work permits thanks to the Obama administration . They applied under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which was introduced in 2012 .
The bill the House just passed is n't retroactive — it would only apply to immigrants who sought protection from deportation after November 20 . So it would n't take protection away from the immigrants who 've already been protected by DACA ( or immigrants whose DACA applications have been submitted , but not approved yet ) .
But DACA only lasts for two years , and the bill would prohibit immigrants from getting their DACA protections renewed . So as DACA grants run out over the next two years , those immigrants would , one by one , become vulnerable to deportation again .
The bill is pretty broad , and it could definitely apply to some longer-standing policies as well . Most notably , it 's possible that banning `` categorical '' relief would end the `` wet foot , dry foot '' policy that allows Cuban defectors to stay in the US . House Judiciary Committee chairman Bob Goodlatte said that the bill would n't affect Cubans , because there 's an existing law that allows all Cubans to get relief in the US — but the text of the bill itself does n't actually carve out an exception for existing law .
Republicans have historically been staunch defenders of `` wet foot , dry foot , '' so it 's notable that they were n't more explicit in carving out an exception .
Seven Republicans voted against the bill . Five of them are pro-immigration or moderate Republicans , who 've voted against previous attempts to expand deportation . The other two ( Rep. Louie Gohmert and Rep. Marlin Stutzman ) are hard-liners , who voted against the bill because it did n't go far enough . Three other House conservatives ( including leading immigration hawk Steve King ) voted `` present , '' for the same reason .
What more can Republicans do to try to stop the president 's immigration actions ?
Republicans are still figuring out whether they want to try to defund the Department of Homeland Security unless the president ends the new relief program . Speaker of the House John Boehner has floated the idea of passing a bill now that would only fund DHS for a few months ( while the rest of the government was funded through fall 2015 ) , so that Congress could decide what to do in the spring . But some conservatives want to pass a bill that would restrict DHS from getting any money now , unless the president agreed to end the program .