Amidst brewing anti-immigration sentiment in Europe and the United States , some Nobel Prize laureates this year are noting their own status as immigrants and commenting on immigration policies , with some highlighting the importance of relatively open borders for the advancement of science .
Of the 2016 Nobel laureates announced so far , all six of those affiliated with US universities are immigrants . Five of them were born in Britain , and one in Finland ; they hold positions on campuses including Princeton University , the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , and Northwestern University .
British scientists have been the most vocal about immigration , amid ongoing debate over the country 's recent vote to leave the European Union , in which tightening borders and cracking down on immigration are major components .
`` I think the resounding message that should go out all around the world is that science is global , '' Sir James Fraser Stoddart , a winner of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry and a professor at Northwestern University , who was born in Scotland , told The Hill . `` It ’ s particularly pertinent to have these discussions in view of the political climate on both sides of the pond at the moment .... I think the United States is what it is today largely because of open borders . ''
The laureate told The Guardian that his research group at Northwestern University has students and scientists from a dozen different countries and that bringing in international talent raises the bar overall .
`` I got colleagues saying 'Do n't you know that our people are better ? ' `` he said of his early career in Britain . `` When you get people from Messina or Madrid moving to a cold place like Sheffield , they 're serious about science .... It 's better for everyone . ''
Duncan Haldane , a British-born professor at Princeton University and winner of the Nobel Prize in Physics , told The Guardian that scientists should be given protected status for visas . He said he had considered returning to Britain , but expressed concerns that research grants from the European Research Council could dry up as a result of Britain 's exit from the European Union .
Foreign-born scientists winning Nobel Prizes for the US is not a 2016 anomaly . In an article for The Huffington Post in December 2015 , James Witte , the director of the Institute for Immigration Research at George Mason University , wrote that from 1901 to 2015 , 31 percent of US Nobel laureates were not born in the US , although no more than 15 percent of Americans were ever foreign-born during that time .
Increasingly , American immigrants are highly skilled and highly educated , according to a September report from The National Academies of Science , Engineering and Medicine . `` The prospects for long run economic growth in the United States would be considerably dimmed without the contributions of high-skilled immigrants , '' the researchers wrote .
While the US is credited by many of these scientists for providing robust research opportunities for immigrant scientists , the simmering anti-immigrant sentiment in the country during this election season also elicits concern for some .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Phil Baty , the rankings editor for the Times Higher Education , told Inside Higher Ed that Nobel Prizes are an example of how global collaborative efforts produce `` groundbreaking results , '' a point that he thinks politicians should remember .
`` But the 2016 Nobels should also serve as a serious warning to those politicians , most notably in the U.K. , but also of course in the U.S. and elsewhere , who would seek to place major restrictions on the free movement of international talent , '' Mr. Baty said . `` This would be a serious blow to science , and in turn a serious blow to humanity . ''