Paul Singer is one of the biggest fish to lend his name to the overhaul effort . | REUTERS GOP donor backs immigration reform
Republican mega-bundler Paul Singer has quietly gotten involved in the fight for immigration reform , making a six-figure donation to a group involved in marshaling conservatives to support an overhaul of federal laws , ███ has learned .
Singer , the hedge fund billionaire who has become one of the Republican Party ’ s most prolific donors and bundlers over the past seven years , made the donation to the National Immigration Forum . The group has been focusing , in part , on getting support from the business community , faith leaders and law enforcement for the reform effort .
Singer , whose fundraising is relied upon by a number of rank-and-file members of Congress and the Senate , is one of the biggest fish to lend his name to the immigration overhaul effort .
“ In my estimation he ’ s probably the first big high-profile Republican to put his name on the line , ” said Ali Noorani , executive director of the NIF Action Fund , who declined to specify the exact amount Singer had given .
Singer has been involved for the past few months , officials said , beginning with the Forum ’ s Bibles , Badges and Business network , one of its programs to corral support for immigration reform from different corners of the GOP .
The group has worked with Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) , a linchpin of the Gang of Eight working on a bipartisan immigration reform package . And the group announced last week that one of its former officials is joining the White House as a Hispanic media adviser .
The involvement of a high-profile bundler on the GOP side has been a missing piece from the Republican column in the reform push , though party stalwarts like former Republican National Committee chairman Haley Barbour have lent support .
For Singer , the move to become involved financially is in keeping with his history of pro-business policies — and dovetails with efforts by News Corp. chairman Rupert Murdoch , who formed a group with New York City Mayor and businessman Mike Bloomberg to support immigration reform from a pro-business standpoint .
Singer has been a donor to the anti-tax Club for Growth , which made itself a major presence in primaries last cycle on the Republican side . But he also helped fund the efforts to pass a gay marriage law in New York State in 2011 , and formed a super PAC last cycle aimed at supporting lawmakers who cast votes that were friendly on gay rights .
At a recent fundraiser at the St. Regis Hotel in New York that benefited House Speaker John Boehner ’ s PAC , Singer discussed immigration reform with people in the room , sources familiar with the event said . National Republican Campaign Committee chairman Greg Walden was also on hand for the dinner .
A major question about the immigration reform efforts is whether the GOP-led House , where members are concerned about primaries from the right in increasingly gerrymandered districts , would pass a bill that clears the Senate . The supposition has been that both parties recognize the political pragmatism behind immigration reform , but a number of conservatives have denounced the Gang of Eight product as “ amnesty , ” and one that would likely ultimately benefit Democrats electorally .
Singer , through his donations , “ wants to make sure there is a Republican forum for immigration reform , and [ that ] he ’ s contributing to it , ” Noorani said .
Asked whether he thinks this will lead to other major bundlers making similar efforts , Noorani said , “ I certainly hope so . It ’ s good politics and good policy for Republicans and Democrats to be working together on this . ”