WASHINGTON – Two years after an Obama-era executive order offering protection for immigrants brought to the US illegally as children was rescinded , court battles and politics have kept the future and fate of 700,000 so-called Dreamers in question .
Now , a group of lawmakers believes DACA ( Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ) could be the answer to ending the government shutdown and addressing border security .
`` It 's got ta be wall plus something else , '' Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-SC ) told reporters . He doubled down on that offer Sunday in an appearance on `` Fox News Sunday . ''
According to Graham , that `` something else '' could include legal work permits for Dreamers .
He 's not alone . Rev . Sammy Rodriguez , a member of the president 's evangelical council , declared , `` The time is now , fund the wall and give us DACA ! ''
That 's a tough pill for conservatives who say it 's too close to amnesty and Democrats who offered a similar deal last year the White House ultimately rejected .
Graham reminded his colleagues across the aisle that this is something they said they wanted – to help DACA recipients .
`` The DACA population came here on average at the age of six . If you told them to go back home , they 'd go to the house they were raised in , '' Graham said .
Claudette Monroy , an immigrant who came to the US as a teen on a tourist visa , echoed that sentiment .
`` Where could I go ? I do n't even know , '' said Monroy , who calls the nation 's capital home .
`` My dad passed away ; my mom started working and trying to provide for my family . I ended up having to drop out of school in 5th grade to be able to stay home with my little sister , '' she told ███ News .
Her road to opportunity hit a wall when she learned the reality of her legal status years later .
Then President Obama opened a door for people like her to legally live and work here – a move critics view as controversial and a gross example of unconstitutional overreach .
Nevertheless , Monroy took advantage of the opportunity and paid the nearly $ 500 fee . She has paid that fee and renewed her permit every two years ever since .
`` I had this amazing thing for a few years of my life and then it can just be taken away , '' Monroy lamented .
Throughout the years , many have asked her why she did n't pursue citizenship .
`` Sadly , if people look into immigration , there is not a path to citizenship , '' she explained .
According to Matthew Soerens of World Relief , the road from immigrant to citizen is a bit more complex for Dreamers .
`` To become a citizen of the United States , you first have to become a lawful permanent resident , which means you have a Green Card , '' Soerens told ███ News .
`` There are particular ways to apply for a green card : through a family sponsor , through an employer sponsor , if you are very highly educated , if you are granted refugee status having fled persecution , '' he continued .
`` Most people who we now consider Dreamers never fit into one of those categories , '' he explained .
Monroy knows she 's a success story , an illegal immigrant with a college degree and job she loves . She credits Christians for helping her along the way .
`` I 've been hearing a lot about in the news or in social media , people talk about the people and the families , especially the mothers that try to come into the US right now have low literacy levels and do n't have skills , '' she began .
`` For me , I think that what made the difference was the people that came around me , the Christian families , '' she recalled .
They were Christian families that helped her apply to college and find scholarships for undocumented immigrants . She eventually became a Christian herself .
Monroy says she still believes both sides will come around .
`` I go on prayer walks around our city , prayer walks around the capitol and the White House . Sometimes I feel like I ca n't do anything , but God can , '' she said .
So far , Democrats have shown little interest in including DACA in shutdown negotiations .
President Donald Trump tweeted , `` Democrats are saying that DACA is not worth it and do n't want to include in talks . Many Hispanics will be coming over to the Republican side , watch ! ''
However , the back and forth between the White House 's official position on DACA and the wall has been unclear .
Last week , Vice President Mike Pence announced to reporters DACA would not be on the negotiating table until the Supreme Court weighs in . `` We feel confident the Supreme Court will find DACA to have been unconstitutional , '' said Pence .
The president has repeated the same statement in recent weeks .