President Donald Trump sits at the center of the fight to reopen the federal government , and it ’ s posing a major problem .
“ Negotiating with President Trump is like negotiating with Jell-O , ” Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said on the Senate floor on the first day of the government shutdown .
Republicans and Democrats are stuck in a standoff over the future of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , which the Trump administration has promised to fully sunset by March 5 . Frustrated with Trump ’ s unwillingness to accept a bipartisan proposal to address the nearly 700,000 DACA recipients in legal limbo , Democratic — and some Republican — senators voted against the short-term spending bill on Friday to force a sense of urgency over immigration negotiations . The conversation about reopening the government has become hopelessly entangled with the conversation about what to do on immigration .
But each side is also solidifying its resolve . The White House said talks would only continue after Democrats agreed to vote in favor of funding the government , but Democrats are holding out for assurances that immigration negotiations will actually deliver results .
For weeks , Republican leaders have slow-walked immigration negotiations in the name of Trump ; they still didn ’ t know what he wanted on a DACA deal and have said they won ’ t move forward with a bill unless the president gives his approval . But with a government shutdown hovering , in the early hours of Saturday morning , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell appeared to make a major concession : He told lawmakers that if they voted to open the government , he would promise to allow votes on immigration proposals with or without Trump ’ s approval .
That ’ s a substantial step forward , but not enough to assure Democrats that the House would do the same .
The state of immigration negotiations encapsulates the fundamental reason this shutdown happened : Immigration is a messy , controversial issue . Between the Senate , the House , and the White House , Republican leaders have made promises that are impossible to keep .
There ’ s a major promise on the table — and it ’ s being held hostage by conservative hardliners
It was nearly 2 am on Saturday when Sens . Jeff Flake ( R-AZ ) and Lindsey Graham ( R-AZ ) , who have run point on bipartisan immigration negotiations , said they had the contours of an agreement : a short-term spending bill to keep the government open until February 8 , and a promise from McConnell to move forward with an immigration bill , regardless of whether Trump approves of it .
It ’ s similar to what Flake agreed to during the tax reform debate , when leadership told him he would see an immigration vote on the floor by the end of January , in exchange for his vote on the GOP tax bill . But leadership added a condition to that deal after the fact , saying they wouldn ’ t vote on an immigration bill that the president didn ’ t support . Since no one , including Republican leaders , appears to know what Trump wants on immigration , negotiations have stalled .
This offer from McConnell appears to promise that an immigration bill — or multiple bills — would be debated on the Senate floor ( instead of in closed-door meetings ) , allowing for lawmakers to bring up their proposals and let them be judged by the entire body .
But Democrats don ’ t have much reason to believe this promise will bring them closer to putting a bipartisan immigration bill on Trump ’ s desk : They want something to be attached to a must-pass piece of legislation , like a government spending or debt ceiling bill , to ensure the House passes it and Trump signs it .
But in the House , Speaker Paul Ryan ’ s only assurances on immigration have been to hardliners , who threatened to shut down the government themselves if they weren ’ t given a vote on a conservative immigration bill . Ryan has promised that an immigration bill passed in the House would be done so with the support of the “ majority of the majority ” and his leadership team would whip the votes for a conservative proposal .
The bill would likely look something like a proposal put forward by Rep. Bob Goodlatte ( R-VA ) that would criminalize all unauthorized immigrants in the US and curb legal immigration by 25 percent , while giving legal status — but not green cards — to current DACA recipients . Goodlatte ’ s bill has become the consensus choice of conservatives but is too far to the right for any Democrat to support .
Meanwhile , Trump , who has continually engaged Congress ’ s archconservatives on DACA , told Rep. Mark Meadows ( R-NC ) , who leads the far-right Freedom Caucus , and his immigration hawk counterpart in the Senate , Sen. Tom Cotton ( R-AR ) , that he wouldn ’ t agree to any bill that doesn ’ t have their blessing .
If there ’ s going to be a DACA deal on the president ’ s desk , some of these promises will have to be broken . But as long as Trump and Republican leaders are intent on keeping their word with conservatives , there ’ s no deal to be had .
That ’ s why Flake and Graham ’ s proposed deal falls apart for Democrats . McConnell says he won ’ t bind Ryan or Trump to an immigration deal , and Democrats won ’ t sign on to a deal that has an uncertain future in the House .
There are immigration proposals out there and no path forward
The problem isn ’ t that no one has any ideas . It ’ s that the ideas that have been presented are either too far to the left to satisfy “ a majority of the majority ” among House Republicans or too far to the right to attract any Democratic votes in the Senate .
In the Senate , the plan concocted by Sens . Lindsey Graham ( R-SC ) and Dick Durbin ( D-IL ) , among others , offers legal status ( and eventual citizenship ) to young unauthorized immigrants who meet certain criteria , whether they currently have DACA or not , and allows their parents to apply for three-year renewable work permits ( while preventing those parents from ever becoming citizens through their children ) . On the enforcement side , it gives about a year ’ s worth of funding for the border “ wall , ” and eliminates the diversity visa lottery — replacing it instead with “ merit-based ” visas for the countries currently eligible for the lottery , and with green cards for some immigrants facing the loss of their Temporary Protected Status .
In the House , a narrower plan , focused on border security and DREAMers , has been introduced by Reps. Pete Aguilar ( D-CA ) and Will Hurd ( R-TX ) . That bill would allow DREAMers to get a potentially quicker path to citizenship ( without making any accommodations for their parents ) . And instead of directing the construction of a border wall , it would set the framework for DHS to come up with a comprehensive border strategy and make a few other small fixes to border operations . And it would hire more judges and clerks in immigration courts — which are currently so badly bottlenecked that it can take months , or years , for someone to be deported after getting arrested .
Both of these bills have meaningful Republican co-sponsorship . But neither has enough buy-in from Republicans to make it to the floor right now .
There ’ s a serious question whether any immigration bill on its own can pass the “ Hastert Rule , ” and there ’ s an understanding among some Republicans that pushing a conservative proposal would only give more Republicans cover for wanting to vote against a bipartisan final product .
“ The Goodlatte bill will incentivize people to vote against the final product on the Republican side , ” says Rep. Charlie Dent ( R-PA ) , a moderate Republican who said he doesn ’ t see an immigration bill being able to reach 218 votes in the House .
“ This proposal is designed not to become law — everyone knows that . I doubt it can even pass the House . ”
Republicans need to decide who is in charge of immigration negotiations
It ’ s pretty clear that an ultimate deal may not be based on any of these bills . Trump ’ s negotiations with Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer on Friday appeared to be an attempt to start from scratch — resulting , according to Schumer , in a tentative agreement to legalize DREAMers in exchange for much or all of the money needed to build Trump ’ s wall .
But that agreement collapsed later on Friday in exactly the same way that two previous Trump agreements on DACA ( in a September meeting with Schumer and Pelosi , and in a call last week with Schumer and Durbin ) did : Trump changed his mind and started making more hawkish demands .
It ’ s not just that there ’ s no consensus among Republicans on what their demands are for a DACA fix . It ’ s that there isn ’ t agreement on what areas of immigration policy most need to be toughened .
For months , Trump appeared most interested in curbing legal immigration — especially “ chain migration ” and the visa lottery — in exchange for a DACA fix . Trump ’ s Department of Homeland Security , along with Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn , appears most concerned with not only providing more resources at the border but also closing what they call enforcement “ loopholes ” — in other words , tightening asylum law and eliminating some protections for unaccompanied children . And on Friday , Trump and Chief of Staff John Kelly apparently concluded the deal with Schumer didn ’ t do enough on the border — or enough to increase immigration enforcement in the interior of the US , something that hasn ’ t been a hot topic in the negotiations so far .
The lack of focus on the enforcement side has made it really hard to determine what Republicans would actually be willing to agree to for DREAMers themselves . It ’ s possible that the White House or conservatives will take a hard line that any DACA fix applies only to immigrants who currently have DACA — excluding not only those who were eligible but didn ’ t apply but also any immigrant who was younger than 15 on September 5 , 2017 . It ’ s also possible ( if slightly less likely ) that they ’ ll refuse to allow legalized DREAMers to apply for green cards on their own , or even by marrying US citizens .
The public doesn ’ t know what the bright lines are here because the Republican Party hasn ’ t gotten there yet . It ’ s still too unclear on what it would insist on to be willing to entertain any legalization of DACA recipients whatsoever . And that , in turn , is unclear because the White House is attempting to delegate legislative negotiations to Congress ( while vetoing any deals it doesn ’ t like ) , while congressional Republicans , aware of the divisions within their party , believe the only way they ’ ll get enough support for a DACA deal is if Trump gives it his blessing .