It ’ s easy to be skeptical , because the list of conditions is long . Legal immigrants have been languishing for decades in the existing system ; without a concerted effort to clear backlogs , many of the 11 million may not have enough lifetimes to complete the citizenship path .
The senators ’ memo calls for a new national entry-exit system to make sure that all foreign visitors leave when they are supposed to . It seeks a national employment-verification system and the deployment of ever more border patrol officers — and more unmanned drones — to the southern border . It would establish a commission of border-state officials , including governors and attorneys general , to monitor progress and declare when the enforcement measures are complete .
But demanding an airtight 2,000-mile border before making citizenship possible for the undocumented basically means the path will never be open . The immigration system needs sensible , solid layers of enforcement to end the illegal border flow and illegal hiring . But the other part of reform — moving to make citizens of the shadow population — can not be held hostage to an impossible standard . Undocumented immigrants , many of whom have lived here for decades , have waited too long for a chance to get right with the law . People like Jan Brewer of Arizona , a hard-line governor of the most radicalized anti-immigrant state , can not be given a veto over their future .
There is the real possibility that this road to reform will be illusory , stacked with obstacles , detours , dead ends and quick exits . While the senators ’ memo envisions faster citizenship paths for immigrants with advanced degrees , farm workers and the young students known as Dreamers , it is vague about the rest of the 11 million . The requirements for green cards and citizenship could be made so extreme , disqualification so easy , and delays so long , that too few would have any real hope of qualifying .
President Obama plans to speak on immigration on Tuesday . We hope he stands firm on a realistic hope for citizenship , and acknowledges the unnecessary toll that overbroad enforcement — including his own — has taken on those whose legalization he has lately been championing . There is a moral , not just practical , case to make for bringing the failed immigration system in line with American ideals . Millions of immigrants , unshackled from fear , could be fully participating in the life and prosperity of the United States . Mr. Obama should make the case for them and see their path through to the end .