Tijuana , Mexico . A huge refugee camp a few minutes away from the U.S. southern border . Thousands of Central Americans arriving in the northernmost Mexican city of Tijuana , in an attempt to change their lives . Some with raw memories of their eyes , and their children ’ s eyes , burning from tear gas . A border just about closed to those who want to apply for political asylum . And a new Mexican government about to take over . This is the crisis designed by the Trump Administration .
The U.S. president has created a bottleneck in Tijuana . Government agents are barely processing a hundred asylum applications per day , as a government official confided to me . They could work far faster if judges and caseworkers were sent , instead of soldiers , to one of the most active borders in the world . But the Administration wants to keep it this way with two increasingly clear goals : to send a message to the people of Central America that they won ’ t be able to easily cross into the United States , and to force Mexican President-elect Andrés Manuel López Obrador into accepting a plan called “ Remain in Mexico , ” keeping the Central American applicants out of the U.S. while their asylum cases are being processed and investigated .
It isn ’ t a physical and technological barrier along the 1,954 miles of border with Mexico , as he had promised during the presidential campaign . And it doesn ’ t stop all undocumented immigrants , since many come by plane and overstay their visas , or cross through the Arizona desert and the Rio Grande . But the Administration has been able to effectively close the border in California to the most vulnerable in our hemisphere : refugees and their children who are escaping gangs , the highest crime rates in Latin America , rampant government corruption and extreme poverty . Those in Tijuana today have fled those horrors only to face one of the most protected areas of the U.S.-Mexico border , with metal and concrete walls that date to the Clinton Administration , outfitted with the latest motion-detection technology and savvy agents . By adding the protection of the military , the area between Tijuana and San Diego is practically sealed .
Trump has built this structure in a way that encourages people seeking to follow the law to instead break it . The members of the Central American caravans , who I have met with , wanted to avoid the brutal Mexican drug cartels on the Gulf coast . That ’ s why they chose to go to Tijuana instead of taking the closer route to Texas . They chose the legal ports of entry that are now blocked . The majority of refugees don ’ t want to go back to Honduras , Guatemala or El Salvador , nor do they want to stay in Mexico ( despite the assurances of jobs and legalization by López Obrador ) . Their only alternative is to wait for months in Tijuana — hoping to be among the lucky ones in line whose asylum applications are accepted .
News at the border travel fast , though , especially when people have nothing else to do but wait . The Honduran , Salvadoran and Guatemalan immigrants in Tijuana might not have the resources and the will to go southeast to Texas . But the new caravans — and they are coming — will soon realize that they ’ ll have a better chance at getting asylum if they surrender themselves to immigration officers in the Rio Grande Valley , where there are areas with no walls at all . Compared to the year prior , the number of “ family units ” — often parents with young children — apprehended by the increased 27 % between October 2017 and this September , to 63,278 . Most of this happened between Rio Grande City and Brownsville . Trump is only making this route more popular to a desperate people forced to decide between living in constant danger or breaking the law of supposedly the greatest country on earth .
Meanwhile , Mexico is not used to having refugee camps in its territory . Now it has one of the largest in the continent , only compared with the Venezuelan settlements in Colombia . The new Mexican government is discussing long-term solutions , exploring the possibilities of U.S. private investments in southern Mexico and Central America . But that will take too long .
In general , Mexican citizens throughout the country have been very generous to the Central American immigrants . I personally saw how they fed them and provided them with shoes and clothing in the southern state of Chiapas . But racist and xenophobic chants have been heard out loud in Tijuana and on social media . America should know by now not to assume everlasting calm just south of its border .
What we have in Tijuana is a humanitarian emergency that won ’ t be solved with more walls , soldiers and bureaucratic delays — which will only spread the people and their pain , not stop or help them .
Countries are judged by the way they treat the most vulnerable , not the rich and powerful . The image of the United States in the world right now is that of a nation that throws tear gas at women and children . Of a nation that can easily absorb thousands of refugees — the same way many European nations have been doing for years — without significant economic consequences , but doesn ’ t . Of a nation with a failed immigration system , that refuses to cooperate with all the countries in North and Central America . I wish Trump saw the same potential in America that those he ’ s keeping out do .