There ’ s little reason to believe that President Trump ’ s State of the Union immigration proposals will be met with anything but continued Democratic “ resistance. ” The Democrats ’ packing the galleries with so-called dreamers was a signal that Trump ’ s offer of a “ path to citizenship ” for 1.8 million of them , a serious concession , hasn ’ t softened liberal opposition .
The hard line is relatively new . Not long ago , moderate Democrats signed on to a serious immigration proposal that overlapped in several ways with the president ’ s plan . In 2009 , the Brookings Institution , in tandem with Duke University ’ s Kenan Center for Ethics , convened a bipartisan group , of which I was a member , to accomplish what the title of our report promised : “ Breaking the Immigration Stalemate. ” The group , led by Clinton administration domestic policy advisor William Galston , included thoughtful policy experts from across the political spectrum .
No one proposed a wall , certainly . But we did agree on a commitment to the electronic E-Verify system , designed to make it impossible for illegal immigrants to get hired for jobs . And , before “ chain migration ” entered the political discussion , we pushed to limit the practice : “ Congress Should Eliminate Diversity Visas , Restrict Eligibility for Family-Sponsored Visas , and Increase Visas for Skilled Immigrants , ” our report declared . Doing this would mean an additional 150,000 visas for workers with coveted skills—and an end to granting preference to newcomers simply because they represented “ diversity ” or had blood relations here already . ( That was then : last night , Democrats hooted and booed President Trump when he proposed to limit this practice , demonstrating how quickly the Left has moved in a radical direction . )
Our report suggested that extended family members should no longer get immigration preference but that spouses and children , as members of nuclear families , still would . Workplace enforcement would lay the foundation for eventual legalization . Even this came with conditions , though . We proposed the launch of a “ legalization program requiring unauthorized workers who have been in the country for five or more years to : pay a fine ; provide evidence of current employment and a steady work history , payment of taxes , and good moral character ; pass a background check ; and study English and learn about U.S. history and government . ”
The Brookings-Duke report fit within a moderate-Democrat tradition of immigration restriction that has now vanished . Texas congresswoman Barbara Jordan—the first African-American woman elected to Congress from the South—chaired the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform , which reported to President Clinton in 1997 . Among its consensus conclusions : “ Effective policy means enforcement of immigration limits ; sponsors are responsible for ensuring that immigrants do not become a burden on the American taxpayer ; immigration policy must protect U.S. workers against unfair competition from foreign workers , and a sound immigration policy supports Americanization. ” Jordan called out low-skilled immigration as responsible for depressing the wages and employment of African-Americans , a perspective that has now been banished from Democratic dogma as hateful and divisive . The report led Clinton to agree to reduce legal immigration by one-third . All this at a time when Donald Trump was a Democrat !
It ’ s hard to imagine prominent Democrats endorsing such plans today , though doing so could go a long way toward defusing the bad feelings about immigration policy . Compromise with the Trump administration doesn ’ t appear to be on the table ; Democrats seem determined to stick with a hardline on amnesty , without negotiations . But the underappreciated Brookings-Duke report pointed the way toward good policy that could gain broad political acceptance . Clearly , $ 25 billion for a wall might make it tough for willing Democrats to accept Trump ’ s concessions on “ dreamers. ” But how about an “ electronic wall ? ” Let Trump and the Democrats save face—and negotiations actually get to “ yes . ”