President Obama 's unilateral executive amnesty will cost taxpayers $ 10.2 billion in Earned Income and Additional Child tax credits over the next ten years the Congressional Budget Office estimated Thursday .
In a letter to Sen. Thad Cochran ( R-MS ) , CBO Director Douglas Elmendorf wrote that the House of Representatives Department of Homeland Security funding bill , which would undo both of Obama 's executive amnesty programs ( the 2012 Deferred Action for Childhood Arrival program and the 2014 Deferred Action for Parental Accountability program ) , would decrease on-budget deficits by $ 8.8 billion over ten years thanks largely to billions in tax credit spending cuts .
`` The earned income tax credit and the child tax credit are refundable tax credits , '' the letter reads . `` Refundable tax credits reduce a taxpayer ’ s overall income tax liability ; if the credits exceed the other liability , the excess may be refunded to the taxpayer . Those refunds are classified as outlays in the federal budget . ''
`` JCT estimates that the bulk of the decrease in outlays for refundable credits projected for the 2015–2025 period would be attributable to decreases in earned income tax credits , '' the letter continues . `` H.R . 240 would decrease the amount of earned income tax credits by decreasing the number of people with Social Security numbers , which are required for taxpayers and dependents to qualify for earned income tax credits . ''
In other words , since Obama 's amnesty gives millions of illegal immigrants Social Security numbers , it will cost American taxpayers billions in new spending on those same illegal immigrants .
This CBO letter contradicts Obama 's promise to the American people that illegal immigrants given amnesty under his program would not be offered `` the same benefits that citizens receive . ''
The CBO letter also estimates that amnestied immigrants will pay $ 22 billion in Social Security payroll taxes over the next ten years . But like all Social Security recipients , unless they are deported , amnestied immigrants will eventually be a net drain on the Social Security system , taking out far more in benefits then they paid in .