The illegal-immigrant population has begun to tick back up with the improving economy , rising to 11.7 million last year , according to the latest estimates Monday from the Pew Hispanic Center .
Those numbers would appear to contradict claims that the U.S. has control of its borders — a question that is at the heart of the immigration debate in Congress .
Pew , which crunched U.S. government data , said illegal immigration peaked at 12.2 million people in the country without authorization in 2007 and then began to fall , dipping to 11.3 million in 2009 before ticking up again , though at a slower rate than it did during the early part of the previous decade .
Pew said the change is particularly apparent in migration involving Mexico , where a large number of people are going from the U.S. back to Mexico — actually reducing the number of illegal immigrant Mexicans in the U.S .
“ This increased return represents a marked change in pattern from the largest immigration wave in U.S. history , ” Pew said .
The Obama administration has said the border is as secure as it can be , and pointed to the declining number of illegal immigrants and drop in arrests along the border as evidence . Armed with that data , President Obama has said it ’ s time to start legalizing illegal immigrants .
But the latest evidence bolsters those who said the poor economy , not a sealed border , was responsible for the drop in illegal immigration . While the numbers don ’ t prove a link , they do track the same time period as the economy ’ s downturn and then its slow path upward .
However , Steven A. Camarota , research director at the Center for Immigration Studies , which pushes for stricter immigration limits , said the leveling out and potential increases since 2009 could be due to Mr. Obama ’ s own enforcement priorities .
He said the administration ’ s decision not to go after illegal immigrants in worksite raids , and to rejigger enforcement priorities so most illegal immigrants face less danger of deportation , coincide with the trends .
Whatever the cause , Mr. Camarota said the numbers underscore there is still a problem with illegal immigration .
“ These numbers remind us of what we already knew — that the number of people coming has remained high , and we never had control of these numbers , ” he said .
The Department of Homeland Security hasn ’ t updated its estimate of the illegal-immigrant population since January 2012 . In recent weeks , the National Association of Former Border Patrol Officers argued that the number of illegal immigrants could actually be as high as 20 million .
Seeking to boost border security in their immigration bill , senators earlier this year approved adding 20,000 more Border Patrol agents to the southwest border — a move the Obama administration embraced .
For their part , many Republicans argue that the Obama administration doesn ’ t have a handle on the illegal flow across the southwest border .
The administration three years ago scrapped the previous yardstick , which measured the number of border miles under “ operational control. ” No replacement yardstick has been created .