This argument ’ s logic , at once consistent and deliberately obtuse , raises one obvious question : Why stop at half ? ( Activists are already asking . ) After all , under this theory of what counts as faithfully executing the law , all that matters is that somebody , somewhere , is being deported ; anyone and everyone else can be allowed to work and stay . So the president could “ temporarily ” legalize 99.9 percent of illegal immigrants and direct the Border Patrol to hand out work visas to every subsequent border crosser , so long as a few thousand aliens were deported for felonies every year .
The reality is there is no agreed-upon limit to the scope of prosecutorial discretion in immigration law because no president has attempted anything remotely like what Obama is contemplating . In past cases , presidents used the powers he ’ s invoking to grant work permits to modest , clearly defined populations facing some obvious impediment ( war , persecution , natural disaster ) to returning home . None of those moves even approached this plan ’ s scale , none attempted to transform a major public policy debate , and none were deployed as blackmail against a Congress unwilling to work the president ’ s will .
And none of them had major applications outside immigration law . No defender of Obama ’ s proposed move has successfully explained why it wouldn ’ t be a model for a future president interested in unilateral rewrites of other areas of public policy ( the tax code , for instance ) where sweeping applications of “ discretion ” could achieve partisan victories by fiat . No liberal has persuasively explained how , after spending the last Republican administration complaining about presidential “ signing statements , ” it makes sense for the left to begin applying Cheneyite theories of executive power on domestic policy debates .
Especially debates in which the executive branch is effectively acting in direct defiance of the electoral process . This is where the administration has entered extraordinarily brazen territory , since part of its original case for taking these steps was that they supposedly serve the public will , which only yahoos and congressional Republicans oppose .
This argument was specious before ; now it looks ridiculous . The election just past was not , of course , a formal referendum on the president ’ s proposed amnesty , but it was conducted with the promise of unilateral action in the background , and with immigration as one of the more hotly debated issues . The result was a devastating defeat for Obama and his party , and most polling on unilateral action is pretty terrible for the president .