Top House Republicans agree on a two-part plan to keep the government from closing in nine days . Now comes the hard part : selling it .
At a meeting in the basement of the Capitol Tuesday morning , Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) and the GOP leadership team will face rank-and-file Republicans for the first time since President Barack Obama ’ s executive action on immigration . They will try to convince the troops to channel their anger at a mostly symbolic immigration bill , while agreeing to a separate funding package that would keep most of the government open for nine months , while funding immigration enforcement agencies for just a few months .
The meeting is the first big test of whether Boehner , Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) and Steve Scalise ( R-La . ) can accomplish what they have promised since a sweeping election victory this fall — that they can move beyond the days of ruling by crisis and prove they can govern responsibly .
By Monday night , leaders were beginning to gauge whether their colleagues would support a bill introduced by Rep. Ted Yoho ( R-Fla. ) that states the executive branch does not have the power to exempt some people from immigration laws — a direct affront to Obama ’ s moves . The Florida Republican ’ s bill is expected to garner widespread support in the House conference and give GOP lawmakers an outlet to vent some of their frustrations with Obama . The Senate is not likely to take up the measure .
Boehner and other GOP leaders hope that by allowing them to vote for the Yoho bill they can get enough support from the rank and file to move forward with a funding deal , which will keep nearly all the government open until September 2015 , while funding immigration enforcement agencies on a short-term basis .
It won ’ t be an easy task . Not only is Boehner weighing the desires of his own rambunctious conference , his moves are part of a larger game of three-level chess with power centers on K Street , across Capitol Hill and in the White House competing to move their agenda forward in the next week and a half . Boehner and his allies say he has been hobbled by the White House , which unveiled a controversial proposal before government funding was set to expire .
The most pressing item Boehner has to deal with is the government-funding fight . The GOP leadership plans to move forward with a plan at some point next week .
Some aides and lawmakers in the leadership think that the anger about the executive action is overstated , and Boehner and McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) will be able to credibly make the case that Yoho ’ s bill is a good option . And , leadership will argue that if the Senate ignores the language , they can return to the fight in early 2015 .
Others are less sanguine , and have been exploring options such as a split government funding bill , a short-term bill , language to prevent Obama from using government-collected fees to implement his policies and a lawsuit . Some have advocated action on a series of small-bore immigration bills . If all other options fail , Congress is poised to create another cliff in the first quarter of 2015 by passing a short-term funding bill .
At the same time , House Republican leadership is privately plotting how to move a yearlong extension of business-friendly tax breaks . GOP leders began gauging support Monday , and were studying the calendar so the Senate has enough time to vote . A bill could come to the floor by Wednesday .
This flood of action is unexpected and unwanted . Boehner and incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) wanted to have a quiet lame-duck session , where the leadership simply cleared legislation and potential funding cliffs to have a productive first quarter . But now , these fights are shifting to the beginning of 2015 , throwing them into the mix with a new Republican majority that will be beginning to jell , and a presidential nominating contest that will be starting .
Some of this is Congress ’ s fault , but leaders on Capitol Hill blame the president . The government funding debate was designed to be simple — the House Republicans and Senate Democrats had all but agreed on a yearlong spending bill until the executive order on immigration was issued . That also blew up tax extender deal , which was negotiated by House Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp of Michigan , Senate Finance Chairman Ron Wyden of Oregon and Reid .
One former Republican tax aide was pessimistic that Congress and the White House could come to a deal for a bigger extension package. “ How do you put Humpty Dumpty back together again given the terms of the original agreement have been widely discussed ? ”
While the leadership struggles to coalesce , K Street is growing restless — putting enormous pressure on key allies to act . The short-term bill that Congress is settling on is a worst-case scenario for business . One tax lobbyist said there was widespread frustration with the White House for “ torpedoing ” a deal and called it “ sobering ” that Congress would likely do the bare minimum before leaving .
K Street , meanwhile , has been flooding Capitol Hill trying to gather intelligence and meet with key aides to push lawmakers to aim for a longer-term tax deal . Powerful industries ranging from manufacturing , to high tech , to wind energy , business groups like the Business Roundtable and U.S. Chamber of Commerce have all been pressing their case .
“ It ’ s all hands on deck just to get them to act to get something done and not allow this Congress to leave without renewing them , ” said Rich Gold , the head of Holland & Knight ’ s government affairs practice , of tax extenders .
“ I think that part of the frustration is that you are talking about immediate economic consequences , ” Information Technology Industry Council ’ s Andy Halataei said . “ To the degree that a one-year extension really only applies to 2014 , it would be much better than Congress just adjourning , but it still doesn ’ t speak to the certainty that we need to plan and to remain competitive in a global marketplace . ”
Not taking any action would be a disaster for corporations looking to plan for the next year . It would be nearly unprecedented for Congress to leave without passing a one-year extension .
“ If they don ’ t extend these , it ’ s a tax increase on all those companies that are affected , ” said Dorothy Coleman , head of tax policy for the National Association of Manufacturers .