CLOSE President Trump 's incoming Chief of Staff , Mick Mulvaney said Trump is sticking with his demand for money to build a border wall with Mexico . Trump recently raised the stakes on the negotiations , threatening to shut the U.S.-Mexico border . ( Dec. 28 ) AP
WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump threatened Friday to close the U.S. border with Mexico if Democrats keep opposing funding for his proposed wall , but he did not spell out how he would carry out such a policy or its broader impact .
`` We will be forced to close the Southern Border entirely if the Obstructionist Democrats do not give us the money to finish the Wall & also change the ridiculous immigration laws that our Country is saddled with , '' Trump tweeted .
Trump has made the threat before but has not offered details . Illegal crossings are at the heart of his dispute with congressional Democrats over funding for a proposed wall along the U.S.-Mexico border .
It 's also uncertain how closing the border would affect migration . Many people seeking to enter the United States claim political asylum , and the government is required to consider those requests regardless of border closures .
U.S. Customs and Border Protection reported that in November `` 51,856 people were apprehended between ports of entry on the Southwest Border . ''
There were an estimated 10.7 million undocumented immigrants already living in the United States in 2016 , a 12-year low , according to the most recent statistics compiled by the Pew Research Center .
The partial government shutdown began after Trump refused to endorse a temporary spending bill because it lacked full funding for the border wall . Senate Democrats , meanwhile , blocked a revised plan that included wall money , describing Trump 's barrier as an unnecessary waste of money that has now caused a temporary government shutdown .
We will be forced to close the Southern Border entirely if the Obstructionist Democrats do not give us the money to finish the Wall & also change the ridiculous immigration laws that our Country is saddled with . Hard to believe there was a Congress & President who would approve ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 28 , 2018
`` This is n't about security . It 's Trump trying to get taxpayers to fund what Mexico wo n't – a monument to him at the border , '' said Democratic strategist Jesse Ferguson . `` He 's taken taxpayers hostage , and now he 's upping the ransom demands . ''
Trump tweeted amid signs that the partial government shutdown that began a week ago will likely go on into the new year and the new Congress .
House and Senate leaders have said no votes are scheduled in the near term .
The new Congress is scheduled to convene Jan. 3 , including a new Democratic majority in the House .
In an interview with ███ this week , incoming House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said Democrats have no plans to support Trump 's wall funding . She said the president is using fact-free `` scare tactics '' to stump for his wall , and has frequently changed his demands .
`` First of all , the fact ... that he says , ‘ we 're going to build a wall with cement , and Mexico 's going to pay for it ’ while he 's already backed off of the cement , '' Pelosi said . `` Now he 's down to , I think , a beaded curtain or something , I 'm not sure where he is . ''
In a Friday morning tweet storm , Trump appeared to argue that closing the southern border would improve U.S. trade with Mexico , even though a full closure would presumably curtail the movement of goods and services over the border .
In November , U.S. officials closed the San Ysidro border crossing near San Diego , California , for five hours following a confrontation between migrants and U.S. authorities . The San Ysidro Chamber of Commerce later estimated a one-day loss of $ 5.3 million for more than 700 local businesses .
Sarah Pierce , a policy analyst with the Migration Policy Institute , said Trump could be talking about closing formal ports of entry like the one at San Ysidro . The government is already trying to harden the many areas between formal ports of entry ,
`` We 're doing everything we can between points of entry , '' Pierce said .
In his tweets , Trump also again said he would consider cutting foreign aid to countries he claims are not doing enough to stop migration , specifically citing Honduras , Guatemala and El Salvador .
Reiterating his threat , Trump said in one post : `` Either we build ( finish ) the Wall or we close the Border . ''
In October , just a few weeks before pivotal congressional elections , Trump threatened to close the southern border .
`` I must , in the strongest of terms , ask Mexico to stop this onslaught - and if unable to do so I will call up the U.S. Military and CLOSE OUR SOUTHERN BORDER ! '' he wrote on Twitter .
Mexican officials have said they are trying to work with U.S. officials to keep asylum seekers in Mexico until their claims move through U.S. courts .
Trump also threatened to close the border – `` permanently if need be '' – in a tweet on Nov. 26 , weeks after elections in which Democrats won control of the U.S. House and as the wall funding dispute was building .