Paul Ryan , John Boehner and Steve King have varying takes on the issue . | AP Photos Immigration faces critical weeks
When it comes to immigration , the House looks like a mess .
Speaker John Boehner wanted to pass something by August , but that ’ s not happening . A bipartisan “ gang ” has missed every self-imposed deadline to unveil its bill . Rep. Paul Ryan is talking to everyone with an “ R ” next to their name — and a handful of Democrats , too — but his endgame is unclear . And House Majority Leader Eric Cantor says he wants to help undocumented children gain legal status — but hasn ’ t said much beyond that .
Boehner — at least publicly — says he ’ s not going to referee the immigration battle . Appearing on CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation ” on Sunday , the speaker repeatedly said it ’ s his job to “ facilitate ” a conversation and process .
“ This is about bringing these bills out here in a common-sense way , ” Boehner said . “ And I ’ m not going to predict what ’ s going to be on the floor and what isn ’ t going to be on the floor. ” Or when .
August is certain to become a storm of dueling town halls , rallies and lobbying efforts on both sides , so how lawmakers handle the next two weeks will be critical . Three factions are emerging that could help decide what — if anything — the House does on immigration .
There ’ s endless fascination about the Wisconsin Republican ’ s work on immigration .
He is often seen in deep conversation — he calls them informal talks — with immigration players like Reps. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) , Luis Gutierrez ( D-Ill. ) and Zoe Lofgren ( D-Calif. ) . Last week , he bounced between Diaz-Balart and Boehner . And he ’ s in close contact with committee chairmen like Homeland Security ’ s Mike McCaul ( R-Texas ) and Judiciary ’ s Bob Goodlatte ( R-Va. ) , who will be two key conduits for immigration reform through the House .
“ I ’ m just trying to find the sweet spot , ” Ryan told ███ on Friday . “ I see an emerging consensus . ”
There are signs that Ryan is making progress , although he declined to go into specifics . His discussions are both on finding a policy and a process solution , such as what bills they move and how they move them .
His is an important conservative stamp of approval — there ’ s no one who is as respected on Capitol Hill as the GOP ’ s 2012 vice presidential candidate .
“ He ’ s exceedingly courageous , ” Diaz-Balart said of Ryan . “ So yes , if we could get his support for a specific proposal , that would be huge . ”
But it ’ s Ryan ’ s vagueness that has some on the right concerned . Some Republicans are privately skeptical about Ryan ’ s involvement . They say he is really aiming for a large-scale immigration bill — and toying with a piecemeal approach publicly only to appease leadership .
The secretive House group of seven lawmakers — four Democrats and three Republicans — is working to line up additional co-sponsors for its comprehensive immigration reform once its members put the finishing touches on the estimated 500-page bill . The legislation isn ’ t expected to be released until at least September .
For them , securing Ryan as one of those co-sponsors would be a significant coup .
“ We ’ d love to have Paul Ryan , ” said Rep. John Carter ( R-Texas ) , one of the seven negotiators . “ I think we will . ”
There have been planning sessions : The Texas delegation — including Carter and Rep. Sam Johnson — has participated . In a hopeful sign , Boehner emerged from a weeks-long , self-imposed silence on immigration reform , saying the American people “ expect that no one who broke our laws will get special treatment . ”
It was a glimpse at Boehner ’ s view on the pathway to citizenship — the most treacherous part of immigration reform in the House . And he said last week that he wants immigration legislation to clear his chamber before Congress tackles the debt ceiling debate sometime this fall .
Boehner has generally been careful not to make his own positions part of the debate . On Sunday , he repeatedly declined to say whether he personally favors a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented immigrants living in the United States .
“ It ’ s not about me . It ’ s not about what I want , ” Boehner said , adding later : “ If I come out and say , ‘ I ’ m for this and I ’ m for that , ’ all I ’ m doing is making my job harder . ”