Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , called on President Trump to `` abandon the wall '' Saturday if he wants to reopen the government , saying Trump does not have the votes in the Senate to get it funded -- hours after the government shut down over an impasse over funding for Trump 's signature 2016 campaign promise .
`` It will never pass the Senate , not today , not next week , not next year . So President Trump , if you want to open the government , you must abandon the wall , plain and simple , '' Schumer said on the Senate floor .
The partial shutdown began at midnight Saturday , a few hours after the House and Senate adjourned without getting a funding agreement to the president 's desk . The shutdown was expected to last at least a few days , with sources on both sides of the aisle telling ███ that Washington could be in for a prolonged shutdown .
The Senate adjourned Saturday afternoon and was not due to meet for a scheduled session until Thursday . Early Saturday evening , the House also concluded for the day .
Vice President Mike Pence and Acting Chief of Staff Mick Mulvaney arrived at the Capitol Saturday afternoon to meet with Schumer to continue negotiations for an end to the stalemate . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , said that `` productive discussions are continuing . ''
`` When those negotiations produce a solution that is acceptable to all parties -- which means 60 votes in the Senate , a majority in the House , and a presidential signature -- at that point , we will take it up here on the Senate floor , '' he said .
Late Saturday afternoon , a Schumer spokesman said that `` the vice president came in for a discussion and made an offer . Unfortunately , we 're still very far apart . ''
In a letter addressed to fellow Democratic colleagues on Saturday , House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , wrote that `` Last night , Republicans shut down the government . '' She added that barring any developments , making `` progress to end the Trump Shutdown in the next several days '' was not anticipated .
`` Until President Trump can publicly commit to a bipartisan resolution , there will be no agreement before January when the new House Democratic Majority will swiftly pass legislation to re-open government , '' Pelosi wrote , before expressing her wishes for a happy holiday .
With the standoff grinding on , the White House revealed on Saturday that the president planned to stay in the nation 's capital over the holiday .
“ Due to the shutdown , President Trump will remain in Washington , D.C. and the First Lady will return from Florida so they can spend Christmas together , ” White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said in a statement .
The main sticking point for negotiations was funding for Trump 's signature 2016 campaign promise of a wall on the southern border . Trump had demanded $ 5.7 billion for wall funding , and a bill with that funding attached passed the House on Friday . But efforts have derailed in the Senate , where 60 votes were required for passage , and therefore Democrat votes are needed in conjunction with support by the GOP .
Democrats have poured cold water on the idea that they would support anything close to that . Schumer , in his remarks Saturday , said that the wall was a `` bone to the hard right '' and that they had proposed $ 1.3 billion for `` border security . ''
`` I ’ ve heard the president and his allies in the media say that Democrats don ’ t support border security . Nothing could be further from the truth . Democrats have always been for smart and effective ways to secure our border , '' he said . `` We are pushing for technology , like drones and sensors , and inspection equipment . ''
McConnell accused Democrats of backing away from past support for border security , and said they were rejecting a `` reasonable request '' for the $ 5 billion in funding .
`` They ’ ve refused to meet President Trump halfway and provide even one-fifth of the resources for the border they were willing to provide just a few months ago , '' he said on the Senate floor .
Trump has been keen to blame Democrats for the impasse and on Friday urged McConnell to invoke the so-called “ nuclear option ” which would change Senate procedure to require only a simple majority to approve the bill -- therefore allowing Republicans to override Democratic objections .
“ Mitch , use the Nuclear Option and get it done ! Our Country is counting on you ! ” he tweeted on Friday .
IF TRUMP DOES N'T GET WALL FUNDING , IT COULD SPELL TROUBLE FOR HIS 'ELECTORAL FUTURE ' : MOLLIE HEMINGWAY
Late Friday he emphasized the need for a wall in a video he posted to Twitter , and he blamed the shutdown on the Democrats .
“ We ’ re going to have a shutdown , there ’ s nothing we can do about that because we need the Democrats to give us their votes , ” he said . “ Call it a Democrat shutdown , call it whatever you want , but we need their help to get this approved . ”
That contrasted with remarks he made last week during an explosive Oval Office face-off with Schumer and Pelosi , in which he said he was `` proud '' to shut down the government for border security .
`` I will take the mantle . I will be the one to shut it down . I ’ m not going to blame you for it , ” he said .
On Saturday , Trump held a lunch at the White House to discuss border security with staff and top conservatives including Reps. Mark Meadows , R-N.C. , Jim Jordan , R-Ohio , Matt Gaetz , R-Fla. , Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , and Sen. Mike Lee , R-Utah . The inclusion of some of the more hardline voices on immigration could likely serve to harden Trump 's resolve against backing down on the wall .
WHAT HAPPENS DURING A GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN ? 7 THINGS YOU SHOULD KNOW
The Senate appropriations bill passed on Wednesday is the base bill for funding , and that allocated $ 1.6 billion for border security . But it did not spend all money available under sequestration caps . There is an extra $ 900 million available , that could theoretically go toward funding the wall . If that was allocated , it could offer Trump a total wall/border package of about $ 2.5 billion .
While there appeared to be little movement on Saturday , Sunday was expected to be a key day for negotiations to end the shutdown . Lawmakers were aiming for a tentative agreement on all seven outstanding appropriation bills , to be funded until the end of September 2019 . A senior source close to the negotiations told ███ that they will aim to “ see by Sunday morning if there is a center of gravity ” for nailing down a deal .
███ is told Trump would accept the increase in wall funding , and that the administration believes it can find additional wall money across various federal programs that could be “ reprogrammed ” for the wall . White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said on `` America 's Newsroom '' this week that there were `` other ways that we can get to that $ 5 billion . ''
Congress has a little bit of wiggle room for movement as it has a weekend , followed by Christmas Eve -- for which Trump has given federal workers a day off -- and then Christmas Day . So that means that the partial shutdown will not fully bite until Wednesday .
About one-quarter of the government will be affected in a shutdown . Nine of the 15 Cabinet-level departments are to shutter , along with dozens of agencies . Those departments are : Agriculture , Commerce , Homeland Security , Housing and Urban Development , Interior , Justice , State , Transportation and Treasury .
Essential personnel would still be required to work but without pay . Nearly 90 percent of the Homeland Security staff is deemed essential .
Roughly 420,000 workers will be deemed essential and will work unpaid , while more than 380,000 people will be furloughed in the shutdown – meaning they will experience a temporary leave from their work
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN 2018 : WHAT WILL CLOSE AND WHO STILL NEEDS TO WORK
This will include most of NASA , Housing and Urban Development , Commerce and National Park Service workers . Additionally , about 52,000 IRS workers would be furloughed .
The U.S . Postal Service ( USPS ) will remain open as usual during a partial government shutdown because it is “ an independent entity that is funded through the sale of our products and services , and not by tax dollars , ” a spokesman told ███ .
TSA agents , air traffic controllers and border security agents also will be required to work through a shutdown – albeit they might not get a paycheck right away .
Amtrak , a government-owned corporation , also will continue with normal operations during a short-term shutdown , a spokeswoman confirmed to ███ .
Members of Congress will continue to be paid , as legislative branch appropriations had already been approved back in September , and the 27th Amendment bars “ “ varying the compensation ” for lawmakers until after each election .