The Trump administration has continued its public fight over the border wall , with White House senior adviser Stephen Miller telling CBS that President Donald Trump is “ absolutely ” willing to shut down the government on December 21 if Congress refuses to authorize funding for his wall .
Echoing Trump ’ s own sentiments from Tuesday ’ s fiery Oval Office debate , Miller told CBS ’ s Margaret Brennan on Sunday ’ s Face the Nation that Trump would do “ whatever is necessary ” — including allowing a partial government shutdown .
“ If it comes to it , absolutely . This is a very fundamental issue , ” he said . “ At stake is the question of whether or not the United States remains a sovereign country . Whether or not we can establish and enforce rules for entrance into our country . ”
Miller ’ s comments come after a very tense , very public week of funding negotiations : A televised White House meeting between Trump , House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer Tuesday ended with the president saying he would be “ proud ” to shut down the government over their refusal to allocate $ 5 billion in wall funding ( the total cost of the wall ranges from $ 20 billion to $ 70 billion ) . “ If we don ’ t get what we want one way or another . ... I will shut down the government , ” Trump said .
Schumer held equally firm on NBC ’ s Meet the Press Sunday , telling Chuck Todd that Trump is “ not going to get the wall in any form . ”
“ We should not let a temper tantrum , threats , push us in the direction of doing something even our Republicans colleagues know is wrong , ” the New York Democrat said .
On Face the Nation , Miller implied that refusing to fund the border wall was the same thing as advocating for illegal immigration , saying that Democrats have “ a simple choice ” between fighting for America ’ s working class and promoting illegal immigration . There is already $ 1.6 billion proposed for border security funding — it ’ s just a number on which Democrats seem unwilling to budge .
Will the government shut down over a couple billion in wall funding ?
Trump has already signed a number of government spending bills into law . But Congress is staring down another partial government shutdown deadline on December 21 : Seven department spending bills still need to be voted on , and funding for the Department of Homeland Security , which has purview over construction projects on the border , has proven to be the major sticking point .
Democrats have been unwilling to meet Trump ’ s $ 5 billion border wall demands , while Trump has been unwilling to offer them anything — other than not shutting down the government .
It ’ s not the first time Trump has threatened to shut down the government over his border wall — he also threatened a shutdown over summer , although that never went ahead . This shutdown would be the third under Trump ; previous shutdowns occurred because Democrats wanted to force a larger Senate debate on immigration and because Sen. Rand Paul ( R-KY ) was mad about government spending .
It ’ s not clear if the president and his emissaries are serious or simply posturing this time around .
The Trump administration has been threatening this shutdown for a while now , with White House counselor Kellyanne Conway telling Fox & Friends last month that Trump “ is keeping all options open , ” when asked about the possibility of a shutdown .
But as Ezra Klein pointed out after the Trump-Pelosi-Schumer showdown , Trump doesn ’ t actually want the wall as much as he wants a reality show-style fight over it :
[ I ] t ’ s the winning , not the wall , that drives him . It ’ s showing his supporters he ’ s fighting for them that powers his presidency , not actually getting anything done . Tuesday ’ s Oval Office meeting was meant to give Trump what he at least thinks he wants — not the wall , but a fight over the wall .
The White House chose to send Miller , a hardline immigration opponent , out to talk on Sunday — and he delivered a hard line ( plus some good television ) .