“ The American people are skeptical of big , comprehensive bills , and frankly , they should be , ” Mr. Boehner told reporters recently . “ The only way to make sure immigration reform works this time is to address these complicated issues one step at a time . I think doing so will give the American people confidence that we ’ re dealing with these issues in a thoughtful way and a deliberative way . ”
Nonetheless , immigration activists say they are hopeful that politics may ultimately lead Mr. Boehner to ignore conservative voices who oppose a path to citizenship . Mitt Romney , the Republican nominee for president in 2012 , who took a hard line on immigration , won only 27 percent of the Hispanic vote — a key reason for his loss to President Obama .
Mr. Obama has in the meantime said he is open to the piecemeal approach on immigration favored by House Republicans , but only if it does not abandon comprehensive goals in legislation that passed the Senate last summer . Reconciling the House approach with the broader ambitions of the Senate bill is the biggest hurdle , strategists in both camps say .
“ We ’ ve got to grab the brass ring while it ’ s there , ” said Kevin Appleby , the director of migration policy at the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops . “ I ’ ve been in this debate long enough to know you can ’ t rely on anything happening at a certain time or on assurances that we ’ re going to do something this year . ”
Advocates for an immigration overhaul will start 2014 with a race against the election-season clock and a new campaign aimed at forcing action on Capitol Hill . Civil disobedience demonstrations are planned in Washington and elsewhere . Business groups are readying lobbying blitzes on Capitol Hill . Labor leaders and evangelical ministers are considering more hunger fasts to dramatize what they say is the urgent need to prevent deportations .
The most likely legislative approach , according to lawmakers , White House officials and activists , is a push to pass legislation in the House by May or June — after most Republican lawmakers are through with their primary campaigns — with the goal of reaching a compromise that Mr. Obama could sign before the 2014 midterm election campaigns intensify next fall .
“ That ’ s our first window , ” said Jim Wallis , the president of Sojourners , a Christian social justice organization in Washington that is working to change the immigration laws . “ We are organizing , mobilizing , getting ready here . I do really think that we have a real chance at this in the first half of the year . ”