The White House is asking for full funding for the border wall , new authority to prevent another surge of illegal immigrant children and restrictions on so-called sanctuary cities all be included in any bill to grant legal status to illegal immigrant Dreamers .
President Trump ’ s proposal , sent Friday to Capitol Hill , instantly roiled the debate , with Sen. Richard Durbin — Democrats ’ chief negotiator in the discussions — saying his party was prepared to risk a government shutdown to avoid giving in to the president ’ s demands .
The Homeland Security Department has specifically asked for authorization to build about $ 18 billion worth of new fencing on the border , sending long-awaited details of the plan to Capitol Hill .
And the department reiterated that Mr. Trump ’ s October list of priorities must be part of the discussion . That list included the crackdown on sanctuary cities , new authority to reject bogus asylum applications and to quickly kick out new illegal immigrants , and a change in the current patterns of family-based chain migration .
“ Effective border security will not be successful unless we close dangerous legal loopholes that enable illegal immigration and visa overstays . If these loopholes are not closed , and enforcement capabilities are not enhanced , our immigration system and border can not be secured , ” Benjamin L Cassidy , an assistant secretary at Homeland Security , said in a letter released by Mr. Durbin .
“ President Trump has said he may need a good government shutdown to get his wall . With this demand , he seems to be heading in that direction , ” Mr. Durbin said .
He said Democrats would consider “ reasonable border security measures , ” but said the list sent over by the administration Friday was “ outrageous . ”
Mr. Durbin said he ’ ll continue to negotiate with Sen. Lindsey Graham and other Republicans willing to work with him .
Immigrant-rights groups were furious at the report that Mr. Trump envisions a $ 18 billion in new fencing along the southwest border , and some also said they don ’ t want to see any more Border Patrol agents added to the force .