Democrats , perhaps optimistically , hope to get Mr. Tipton to sign on to the broad bill they recently introduced , which includes a path to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented immigrants already in the country . Immigration advocacy groups hope to show him that there could be political consequences if he does not take steps to help overhaul the nation ’ s immigration system .
According to the most recent census , Mr. Tipton ’ s district , which covers nearly the entire western half of the state as well as part of its southern border with New Mexico , is 24 percent Hispanic . Combined with the large agricultural businesses on the Western Slope , the demographic forces alone would seem to compel Mr. Tipton to support some form of immigration overhaul . President Obama won the state narrowly in both 2008 and 2012 , and Mr. Tipton won re-election last year with 53 percent of the vote .
This month , a coalition of immigration advocates , as well as labor and religious groups , inaugurated the “ Cost of Inaction , ” a voter education and outreach campaign that targets nine House Republicans , Mr. Tipton included , to push for a vote on an immigration overhaul before the end of the year . Though the Senate passed its own broad immigration bill in June with bipartisan support , immigration advocates have become increasingly frustrated with the House , which has made little progress on legislation of its own and is unlikely to take a vote this year .
“ We feel that to move them , we have to awaken the electoral vulnerability that Republicans face , both specific Republicans that have large and growing immigrant electorates and also the party as a national party , ” said Tom Snyder , the immigration campaign director for the A.F.L.-C.I.O. , one of the groups behind the campaign . “ It ’ s very hard to think about them winning a presidential election with an immigrant electorate that ’ s growing and overwhelmingly hostile to the party . ”
Mr. Tipton said that as a former businessman , he favored a “ step by step ” approach to the problem , with smaller bills dealing with border security and a guest worker program coming first . “ If we ’ ve got border security and , in virtual tandem , a good viable guest worker program , ” he said , “ this is going to first of all address national security concerns . ”
He is also worried about the potential immigrants still in their home countries , who have been waiting , sometimes for years , to try to enter the United States through legal channels . “ Do we want to treat them fairly as well ? ” he asked . “ We can ’ t put anyone in front of them . ”