President Trump blessed House Republicans ’ compromise immigration bill “ 1,000 percent ” Tuesday , giving political cover to conservatives looking to back the bill and creating momentum ahead of a showdown vote expected this week .
He said the legislation , which grants citizenship rights to illegal immigrant “ Dreamers , ” funds his border wall , limits the chain of family migration and ends the visa lottery , checks off all the boxes on his immediate immigration wish list .
Meeting with Republicans for an hour Tuesday evening , Mr. Trump told them he would welcome a fix to the family separation issue that has engulfed the immigration debate this week . But he made clear that any action would have to come from Congress , not from the administration .
His blessing clears up the mess he left Friday when he said he wouldn ’ t sign the bill . The White House later said he misunderstood the question , but his wavering left a number of conservatives fearful of voting for the bill only to have the president walk away from the legislation , leaving them on a political ledge .
“ He says , ‘ I am behind you 1,000 percent and I am not going to leave you out to dry , ’ ” said Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers , Washington Republican and chairwoman of the House Republican Conference .
Whether that is good enough to win the votes of 218 Republicans — the number needed to approve the bill — is unclear .
“ It ’ s going to be close , ” said Rep. Carlos Curbelo , a Florida Republican who helped craft the compromise bill . “ This is a very challenging issue , very controversial . All members are going to have to take some risks to make this happen . ”
Rep. Mark Meadows , North Carolina Republican and head of the Freedom Caucus , said he is still weighing his vote , but the bill is a no-go for other conservatives .
“ I think there are some who believe that it is amnesty , and they don ’ t want to vote for amnesty , ” he said .
He also said some on the liberal side of the party wanted a more generous legalization for Dreamers .
“ We represent very different districts , ” he said . “ The thing that motivates me to stay involved is I think the moderates negotiated in good faith — whether we get to 218 or not , I don ’ t know . ”
Republican leaders released the official version of the bill Tuesday evening while Mr. Trump was meeting with them .
The bill would grant full legal status and a path to citizenship to people who qualify for the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . The bill also would end the visa lottery and limit the types of family members who can be sponsored for immigration . It takes those visas and uses them for the DACA population and other children brought to the U.S. illegally as minors by their parents .
In terms of enforcement , the bill allows the Department of Homeland Security to detain more people and deport them faster , and it increases the threshold for people attempting to claim asylum , with a goal of reducing fraudulent claims that have clogged the system .
Republican leaders tucked in a fix for the family separation issue , allowing the government to hold children and their parents in immigration detention facilities for longer than 20 days . The bill also says that illegal immigrant parents charged with misdemeanors , who normally would be sent to the criminal justice system ’ s jails , can be held in immigration detention — meaning they can remain with their children .
House Speaker Paul D. Ryan , Wisconsin Republican , told The ███ that Mr. Trump got a good reception from the party .
Outside the meeting , a group of Democrats marched along the corridors holding signs that said , “ Families Belong Together , ” and that depicted some of the now-iconic photos of children and their parents at the border .
As the president walked through one of the Capitol ’ s corridors , a heckler shouted at him , “ Mr . President , F– you ! ” An NBC reporter said on Twitter that the culprit was a congressional intern .
Earlier Tuesday , some of the president ’ s key supporters warned him against embracing the bill .
The National ICE Council , the union that represents officers at U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement , said the bill falls short on a number of the president ’ s campaign promises .
Chris Crane , the council president , wrote a letter to Mr. Trump saying the bill would open the door to massive fraud , would allow people who defy judges ’ deportation orders to get on a pathway to citizenship and would fail to make good on Mr. Trump ’ s promise of a deportation force of 10,000 more Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers .
He labeled the bill the “ Ryan amnesty ” and said it repeats the mistakes of the failed 2013 “ Gang of 8 ” immigration bill .
“ You pledged publicly to ‘ have the backs ’ of the men and women of ICE law enforcement . I am asking you to keep that promise , ” Mr. Crane wrote .
The ICE Council endorsed Mr. Trump on the campaign trail in 2016 .
Rep. Bob Goodlatte , Virginia Republican , said he is “ sympathetic to their concerns ” but that the compromise is better than alternative proposals that they would have hated .
“ But we really have to do something that can get to 218 votes , and some of the people who are in that negotiation did not support their request , ” Mr. Goodlatte said . “ This happened very quickly , and if they don ’ t think they were consulted enough , I understand that . ”
The White House did not respond to questions about the letter .
One would be on an enforcement-heavy bill written months ago by Mr. Goodlatte and Rep. Michael T. McCaul , Texas Republican . Both chair key committees . That bill includes a renewable DACA permit but doesn ’ t give Dreamers a pathway to citizenship . It does include a host of new enforcement measures such as requiring employers to use E-Verify to check their hires , cracking down on sanctuary cities and making it a misdemeanor to overstay a visa .
Those measures went too far for many Republicans , and the Goodlatte bill struggled to reach 218 supporters .
So Republican leaders pushed Mr. Goodlatte , Mr. McCaul and moderate lawmakers to work on the compromise bill .
Mr. Trump had backed the enforcement-heavy bill , but his full-throated support for the compromise was critical .
“ Folks that would have been against it , I think it ’ s harder for them to be against it now , ” said Rep. Bill Flores , Texas Republican . “ I think he probably changed a lot of minds . ”