Senator Kamala Harris speaks at a Polk County Democrats event in Des Moines , Iowa , October 22 , 2018 . ( KC McGinnis/Reuters )
Senator Kamala Harris of California on Thursday compared contemporary public perceptions of Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) to the way in which the American public perceived the Ku Klux Klan in the early part of the 20th century .
Harris , a staunch advocate of more permissive immigration policy , made the comparison while questioning Ronald Vitiello , President Trump ’ s nominee to lead ICE , during his confirmation hearing . She began the line of questioning by citing Vitiello ’ s use of the term “ neo-Klanist ” in a 2015 tweet , which he applied to Democrats in order to highlight the party ’ s role in advancing segregationist policies during the 19th and 20th centuries . She then sought to apply Vitiello ’ s characterization of twentieth century Democrats to the agency he has been nominated to lead .
“ Are you aware of the perception of many about how the power and the discretion at ICE is being used to enforce the laws and do you see any parallels ? ” she asked .
“ I do not see any parallels , ” Vitiello interjected . “ That puts ICE in the same category as the KKK . Is that what you ’ re asking me ? ”
“ No , I ’ m very specific in what I ’ m asking you . Are you aware of a perception that the way that they . . . ” Harris continued , before Vitiello interjected . “ I see none , ” he said .
“ Are you aware that there is a perception that ICE is administering its power in a way that is causing fear and intimidation , particularly among immigrants and specifically among immigrants coming from Mexico and Central America ? ” she asked .
A number of prominent Democrats have called for the abolition of ICE in the wake of the Trump administration ’ s application of a zero-tolerance immigration-enforcement policy , which resulted in the separation of some 2,000 minors from their parents at the border in June . While Harris has stopped short of joining Senator Kirsten Gillibrand ( D. , N.Y. ) and her allies in the House in calling for the agency ’ s abolition , she has pushed for sweeping changes to the agency .
Update 2:50p.m . : RNC Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel called Harris ’ s comments “ disgusting ” in a Thursday afternoon tweet .
Kamala Harris is trying to launch her 2020 campaign off of comparing ICE officers to the KKK , and it 's absolutely disgusting . pic.twitter.com/l6DrpbbQ2k — Ronna McDaniel ( @ GOPChairwoman ) November 15 , 2018