Rebel members of President Donald Trump 's party have helped pass a vote to reject his declaration of an emergency on the US-Mexico border .
Twelve Republican senators broke party ranks to side with Democrats , approving a proposal to revoke the proclamation by 59-41 .
The Democratic-controlled House of Representatives last month backed the measure .
Congress needs a two-thirds majority of both chambers to override a presidential veto , which is viewed as unlikely in this case .
Nevertheless , the vote will be seen as an embarrassing loss for the president on his signature domestic issue .
On Twitter , Mr Trump slammed the vote , calling it a `` Democrat inspired Resolution which would OPEN BORDERS while increasing Crime , Drugs and Trafficking in our Country '' .
It comes just a day after the Senate rebuked him on foreign policy by approving a bill to end US support for the Saudi-led coalition in Yemen .
The Republican rebels on Thursday were Mitt Romney and Mike Lee of Utah , Marco Rubio of Florida , Roy Blunt of Missouri , Lamar Alexander of Tennessee , Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania , Rob Portman of Ohio , Jerry Moran of Kansas , Susan Collins of Maine , Lisa Murkowski of Alaska , Rand Paul of Kentucky , and Roger Wicker of Mississippi .
Thom Tillis of North Carolina changed his mind minutes before the vote and said he would oppose it .
The Republican president declared the emergency on 15 February after Congress refused funding for a wall on the US-Mexico border , a key campaign pledge .
He aims to circumvent Congress and build his long-promised barrier by raiding military budgets .
It could free up almost $ 8bn ( £6bn ) for the wall , which is still considerably short of the estimated $ 23bn cost of a barrier along almost 2,000 miles ( 3,200km ) of border , but far more than the nearly $ 1.4bn begrudgingly allotted last month by Congress .
By any standards this is a big rebellion by Republicans in the Senate and therefore a significant embarrassment for the president .
But what it 's not , is a repudiation by them of his border wall policy which many of them support with varying degrees of enthusiasm .
In straightforward terms , the use of national emergency powers was seen as overreach by the president in two ways :
First , it is a pretty blatant attempt to bypass Congress 's power of the purse - its constitutional right to raise and spend money .
The president had demanded billions for the wall , Congress had n't agreed it ; the government shutdown ; and eventually the White House backed down . So going after the cash by this route was seen as not playing by the rules .
Second , Democrats and some Republicans regard this as a power grab that could set a dangerous precedent .
In the past , a constant refrain from Republicans was that former President Barack Obama regularly abused executive powers to do things he should have won congressional backing for .
And many of the current batch of Republican Senators will be in situ long after President Trump has departed . They might find it harder , if they 'd backed the president now , to argue that a future Democratic president could n't use emergency powers to , say , move on gun ownership or climate change .
So these rebellious Republicans get to have their cake and eat it . A marker has been laid down , but , with no chance of a veto override , the president still gets his way .
Or at least for the time being . Ultimately it will be the nine justices of the Supreme Court who will decide where legitimate authority ends and overreach begins .
Earlier on Thursday Mr Trump called Democrats `` border deniers '' and said any Republican opposing him would be casting `` a vote for Nancy Pelosi '' .
He says the barrier is needed to combat illegal immigration on the southern border which he has described as a `` crisis '' .
Democrats say the declaration is unconstitutional , Mr Trump has manufactured the border emergency and a wall would be a boondoggle .
The resolution to revoke the declaration passed the House by a margin of 245-182 in February . Thirteen Republicans sided with Democrats .
Lawmakers used a provision from the National Emergencies Act to overrule the president .
Most Republicans supported Mr Trump 's decision and accused Democrats of ignoring an emergency at the border .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell says the declaration is `` the predictable and understandable consequences of Democrats ' decision to put partisan obstruction ahead of the national interest '' .
The renegade conservatives largely condemned Mr Trump 's declaration for setting up a dangerous presidential precedent while still agreeing with his border policies .
`` This issue is not about strengthening our border security , a goal that I support and have voted to advance , '' Mrs Collins said ahead of the vote .
`` It is a solemn occasion involving whether or not this body will stand up for its institutional prerogatives and will support the separation of powers enshrined in our constitution . ''
Mr Paul agreed Congress must fund border security , `` but no president should go around Congress '' .
He added that if the declaration stands , it could allow a future `` socialist-inclined president '' to pass environmental or gun control legislation .
Mr Romney echoed a similar sentiment , calling the use of an emergency an `` overreach '' that `` is an invitation to further expansion and abuse by future presidents '' .