WASHINGTON ( CNN ) - The chances that any significant immigration legislation will be enacted before the midterm election grew more remote on Friday , when House Majority Leader Eric Cantor 's office said it would not allow debate on a narrowly crafted proposal sponsored by a fellow Republican .
President Barack Obama and Senate Democrats made a major push this week on the issue , hoping to put pressure on House Speaker John Boehner to allow a vote before the August summer break .
But Boehner and other House GOP leaders have repeatedly rejected calls to vote on a Senate-passed comprehensive immigration bill . They insist the only way the House will act is using a step by step approach .
But resistance from a majority of House conservatives to even start that process has stalled any movement on immigration , and the latest attempt illustrates the prospects for reform are n't good this year .
California Republican Rep. Jeff Denham , whose agricultural district is home to many immigrant workers , wants to add his targeted immigration measure to the defense bill next week .
His “ ENLIST Act ” would allow young people brought into the country illegally to join the military and gain legal status . But even before he gets the chance to offer his amendment , Cantor 's office is shutting it down .
`` No proposed ENLIST amendments to NDAA will be made in order , '' Doug Heye , a spokesman for Cantor , said in a statement .
Last month , the backlash from a group of House GOP members who said Denham 's proposal amounted to `` amnesty '' prevented it from being considered as part of the original defense bill in committee .
House Armed Services Chairman Buck McKeon , a co-sponsor of the ENLIST act , worried the controversial amendment could become a poison pill and jeopardize the defense legislation ’ s passage .
On Friday , White House spokesman Jay Carney said the House would “ pursue its own path in the construction of an immigration reform package . ”
But he also said that the Obama administration would only support a series of bills if they achieved major overhaul of the current immigration system , and that those measures must include a path to citizenship for undocumented workers .
With fewer than three dozen legislative days left before Congress takes a month-long summer recess , the window for acting on immigration is narrow . If there is no will to take up the ENLIST act now , that does n't bode well for any other immigration action this year .