CLOSE About three thousand demonstrators have marched near President Donald Trump 's Florida estate to protest his now-blocked executive order temporarily limiting immigration . ( Feb. 4 ) AP
Refugees and some foreigners were racing the clock to enter the United States as the Trump administration prepared to press a federal appeals court Monday for reinstatement of its controversial travel ban .
The San Francisco-based court denied the Trump administration 's request Sunday but ordered the states of Washington and Minnesota , which filed suit to halt the ban , to provide more details . The Justice Department was told to file its response later Monday .
President Trump issued the travel ban Jan. 27 , one week after his inauguration . His executive order suspended entry of all refugees to the U.S. for 120 days , halted admission of refugees from Syria indefinitely and barred entry for three months to citizens from seven predominantly Muslim countries — Iraq , Syria , Iran , Sudan , Libya , Somalia and Yemen .
After days of legal wrangling , federal Judge James Robart in Seattle issued the temporary restraining order Friday night that lifted the ban nationwide . Robart , appointed to the bench by President George W. Bush in 2004 , cited `` immediate and irreparable injury as a result of the signing and implementation of the executive order . ''
With the ban on hold at least temporarily , people with jeopardized travel plans were on the move . Lebanon 's National News Agency reported that airlines operating out of Beirut 's Rafik Hariri International Airport allowed people from the seven affected countries to board U.S.-bound planes . In Egypt , Cairo airport officials told the Associated Press that 33 people from Yemen , Syria and Iraq boarded flights Sunday for the United States .
Late Sunday , an Iranian researcher who had been prevented from coming to the United States to do research at Stanford University arrived safely at New York 's Kennedy Airport .
Nima Enayati was turned away last week when he tried to fly to New York from Italy , where he 's working on a Ph.D .
Enayati is on a visa for three months to conduct research at Stanford working on robotics that will help make surgeries less invasive and cheaper for patients .
The Royal Jordanian airline took a lighter tack , tweeting an ad : `` Fly to the US on RJ now that you 're allowed to . '' The ad included the words `` Bon voyage ! '' with the first word tweaked to look as if it previously said `` ban . ''
In Iran , Foreign Minister Mohammad-Javad Zarif reversed an earlier decision and said visas will be granted to American wrestlers to travel to Iran to attend the 2017 Freestyle World Cup , the Islamic Republic News Agency reported .
The fate of Trump 's executive order is far from resolved . Any decision emerging from the appeals court in the coming days is likely to be appealed further , likely up to the Supreme Court . More limited challenges to the ban also are pending in district courts in Massachusetts , New York , Virginia and Hawaii .
The Justice Department , arguing its case Saturday in the appeal , accused Robart of `` judicial second-guessing of the President '' that constitutes an `` impermissible intrusion '' into Trump 's authority over who can enter the country .
The opinion of this so-called judge , which essentially takes law-enforcement away from our country , is ridiculous and will be overturned ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) February 4 , 2017
`` This is particularly true as to predictive judgments about the potential national security threat posed by a class of aliens , '' the department said in its appeal . `` A reviewing court would not be well-equipped to ascertain the quantum of risk , or what is a reasonable margin of error in assessing risk . ''
Trump was more succinct , tweeting that the `` opinion of this so-called judge '' would ultimately be overturned .
`` The judge opens up our country to potential terrorists and others that do not have our best interests at heart , '' Trump said on Twitter . `` Bad people are very happy ! ''
The State Department said it was restoring tens of thousands of canceled visas for foreigners , and the Department of Homeland Security `` suspended all actions '' for enforcing the ban and instead began standard inspection of travelers .
Because the ban was lifted by a judge , many very bad and dangerous people may be pouring into our country . A terrible decision — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) February 4 , 2017
The State Department on Saturday advised refugee aid agencies that refugees set to travel before Trump signed the order will now be allowed in . A State Department official said in an email obtained by the Associated Press that the government was `` focusing on booking refugee travel '' through Feb. 17 and working to have arrivals resume as soon as Monday .
Trump 's Jan. 27 executive order immediately sparked anger and confusion across the nation . Scores of incoming travelers were held up at U.S. airports , and many more were halted from boarding flights bound for the United States . Protests erupted at airports and city halls nationwide .
The ACLU and other advocacy groups now urge travelers caught in limbo to act quickly . Omar Jadwat , director of the ACLU ’ s Immigrants ’ Rights Project , applauded the weekend ruling as `` another stinging rejection of President Trump ’ s unconstitutional Muslim ban . We will keep fighting to permanently dismantle this un-American executive order . ''
Becca Heller , director of the New York-based International Refugee Assistance Project , stressed that previously issued visas would once again be valid unless they were stamped `` canceled . ''
`` The reinstatement of visas is the only right move to remedy the situation of the last week , which has caused havoc here in the United States and across the world , ” Heller said .
The Trump administration had a different take . Vice President Mike Pence made the rounds of the Sunday morning news shows , stressing the importance of the executive order .
“ From the outset of his campaign and administration , the president of the United States has made it clear to put the safety of the American people first , '' Pence told Fox News Sunday . `` We are going to win this argument . ”
During his Sunday sermon , the Rev . Kevin Ulmet , senior pastor of Nashville First Church of the Nazarene , recounted the African congregation 's nearly two-year history . Pastor Jerome Songolo , a refugee who fled the strife-torn Democratic Republic of the Congo , stood beside him , translating his words from English to Swahili .
`` I want to say this very clearly : Those whom God wants here God will bring here and no government or president will stop that , because God will do what God will do and his kingdom will advance . ''