Former Florida Gov . Jeb Bush says he thinks people can be “ persuaded ” on the issue of immigration and questioned whether people want to elect a president who will simply “ bend with the wind . ”
“ I ’ ve been traveling over the last three months , and I get a sense that a lot of people can be persuaded , to be honest with you , ” he said in an interview that aired Monday evening on Fox News ’ “ The Kelly File. ” “ But here ’ s the deal , Megyn : if I go beyond the consideration of running to be an actual candidate , do you want people to just bend with the wind , to mirror people ’ s sentiment , whoever ’ s in front of you ? ‘ Oh yes — I used to be for that , but now I ’ m for this. ’ Is that the way we want to elect presidents ? ”
“ Running for president is tough . Serving as president , which should be the objective , is a little harder . Dealing with Putin is a heck of a lot harder than going to a town meeting in New Hampshire and explaining your views on immigration , ” he said .
Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida , who is running for president in 2016 , was part of an original “ Gang of Eight ” senators that crafted legislation that passed the U.S. Senate in 2013 that included a broad rewrite of the nation ’ s immigration laws and provided an eventual path to citizenship for most of the millions of illegal immigrants in the country .
Mr. Rubio , whose support for the bill cost him some backing among conservatives , later backed away from it and has said since then that border security has to happen first .
Wisconsin Gov . Scott Walker , who like Mr. Bush is laying the groundwork for a possible White House run , said earlier this year that his “ view has changed ” on immigration and that he firmly opposes amnesty , dinging President Obama for mishandling the issue .
Mr. Bush also separated himself from rhetoric used by former Massachusetts Gov . and 2012 GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney during a 2012 debate in which Mr. Romney advocated for “ self-deportation ” of illegal immigrants .
“ The option of self-deportation , or making things so harsh is not really — I don ’ t think that ’ s practical . And rounding people up door-to-door isn ’ t practical , either , ” Mr. Bush said .
“ We need to enforce the laws of our country for sure — enforce the border , ” he said . “ There ’ s a lot of things we need to do , but a practical solution of getting to fixing the legal system is also allowing for a path to legalized status — not necessarily citizenship . ”
He said he could support a path to citizenship if that was the way to get to a deal “ where we turned immigration into a catalyst for high sustained economic growth , where we did all the things we needed to do on border security , where we narrowed the number of people coming through family petition and dramatically expanded a like-kind number for economic purposes , which will help us grow and help the median rise up , in return for that as a compromise , sure . ”
“ But the plan in [ our ] book and the plan that I ’ ve suggested when I go out and speak which is almost every day on [ the ] subject — I ’ m talking about a path to legalized status , ” he said .
Mr. Bush also reiterated his position that he would reverse President Obama ’ s executive actions to shield millions from the threat of deportation and also said he understands people ’ s frustrations and sentiments on the issue .
Asked how he would undo the actions , Mr. Bush said , “ passing meaningful reform of immigration and make it part of it . ”