poster= '' http : //v.███.com/images/1155968404/201609/1988/1155968404_5108172256001_5107413820001-vs.jpg ? pubId=1155968404 '' 2016 Trump 's immigration rope-a-dope After diplomatic turn in Mexico , a fiery immigration speech proves the GOP nominee 's moderation to be a ruse .
PHOENIX — After playing at diplomacy in Mexico following two weeks of muddled messaging on his signature issue , Donald Trump shed any pretense of a softer message or general election “ pivot ” with a declaration of his fealty to the hard-line positions and inflammatory rhetoric that propelled him to the Republican nomination .
Trump ’ s surprising trip to the presidential residence in Mexico City on Wednesday afternoon , which created a moment for him to stand side by side with an elected head of state and declare sovereign nations ’ rights to protect their people , amounted to a well-executed bit of campaign stagecraft by the GOP nominee who , after a year of demonizing Mexico and its people , managed to strike a far more diplomatic tone — for him , anyway — on the international stage .
“ I happen to have a tremendous feeling for Mexican-Americans , ” Trump said , eschewing the usual vitriol as he stood before a dark marble wall that evoked speeches by foreign leaders at the United Nations .
Having ditched his traveling press corps , Trump ’ s lie that he and President Enrique Peña Nieto didn ’ t discuss who would pay for his border wall wasn ’ t exposed until the Mexican president tweeted that they had a few hours later . And minutes after he stepped onto another stage here Wednesday night and began to speak to his raucous supporters , it was even more clear that the sojourn across the southern border , much like his campaign ’ s two weeks of gentle walkbacks , was a ruse — that Trump and his campaign had used Peña Nieto as a prop in an opening act that served only to set up an evening stemwinder . The farce was , in hindsight , clear even before Trump approached the mic , as two of his warm-up speakers , Rudy Giuliani and Jeff Sessions , donned Trump hats that read “ Make Mexico Great Again Also . ”
Time after time , the crowd of more than 5,000 people , clad in red Trump hats and waving campaign signs , erupted unprompted into chants of “ Build the wall ! ” and “ Lock her up ! ”
In the Arizona desert , hours after he spoke of his affinity for the Mexican people and the shared priorities of the two neighboring countries , Trump railed for nearly 90 minutes about the many ways undocumented immigrants are hurting the country and harming Americans . He promised not just to build a border wall , but also to empower a massive new “ deportation task force ” of Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents to round them up .
“ You can call it deported if you want . The press doesn ’ t like that term , ” Trump said . “ You can call it whatever the hell you want . They ’ re gone . ”
He reverted to the tough talk he was unable to muster on foreign soil just hours earlier about Mexico paying for the wall . Toward the end of his speech , he used the personal anecdotes of mothers whose children were killed by undocumented immigrants to further demonize “ illegals. ” He blamed the deaths of “ countless Americans ” on President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton and their immigration policies .
A senior Clinton campaign adviser acknowledged that Trump ’ s daring Mexico gambit seemed effective and thus worrisome for a few hours Wednesday — until his speech a few hours later . “ Not worried anymore , ” the adviser said . “ The Nuremberg speech put all that statesman-like stuff away . ”
Rather than issuing a statement criticizing the speech , Clinton ’ s campaign sent reporters a collection of tweets praising it — from noted white supremacists like David Duke and conservative provocateur Ann Coulter .
For weeks , Trump had dithered on the issue that has defined his candidacy from the start , suggesting that the question of what to do with the 11 million undocumented immigrants in the country was more difficult than he ’ d heretofore suggested as he vowed to send them all home . Kellyanne Conway , his newly hired campaign manager , praised his newfound recognition of the issue ’ s complexity ; and his inner circle of advisers grappled with how to better sell Trump ’ s tough policies to a general election audience .
Ultimately , however , Trump was seemingly attempting to sell a slightly softened position on deportations to the base that voted for him in the primaries largely because of that stance . Trump ’ s revived bombast and the 10-pronged list of immigration policy ideas were actually a clumsy effort to obscure the fact that he is no longer vowing to immediately deport every undocumented immigrant in the country illegally ( just as many as possible in a more gradual manner starting with 2 million who have criminal records ) .
“ They ’ re going out fast , ” he said . “ Moving forward , we will issue detainers for illegal immigrants who are arrested for any crime whatsoever , and they will be placed into immediate removal proceedings , if we even have to do that .
“ We will terminate the Obama administration ’ s deadly , and it is deadly , nonenforcement policies that allow thousands of criminal aliens to freely roam our streets , walk around , do whatever they want to do — crime all over the place . That ’ s over . That ’ s over , folks . That ’ s over . ”
But in trying so hard to present his proposals as a hardening of his position , he ’ s unlikely to accomplish the only real imperative of any policy speech delivered 69 days before an election — winning over unconverted general election voters . And Trump ’ s amped-up nativism , and his proposal to curb even legal immigration are likely to only harden the two blocs of ardently pro-Trump and never-Trump monoliths on opposite poles of this election .
The irony in Trump ’ s pre-Labor Day base play is that many of his supporters don ’ t need harsher rhetoric or unwavering policy positions to turn out for him in November . Many , in fact , don ’ t take his promises of deporting all undocumented immigrants or forcing Mexico to pay for a border wall all that literally .
“ He ’ s never going to be able to get 11 million people out of the country , ” said Steve Hagely , a Trump supporter from ucson standing near the back of the crowd inside the cavernous , concrete-floored convention center . “ It ’ s just something he says . ”
While screams and cheers answered Trump ’ s promise of a border wall , some supporters aren ’ t convinced that will actually happen either . “ How ’ s he going to really get them to pay for it ? ” said Brian Howe of Phoenix . “ I think what he ’ s saying is that America ’ s not going to get taken advantage of anymore . ”
Trump spent his speech Wednesday night addressing those already converted to his cause , forgetting how easily most of them will forgive whatever small touches of moderation might creep into an otherwise hawkish policy platform .
“ I think he ’ s just trying to win , ” said Drew Hathcock , from Surprise . “ The people who are already with him , he ’ s not going to ever lose them . He ’ s trying to get more . He needs more . The base isn ’ t big enough for him to win with just them . ”
Unfortunately , Trump 's speech appears to be narrowing his support even more , driving away some of the prominent Hispanic Americans who had willingly taken part in the GOP nominee 's recent `` roundtables '' that in hindsight seem more like hollow photo ops .
Immediately following the Arizona speech , Jacob Monty , a member of Trump ’ s newly formed National Hispanic Advisory Council , resigned , and Alfonso Aguilar , president of the Latino Partnership for Conservative Principles , said in an interview that he is “ inclined ” to pull his support .
“ I was a strong supporter of Donald Trump when I believed he was going to address the immigration problem realistically and compassionately , ” said Monty , a Houston attorney who has aggressively made the case for Trump . “ What I heard today was not realistic and not compassionate . ”
Aguilar , president of the Latino Partnership for Conservative Principles , was a one-time Trump critic who earlier this summer set aside his qualms about the New York tycoon ’ s rhetoric toward Hispanic people , and organized a letter of support signed by himself and other prominent Latino conservatives . Since then , he has repeatedly defended Trump in media appearances , as has Monty .
“ It ’ s so disappointing , because we feel we took a chance , a very risky chance , ” Aguilar said . “ We decided to make a big U-turn to see if we could make him change . We thought we were moving in the right direction . ... We ’ re disappointed . We feel misled . ”