FILE PHOTO - People protest for immigration reform for DACA recipients and a new Dream Act , in Los Angeles , California , U.S. January 22 , 2018 . ███/Lucy Nicholson
( ███ ) - A second U.S. judge on Tuesday blocked President Donald Trump ’ s decision to end a program that protects immigrants brought to the United States illegally as children from deportation .
U.S. District Judge Nicholas Garaufis in Brooklyn ruled that the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , or DACA , can not end in March as the Republican administration had planned , a victory for Democratic state attorneys general and immigrants who sued the federal government .
The decision is similar to a Jan. 9 ruling by U.S. District Judge William Alsup in San Francisco that DACA must remain in place while litigation challenging Trump ’ s decision continues .
The legal battle over DACA complicates a debate currently underway in Congress on whether to change the nation ’ s immigration laws .
The Supreme Court on Friday is due to consider whether to take up the administration ’ s appeal of the San Francisco ruling . The court could announce as soon as Friday afternoon whether it will hearing the case .
Garaufis said the administration could eventually rescind the DACA program but that the reasons it gave last September for rescinding it were too arbitrary and could not stand . The judge ordered the administration to process DACA renewal applications on the same terms as had been in place before the president took his action .
In a statement , U.S. Justice Department spokesman Devin O ’ Malley said DACA was implemented unilaterally by Trump ’ s Democratic predecessor Barack Obama and thus unlawfully circumvented Congress .
“ The Justice Department will continue to vigorously defend this position , and looks forward to vindicating its position in further litigation , ” O ’ Malley said .
Often called “ Dreamers , ” hundreds of thousands of young adults , mostly Hispanics , have been granted protection from deportation and given work permits under DACA , which was created in 2012 .