An appeals court pressed a Justice Department lawyer Tuesday on whether President Donald Trump ’ s executive order on immigration is discriminatory , while also pushing an attorney for the two states fighting the order to explain how it could be unconstitutional to bar entry of people from terror-prone countries .
August Flentje , the Justice Department lawyer arguing on behalf of the administration , urged the appeals court to rescind a restraining order issued by a lower court , arguing the judge who issued it was wrong to second-guess the president on a question of national security .
The executive order , Mr. Flentje told a three-judge panel of the San Francisco-based Ninth U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals , struck a balance between security concerns and the practice of allowing people to enter the country .
“ The president struck that balance , and the district court ’ s order has upset that balance , ” he said . “ This is a traditional national security judgment that is assigned to the political branches and the president and the court ’ s order immediately altered that . ’ ’
The oral arguments on whether to reinstate some , all , or none of President Donald Trump ’ s executive order on immigration represented a crucial test in the fast-moving legal battle over White House efforts to restrict entry into the U.S . The Jan. 27 order suspended U.S. entry for visitors from seven predominantly Muslim countries for at least 90 days , froze the entire U.S. refugee program for four months and indefinitely banned refugees from Syria . The administration argues the action was needed to keep terrorists from domestic soil .
The president weighed in on Twitter on Wednesday morning : “ If the U.S. does not win this case as it so obviously should , we can never have the security and safety to which we are entitled . Politics ! ”
The appeal challenges the broad restraining order issued late last week by a Seattle judge who temporarily halted enforcement of the president ’ s order , after the states of Washington and Minnesota sued . The Ninth Circuit Court earlier Tuesday said it would likely issue a ruling later this week .
The legal clash , which is also playing out in other courts around the country , represents a remarkable test of the powers of a new president determined to act quickly and aggressively to follow up on his campaign promises . Mr. Trump , who promised repeatedly on the campaign trail to tighten what he called lax immigration policies , issued his executive order a week after taking office , generating widespread protests as well as plaudits and setting off an immediate debate over the extent of executive branch authority .
The judges pressed Mr. Flentje to explain why the executive order shouldn ’ t be considered a violation of constitutional protections against religious discrimination . During the campaign , Mr. Trump called for a temporary shutdown of Muslim entry into the U.S. , though the White House says the current executive order is in no way a Muslim ban .
“ Could the president simply say in the order we ’ re not going to let any Muslims in ? ’ ’ asked Judge William Canby .
“ That ’ s not what the order does , ’ ’ Mr. Flentje replied . “ This is a far cry from that situation . ’ ’
The judges also asked Mr. Flentje for any evidence that the countries cited in the executive order were connected to terrorism . He responded that a previous Congress and former President Barack Obama had found that they were .
At one point , Mr. Flentje , conceding that “ I ’ m not sure I ’ m convincing the court , ” asked that if the judges didn ’ t overturn the lower court ruling completely , at least they could rule that it went too far .
Noah Purcell , the attorney for Washington state , argued that there was clear evidence of religious discriminatory intent behind Mr. Trump ’ s order . “ There are statements that…are rather shocking evidence of intent to harm Muslims , ” Mr. Purcell told the court .
The court isn ’ t making a final determination on the legality of Mr. Trump ’ s order for now . Instead , it must decide what immigration rules will be in effect during the coming months while court proceedings on the substance of the president ’ s restrictions continue .
Another judge on the panel , Richard Clifton , voiced skepticism about claims that the executive order was discriminatory .
“ I have trouble understanding why we ’ re supposed to infer religious animus , ’ ’ said Judge Clifton . “ The concern for terrorism with those connected to radical Islamic sects is kind of hard to deny . ’ ’
Mr. Purcell answered that the president ’ s own statements and those of some of his advisers indicated the executive order grew out of a desire to keep Muslims out of the country .
“ At this point it ’ s now the federal government that ’ s asking the courts to upset the status quo , ’ ’ Mr. Purcell said . “ Things are slowly returning to normal before the chaos of the executive order . ’ ’
Mr. Purcell also found himself defending the states ’ standing to bring the case in the first place . Pressed on whether states have the right to bring lawsuits on behalf of their citizens , he said legal precedents have established that they do .
At times , the judges appeared to consider whether the order could be scaled back so that it didn ’ t affect those who had already lived in the U.S. and wanted to return . Mr. Purcell argued that it would be a very difficult and complicated task trying to draw broad new rules and restrictions among foreign students , workers and their relatives .
Mr. Trump has vigorously defended the executive order and criticized in unusually blunt terms the Seattle judge , U.S. District Judge James Robart , who put the executive order on hold nationwide while courts sort out its legality . On Sunday Mr. Trump said the judiciary should be blamed if there is a terrorist attack .
Washington and Minnesota are making a variety of legal claims in their case , including that the executive order is discriminatory and that it violates constitutional guarantees of due process and equal protection under the law .
The states also have said the president ’ s order has harmed thousands of noncitizen residents of their states , and that individuals traveling abroad were unable to return , including faculty and students from state universities . They also said the restrictions cost them tax revenue and created travel impediments for businesses based within their borders .
Several variables could affect the Ninth Circuit ’ s deliberations . The states say the appeals court has no jurisdiction to consider the restraining order because of its temporary nature ; the Justice Department says the states have no legal standing to bring a lawsuit on behalf of their residents against the federal government .
The appeals court may have the option to choose a middle ground , and is n't limited to an all-or-nothing pronouncement on whether the Trump order can be enforced in the coming months . For example , the judges could find that the lower court ’ s ruling suspending Mr. Trump ’ s order was appropriate in some ways but overly broad in others .
The Justice Department indirectly floated a potential compromise in its legal papers , arguing that at a minimum the executive order must be enforced against aliens who have never set foot in the country or have no specific connections to Washington or Minnesota .
If the Ninth Circuit appeals court rules broadly in favor of Washington and Minnesota after Tuesday ’ s hearing , the executive order would continue to be suspended nationwide .
It is likely that the losing party will ask the Supreme Court to intervene on an emergency basis . Any such request , however , could be complicated by the fact that the current court is evenly divided between four liberal justices and four conservatives . A 4-4 deadlock would leave the Ninth Circuit ’ s decision intact .
Despite the flurry of litigation , the courts are far from issuing a final ruling on the underlying merits of the president ’ s executive order . Full court proceedings are expected to take many months , and a lengthy appeals process could mean it is well over a year before courts fully resolve the legality of Mr. Trump ’ s approach . It is likely that the final word on the matter will come from the Supreme Court .