WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - The Trump administration on Wednesday unveiled a rule that allows officials to detain migrant families indefinitely while judges consider whether to grant them asylum in the United States , abolishing a previous 20-day limit .
The rule , which is certain to draw a legal challenge , would replace a 1997 court settlement that limits the amount of time U.S. immigration authorities can detain migrant children . That agreement is generally interpreted as meaning families must be released within 20 days .
It was the Republican administration ’ s third major regulation restricting immigration in little more than a month , all during an unsettled period when senior immigration officials hold “ acting ” titles lacking U.S. Senate confirmation .
Trump has made cracking down on legal and illegal immigration a hallmark of his presidency after campaigning in 2016 on a promise , so far unfulfilled , that Mexico would pay for a border wall to keep migrants from entering the United States .
In what would be another attempt to dismantle established immigration law , Trump told reporters on Wednesday his administration was seriously looking at ending the right of citizenship for children born to non-citizens within the United States .
Immigration officials are looking for any kind of deterrent to reverse a record surge in families fleeing violence and poverty in Central America . Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) officials say they have caught or rejected 475,000 family members in the past 10 months , more than three times any previous full year .
On July 15 the administration unveiled a rule to bar almost all immigrants from applying for asylum at the southern border , and on Aug. 12 it announced regulation denying visas and permanent residency for those who fail to make enough money .
Multiple lawsuits were filed within days of the two previous immigration rules .
Legal challenges have held up many of Trump ’ s initiatives , but immigration advocates say he has managed to build an “ invisible wall ” through executive actions bypassing Congress .
The administration framed the policy as a humane approach to a crisis .
“ To protect these children from abuse , and stop this illegal flow , we must close these loopholes . This is an urgent humanitarian necessity , ” Trump said in a statement .
Critics counter that Trump and Stephen Miller , his aide on immigration , are using a series of heartless policies to animate hard-core political supporters .
“ The administration is seeking to codify child abuse , plain and simple , ” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , a Democrat , said in a statement , adding that she expected a federal judge would strike down the new rule .
Mexico ’ s Foreign Ministry expressed concern over the plan , saying in a statement that it would consider legal action .
Pediatricians have said children may suffer numerous negative physical and emotional symptoms from detention , even if only brief . The American Psychoanalytic Association on Wednesday branded the Trump policies as “ psychological warfare . ”
“ It has become clear that the current administration uses cruel language , policies and abuse with the objective of deterring immigrants and asylum seekers , ” said Lee Jaffe , president of APsaA .
Officials said the families would receive mental health treatment and other services in facilities that are held to high standards of care .
“ They ’ re campus-like settings with educational , medical , dining and separate , private living facilities , ” acting Homeland Security Secretary Kevin McAleenan told Fox News .
Robyn Barnard , an attorney for the nonprofit organization Human Rights First , challenged that characterization , saying that just because a facility is in a pastoral setting does not make it more humane .
“ A gilded cage is still a cage , ” Barnard said . “ There are locks on the doors , there is no freedom of movement . It is for all intents and purposes a prison . ”
The latest action tears apart the Flores Settlement Agreement that had placed limits on how long children of families seeking asylum could be held in detention , enabling the U.S. government to release tens of thousands of families pending the resolution of their cases .
Trump officials had blamed Flores for the spike in immigration , especially of Central American families , saying it encouraged migrants to bring children with them so they could be released into the United States pending their court cases .
Families typically wait several months for their cases to work their way through immigration court , and the new rule would allow the DHS to keep those families at detention facilities .
The rule will be published in the Federal Register on Friday and will take effect 60 days later . The implementation deadline could slip , however , depending on the success of the court challenges .