Washington ( CNN ) - The only House Republican to so far sign onto a Democratic immigration bill in the lower chamber thinks he will soon be joined by many other Republicans .
Asked by CNN 's Wolf Blitzer Monday how many other Republicans will sign onto the House bill , Rep. Jeff Denham answered that `` I 'm confident we 're going to get a huge number of Republicans , '' he said , although `` the ultimate number I think remains to be defined . ''
The immigration bill in question has 185 Democrats signed on as co-sponsors . The Republican co-sponsors ? One , Denham , a California Republican whose central-valley district is 40 % Latino .
Like its Senate-passed cousin that Speaker John Boehner has refused to bring up , the House bill includes a pathway to citizenship for most of the nation 's 11 million estimated undocumented migrants . At minimum , that pathway would take 13 years , with 10 years just to become a legal permanent resident .
The difference between the House and Senate versions , Denham said , is border security . While the Senate bill greatly expanded the U.S. Border Patrol , it included little or no requirements for exactly how much the flow of undocumented workers must be stunted before the pathway to citizenship can even begin . That lack of metrics , along with a pathway to citizenship labeled as amnesty for lawbreakers by many in the GOP , has caused House Republicans to swear off the Senate version . They favor a piecemeal approach with multiple bills .
`` We have now added the Republican version to this bill , that addresses that border security with real metrics , guaranteeing that we have a solid , over 90 percent success rate before we even implement the rest , '' including the pathway , Denham said on `` CNN Newsroom , '' calling the bill `` a bipartisan solution . ''
Rubio favors House approach over immigration bill he helped author
The new House immigration bill is called `` The Border Security , Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act , '' or bill H.R . 15 . It includes Denham 's ENLIST Act which would allow for qualified undocumented immigrants to serve in the U.S. Armed Forces and thus earn their citizenship at an accelerated rate .
Immigration reform was placed on the backburner after the Senate bill passed in June . It has seen a new push after President Barack Obama made a renewed call for reform last week .
Whether or not the push will reach the ears of House Republicans remains to be seen . Only a few Republicans have districts with a strong presence of Latino voters , such as Denham .
Denham shrugged off the suggestion Monday that he is breaking ranks from the rest of the House GOP .
`` This is to focus the House on getting real reform done this year , '' Denham said of his co-sponsorship . Whether one bill or many , `` my focus is to make sure we have a solution this year . ''