Former US President Barack Obama has attacked the Trump administration for scrapping his scheme to protect young undocumented migrants from deportation .
The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( Daca ) programme was rescinded on Tuesday , in a move that could affect some 800,000 beneficiaries .
While existing recipients will see no impact for at least six months , no new applications can now be made .
Appealing to Congress , Mr Obama said the decision was `` cruel '' and `` wrong '' .
The so-called `` Dreamers '' , mostly Latin Americans , were able to apply for work and study permits under the policy he introduced five years ago .
The Trump administration argues that the programme , which Mr Obama bypassed Congress in order to enact , was unconstitutional ,
In a tweet , President Donald Trump , said he now looked forward to working with both Democrats and Republicans in Congress to `` address immigration reform in a way that puts hardworking citizens of our country 1st '' .
`` Congress now has 6 months to legalize DACA ( something the Obama Administration was unable to do ) . If they ca n't , I will revisit this issue ! '' he added , in a second tweet .
Police in New York made at least a dozen arrests when protesters rallied in front of Trump Tower , US media report , but there were no reports of clashes .
Candidate Trump promised to do away with Daca , despite warnings from a cross-party collection of politicians . Or , knowing this president , objections from `` the establishment '' only make him more determined to act .
Fortunately for him , unlike repealing Obamacare or building his Mexican border wall , he does not need Congress 's help here .
In fact , by setting a six-month fuse on the effects of Daca 's termination - and stretching the impact out over the next two years as work permits expire - Mr Trump puts all the pressure on legislators .
It will not be easy for Daca supporters in Congress . They will have to get legislation passed over the objection of immigration hawks in the House . It may also need 60 votes in the Senate to break a filibuster , if the bill is packaged with hardline immigration measures . What is more , Congress already has its hands full with other pressing issues - hurricane relief , budget resolutions , the need to authorise new government debt and , at some point , tax reform .
If Congress fails to act , Republicans with tough re-election races will be in a difficult spot , facing angry constituents just as the campaign season gets into gear .
The president , however , satisfies his anti-immigration base with this move - and washes his hands of the matter . The loyalists who have stood by him are rewarded , others in his party be damned .
Mr Obama wrote on Facebook : `` To target these young people is wrong - because they have done nothing wrong . ''
`` Ultimately , this is about basic decency , '' he said . `` This is about whether we are a people who kick hopeful young strivers out of America , or whether we treat them the way we 'd want our own kids to be treated . ''
Despite bypassing Congress himself over the issue , the former president said : `` Now that the White House has shifted its responsibility for these young people to Congress , it 's up to members of Congress to protect these young people and our future . ''
In a statement , House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi also slammed Tuesday 's decision and called on majority Republicans in Congress to join Democrats in immediately moving to safeguard Daca recipients .
Two senators from the opposing parties held a joint news conference to call for bipartisan legislation to protect Dreamers .
`` The clock is ticking , '' Democrat Dick Durbin said , while Republican Lindsey Graham said : `` We believe in doing it right but 'right ' means taking care of these kids . ''
The Mexican government said in a statement ( in Spanish ) that it profoundly regretted the scrapping of Daca and would step up its consular work on behalf of its citizens who are affected .
Mr Trump took a hard line on immigration while campaigning last year and promised to scrap Daca if elected .
In a statement , he said he did not `` favour punishing children , most of whom are now adults , for the actions of their parents '' .
`` But we must also recognise that we are nation of opportunity because we are a nation of laws , '' he added .
The scrapping of Daca was announced on Tuesday by Attorney General Jeff Sessions who described Mr Obama 's policy as an `` open-ended circumvention of immigration laws '' .
`` There can be no path to principled immigration reform if the executive branch is able to rewrite or nullify federal laws at will , '' Mr Trump said .
No new first-time requests will be acted on after 5 September , Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) Acting Secretary Elaine Duke said in a memo released after Mr Sessions spoke .
However , no existing beneficiaries of the policy will feel any impact for six months , the period of time allotted for Congress to `` deliver on appropriate legislative solutions '' .
People who have current Daca work authorisation will be able to keep it until it expires while people whose permits expire in less than six months can renew before 1 October for another full two years .
In order to qualify for Daca , applicants under the age of 30 had to submit personal information to the DHS .
They had to go through an FBI background check and have a clean criminal record , and either be in school , have recently graduated or have been honourably discharged from the military .
In exchange , the US government agreed to defer any action on their immigration status for a period of two years .