There ’ s an old legal saying that goes , “ Hard cases make bad law. ” Essentially , what that means is that when you try to take an extreme case and use it as the basis for general laws , the end product doesn ’ t work very well . In this case , when you try to take the most sympathetic group of illegal aliens and craft a law around them , it ’ s going to create a huge mess . Setting aside the fact that illegals of any age are breaking the law and that could be the entire list 1-5 , there are a number of other reasons that young illegal aliens should not be allowed to stay .
1 ) The “ Dreamers ” are mostly adults , not children or teens . Many people seem to believe “ Dreamers ” are little kids . Actually , only 22 % of them are even below the age of 25 according to the Department of Homeland Security . Moreover , there are “ Dreamers ” as old as THIRTY SIX eligible under the largely unverifiable requirements of the program . So we ’ re not talking about kids and we ’ re not talking about children . In some cases we ’ re talking about people who ’ ve spent more than a decade knowingly breaking our immigration laws as adults . Why would we want to give amnesty to someone like that ?
2 ) Kids get punished for things their parents do all the time . If mom and dad sneak their kid into a waterpark without paying , they ALL get kicked out at the same time . Why should it be any different with our country ? If an American man commits an armed robbery , he doesn ’ t get to avoid jail time because there ’ s a kid at home who will be deprived of his daddy . If mom is an alcoholic , dad refuses to work or both of them are weirdos who think little Sally needs to have gender reassignment surgery because she likes to play with trucks , the kids suffer . This is life and the idea that the government can fix every mistake parents make with their kids is unworkable and foolish . That ’ s doubly true when you ’ re talking about adults . Americans typically don ’ t get a pass for breaking the law when they ’ re adults because mommy and daddy weren ’ t good parents when they were kids . “ Dreamers ” shouldn ’ t get one either .
3 ) Republicans are giving up on making a real deal before they ’ ve even started . I am adamantly against illegal immigration and think it would be a huge mistake to legalize “ Dreamers. ” Unfortunately , the GOP seems hell-bent on doing it no matter what conservatives think . Theoretically this might make sense because since this is a group of people Democrats care about desperately , it ’ s the best chance we ’ ll ever have to actually get them to cooperate on serious anti-immigration measures . At a minimum , we should ask for funding of a wall , taking E-Verify national as well as a merit-based immigration system and tough anti-illegal immigration measures before “ Dreamers ” get legal status , not citizenship . Getting even half of that would be something the GOP could brag about after years of failure on the issue .
Unfortunately , Donald Trump has already confirmed that he ’ s not going to demand a wall in return for “ Dreamers. ” Worse yet , he ’ s said that he ’ ll take care of the “ Dreamers ” no matter what already amnesty loving Republicans like John McCain and Paul Ryan do in Congress . In other words , even though this is the best chance Republicans will ever have to come to an agreement on immigration , they ’ ve given away all of their leverage before they ’ ve even gotten started . What that means is we ’ re likely to see the GOP get some minor face-saving security measures while the Democrats will get whatever they want in return ( which will certainly mean bringing in a lot more illegals than are currently included under DACA ) . Granted , Trump being Trump , might change his mind and decide to play hardball on the issue , but at the moment it looks like another typical “ bipartisan ” deal is in the works that will end up with liberal Democrats getting 90 % of what they want while people who believe in putting Americans first get the shaft .
4 ) Many of the “ Dreamers ” are not who you think they are . If you listen to the way young illegals are described in the press , you ’ d think they are all 11 year olds who were brought here when they were three or young geniuses acing college .
However , “ Dreamers ” are much less educated than American kids . Twenty one percent drop out of high school , compared to 5.9 % of American kids . Twenty two percent of those of age have bachelor ’ s degrees , compared to 32 % of Americans .
Some of them aren ’ t all that young either . The cutoff for DACA was 31 years of age on June 15 , 2012 . In other words , there are 36 year old “ Dreamers ” who ’ d be eligible for permanent residence – if they ’ re not even older . When people are here illegally , without documentation , how do you really know their age ? How do you know they arrived here before they were 16 ( which is a DACA requirement ) ? It ’ s not shocking that some estimates put the level of fraud in the program as high as 50 % .
On top of all that , eligible illegals can be high school drop outs , have up to two misdemeanor convictions and are not required to speak English . Do any of those groups sound like people we should want living here long term ?
5 ) It will encourage more illegals to bring their kids here . When you reward lawbreaking with amnesty , you get more lawbreaking . When Obama announced his DACA policy , a surge of illegal children came over the border . The same thing would happen again if we legalize young illegals , except it would be much more sustained . After all , if we ’ re actually changing the law so that young illegals will get to stay , why wouldn ’ t every illegal bring his kid ? That ’ s especially true since we have an immigration system that rewards family ties , not merit . Bring the kid over today and even if you are kicked out now , he ’ ll get to stay and bring you in later .
Besides , is there anyone who believes we can ignore the law this time , but then 10 years from now kick millions of illegals out of the country who supposedly came here as children ? It ’ s not going to happen because we ’ re setting a precedent for ignoring the law in this situation . Either we ’ re going to enforce the law or we ’ re going to have this exact same problem down the road , except even worse . Ronald Reagan was suckered into a “ one-time ” amnesty in return for promises of security that were never delivered . How can Republicans in Congress be so stupid as to learn nothing from his example ? Fool us once , shame on you . Fool us twice , shame on us .