CLOSE President Donald Trump is using a White House event to pay tribute to federal immigration officials , returning to the fight over the U.S. southern border . ( Aug. 20 ) AP
WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump called on local officials to support U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents in an open letter Monday , warning that “ terror , bloodshed and suffering ” would continue without their cooperation .
Trump ’ s letter , which was released by the White House hours before he was scheduled to hold an event to “ salute ” immigration officials , criticized the “ abolish ICE ” movement supported by some Democrats on Capitol Hill .
“ Tragically , the brave men and woman of ICE have recently been subjected to a nationwide campaign of smears , insults and attacks by politicians shamelessly catering to the extreme elements in our society that desire lawlessness and anarchy , ” Trump wrote to state and local leaders .
Though Trump did not mention Democrats directly in the letter , the language mirrors rhetoric the president has often embraced during campaign rallies . He regularly accuses Democratic candidates at those events of supporting “ open borders . ”
Returning to an issue that was central to his 2016 campaign , Trump has been working to bring immigration to the fore again in this year ’ s midterms , hitting Democrats who have supported abolishing the agency .
ICE came under new scrutiny this year following the president 's `` zero tolerance '' policy , which led to high profile family separations at the border .
A group of House Democrats introduced legislation last month to abolish ICE within one year , although the legislation has little to no chance of becoming law because neither the Republican majority nor many centrist Democrats support the idea .
In the letter , Trump mentioned the protests that took place this summer in Louisville , Kentucky , and Portland , Oregon .
And the president called on local officials to voluntarily comply with federal immigration agencies , even as some cities and counties have decided to restrict the level of information they will provide to ICE .
“ The most recent assaults include the repugnant hostility directed toward selfless ICE employees in Portland , Oregon , and the verbal abuse suffered by ICE employees in Louisville , Kentucky , ” Trump wrote .
More : House Democrats introduce bill to abolish ICE , create 'humane ' immigration system
More : ICE says man taken while rushing pregnant wife to hospital is wanted for murder in Mexico
More : As court deadline looms , family separations continue to haunt White House