With High Court Evenly Split , Obama 's Immigration Actions Remain On Hold
The Supreme Court deadlocked when it considered whether President Obama had the authority to shield millions of immigrants from deportation .
The 4-4 tie — announced in a single sentence by the court — deals a major blow to the president and leaves in place a lower court ruling that put his plan on hold .
If you remember , back in 2014 , Obama announced that he was expanding his Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , which stopped the deportation of `` dreamers , '' or young people who were brought into the U.S. illegally by their parents .
DACA , which was not under scrutiny here , shielded more than 1.1 million immigrants from deportation , while the expansion of that program and the creation of another — called Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents ( DAPA ) — would have shielded some 4 million others .
Back in November , the 5th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a lower court decision that put DAPA and the expansion of DACA on hold while the government awaited a trial . The government appealed that decision to the Supreme Court , and the eight justices could not form a majority .
The deadlock leaves the big legal questions at the center of case — whether states have standing to sue the administration over this issue and whether Obama has the constitutional authority to enact those programs — unresolved .
The deadlock also means the decision of the 5th Circuit stands , and with little time left in Obama 's term , this could essentially be the last judicial fight over his executive actions on immigration .
In a statement , Pablo Alvarado , executive director of the National Day Laborer Organizing Network , said Obama needed to announce a new plan immediately .
`` It will be fully unacceptable for the President to use this decision as an excuse for inaction in cleaning up the mess created by his brutal deportation policy , '' Alvarado said .
Reporting from San Marcos , Texas , NPR 's John Burnett talked to Karina , who has been in the United States for 15 years and is the mother of four U.S. citizen children .
She heard the news on CNN in the hotel breakfast area where she works .
`` It 's very sad because we wanted to do many things with the hope that we could travel legally without fear , find better work , get drivers licenses , '' she said . `` When I saw the bad news , I did n't want to believe it , I did n't want to believe this was the court 's definitive decision . ''
In a short televised statement , Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan hailed the decision , saying it affirms the country 's separation of powers .
In his own statement , Obama shrugged off Ryan , saying the deadlock lets the status quo stand . The 4-4 decision , Obama said , `` was n't any value statement or a decision on the merits on these issues .
Ultimately , Obama added , it is now up to the American voters to decide how to proceed on immigration .