Before the Trump presidency , the media might have hesitated to hype a story about illegal immigrants who drag a sickly child through the desert , then retain advocates and lawyers who blame her death on the country they tried to enter . But since any stick will do against Trump , CNN and company couldn ’ t resist peddling that outrageous storyline .
American border officials had in fact gone to great expense and trouble to chopper the Guatemalan child to a hospital and provide the best possible care to her . But you would have never known that from the headlines . Most of the headlines portrayed the child dying in American “ custody ” — a headline that makes about as much sense as “ Victim Fails to Save Mugger ’ s Life. ” The child ’ s cardiac arrest , dehydration , and septic shock was due to the deprivation of water and food in parental , not American , custody .
Yet the media has spent days giving open-borders hacks a platform to blame the child ’ s death on the Trump administration . Commentaries have poured forth about the cruelty of a government that uses the “ desert as a weapon. ” The Washington Post published an Op-Ed with the headline , “ We warned DHS that a migrant child could die in U.S. custody . Now one has. ” Even though the seven-year-old hadn ’ t died in a “ family detention center ” but in the desert with her father , the piece rattled on about the lack of “ pediatric providers ” at border facilities .
Such twisted polemics are now daily fare in the media , which caters almost exclusively to America-last liberals eager to hear about the imaginary transgressions of their government against foreigners . Policies once so obvious both parties took them for granted are suddenly treated as red-hot “ controversies ” that cry out for Congressional hearings . The cheapest of cheap shots are quoted reverentially by the press , such as Hillary Clinton ’ s ludicrously unfair tweet , “ There are no words to capture the horror of a seven-year-old girl dying of dehydration in U.S. custody . What ’ s happening at our borders is a humanitarian crisis . ”
In this hopelessly demagogic climate that idolizes the illegal immigrant , Tucker Carlson was bound to get into trouble for speaking indisputable truths about the mess on the border . Liberals worked themselves up into a lather this week over his comment that unregulated mass immigration makes America “ poorer and dirtier and more divided. ” The left ’ s bully-and-intimidation lobby immediately moved into action , demanding that companies “ boycott ” Carlson ’ s show . This has resulted in the Kabuki dance of advertisers pretending to agree with the boycott while simply moving their advertisements to other Fox programs until the inane protest peters out . The boycott is a badge of honor for Carlson , whose sharpness has turned him into an object of obsession for an unnerved liberal elite . Too afraid to debate him , they are reduced to boycott threats and nervous satire , which always grow in proportion to a conservative ’ s effectiveness .
This nontroversy is so juvenile and dumb it is not even worth unpackaging . Carlson clearly didn ’ t call immigrants “ dirty , ” but Emma Lazarus , the poet whom liberals quote so worshipfully , did . Maybe her line about immigrants as the “ wretched refuse of your teeming shore ” will have to be expunged from high school textbooks .
In between showing images from the trash piles of immigrant-besieged Tijuana , the media played dumb about Carlson ’ s comment . Carlson put his finger on the game at work : “ precisely because [ my comment ] is so obviously true , saying it out loud is a threat . Our immigration policy exists for the profit and the comfort of a relatively tiny number of people . Everybody else gets shafted . Meanwhile , the people profiting from the policy don ’ t want the rest of us to think about it too much . They want us just to mouth the empty platitudes and move on . ‘ Nothing to see here . Shut up and go away. ’ Those who won ’ t shut up get silenced . ”
The left is always on the hunt to find truth-tellers and punish them . It operates not by persuasion but by power . Even when it is a political minority , it acts like a majority , dictating to everyone from duly elected presidents to popular talk show hosts what they can and can ’ t say . Last-place hosts on cable , such as the puffed-chest phony Chris Cuomo ( who gravely informed his audience that he doesn ’ t regard Carlson as a fellow “ journalist ” ) , try to convince everyone that they speak from the commanding heights of power . In truth , they speak for a shrinking , deluded elite , who listen to sophomoric podcasts about the glories of illegal immigration and the dangers of walls while they drive home safely past the gates of their mansions .