Their absence comes as Senate Republican candidates in battleground states launch attack ads . | AP Photos Billionaire immigration push slows
Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg , billionaire Michael Bloomberg and Citigroup exec Carlos Gutierrez gave immigration reform firepower last year when they lent their money or names to the cause .
But roughly two months before Election Day , the three groups the business titans helped launch are all but silent on the campaign trail . None of the three has purchased airtime for ads on immigration reform this fall .
Their virtual absence comes as Senate Republican candidates in battleground states are launching attack ads against Democrats accusing them of supporting “ amnesty , ” leaving pro-immigration reform candidates even more vulnerable and immigration reform even less likely to happen .
Gutierrez ’ s group , Republicans for Immigration Reform , has no plans to launch a counteroffensive . Despite being billed as the GOP rainmaker on immigration reform , the group has struggled to make inroads with big GOP donors .
“ With the problem at the border and the president ’ s rhetoric on executive action have totally poisoned the well , ” said Charlie Spies , who helped organized Republicans for Immigration Reform . “ I don ’ t think anybody believes anything can happen this year . ”
They aren ’ t alone . While American Action Network was heavily invested in pushing immigration reform when legislation was under discussion in the Senate , the multi-issue conservative group isn ’ t active on the ground or on TV trying to make an example of House Republicans who have blocked similar efforts in that chamber .
Bloomberg ’ s Partnership for a New American Economy also has no plans for major network or cable TV ad buys on immigration reform .
Zuckerberg ’ s FWD.us could go up with ads later this fall , but doesn ’ t have any time reserved as of yet .
Representatives from the groups cite a variety of reasons for not playing an active role in the election — everything from immigration reform not being a top issue this cycle to trying to save limited resources for when the legislative environment in Congress becomes better .
Still , it ’ s a stark contrast from earlier this year when immigration groups , GOP operatives , unions and others were putting a full-court press on House Republicans with ads , private meetings and in district lobbying to engage on the issue .
Some groups fed up with Republicans became aggressive last year . Kica Matos , a spokeswoman for the Fair Immigration Reform Movement said earlier this year that it was time to “ switch tactics from persuasion to punishment . ”
Many hoped the big outside groups would pick up that mantle .
Sill , Republicans have moved increasingly to the right on the issue of immigration , following the dramatic surge of illegal immigrants on the Texas border . And they aren ’ t afraid to show it . Attack ads have aired in Arkansas , Michigan and New Hampshire — key states for which party will control the Senate . Failed Alaska tea party Republican Senate candidate Joe Miller , who was vying to become the GOP nominee , went so far as to send out a mailer that depicted illegal immigrants as gang members .
President Barack Obama has signaled he will use executive actions regarding immigration reform in mid-September . When he does , it ’ s expected to incite the barrage of criticism on the campaign trail from Republicans even more .
The Latino Victory Project is trying to provide a backstop for Obama . The group , which was supported by actress Eva Longoria and Democratic megadonor Henry Muñoz , is launching cable TV ads in English and Spanish to run in Washington through the beginning of September that criticize House Republican leadership ’ s failure to act on immigration reform . The group also plans to run digital ads in Iowa Republican Rep. Steve King ’ s district .
Latino Victory Project ’ s Cristobal Alex said they decided to go up with the ads because there was a “ vacuum ” on the pro-immigration reform side , and expects to do another round of ads once Obama takes executive action on the issue .
He praised the other pro-immigration groups activity so far , but said it would be “ unfortunate if they pulled back at this moment . ”