The Trump administration is reportedly considering using executive action to prevent people traveling in the migrant “ caravan ” from presenting themselves for asylum at the US-Mexico border .
The Department of Justice ( DOJ ) and Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) are developing a plan that mimics the “ travel ban ” from 2017 , the San Francisco Chronicle and other media outlets reported Thursday night : President Donald Trump would issue a proclamation preventing a certain “ class ” of people from being allowed to enter the US . It ’ s not yet clear how that “ class ” would be defined , but it would target either the “ caravan ” in particular or asylum-seekers more broadly .
It ’ s legal to seek asylum without papers , and the US government is obligated under international law not to send anyone back to a country where they are at risk of persecution due to race , nationality , religion , political opinions , or membership in a social group .
But the Trump administration appears to be laying the groundwork for a plan that would simply bar people from entering the US — presumably keeping Central American asylum-seekers on the Mexican side of the border .
The US government has already been restricting access at official US border crossings and requiring would-be asylum-seekers to wait before being allowed to enter , claiming space constraints at ports of entry .
The “ caravan ” of about 5,000 people , which originally set off from Honduras on October 12 , is still weeks from the US-Mexico border . It is not going to arrive before the November 6 midterm elections , and it is already shrinking as caravan members decide to apply for asylum in Mexico or return to their home countries instead .
However , the Trump administration is in overdrive to respond to what Trump has called a “ National Emergency. ” The US is already sending 800 troops to the US-Mexico border to provide logistical support for Customs and Border Protection agents .
The proposal ( or proposals ) reported Thursday night are still under discussion . It ’ s not clear when or if the White House will act on them . If Trump does take executive action to ban entries in the name of stopping the caravan , though , it ’ s almost certainly going to attract another court challenge over executive authority to stop people from entering the US — and may well prevent many , many Central American asylum-seekers who aren ’ t in the caravan from being allowed into the US to make their case .
The plan reported by the San Francisco Chronicle ( which matches a plan ███ has heard is in the works ) would have two parts .
The first step in the plan would be to publish a regulation barring asylum claims from anyone who ’ s subject to a presidential ban issued under section 212 ( f ) of the Immigration and Nationality Act . That provision , also used in the travel ban , allows the president to “ suspend the entry ” of a “ class of aliens ” if he determines their entry would be “ detrimental to the interests of the United States . ”
a regulation barring asylum claims from anyone who ’ s subject to a presidential ban issued under section 212 ( f ) of the Immigration and Nationality Act . That provision , also used in the travel ban , allows the president to “ suspend the entry ” of a “ class of aliens ” if he determines their entry would be “ detrimental to the interests of the United States. ” The Trump administration has already been working on such a regulation as part of a broader package of asylum regulations being reviewed at DOJ and DHS .
Instead of going through the normal process ( which takes several months ) , however , the regulation barring asylum for banned immigrants would be issued as an “ interim final rule ” — allowing the government to enforce it while it goes through the review process .
The regulation , which could be issued as soon as Friday , would not change anything on its own . It would have to be issued before the ban itself went into effect .
As early as Monday or Tuesday , the president could sign a ban that refused entry to some class of people under the 212 ( f ) provision . At that point , those people would also not be allowed to apply for asylum .
But there are still a lot of unknowns in this process . Here ’ s what we don ’ t know :
Whether other , broader executive actions are also being considered . The New York Times reported that plans were under development to “ close the southern border ” — which implies refusing not only asylum-seekers , but all people or goods seeking to cross from Mexico into the US . This is a much broader proposal than the one the San Francisco Chronicle reported on ( and the one ███ has heard about ) . It ’ s not at all clear what the legal vehicle for such a move would be .
Exactly who would be banned under this plan . The ban could cover only members of the caravan currently traveling through southern Mexico ( although it ’ s not clear how the government would know who exactly had been part of the caravan and who wasn ’ t ) . Alternatively , it could cover all asylum-seekers from Honduras , Guatemala and El Salvador — the “ Northern Triangle ” countries driving asylum-seekers to the US — or even all asylum-seekers generally .
How much advance notice the government would give before implementing the ban , and when it would go into effect . Thousands of Central American asylum seekers present themselves to US officials every month . A broad ban would be far harder to enforce than even the first version of the travel ban in January 2017 — whose rollout was famously disastrous . Without training time , this ban could make that one look like a smooth and efficient government operation .
Who , if anyone , has signed off on this plan , and whether it will ultimately be approved .
Whether the ban could survive a legal challenge . In upholding the final version of Trump ’ s travel ban in June in the case Trump v. Hawaii , the Supreme Court ( in an opinion written by Chief Justice John Roberts ) made it clear that the president ’ s power to ban immigrants under 212 ( f ) is extremely broad . At the same time , however , the opinion pointed to the national security reasons offered for the ban , and the careful process by which it was drafted , as evidence that it was legitimate government policy and not just driven by the whims of Trump .
It ’ s hard to imagine a caravan ban would look as well-thought-out — not least because there ’ s no evidence that anyone in the caravan poses a security threat , or that the caravan , should it arrive at the border , wouldn ’ t just line up at a port of entry to seek asylum legally .
The right to seek asylum isn ’ t just a matter of international law but of the 1980 Refugee Act . Whether US law allows a president to refuse someone the power to seek asylum through a proclamation isn ’ t entirely clear . It ’ s a question that the Supreme Court will almost certainly have to consider if this plan is put into effect .