Time Running Short For Congress To Agree On Border Bill
Congress is set to disband later this week for a summer break stretching past Labor Day . That leaves lawmakers only a few more days to act on an urgent request from President Obama .
The president wants nearly $ 4 billion in emergency funds to deal with the tens of thousands of children from Central America who 've been illegally crossing the U.S.-Mexico border in recent months . The GOP-led House may act on just a fraction of that request , setting up a clash with the Democratic-led Senate .
House Republicans are in a tricky spot : with mid-term elections coming up , they do n't want to be seen as the party that ignores the plight of Latin Americans fleeing to the U.S . But many GOP lawmakers are also loathe to give President Obama what they perceive to be a blank check for resolving the crisis .
House Speaker John Boehner declared Thursday there will be no blank check , but he also made clear doing nothing is not an option .
`` I think taking some action to solve this problem is in order , '' Boehner said . `` I think dealing with the humanitarian crisis on the border is also in order , and I 've frankly been clear with my colleagues about it . ''
Boehner gathered his fellow Republicans behind closed doors Friday in the basement of the Capitol to pound home that message . It was enough to sway even Rep. Steve King , the Iowa conservative who 'd earlier opposed funding for the border crisis .
`` I 'm a little more comfortable with the speaker 's position on this than I was when I woke up this morning , '' King said .
And Texas Republican Pete Sessions , another hardliner on border security , declared his aim was to reverse the tide of illegal immigration .
`` We 're gon na make sure that these children are treated humanely and that we move them back to their home countries , which is where they belong , '' Sessions said .
Republicans say the only way to do that is by amending a 2008 law that allows young people from nations other than Canada and Mexico , who 've entered illegally , to remain in the U.S. while their cases are adjudicated . Republican Rep. Kay Granger of Texas is a key player in the House response to the president 's request . She says any bill it passes must have two things .
`` One thing is changing the 2008 law , treating everyone the same , '' Granger said . `` The other thing is to have more judges — significantly more judges — so they can hear these cases more quickly . ''
But House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , like most House Democrats , opposes attaching a change in that law to the funding bill .
`` You want to have a separate bill on 2008 ? Discuss it there , '' Pelosi said . `` Do n't hold the children hostage to the cosmetics of how tough you are on the border . ''
Most Senate Democrats also oppose such a change , including New Mexico 's Martin Heinrich .
`` It 's one thing to say you 're gon na speed up that process ; that 's something I can probably support , '' Heinrich said . `` But you ca n't short-circuit that process ; you ca n't take due process away from those kids . ''
House Republicans may also approve only about a quarter of the funds the president requested . Senate Democrats are also likely to give Obama less than what he wants .
`` Some people argue it is too expensive , '' said Dick Durbin , the Senate 's number two Democrat . `` Well , we can argue about the exact amount of money , but I hope we are n't arguing about the value and the principle that is being tested . I hope we are not arguing about whether the United States is a caring and compassionate nation . ''
Senate Democrats are doing their own emergency funding bill ; even if it passes , there may be no time left this week to reconcile it with whatever the House produces .