( ███ ) - The arrest of a man who U.S. authorities have said is an illegal immigrant on charges of murdering an Iowa college student has thrust the case into the debate on immigration policy , with President Donald Trump blaming Mollie Tibbetts ’ death on weak laws .
Christhian Rivera , 24 , was arrested and charged on Monday with the murder of 20-year-old Tibbetts , who disappeared in July while out jogging . A woman ’ s body has been found but has not yet been positively identified , authorities have said .
Law enforcement officials told reporters on Monday that Rivera was Mexican and in the country illegally . However , his defense lawyer said in a court filing on Wednesday that Rivera had legal status .
Trump , who has taken a tough stance on immigration and referred to some Mexican migrants as criminals and rapists in his 2016 election campaign , made a reference to the Tibbetts case at a rally in West Virginia on Tuesday .
“ Should never have happened , ” said Trump . “ The immigration laws are such a disgrace . ”
The political fallout from the killing could reverberate across Iowa , a swing state that has a hotly contested gubernatorial race and where Democrats see a chance at taking two of the 23 seats they need to win back from Republicans in November ’ s midterms to gain a majority in the House of Representatives .
Iowa Republican Governor Kim Reynolds echoed Trump ’ s approach , blaming Tibbetts ’ death on the nation ’ s immigration laws .
“ We are angry that a broken immigration system allowed a predator like this to live in our community , and we will do all we can bring justice to Mollie ’ s killer , ” she said in a Tuesday statement .
Cristhian Rivera , 24 , accused of killing University of Iowa student Mollie Tibbetts , is led from the courtroom after making his initial appearance on a charge of first-degree murder during at the Poweshiek County Courthouse in Montezuma , Iowa , U.S. , August 22 , 2018 . Jim Slosiarek/The Gazette/Pool via ███
But Republican members of Congress and congressional candidates in closely competitive Iowa districts were more guarded , perhaps wary of voter backlash if they politicized the case .
Republican lawmakers Rod Blum and David Young each issued statements expressing sympathy for the Tibbetts ’ family but avoided any mention of illegal immigration .
Christopher Peters , a Republican mounting a long-shot challenge to Iowa Democratic Congressman Dave Loebsack , said on Facebook that politicizing Tibbetts ’ murder “ cheapens the death of this young woman . ”
“ Yes , our immigration system is broken , and Congress has failed to fix it , ” Peters wrote . “ There is much we can and must do . For now , though , we should mourn the loss of Mollie . ”
Tibbetts ’ father , who made many public pleas for information about his daughter ’ s whereabouts , could not be reached for comment on Wednesday . A man who picked up the phone at the home of Tibbetts ’ mother in Iowa declined to comment .
During his 2016 campaign , Trump spoke almost daily about the 2015 death of Kate Steinle , who was struck by a bullet that ricocheted off the ground after being accidentally fired by an illegal immigrant . A jury last year cleared the immigrant of murder and manslaughter charges , and Trump railed against the decision .
Iowa voters might recoil at Tibbetts ’ death being politicized so quickly , said Timothy Hagle , a political science professor at the University of Iowa .
“ Kate Steinle was used nationally by Republicans as an example of a system that needs fixing , ” Hagle said . “ That might happen again , but I ’ m not sure it will be handled the same way in Iowa . ”
Mollie Tibbetts of Brooklyn , Iowa , a college student who went missing , poses for an undated photograph obtained by ███ August 22 , 2018 . Social Media via ███ .
Several residents of Brooklyn , Iowa , where Tibbetts lived , expressed sadness at how quickly her death had become a political talking point .
“ I wish Trump had not made this political , ” said Janice , a 60-year-old waitress at the Classic Deli , who declined to give her last name . “ The family just wants to heal . I have a farm with Mexican immigrants , and I never felt afraid . ”