President Trump threatened Tuesday to have the military “ build the remaining sections ” of the U.S.-Mexico border wall , appearing to revive a call to use Pentagon money to finish the project ahead of a meeting with congressional Democratic leaders opposed to the president ’ s funding request .
“ People do not yet realize how much of the Wall , including really effective renovation , has already been built . If the Democrats do not give us the votes to secure our Country , the Military will build the remaining sections of the Wall . They know how important it is ! ” Trump vowed , capping a series of tweets meant to set the stage for the White House summit .
For their part , House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi and Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer put out a joint statement Monday arguing Trump and his party will own a government shutdown if they can ’ t strike a deal .
`` Republicans still control the House , the Senate and the White House , and they have the power to keep government open , '' they said . `` Our country can not afford a Trump Shutdown , '' the Democrats said , adding that Trump `` knows full well that his wall proposal does not have the votes to pass the House and Senate and should not be an obstacle to a bipartisan agreement . ''
Congress last week temporarily averted a partial shutdown amid the funeral services for the late President George H.W . Bush , pushing the new deadline to Dec. 21 . Trump was meeting at the White House Tuesday with Pelosi and Schumer to discuss a new government spending package – with border wall funding the biggest sticking point . The Democratic leaders arrived at the White House shortly before noon .
Trump wants $ 5 billion for the project , while Democrats are offering $ 1.3 billion for border security .
The president earlier this year pushed for military funding to finance the border project . But while administrations can move some money around in their budgets , they need approval from Congress – and the relevant appropriations bills for fiscal 2019 did not include money for this purpose .
Top Democrats also warned earlier this year that the Pentagon would not have the power to redirect funding to the border wall .
But Trump ’ s tweets marked the latest effort on both sides to project a strong negotiating position .
The president also claimed that the wall and fencing already in place helped turn back the migrant caravans forming in Mexico . He accused Democrats of sacrificing border security for political reasons , even suggesting Pelosi is holding up funding for a border wall in order to secure votes for the speakership in the next Congress .
“ We have already built large new sections & fully renovated others , making them like new . The Democrats … however , for strictly political reasons and because they have been pulled so far left , do NOT want Border Security . They want Open Borders for anyone to come in . This brings large scale crime and disease , ” he tweeted .
“ Our Southern Border is now Secure and will remain that way … I look forward to my meeting with Chuck Schumer & Nancy Pelosi . In 2006 , Democrats voted for a Wall , and they were right to do so . Today , they no longer want Border Security . They will fight it at all cost , and Nancy must get votes for Speaker . But the Wall will get built . ”
Pelosi does face pressure from her base not to bend on the border wall funding fight . But more than the speaker ’ s gavel is at stake – Democratic votes in both the House and Senate could be critical for averting a partial shutdown .
Sixty votes are required in the Senate to overcome a filibuster . And , at least for the near-term , Republicans only have 51 members .
Republicans for the rest of the month have a comfortable majority in the House , but lack the votes on their side alone to pass a bill with or without wall money .
Pelosi and Schumer have urged Trump to support a bill that includes a half-dozen government funding bills largely agreed upon by lawmakers , along with a separate measure that funds the Department of Homeland Security at current levels through Sept. 30 .
Democrats will likely push for a continuing resolution that funds the remaining appropriations bills if Trump does n't agree to that , an aide told The Associated Press .
Trump said Friday that Congress should provide all the money he wants for the wall and called illegal immigration a `` threat to the well-being of every American community . ''
Pelosi said she and many other Democrats consider the wall `` immoral , ineffective and expensive . ''
Schumer said Democrats want to work with Trump to avert a shutdown , but said money for border security should not include the concrete wall Trump has envisioned . Instead , the money should be used for fencing and technology that experts say is appropriate , Schumer said .
`` We do not want to let a Trump temper tantrum govern our policies or cause the shutdown of a government , which everyone on both sides of the aisle knows is the wrong idea , '' Schumer said . If Trump `` wants to shut down the government over Christmas over the wall , that 's his decision , '' he said .
But House Majority Whip Steve Scalise , R-La. , said Democrats were the ones playing politics .
Trump `` wants to secure the border . He got elected president on that platform , '' Scalise told ███ .
If there 's a better way to secure the border than the $ 5 billion plan Trump has laid out , Democrats `` need to come with an alternative , '' Scalise said Monday .