Outside contributors ' opinions and analysis of the most important issues in politics , science , and culture .
Congress this week failed to come up with a solution to protect undocumented people who have been shielded from deportation under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . The program is now set to end on March 5 , six months after US Attorney Jeff Sessions announced that the Trump administration planned to phase out DACA , which has protected as many as 800,000 undocumented people .
The failure to protect these people would be a tragedy , because the program has changed many , many lives for the better , as my research and that of others has shown . It took them out of limbo and let them contribute to their families , communities , and the US economy .
When the Obama administration launched DACA in 2012 , it amounted to a natural experiment : What would happen if you gave a portion of the overall population of undocumented immigrants fresh access to employment and other opportunities ?
Immigrants who applied for protection under the program — enrollment is not automatic — were at least temporarily shielded from deportation . They also got temporary Social Security numbers and two-year work permits . To qualify , they had to have arrived in the US before 2007 ( at 15 years old , or younger ) , been 30 or younger in 2012 , and either have a high-school degree or be enrolled in high school or similar educational program .
When the program began , I started a national research project to study the effects on its beneficiaries . Those effects were profound : Under DACA , beneficiaries saw increased educational attainment , higher social mobility , and better mental health .
My research into undocumented immigrants predates DACA . From 2002 to 2015 , I followed 150 undocumented young adults in Los Angeles , examining how they transitioned to adulthood in a context of limited rights . In Lives in Limbo : Undocumented and Coming of Age in America , I compared a group of people who attended college with a group that had left school at or before high school graduation .
Before DACA , undocumented immigrants could not translate academic achievement into professional success
Pre-DACA , even those young adults who had attained advanced degrees found their work and life outcomes limited — and unusually similar to those of less-educated peers . Lacking Social Security numbers , driver ’ s licenses , and other credentials , college graduates found they had little choice but to enter the informal , low-wage labor market .
In 2011 , I sat across an auto assembly plant lunchroom table from Jonathan , who had not graduated from high school , and Ricardo , who had two postsecondary degrees . If Ricardo had been a citizen , he would have had his choice of attractive job possibilities , but both , now in their late twenties , faced the same limited work options .
Many people I interviewed described chronic headaches , toothaches , ulcers , difficulty sleeping problems , eating disorders , and thoughts of suicide . They had grown up in communities around Los Angeles and ( as a result of the 1982 Supreme Court decision Plyler v. Doe , which opened the door to a K-12 education ) they had attended school alongside American-born and citizen peers .
But at a critical stage in their lives , their immigration status blocked important rites of passage — they couldn ’ t get getting driver ’ s licenses , after-school jobs , or financial aid for college . ( Many colleges would allow them to enroll , but they were disqualified from federal financial aid . )
Life in the shadows enacts a heavy toll . In my book , using a term from sociology , I argued that illegality was a “ master status ” : a binding constraint that overwhelmed all other traits and achievements . It acted as a lead weight that eventually dragged them down .
The undocumented young adults in my study were the embodiment of Langston Hughes ’ s “ dream deferred . ”
But with DACA , things changed for many of these same people . In 2013 , my research team surveyed nearly 2,700 DACA-eligible young adults . Moreover , beginning in 2015 , we carried out two waves of in-depth , in-person interviews with 481 DACA beneficiaries in six states : Arizona , California , Georgia , Illinois , New York , and South Carolina .
Just 16 months into the program , 59 percent of respondents reported having found a new job . Over one-fifth of the people we surveyed had obtained a paid internship .
Undocumented immigrants aren ’ t forbidden from having credit cards or bank accounts , but having a Social Security number makes getting these financial tools a lot easier . Almost one-half of our survey respondents opened up their first bank account after receiving DACA , and a third acquired their first credit card . Close to 60 percent of our respondents had obtained a driver ’ s license .
Twenty-one percent of those we surveyed reported that their access to health care had improved , sometimes because they had access to health plans provided by schools or employers .
DACA ’ s benefits appear to be greatest for people with degrees from four-year colleges . They were more than 1.5 times as likely to obtain new jobs and increase their earnings than DACA beneficiaries who never went to college . It seems they were finally able to make full use of their credentials and networks .
Our findings are now a couple of years old , but they have been corroborated . Six months ago , the political scientist Tom K. Wong , of UC San Diego , released results from a similar survey of DACA beneficiaries that found that 69 percent of respondents reported moving to a job with better pay . More than half moved to a job that they thought better fit their education and training , or offered better working conditions .
Much of the political and media coverage of this group has focused on the academically gifted , but , in terms of distance traveled , DACA ’ s biggest success stories involve moderate achievers . Most undocumented immigrant youth end their schooling before entering college . ( In fact , more than 40 percent fail to complete high school . )
Many of our respondents reported that DACA led them enroll in community college or in jobs-training programs sponsored by community-based organizations . DACA beneficiaries who completed certificate or licensing programs — in fields like nursing , dentistry , construction , and cosmetology — experienced significant growth in salary . Sixty-eight percent who did so told us their hourly salaries increased from the $ 5-to- $ 8 range to more than $ 14 an hour .
Employers benefit , too , when they can hire qualified beneficiaries of DACA
Less tangible , but equally important , is DACA ’ s positive role in improving the mental health and general well-being of its beneficiaries . More than two-thirds of recipients told us they were less afraid of law enforcement and of being deported . ( Fifty-nine percent of our respondents say they would report a crime now in a situation when they wouldn ’ t before . )
Being able to get a driver ’ s license or to obtain lawful employment is about more than transportation and work : It ’ s about not having to always look over your shoulder . Nearly 70 percent indicated that they feel less stress in general .
Eighteen-year-old Carolina , who is from Illinois , told us , “ My freshman and sophomore year , I did really bad [ in school ] , mostly because I was just not motivated because … all of this is going to be worthless in the end. ” With DACA , her mindset changed : “ OK , I actually have a chance , ” she said .
Failing to replace DACA would also have negative consequences for the schools , hospitals , tech firms , courts , and community organizations for which this population is now able to work . There are now thousands of “ DACAmented ” teachers in US schools .
While not a perfect policy — only a pathway to citizenship would offer that — DACA has provided a significant boost to a large number of young people . The research is clear that DACA beneficiaries have made truly impressive economic and educational gains .
Our elected officials still have a chance to correct the mistake of ending this important program . Failing to do so would hurt the lives of thousands of people in cruel fashion and to no purpose . It would be a stain on the soul of our nation .
Roberto G. Gonzales is professor of education at Harvard University and author of Lives in Limbo : Undocumented and Coming of Age in America .