As President Donald Trump threatens to “ close ” the US-Mexico border , one of the Democrats seeking to run against him in 2020 is coming out with the primary ’ s first immigration proposal — one that would dramatically reduce immigration enforcement .
Democratic presidential candidate Julián Castro , a former mayor of San Antonio and secretary of housing and urban development , released an immigration platform on Tuesday morning , along with a Medium post outlining what the Castro campaign calls its “ People First ” immigration policy .
So far , the many Democrats vying for the 2020 presidential nomination have stayed in pretty safe territory on immigration , promising to support bills that would provide a path to citizenship for unauthorized immigrants living in the US — and especially groups that are at risk of losing legal protections under the Trump administration , like immigrants protected from deportation under the DACA , Temporary Protected Status , and Deferred Enforced Departure programs .
Castro ’ s proposal promises those things , as well as reversals of signature Trump policies like the travel ban and the reduction in refugee resettlement . But it goes much further than that in dismantling immigration enforcement .
In many ways , it seeks to unravel the post-9/11 immigration enforcement system — which has made it legally riskier than ever to live in the US as an unauthorized immigrant .
Most notably , Castro proposes to repeal the provision of US law that makes “ illegal entry ” into the US a federal crime , which has been on the books since 1929 but has only been routinely enforced in the 21st century . Prosecuting illegal entry — often referred to by “ 1325 , ” the relevant section of Chapter 8 of the US Code — gave the Trump administration the power to separate thousands of families in 2018 , by referring parents for criminal prosecution .
“ The fact that over the last several years this system has been weaponized by the Trump administration to go after immigrants , and the chaos that has been created under 1325 , I believe , is the wrong direction for the country , ” Castro told ███ . And his response — “ to go the opposite way ” — is to undo the legal underpinning that made it possible .
That proposal , and others , would require Congress to pass an immigration bill — something that Castro remains optimistic there ’ s bipartisan appetite for in Congress , but has said elsewhere wouldn ’ t be his first legislative priority . Unlike other plans 2020 candidates have released on other issues , however , much of the immigration policy Castro addresses is about what to do with existing executive branch resources and authorities — it ’ s policy , in other words , that Castro or another Democrat could start to change on day one .
Castro , who is polling around 1 percent in most early primary polls , is struggling to gain a foothold in the 2020 primary ; unlike several of his competitors , he doesn ’ t have a US Senate seat from which to launch his campaign proposals as bills . But his immigration platform could help him capitalize on his status as the only Latino candidate in the field , in a party that will likely need to mobilize Latino voters to take back the presidency from Trump in 2020 . It could also serve as a marker as other candidates work to define their immigration stances — setting a goalpost far to the left of what Democrats have proposed in previous presidential cycles .
Under Castro ’ s plan , an immigrant crossing into the US without papers — whether he was seeking asylum in the US or coming for some other reason — would not be committing a federal crime . If caught by Border Patrol agents , she ’ d be detained for a brief amount of time , but if she didn ’ t raise any red flags , she ’ d be released into the US ( with a case management system to check up on her whereabouts ) pending an immigration hearing .
If she didn ’ t qualify for some form of legal status like asylum , she ’ d still ultimately be ordered deported from the US . Being in the US without papers would still be a civil offense — the federal equivalent of a traffic ticket — and deportation would still be the penalty . That ’ s what Castro points out distinguishes his plan from “ open borders ” ; he ’ s not actually suggesting that everyone who comes into the US be allowed to stay .
But he is saying that none of them should be charged with a crime , immediately deported , or detained for more time than strictly necessary for crossing the border .
In one respect , this is undoing 90 years of US law . Illegal entry has been a federal misdemeanor since 1929 . ( This distinguishes unauthorized immigrants who crossed the border without papers , and thus committed a misdemeanor , from those who overstayed their visas and committed only the civil violation . ) In another respect , though , it ’ s a return to the immigration system of the 20th century , when illegal entry was rarely prosecuted and border crossers were simply informally returned after being caught .
The difference is that in the 20th century , this was just a matter of discretion — presidents chose not to pour resources into enforcing this particular misdemeanor . When priorities changed , under the Bush administration , widespread illegal entry prosecutions became common — swamping federal courts along the border . More recently , the Trump administration ’ s attempts at “ zero tolerance ” prosecution of illegal entry were the legal basis for its widespread separation of families in 2018 : Children were separated because their parents were being transferred to criminal custody for prosecution .
Proposing that “ illegal entry ” no longer be a federal crime is the policy equivalent of the “ no human is illegal ” slogan — a way to combat hawkish attitudes toward the “ rule of law ” by challenging the idea that migration ought to be a matter of crime and punishment to begin with . But it ’ s also a key justification for reversing the past few decades of border crackdown , by unpinning immigration enforcement — at least when it comes to unauthorized immigrants themselves — from crime .
Dismantling — or at least restructuring — the post 9/11 immigration-enforcement system
Castro ’ s plan isn ’ t just focused on the border . It essentially calls for the government to get out of the business of routine immigration enforcement .
Immigration and Customs Enforcement would retain its investigations unit , but Enforcement and Removal Operations — which is responsible for routine arrests and detention and deportation of unauthorized immigrants — would see its functions split over different agencies under DHS and the Department of Justice . As a result , the Castro campaign told ███ , immigration enforcement “ would prioritize individuals with serious criminal convictions , threats to national security , and multiple reentries with a criminal history . ”
under DHS and the Department of Justice . As a result , the Castro campaign told ███ , immigration enforcement “ would prioritize individuals with serious criminal convictions , threats to national security , and multiple reentries with a criminal history. ” Customs and Border Protection would be steered away from routine immigration enforcement within the United States ( where it has broad latitude to operate within 100 miles of a US border ) .
DHS would stop signing agreements with local law enforcement agencies ( known as 287 ( g ) agreements ) to help enforce immigration law — undoing one of the key tools that 21st-century presidents have used as a “ force multiplier . ”
( known as 287 ( g ) agreements ) to help enforce immigration law — undoing one of the key tools that 21st-century presidents have used as a “ force multiplier. ” Immigration detention would only be used in the most serious cases — and since the plan promises to end the use of private prisons , which account for the overwhelming majority of immigration detention facilities , it wouldn ’ t really have much flexibility as to what those cases were .
— and since the plan promises to end the use of private prisons , which account for the overwhelming majority of immigration detention facilities , it wouldn ’ t really have much flexibility as to what those cases were . Immigration courts would be removed from the attorney general ’ s authority . Right now , immigration courts are at best quasi-independent ; they ’ re under the Department of Justice , and the attorney general has power to set court precedent and regulate caseload . ( Under Jeff Sessions and his successors , the Trump DOJ has used these powers aggressively . ) The Castro proposal , echoing a call that ’ s been gaining steam among immigration lawyers and advocates , would turn immigration courts into “ Article I ” courts — like tax court — with more independence .
Some of these proposals would require Congress to pass them — namely , the ones reorganizing parts of federal agencies . Others wouldn ’ t . But it ’ s important to think of the two of them together because of the structure of immigration enforcement as it exists right now , where a lot of power is delegated to the executive branch but in practice , policy is often made by the agents on the ground .
Castro is making a statement about what his immigration priorities would be as president — similar to those of the past two years of the Obama administration , if not even more lenient . While pretty much all of the other proposals 2020 candidates have released on various issues have been proposals for bills that Congress could take up ( not surprising , since many of them are currently senators ) , all the candidates admit that they can ’ t get an infinite number of bills through Congress . This proposal actually explains what one candidate for president would do with the powers he ’ d ( theoretically ) have on day one .
At the same time , though — as the Obama administration learned during its first six years — setting immigration priorities at the top doesn ’ t necessarily work if the agents themselves are unwilling to go along with them . The restructuring Castro is proposing would take an act of Congress to pass , but if it did pass , it would make it easier for future immigration-dove presidents to exert tighter control over enforcement line agents — while making it harder for future immigration-hawk presidents to exert similar control over immigration judges .
Castro ’ s proposal is better fleshed out in some areas than others — as you might expect for the first full proposal on immigration from a 2020 candidate , or for any proposal being released 10 months before the Iowa caucuses .
For example , reflecting the fact that the Democratic base is currently a lot more riled up about immigration enforcement than legal immigration changes , the only proposals addressing future legal immigration are either ways to address demands of people already in the United States ( for example , getting rid of the three- and 10-year bars on the spouse of a US citizen getting his green card for years if he ’ s lived in the US as an unauthorized immigrant ) or responses to particular Trump outrages ( a commitment to expanding refugee resettlement again ) .
But the biggest question mark in Castro ’ s proposal — and one that the Democratic field is likely to struggle with as a whole — is the immediate crisis facing the US right now : the influx of up to 100,000 unauthorized immigrants , many of them families , children , or asylum seekers , into the US a month , and the challenges of caring for them .
Castro does have plenty of suggestions for this population . His plan calls for expanding ports of entry to make it easier for people to seek asylum without crossing illegally , supporting shelters and humane care for immigrant families , and expanding access to counsel for asylum seekers . And an entire section of his plan , borrowing Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador ’ s call for a 21st-century “ Marshall Plan ” for Central America , suggests various ways the US can become a more productive leader in the region — “ to create safety and opportunity so that people can stay there and find what they need in their home country , ” Castro told ███ .
“ In Latin America , we have a checkered past , and one that has bred a lot of resentment , ” Castro said . “ I ’ m not naive , I don ’ t think it can happen overnight , but I do believe we can go in a different direction . ”
But , of course , that isn ’ t going to bear fruit immediately in terms of reducing immigration to the US . ( In fact , research shows that economic development can even lead to more migration in the short term . ) People will continue to come — perhaps even in unprecedentedly high numbers . Even the short-term proposals to deal with migrants who are already here will take time to build up .
And there ’ s nothing in this proposal to directly address the large number of people who won ’ t ultimately qualify for asylum under US law — even if they have attorneys , and even if the Trump administration efforts to restrict asylum for , say , victims of gang and domestic violence are reversed . Not everyone fleeing their home country out of legitimate need qualifies for asylum as US law defines it , and many of the people currently coming will not .
To many migration experts — not just immigration hawks — the “ mixed flow ” into the US is a problem . They believe it is important to reduce the number of people coming to the US without legitimate asylum claims , both because it frees up resources to address the remaining asylum seekers and because it reduces the possibility of deliberate malfeasance or fraud .
It ’ s possible that Castro and other Democrats genuinely don ’ t see that as a problem — that they ’ re willing to do whatever it takes to treat 100,000 immigrants a month as humanely as possible for as long as their cases take , even if fewer than half of them ( at the most generous accounting ) ultimately qualify for legal status in the US . Alternatively , it ’ s possible they believe that most of those 100,000 people a month really ought to qualify for humanitarian protections here , and US law needs to be expanded to accommodate that .
But that hasn ’ t been something they ’ ve articulated yet , much less been asked to justify by people who might not agree .
It might not be the turf Democrats want to fight on in 2020 . They would probably rather focus on the Trump administration ’ s biggest political overreaches on immigration : the attempt to rescind DACA , family separation , the travel ban . But depending on what happens at the border between now and then , they may not have a choice .