The federal government ’ s chief deportation agency has seen its success plummet under President Obama , and its chief , Sarah R. Saldana , will tell Congress on Tuesday that they ’ ve had trouble adapting to the changing face of illegal immigration and a lack of cooperation from both American cities and from foreign countries .
Ms. Saldana , director of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) , says in testimony prepared for the House Judiciary Committee that the dramatic drop in deportations is a reflection of a trickier set of circumstances and pressures from all sides .
She said she had to pull agents off their regular duties during last summer ’ s illegal immigrant surge at the border , which meant fewer people focusing on deporting the longtime illegal immigrants living in the interior of the U.S. And she said the lack of cooperation from states , counties and cities when agents ask them to hold an illegal immigrant for pickup has also hindered efforts .
“ While the reasons for this may vary , including state and local legislative restrictions and judicial findings of state and local liability , in certain circumstances we believe such a lack of cooperation may increase the risk that dangerous criminals are returned to the streets , putting the public and our officers at greater risk , ” she will testify .
Ms. Saldana is likely to face a severe grilling over the troubles at her agency , as she defends Mr. Obama ’ s immigration policies , which have neutered much of ICE ’ s work .
Republicans said it amounts to a “ failure ” on the agency ’ s top priority .
SEE ALSO : Team Obama fires back : Justice Dept . lawyers insist they didn ’ t lie to court over amnesty
“ Over the past six years , President Obama has steadily dismantled the interior enforcement of our nation ’ s immigration laws , ” said Judiciary Committee Chairman Robert W. Goodlatte . “ Under the Obama administration ’ s watch , the apprehension , detention , and removal of unlawful and criminal aliens has dramatically declined . Altogether , the actions taken by this administration undermine the rule of law , make our communities less safe , and place ICE officers in harm ’ s way . ”
Ms. Saldana botched her last appearance before Congress , in March , when she told a congressional committee she would welcome a new law cracking down on so-called “ sanctuary cities ” who refuse to cooperate .
“ Thank you , Amen , ” she told the House Appropriations Committee , when a lawmaker asked her if she would like to see such a law .
A day later , however , after a furious outcry from immigrant-rights groups , she backed off , issuing a statement saying such a law would “ be a highly counterproductive step . ”
Some localities say that holding illegal immigrants for pickup by federal authorities after they ’ ve completed their sentences or processing for their local crimes is unconstitutional .
In her testimony for Tuesday , Ms. Saldana said her agency is going to carry out a new program that doesn ’ t ask localities to hold illegal immigrants any longer than they already do , but would ask the localities to alert federal authorities about impending releases so agents can be on hand to pick illegal immigrants up immediately .
Ms. Saldana , who took over as director in December , described an agency hit hard by last summer ’ s illegal immigrant surge . She said shifting agents to deal with the increase in new illegal immigrants from Central America meant less focus on long-time illegal immigrants in the interior , and on trying to disrupt Mexican smuggling operations .
One key cut was to the Alien Transfer Exit Program ( ATEP ) , which takes Mexicans captured at one point on the border and ships them to another place to be deported . The theory is that if they were released where they were caught , they would turn around and , with the help of the same smugglers , immediately attempt to come back in .
She said limiting the ATEP put a dent in ICE ’ s overall deportations , which have dropped to their lowest level since the Bush administration , and are down about 25 percent from their peak in 2012 .
Deporting illegal immigrants from Central America takes longer than deporting those from Mexico , and tasks such as arranging travel documents and flights mean the cost is higher .
Away from immigration , ICE did notch successes in customs investigations , going after several cartels involved in black market peso exchanges and targeting human smuggling operations . Operation Coyote , designed to combat the smugglers who helped spark last summer ’ s immigration surge , has resulted in nearly 1,300 criminal arrests , Ms. Saldana will testify .