███ is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power . Sign up to receive our biggest stories as soon as they ’ re published . This article is co-published with The Texas Tribune , a nonprofit , nonpartisan local newsroom that informs and engages with Texans . Sign up for The Brief weekly to get up to speed on their essential coverage of Texas issues .
Tommy Fisher billed his new privately funded border wall as the future of deterrence , a quick-to-build steel fortress that spans 3 miles in one of the busiest Border Patrol sectors .
Unlike a generation of wall builders before him , he said he figured out how to build a structure directly on the banks of the Rio Grande , a risky but potentially game-changing step when it came to the nation ’ s border wall system .
Fisher has leveraged his self-described “ Lamborghini ” of walls to win more than $ 1.7 billion worth of federal contracts in Arizona .
But his showcase piece is showing signs of runoff erosion and , if it ’ s not fixed , could be in danger of falling into the Rio Grande , according to engineers and hydrologists who reviewed photos of the wall for ███ and The Texas Tribune . It never should have been built so close to the river , they say .
This story is part of a collaboration between ███ and the Texas Tribune . Learn more
Just months after going up , they said , photos reveal a series of gashes and gullies at various points along the structure where rainwater runoff has scoured the sandy loam beneath the foundation .
“ When the river rises , it will likely attack those areas where the foundation is exposed , further weakening support of the fence and potentially causing portions ... to fall into the Rio Grande , ” said Alex Mayer , a civil engineer professor at the University of Texas at El Paso who has done research in the Rio Grande basin .
Fisher dismissed the concerns . A company attorney , Mark Courtois , called the erosion “ a normal part of new construction projects like this and does not in any way compromise the fence or associated roadway. ” The company will seek to build drainage ditches to lessen the deterioration , he added . Neither Courtois nor Fisher responded to additional questions made through Courtois ’ office .
The Mission private wall project , Fisher ’ s second following a similar undertaking outside El Paso , is a little known but crucial part of the effort to help President Donald Trump meet his campaign promise to build 450 miles of “ big , beautiful wall ” by the end of 2020 . For the administration , Texas remains the biggest challenge . That ’ s because the Rio Grande has served as a natural divider , and , unlike other states , most land abutting it is privately owned .
Fisher ’ s New Mexico and South Texas private fence projects have gone up with financial and political help from We Build the Wall , an influential conservative nonprofit that counts former Trump political strategist Steve Bannon as a board member . The group says it has raised $ 25 million toward the private wall effort and claims to have agreements with landowners on 250 miles of riverfront property in Texas .
Fisher ’ s success and the $ 1.3 billion contract in Arizona he won in May — the largest border wall contract ever awarded — came despite repeated questions about his qualifications and work . Army Corps of Engineers officials have said the firm won because it submitted the lowest bid .
Last December , Rep. Bennie Thompson , D-Miss. , called for the Pentagon ’ s inspector general to review Fisher ’ s first $ 400 million fence contract , awarded in December over concerns of “ inappropriate influence. ” The audit is ongoing .
Victor Manjarrez , associate director for University of Texas at El Paso ’ s Center for Law and Human Behavior , said he would never have built along the river ’ s edge .
“ That is nuts , ” said Manjarrez , a former El Paso sector chief for the Border Patrol , who spent years working along the Rio Grande . “ You ’ re going to get all the hydrology problems and not even from a flood , just normal ebb and flow . ... If I was the sector chief and built something like that , I ’ d be in so much trouble . ”
The private fence lies in the distance about a mile south from the site of a proposed government fence , forced inland because of flooding concerns . ( Verónica G. Cárdenas for The Texas Tribune/███ )
Located on the southernmost tip of Texas , the Rio Grande Valley ’ s unique terrain has challenged wall builders for nearly two decades . The topography of the Valley includes a wide floodplain that has forced the government to construct barriers inland , on top of a levee system . That has left swaths of farmland , cemeteries and even homes in a kind of no man ’ s land south of the fence , which has been built in fits and starts .
Though tamed by a series of irrigation and flood control dams , the Rio Grande floods periodically , and sometimes catastrophically . In 2010 , Hurricane Alex caused widespread damage along the banks of the river , including at the National Butterfly Center , just upriver from Fisher ’ s fence .
“ People don ’ t appreciate the power of the Rio Grande when it does indeed wake up , ” said Jude Benavides , who specializes in floodplain mapping in the Lower Rio Grande Valley at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley . “ It changes the landscape . ”
Fisher has said his wall — about a mile south of where the government is already building its version — will finally bring “ border security to the border ” through a design that erases the flooding and erosion concerns that had scuttled earlier plans and vastly speeds up construction time .
It would be the first wall system that wouldn ’ t cause flooding or deflect water , We Build the Wall founder Brian Kolfage claimed in a tweet . “ The best engineers in the world designed this for floods , not government employees . ”
Fisher ’ s system uses excavators to hang bollard sections , and without having to obtain myriad permits and approvals , he built it in just a matter of weeks , in stark contrast to government projects that take months or years to complete .
When the government builds border fencing , it must meet a long list of requirements , including public meetings and stewardship plans , though critics say the process is fairly toothless since the Department of Homeland Security has waived many environmental requirements .
Fisher doesn ’ t have to meet even those scaled down requirements .
Government builders have also been slowed by eminent domain battles with landowners reluctant to sell . Fisher said his riverside building plan is more attractive to those hoping to avoid a fence bisecting their land and leaving acres behind a fence .
Fisher ’ s strategy was years in the making . Soon after the 2016 election , he became a frequent guest on Fox News , where he caught the attention of Trump . Last year , The Washington Post reported that the president “ latch ( ed ) on ” to Fisher ’ s claims of speed and quality and “ aggressively pushed ” for the firm in conversations with top Homeland Security officials .
But Fisher ’ s border wall business got off to a rocky start , despite paying a lobbying firm tens of thousands of dollars to push for contracts . In 2017 , the firm , founded in 1952 and best known for large highway projects , had its wall prototype rejected by the Department of Homeland Security . It later attempted to join an elite group of preapproved border wall bidders , but it was again turned down by the Army Corps of Engineers , which said it failed to meet its requirements or obtain the necessary regulatory approvals .
In response , Fisher sued the department and was added to the list of preapproved bidders thanks to White House pressure , administration officials told the Post last year .
Fisher was also aided by a close relationship with freshman U.S. Sen. Kevin Cramer , R-N.D. , who advocated for the company with Trump and Trump ’ s son-in-law , Jared Kushner . Fisher and family members donated at least $ 24,000 during Cramer ’ s victorious 2018 bid , according to campaign finance records . Cramer ’ s spokesperson did not return emails for comment .
Fisher ’ s ambition was matched by his brashness , another quality that observers say drew him to the president . Last year , he compared traditional government wall building to a horse and carriage . “ But I have a Lamborghini , and there ’ s gon na be this concrete road , and we can do two hundred miles an hour , not ten , ” he told Texas Monthly .
As Cramer lobbied for the company , which included bringing Fisher to Trump ’ s 2018 State of the Union address , Fisher embarked on two private ventures alongside We Build the Wall , whose board members include immigration hardliners such as former Colorado congressman Tom Tancredo , former Milwaukee Sheriff David Clarke and former Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach .
The first was in a mountainous area of Sunland Park , New Mexico , just outside of El Paso , where a half-mile wall of fencing appeared seemingly overnight to the surprise of local residents around Memorial Day 2019 .
Sunland Park officials temporarily halted the group ’ s fence project because it lacked proper building permits , prompting We Build The Wall to launch a campaign to flood town personnel with pushback .
“ So Sunland Park officials support open borders , the sex slaves and illegal drugs coming into their communities ? ” Kolfage responded on Twitter , and he directed followers to “ burn up the phone lines . ”
Sunland Park Mayor Javier Perea said he received several death threats and thousands of messages , some telling him to watch his back and that opposition to the wall is equivalent to treason . “ I will support legislation to that effect , ” one email read . “ I would attend the hangings . ”
“ If they had followed the rules from the very beginning , this wouldn ’ t have been so much chaos and controversy , ” he told ███ and The Texas Tribune . “ But that was not their intention , their intention was to bring attention to the issues and fundraising. ” The city ultimately issued the permits and the wall is still standing .
Six months later , Fisher moved 800 miles east , and as his companies did in Sunland Park , he began building , this time along the sandy banks of the Rio Grande .
The $ 42 million project , which included a $ 1.5 million contribution from We Build the Wall , sputtered at the start . As Fisher began clearing a path for the wall , his company was sued by the federal government and a neighboring wildlife refuge in December .
The National Butterfly Center and the International Boundary and Water Commission brought Fisher Sand & Gravel Co. and its subsidiaries to court to stop it from building the fence until it submitted a detailed engineering study to determine the fence ’ s impact on the flow of the Rio Grande and nearby properties .
The IBWC is a binational body that regulates building in the floodplain between the U.S. and Mexico because structures can worsen flooding and alter the course of the river , potentially violating international water treaties . Here , the international boundary is an imaginary line through the middle of the river .
Engineers and hydrologists told ███ and The Texas Tribune the wall should not have been built so close to the Rio Grande . ( Verónica G. Cárdenas for The Texas Tribune/███ )
The commission had dealt with Fisher in New Mexico , where it also raised concerns after his team built on federal property without permission . In turn , Kolfage , a decorated Iraq War veteran , responded with a social media campaign implying the IBWC and its commissioner , Jayne Harkins , a Trump appointee , were letting unauthorized immigrants into the country and undermining the president .
That pattern repeated in Texas . Kolfage took aim at the National Butterfly Center as well as Rev . Roy Snipes , the parish priest at La Lomita church , an iconic sanctuary built along the Rio Grande in 1899 . Both are critics of the private wall effort and previously convinced lawmakers to exempt their properties from future government wall-building plans .
Kolfage tweeted that they were “ promoting trafficking of children , ” and that the butterfly center was home to a “ rampant sex trade . ”
The center ’ s executive director Marianna Treviño-Wright also received death threats . One irate Facebook user told her , “ You need to all be in jail or hanged . ”
It was “ shocking ” to be on the receiving end of such hate , said Treviño-Wright , who worries about the financial impact on the 100-acre wildlife center , which educates the public about biodiversity and relies on grants and donations .
In court , the IBWC complained to U.S. District Judge Randy Crane that instead of submitting the required comprehensive hydraulic models , Fisher and his team had turned in a six-page document with basic drawings that lacked necessary details .
Despite repeated requests for the additional information and assurances that construction would stop until the U.S. section of the IBWC could analyze the model and confer with its Mexican counterparts , Fisher Industries continued to dig trenches , remove vegetation and grade the banks , court testimony shows .
Fisher insisted that he was acting in good faith and that he had met with IBWC officials , including Harkins , before the project to show them what his builders planned to do . The agency , he testified , didn ’ t raise any red flags with the project and told him its jurisdiction was limited on private property .
Crane ruled in Fisher ’ s favor in January , saying that even though the engineering studies hadn ’ t been completed , government attorneys had failed to show that the project would violate the treaty with Mexico . He allowed Fisher to proceed with construction , but the lawsuit continued as the IBWC ran the hydraulic models . Two months later , with the nation ’ s attention fixated on the COVID-19 outbreak , Kolfage hailed the fence ’ s completion with a highly produced video .
In March , the IBWC ’ s model determined the fence violated the treaty by deflecting too much water at one point along its length . But overall , it found the wall ’ s impacts to be minor and recommended small design changes , such as installing a gate .
Lawrence Dunbar , an environmental and civil engineer who reviewed the report on behalf of ███ and The Texas Tribune , said the model was off , in part because it used flawed bollard width measurements that would show less blockage . The IBWC also needed to start the model farther upstream from the fence for it to work properly , he said .
“ I would have expected that the fence would increase the water level ( during a flooding event ) , the only question was by how much , ” said Dunbar , who has 30 years of experience in flood and drainage matters and is a former lead hydrologist for the Army Corps of Engineers in the development of various floodplains for FEMA .
“ You are putting in an obstruction , a barrier , in the middle of the floodplain of a major river that has a levee back away from it , ” said Dunbar , who has served as an expert witness on a number of state and federal lawsuits , including before the U.S. Supreme Court . “ It ’ s important they get it right , and they clearly did not get it right . ”
Sally Spener , a spokeswoman for the IBWC , said the commission couldn ’ t comment on specifics of the model because of the pending lawsuit against Fisher , but she said the commission ’ s engineers have “ top-notch qualifications and experience . ”
Critics say the commission ’ s decision reflects relaxed oversight at the agency , which in recent years has allowed more construction-friendly hydrology models in part because of political pressure .
“ They still know the U.S. can not guarantee that the fence will not adversely affect Mexico and will not affect the boundary in a flood , ” said Stephen Mumm , a political science professor at Colorado State University , who has spent decades studying U.S.-Mexico water diplomacy .
But , he added , each section has to represent its respective governments and be responsive to their presidents .
For the first time in February , IBWC Commissioner Harkins donated a total of $ 500 to the Trump campaign and a Republican political action committee , even as her agency was suing Fisher for failing to prove its fence would not violate the treaty she oversees . None of her three predecessors made similar contributions during their tenure , according to federal campaign contribution records . Through a spokeswoman , Harkins said , she “ simply responded to a routine solicitation for a political contribution . ”
While Mexico has opposed border wall projects , it has done so quietly . Officials refused to comment for this story , referring all questions to the U.S. section of the commission . Spener said their Mexican counterparts are still reviewing the updated hydraulic model .
But they are concerned about potential obstruction that could raise water elevation as a result , she said , and that the fence could be knocked down during a flood , causing downstream impacts .
There ’ s a reason neither the government nor the private sector has built large structures so close to the river . Given the dynamics of the water , the type of terrain and the distance , it wasn ’ t a matter of whether there would be issues , experts said , it was a matter of how soon .
███ and The Texas Tribune consulted six hydrologists and engineers , with expertise in wall construction , building near waterways or familiarity with the Rio Grande . They analyzed a combination of the six-page analysis from Fisher Industries ; a 24-page hydraulic analysis by the IBWC from March ; a series of photos of the fence and project details taken from court testimony .
Unlike the bollard fences that the government builds 6 to 7 feet into the ground , Fisher ’ s wall has roughly a 2 1/2-foot foundation that stretches 8 feet wide . During court testimony , Greg Gentsch , the project ’ s engineer , downplayed the impact of wind on the fence ’ s shallow foundation and said he was confident that the footing design was appropriate for the area .
“ To me , that was the biggest mistake they made , ” said Joseph Jarvis , an engineer who worked on border wall segments 12 years ago . “ While they focused on the velocity of the water that would go through the bollards , the bigger problem is the water that runs parallel ( to the fence ) , that ’ s the one that ’ s going to erode the dirt that ’ s supporting the foundation . ”
Gashes and gullies at the fence ’ s foundation show potentially dangerous erosion . ( Verónica G. Cárdenas for The Texas Tribune/███ )
Amy Patrick , a Houston forensic structural and civil engineer and court-recognized expert on wall construction , said she worries about its stability long-term . “ They are relying on a very shallow foundation to prevent overturning and then not taking care to ensure the bank on the Rio Grande side of the fence does not erode , ” said Patrick , who has questioned the engineering viability of border walls generally along the southern border .
Fisher ’ s team stripped the bank of its vegetation . They said it had been reseeded but the photographs still show bald spots . Native vegetation is key , said Adriana E. Martinez , a Southern Illinois University Edwardsville professor and geomorphologist who has studied the impact of the barriers on her hometown of Eagle Pass , Texas . It helps slow erosion and minimize the amount of sediment going into the river , which can affect water quality . The Rio Grande supplies drinking water for more than 6 million people .
Solutions to the fence ’ s erosion range from filling the areas that are eroded and thoroughly revegetating with native species to installing piers beneath the foundation , some more costly than others . It will also require constant monitoring and maintenance , the experts said , as debris can clog the fence during heavy storms potentially worsening flooding .
Spener , who confirmed the erosion , said the IBWC has advised Fisher that the company needs to monitor the slope and repair any issues “ in a timely manner . ”
But it ’ s unclear what Fisher ’ s maintenance plan is . Neither the IBWC nor Javier Peña , the attorney representing the National Butterfly Center , has received a copy from Fisher since they requested it in April .
Courtois , the company attorney , did not comment on the maintenance issue , but he said the fence and roadway have performed as intended and are structurally sound . He said Fisher had personally inspected the site last week and attributed the erosion to light surface sand and the parts where “ vegetation has not yet fully taken hold . ”
Spener said the commission ’ s enforcement authority in terms of ordering fixes or changes to a completed structure would be decided in the ongoing lawsuit .
U.S. Rep. Joaquín Castro , D-Texas , called the privately funded wall an illegal vanity project that jeopardizes the property and safety of Texas landowners . He urged the IBWC and courts to take the erosion seriously .
“ It ’ s clear that no degree of ‘ adjustments ’ to the wall will work , ” said Castro , vice chair of the House Foreign Affairs Committee . “ This unnecessary ‘ wall ’ must be taken down . ”
The New Mexico and South Texas projects are likely only the beginning for Fisher and We Build the Wall . They ’ ve both touted agreements with landowners in Texas for hundreds of miles of riverfront property , where the entities could conceivably build more walls like the one in Mission . Kolfage declined to specify locations .
They ’ ve said they hope to sell or donate the walls to the U.S. government . So far U.S. Customs and Border Protection has not agreed to take control of the Mission fence , but it has said it is not concerned about the private wall interfering with its own efforts in the region , which include building a parallel wall on about 13 miles of newly refurbished levee — about a mile above the Fisher structure — as part of a larger $ 300 million project .
And following construction of the Mission fence , the Department of Homeland Security in May announced it was open to allowing private firms to pitch border fence projects . Kolfage called the change a direct result of the private wall projects , which “ prov ( ed ) the power of private enterprise . ”
Out of 30 possible locations identified by the government for potential private wall projects , 23 are in Texas .
Another federal court hearing is scheduled for next week , where Peña , the attorney for butterfly center , said he will urge the judge to order an immediate inspection .
Also unresolved is the IBCW ’ s push for a fix to the deflection problem , where the fence can obstruct the path of the river during a flood event , in violation of the international treaty . Spener said they ’ ve asked Fisher for a plan detailing how they propose to address the issue .
At least for now , Fisher has packed his equipment and moved out west again , where he is erecting a 30-foot fence along the southern Arizona border for the federal government .
“ They built the wall and left , ” Peña said . “ They got their donations , their government contract and they left us . ”