The Trump administration ’ s immigration crackdown , as broad and thorough as it ’ s been , has run time and again into one big obstacle : laws that guarantee due process to many immigrants apprehended without papers , whether they ’ re asylum seekers caught at the US border or immigrants living in the US caught by Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) .
But Attorney General Jeff Sessions and the Department of Justice have the immigration court system surrounded . And now , like an anaconda , they ’ re beginning to squeeze .
As part of a broader attack on what it calls the “ abuse ” of asylum by children and families arriving from Central America , the administration is considering — according to a September memo obtained by CNN ’ s Tal Kopan — allowing judges to strip people who come to the US as “ unaccompanied children ” of the legal protections that status provides if they turn 18 while they ’ re still in immigration proceedings , or if they ’ re reunited with a parent in the US .
Meanwhile , a report from the Washington Post ’ s Maria Sacchetti indicates that the Department of Justice wants to start rating immigration judges based on how many cases they resolve — which would put pressure on them to resolve cases more quickly and show less leniency toward immigrants .
These moves aren ’ t about making more people eligible for deportation . They ’ re about making fewer people eligible for a full legal process before getting deported . The Trump administration , and the Department of Justice in particular , is renewing its efforts to deter people from coming to the US without papers — even to seek humanitarian protection , as US and international law allows them to do — by making that protection as difficult as possible to get .
The Trump administration is trying to close what it sees as a back door into the US — and its critics see as simple due process
Here ’ s the problem the Trump administration is trying to address : A large portion of the people who are currently coming to the US without papers are coming as children , or parents with children , from Central America ( specifically Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador ) . They ’ re seeking humanitarian protection from gang violence in their home countries . And Border Patrol agents , under both US and international law , are obligated to allow them to seek it rather than simply turning them away .
To the Trump administration , though , this isn ’ t an example of border security working — it ’ s a loophole being exploited by people who just want to sneak into the US . Attorney General Sessions ( who gave a speech to immigration judges on Thursday about the “ crisis ” of asylum abuse ) and other administration officials say that too many people are being allowed to stay in the US on the basis of “ credible fear ” of persecution , and that once they ’ re released from custody , they are caught up in a years-long , backlogged immigration court process — or simply disappear into American communities rather than showing up for their court dates .
They ’ re partly right . A majority of people pass their “ credible fear ” screenings , though that number is dropping as the Trump administration has started to raise alarms with employees about asylum abuse : The approval rate for “ credible fear ” was 81 percent in October and only 68 percent in June . ( Sessions and other Trump officials , unsurprisingly , routinely claim that 89 percent of credible fear applications are being approved — which was true in 2014 but isn ’ t anymore — to make the problem seem dire . )
The immigration court backlog is , in fact , the biggest obstacle to large-scale deportations — both of asylum seekers and of unauthorized immigrants living in the US arrested by ICE agents . Many immigrants don ’ t ultimately prevail in immigration court , but the time it takes for them to build their cases ( and the fact that immigration courts are understaffed ) means that it usually takes months or years for a judge to reach that conclusion .
And many people do miss their court hearings once they ’ ve settled in the US , though it ’ s not clear how many of them were lying about their asylum claims ; how many simply didn ’ t know when their court date was ; and how many figured out that the judge was unlikely to approve their asylum claims , regardless of whether they were telling the truth .
But the Trump administration can ’ t simply start turning people away or detaining them en masse . There are laws governing how they have to treat asylum seekers — and how they have to treat families . And people who come to the US as unaccompanied children are given certain legal protections under a 2008 anti-trafficking law — which , among other things , prevents the government from deporting them without a court hearing or deporting them to a third country .
That gives the Trump administration two options : to try to limit the reach of those laws so that fewer people are guaranteed a full judicial process ; or to try to make sure that as often as possible , that process ends with immigrants being denied protection .
Sessions ’ s DOJ wants to make it easier for immigrants who come as children to lose protections months or years after they arrive
The new memo , written by the general counsel of the Executive Office of Immigration Review ( which oversees immigration judges ) , is trying to do everything possible under the executive branch ’ s power to change the anti-trafficking law .
It recommends that the label of “ unaccompanied child ” — and the protections that come with it — should be stripped by an immigration judge if the immigrant is no longer a minor , or if he ’ s no longer unaccompanied . ( Right now , the label of “ unaccompanied child ” is basically assigned when an immigrant arrives in the US and is not reviewed by the judge assigned to process the case . )
The first category could hurt people who arrived in the US in their late or even mid-teens — given the lengthy immigration court backlog , it ’ s possible that it would take a few years for an immigrant to get final approval for humanitarian protections , and that a 15-year-old could simply be stalled in court until turning 18 and becoming imminently deportable .
The second category would hurt children who came to meet parents living in the US ( whether those parents are legal immigrants or not ) . The Trump administration has already started targeting unauthorized immigrants whose children arrive unaccompanied ; ICE has targeted them in nationwide raids . Now , it ’ s sending the message to parents that they are putting not only themselves at risk if they send for their children , but the children as well .
The administration may try to pressure immigration judges to resolve cases quickly
Sessions ’ s DOJ appears to be moving to pressure immigration judges to move through cases more quickly with this new rating system , as reported by the Post . That would incentivize judges to do things , like stripping “ unaccompanied child ” protections , that would allow them to close a case more quickly . And it would more generally be a problem for immigrants trying to pull together evidence to make the strongest possible asylum case .
According to the Post , the DOJ has written in internal memos that it “ intends to implement numeric performance standards to evaluate [ immigration ] Judge performance. ” It ’ s not totally clear what those standards are . But given Sessions ’ s complaints about the length of the court backlog — and guidance sent from DOJ headquarters to judges in July , discouraging them from being too lenient in allowing immigrants to reschedule their hearings for a later date while evidence is being gathered — immigration judges themselves are worried that they ’ re going to be stuck with “ production quotas ” for the number of cases they resolve .
Doing this would require the government to change its current contract with the immigration judges union , which prohibits judges from being rated based on how many cases they resolve or how quickly they resolve them . But the judges union told the Post the government is trying to do just that .
Sessions doesn ’ t appear to be trying to control how judges resolve cases . But the more pressure judges are placed under to resolve cases quickly , the less likely they are to agree to give immigrants time to make the strongest case — and the more likely they are to take any opportunity to deny that an immigrant is entitled to a full hearing at all .
The Trump administration has flipped quickly from celebrating a border “ victory ” to declaring a “ crisis ”
Ultimately , the administration ’ s goal is to stop as many people as possible — including children and families — from even trying to settle in the United States to begin with .
Less than nine months since Trump ’ s inauguration , his government is already the victim of its own success on border security . Trump came to office claiming that the US-Mexico border was so insecure that it was barely a border at all ( despite all evidence to the contrary ) . But when the number of people ( especially Central American children and families ) coming to the US plummeted in the first few months of 2017 , Trump bragged that he ’ d fixed the problem simply by coming into office and talking tough , and now the border was secure .
He probably wasn ’ t wrong — evidence suggests that people really were deterred from coming to the US because they were worried about what Trump would do . But that didn ’ t last forever , because for children and families , there wasn ’ t much the Trump administration could do within the bounds of the law as it had been interpreted .
And now the number of Border Patrol apprehensions has started creeping back up . The Trump administration , in response , has flipped from celebrating its victory on border security to treating it as a “ crisis ” that requires immediate congressional help , and that justifies including all sorts of enforcement measures in Congress ’ s deal to address the fate of immigrants with DACA .
The problem with the Trump administration judging its success on how few people even come to the US , though , is that it ’ s not really in the US ’ s control .
The only thing they can do is punish as many of the people who do arrive as possible , and hope that they spread the word that coming to the US doesn ’ t work .
It ’ s going to be hard to execute that kind of crackdown without outright violating the laws that guarantee due process in the name of humanitarian protection . So , apparently , the Trump administration is trying to chip away at due process from the inside , and hoping that might be enough .