New Jersey has joined 14 other states in passing a law allowing unauthorized immigrants to obtain driver ’ s licenses — meaning that nearly half of the estimated 10.6 million unauthorized immigrants currently in the US now live in states with such laws .
Gov . Phil Murphy , a Democrat , is expected to sign the bill passed by the New Jersey Legislature on Monday night . The legislation would create two forms of driver ’ s licenses : a federally compliant Real ID license that let people board planes , and a “ standard ” driver ’ s license for driving and identification , for which unauthorized immigrants could use foreign passports or driver ’ s licenses to apply rather than a Social Security number . If signed , the bill would go into effect in January 2021 .
The states of California , Connecticut , Nevada , Utah , Colorado , New Mexico , Washington , Illinois , Vermont , Maryland , Delaware , Hawaii , Oregon , and New York , as well as Puerto Rico and Washington , DC , already offer driver ’ s licenses to unauthorized immigrants — meaning that roughly 5.3 million unauthorized immigrants nationwide would be eligible to get one , according to 2017 estimates .
Immigrant advocates continue to lobby other states to pass similar laws , including Florida , Kansas , Massachusetts , Minnesota , North Carolina , Texas , and Massachusetts , which first proposed such legislation 15 years ago .
Research suggests that making driver ’ s licenses available to unauthorized immigrants improves safety . Obtaining a license requires testing and training on road safety , as well as proof that an applicant can get auto insurance . Drivers with licenses are also more willing to cooperate with law enforcement , reducing burdens on police forces .
A 2016 study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences journal found that after California implemented its driver ’ s license law in 2015 , hit-and-runs dropped between 7 percent and 10 percent on average — amounting to roughly 4,000 fewer such accidents annually .
Such policies also have financial benefits , both for local governments and for drivers . The Fiscal Policy Institute found in 2017 that state and county governments could collect about $ 57 million in annual revenue , as well as $ 26 million in one-time revenues , by issuing 150,000 driver ’ s licenses to unauthorized immigrants in New York City . The researchers also determined that it would likely lower auto insurance premiums overall .
An analysis conducted by New York City also found that having a driver ’ s licenses provides additional financial stability for families and increases employment opportunities for unauthorized immigrants . Having a car allows them to look for jobs and housing that are not located near public transportation .
It also helps to shield them from deportation . If a police officer pulls over an authorized immigrant driving without a license , they could be referred to US Immigration and Customs Enforcement and sent to removal proceedings .
But even unauthorized immigrants with driver ’ s licenses might still be at risk for deportation . A lawsuit filed in January claimed that the Vermont Department of Motor Vehicles had unlawfully targeted unauthorized immigrants by sending their names , photos , car registrations , and other personal information to ICE .
The Trump administration has pushed back against efforts to prevent ICE from accessing DMV data . As New York ’ s driver ’ s license law went into effect Monday , a spokesperson for the Department of Homeland Security said in a statement that those records allow it to investigate crimes such as human trafficking by “ building criminal cases , identifying criminal suspects , and enhancing officer safety . ”