D.C. Mayor Vincent C. Gray assured immigrant groups Monday that the District is doing all it can to make sure a program aimed at deporting violent aliens does not erode trust between residents and law enforcement after it goes into effect on Tuesday .
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement has implemented the Secure Communities program in nearly all of the country ’ s jurisdictions since it began the effort in 2008 .
Under the program , the FBI automatically shares the fingerprints and criminal data it receives from local law enforcement agencies with ICE , so immigration officials can focus their limited resources on illegal immigrants who have been charged with crimes such as murder , rape and robbery . The agency touts the program as “ a simple and common-sense way ” to carry out its mission .
But critics say the program has been enforced inconsistently , ensnaring low-level offenders and diminishing cooperation between immigrant populations and their local police .
“ Secure Communities jeopardizes that trust , and consequently makes everyone less safe , ” Mr. Gray said Monday at a news conference on the steps of the John A. Wilson Building , one day before the District is included in the program .
Despite its intentions , the program could dissuade illegal immigrants from reporting crimes to the Metropolitan Police Department or serving as witnesses out of fear of deportation , according to city leaders .
Surrounded by Hispanic advocates , Mr. Gray reiterated that the District is “ not going to go about being an immigration agency for the federal government . ”
D.C. Council member Phil Mendelson , at-large Democrat , said it is hard to argue with ICE ’ s stated goal for the program — to deport violent offenders who are in the country illegally .
“ But that ’ s not what they ’ ve done , ” he said . “ What we ’ ve seen over and over again is that people who have not been convicted of a violent crime are being held — and are being held for days ; no , for weeks ; no , for months . They ’ re held on mere suspicion , a suspicion that doesn ’ t pan out . ”
By leveraging data culled by the FBI , Secure Communities does not impose new requirements on local law enforcement , according to ICE . The FBI shares its information with immigration authorities , and the federal government — not a state or local law enforcement agency — decides whether the person is a candidate for removal from the country , the agency ’ s website says .
Because of this , there is little the D.C. government can do except emphasize the bright line between local and federal law enforcement and introduce measures to mitigate the program ’ s effects .
Mr. Gray signed an order in October that prohibits public-safety officers from asking people about their immigration status . The order also directs officers in seven D.C. agencies not to arrest people based only on their immigration status .
Domestic violence cases highlight the need to divorce local crime fighting from immigration enforcement , because spouses sometimes will threaten to call ICE when their partners try to report abuse to police , said Jaime Farrant , executive director of Ayuda , which provides legal assistance to low-income immigrants in the D.C. area .
Mr. Farrant said Mr. Gray , from the start , set the District apart from states with more aggressive stances on undocumented immigrants .
“ We will not let Arizona happen in D.C. , ” Mr. Gray told him , referring to Arizona ’ s tough law against illegal immigrants , according to Mr. Farrant .
Mr. Mendelson , chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary , will introduce emergency legislation that cuts in half the amount of time , from 48 hours to 24 hours , that ICE has to pick up an inmate from the city jail on a federal immigration detainer . It also requires the federal government to pay for the detainee ’ s stay .
An identical bill from Mr. Mendelson received unanimous support from his committee last month . Passage of an emergency version would allow the city to immediately implement the law .
A bolder form of protest , such as failure to provide fingerprints to the FBI , would flout long-standing requirements and thwart other investigative efforts , officials said .
The District was among jurisdictions that tried to “ opt out ” of Secure Communities , but the Department of Homeland Security has since made clear that participation in the program is mandatory .
An ICE-generated map of activated jurisdictions shows that nearly all of the country has been blanketed by the program as of May 30 , except for parts of Illinois and Alabama .
A report by the Homeland Security Department ’ s Office of the Inspector General concluded ICE did not intentionally mislead the public and states . However , it “ did not clearly communicate to stakeholders the intent of Secure Communities and their expected participation , ” said the report , released in March in response to inquiries that Rep. Zoe Lofgren , California Democrat , made in April 2011 .
“ As a result , ” the report said , “ three years after implementation began , Secure Communities continues to face opposition , criticism and resistance in some locations . ”