Short on the heels of a nonbinding House vote to block President Obama 's executive action on immigration , some 20 Democratic U.S. mayors are meeting today in New York City to send a different message :
The meeting , hosted by New York Mayor Bill de Blasio , is significant because cities , in association with their networks of nonprofit service providers to immigrants , will be the spear point of the effort to persuade some 4 million undocumented residents to come forward and apply for deferred action .
`` These mayors support the president because they know the economic benefit to their cities , '' says Laura Burton Capps , spokeswoman for the mayors ' coalition Cities United for Immigration Action . `` They know this will help keep families together and enable immigrants to trust law enforcement and government . ''
Large cities such as New York , Los Angeles and San Francisco have extensive networks with experience reaching out and serving the undocumented . Many other cities do n't have as much experience . Capps says one purpose of the meeting is for mayors and their aides to get together to share `` best practices . ''
That includes ways of collaborating and coordinating city services with nonprofit , educational and philanthropic groups .
A statement issued last week by the mayors says , `` We are ready — and together we 're rolling up our sleeves to turn this policy into a better reality for millions of hardworking people in the communities we serve . ''
Among the agenda items , Capps says , is a summary of lessons that cities and nonprofits learned from implementing the president 's 2012 executive action called DACA , or Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals . DACA , which would be expanded under the plan Obama announced last month , was meant to benefit young people ages 16 to 31 who were brought to this country illegally . So far , though , just over half of the estimated 1.2 million people who were eligible for the program have actually come forward .
The main beneficiaries of the president 's new plan will be the undocumented parents of U.S. citizens or lawful permanent residents . There are an estimated 3.53 million such parents . But if history is any guide , perhaps only half of those people will apply for deferred action from deportation .
The mayors , in their statement , make clear they have n't given up hope that Congress will still pass comprehensive immigration reform .
`` While we continue to urge Congress to enact comprehensive and long-lasting reform , the president 's action will help many immigrants gain the opportunities , skills and status to reach their fullest potential , which will help America 's cities prosper , '' their statement says .
The coalition of mayors includes New York 's de Blasio , Annise Parker of Houston , Ed Lee of San Francisco , Kasim Reed of Atlanta , Michael Nutter of Philadelphia , Mike Duggan of Detroit , Betsy Hodges of Minneapolis and Vincent Gray of Washington , D.C .