I was one of the lawyers permitted to interview children detained at the Border Patrol facility in Clint , Texas . As you ’ ve no doubt read by now , my colleagues and I met with dirty and distressed children held for days without access to soap , showers , toothbrushes , clean clothing , adequate nutrition , or adequate sleep . We were not , however , allowed to visit with the sickest children . The government refuses to allow independent doctors in to help them .
At the Clint facility , my colleagues and I learned about a flu epidemic that left young children quarantined . We had a doctor on our team and wanted to ensure that these children were receiving appropriate care . I pleaded with Customs and Border Protection officials for permission to visit the children in the quarantine . But CBP blocked us from doing so . Eventually we were able to negotiate phone calls to the quarantine . This meant we could talk with sick teenagers but had no way to evaluate tender-age children . You just can ’ t gather any meaningful information from a very sick baby , toddler , or preschooler by phone .
How do I know it ’ s so important for independent doctors to evaluate these children ? The previous week , during interviews with teenage moms at a Border Patrol facility in McAllen , Texas , lawyers and a pediatrician on our team had identified five detained babies who needed immediate hospitalization and were admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit of a local hospital . Over the past year , at least seven children are known to have died in federal immigration custody or shortly after being released . These tragedies occurred after nearly a decade of no reported child deaths . As this public health crisis unfolds , doctors across the nation are volunteering to care for these vulnerable children , just as lawyers rushed to airports at the start of Trump ’ s Muslim ban . But the government won ’ t let them in . This is indefensible .
The law is clear . Children in federal immigration custody must be provided with “ safe and sanitary ” conditions . This requirement is set forth in the Flores settlement agreement from 1997 . Earlier this month , a draft report by inspectors from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security recommended immediate action to remedy the hunger , overcrowding , and prolonged detention of children and adults in CBP custody . This isn ’ t about comfort : Unless unsafe and unsanitary conditions at Border Patrol facilities are addressed immediately , the spread of illness will continue , endangering even more children ’ s lives .
Because CBP blocked our access to the quarantine at Clint , we are left with the children ’ s reports of what it is like there . A 14-year-old girl explained :
I was in the first cell for seven days , sleeping with no mattress . … It is hard to sleep when you don ’ t have a mattress . I then came down with the flu . I then went into the flu cell for seven days . When you are in the flu cell , you also sleep on the floor , but you have a mattress . There were 21 other kids in that space with the flu . I had a fever in there and I was shaking . Some of the other kids were vomiting . They all had fevers . No one was taking care of the kids with the flu … We were not allowed to leave the flu cell , ever . It was very boring . I did nothing to entertain myself , nor was anything offered . It was sad , very sad . I felt locked up and closed in . In the other cells , we can go out of the cell to get water one time a day …
An 11-year-old held in CBP custody for 13 days , despite having parents in New Jersey , shared :
About three days ago I got a fever . They moved me alone to a flu cell . There is no one to take care of you there . They just give you pills twice a day . I also am having an allergic reaction all over my skin . My skin is itchy and red and my nose is stuffed up . Two times they gave me a pill for it but not anymore .
On Wednesday , the Center for Human Rights & Constitutional Law and co-counsel filed a motion to enforce the 1997 settlement agreement on behalf of class members , i.e. , the kids currently in custody , submitting hundreds of pages of evidence documenting the inhumane conditions they are experiencing . Their demands are simple . Among them : Independent doctors should be allowed immediate access to assess and triage children ’ s medical needs . A public health expert should inspect facilities and determine how to make them safe and sanitary .
On Thursday , the government opposed these requests , calling them “ coercive remedies. ” The government wants more time , “ an opportunity to fully review and respond. ” The government says that the children ’ s demands go “ beyond simply ordering that [ the government ] comply with the plain terms of the Flores Settlement Agreement ” —an argument strikingly similar to the administration ’ s argument before the 9th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals that “ safe and sanitary ” conditions do not require the government to provide detained children with toothbrushes , soap , and beds .
But the government fails to address the central question : Why should the government ban independent doctors from assessing children in custody ? If there ’ s nothing to hide , why not let the doctors in ?
Apparently , blocking access is CBP ’ s default position . But the outcry by the American public in recent days has forced the agency to make changes . During the week of June 17 , more than 2,600 children were detained in Border Patrol facilities . Because of the public attention , that number has dropped to fewer than 1,000 . At Clint , the changes have been dizzying . Two hundred forty-nine children were transferred on Monday . The facility was cleaned up . Then , 100 children were brought in so that CBP could stage a highly restricted media tour , during which reporters were barred from speaking with any children , taking any photographs , or going into cells . But toothbrushes and even a soccer ball were on site . That ’ s a baby step in the right direction .
It should not take a national outcry for children in custody to have toothbrushes . It should not take a national outcry to ensure that babies , toddlers , and children held in carceral settings are safe with adequate food , beds , and showers . It should not take a national outcry to ensure that there are no more babies dying in custody . But that outcry—the outcry of the American public—must continue . Because for now , independent doctors are still banned from border detention facilities where vulnerable children languish . Let ’ s not sanction another child ’ s death in our country and in our name .