Congressional Republicans pressed ahead Sunday with their emerging stance on immigration reform , arguing President Obama delaying the implementation of his health care law raises major concerns about whether he ’ ll enforce border security measures in immigration laws .
“ We can not fix with laws things the president refuses to do , ” Iowa Republican Rep. Steve King told “ ███ Sunday . ”
Though well known as one the House ’ s most conservative members , King has emerged as perhaps the chamber ’ s most vocal opponent of the Senate ’ s immigration bill , which includes $ 40 billion toward additional security along the U.S.-Mexico border and a path to citizenship for at least some of the roughly 11 million illegal immigrants now living in the United States .
House Republicans appeared to emerge with the new strategy after a closed-door meeting Wednesday , which was preceded by the Obama administration saying earlier this month that it will delay the start of the so-called employer mandate part of the president ’ s signature health care law until after the 2014 elections .
“ If the president can selectively enforce ObamaCare , what ’ s to say he can not selectively enforce border security ? ” House Majority Leader Eric Cantor said ahead of the meeting .
New York Democratic Rep. Steve Israel urged King and other House members opposed to existing immigration reform legislation not to use the president ’ s delay on ObamaCare -- and arguments his administration currently doesn ’ t enforce border security -- to block immigration reform .
“ You shouldn ’ t use this as an excuse , ” he told ███ , pointing out 68 of the Senate ’ s 100 members agreed this summer to reform legislation and that President George W. Bush and the majority of Americans want the federal government to fix the country ’ s broken immigration system .
He also said Democrats would work with House Republicans if they wanted to approach immigration reform by passing the legislation in pieces .
King also argued Sunday that it was a “ mistake ” to think the 2012 presidential election in which Obama won roughly 71 percent of the Hispanic vote was a referendum on immigration .