Think Obama has Republicans in a tough spot on the fiscal cliff ? Try immigration reform . The GOP 's immigration jam
Behind the Curtain is a reported column , Web show and online conversation about the behind-the-scenes intrigue that shapes politics and policy . It will unfold every Tuesday ( and beyond , when news dictates ) . See previous editions of Behind the Curtain here .
Think Republicans feel in a jam about raising taxes ? Wait until President Barack Obama springs comprehensive immigration reform on them early next year .
With Obama making plain his plans to push immigration soon , leading establishment Republicans — fresh off Mitt Romney getting his clocked cleaned by 44 percentage points among Hispanics last month — insist they are now very much open to a comprehensive package , including eventual citizenship for illegal immigrants .
But while top Republicans think they need to make a big move on the issue and actually want a bipartisan deal with Obama , the rank and file remain skeptical . And it is this tension that is defining the behind-the-scenes machinations as both parties plan for 2013 .
“ There ’ s a growing sense that this is an opportunity that should be taken , ” said Ed Gillespie , a former Republican National Committee chairman and top adviser to Romney ’ s presidential campaign . “ There ’ s no instinct like a survival instinct . ”
Jeb Bush , the former Florida governor , told us that Republicans should strike first and offer “ a conservative immigration proposal that is comprehensive ” before Obama ’ s State of the Union address . “ My personal belief is that President Obama views this issue from a cynical political perspective not an economic one , ” the former governor said by email . “ After all , when he promised four years ago to do something and he had vast majorities in the Congress , he did nothing . ”
Many of the Republicans who would have to vote on such a package — and then run for reelection in off-year primaries and general elections dominated by white conservatives — aren ’ t so sure it ’ s such a great deal . Regardless of exit polls , demographic trends and lectures from party leaders , lawmakers know that many voters — especially primary voters , and especially their primary voters — hate anything that smacks of amnesty . They will hate it even more , given that the issue is likely to come up just after GOP leaders in Washington have negotiated a tax increase .
“ Political consultants in Washington are panicking about Hispanics , and their solution is to grant amnesty , ” said a conservative GOP lawmaker , who insisted on anonymity in order to speak candidly . “ They ’ re afraid Hispanics hate Republicans , so they want more of them ? It doesn ’ t pass the laugh test . This is an important issue with the Republican base , and members are right to be worried about getting primaried . ”
GOP sources tell us a small but influential group of conservative leaders have begun talks to provide cover to House lawmakers fearful about the political implications of immigration . Policy advisers to Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida , House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan of Wisconsin and others are working together on a series of smaller immigration bills that the House and Senate could pass over the next two years .