“ I don ’ t mean you , Mr. Grassley , ” Mr. Schumer said , as Senator Jeff Sessions , Republican of Alabama , accused Mr. Schumer of “ demeaning the witnesses , ” and Mr. Leahy banged his gavel to restore order in the hearing room .
The two brothers suspected of perpetrating the bombings came to the United States through the existing legal immigration system , under a 2002 asylum petition by their father , who said he was worried about his safety because of his activities in Chechnya . One of the brothers had become a naturalized citizen , and the other was here legally on a visa , though his citizenship was still under review after a routine background check revealed that he had been interviewed by the F.B.I . in 2011 .
Senator Ted Cruz , Republican of Texas , touched on another sensitive point when he suggested that instead of passing a broad bill , the Senate should take a piecemeal approach , focusing on areas “ where there is wide bipartisan agreement . ”
“ I don ’ t think that there is any issue in this entire debate that is more divisive than a path to citizenship for those who are here illegally , ” he said . “ In my view , any bill that insists upon that jeopardizes the likelihood of passing any immigration reform bill . ”
Though the bipartisan group has insisted that any legislation must be comprehensive — Democrats , in particular , fear that they would not be able to secure support for a path to citizenship if lawmakers were allowed to vote on that issue separately — Mr. Cruz seemed to echo some House Republicans , who have suggested breaking the bill up into smaller parts and focusing on its less controversial components .
Another touchy point — that the bill currently does not include same-sex couples for family unity consideration — came up during the testimony of Jim Kolbe , a former Republican congressman from Arizona who is gay and who endured a yearlong separation from his partner , a Panamanian immigrant , when the man ’ s work visa expired .
“ Families like mine are left behind as part of this proposal , ” Mr. Kolbe said . “ Equally important , U.S. businesses and our economy suffer because of the omission of lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender families from the bill introduced last week. ” Several Republican members of the bipartisan group have explicitly said that adding such protections would doom the legislation .