Rep. Ilhan Omar ( D-MI ) discussed the immigration crisis on PRI 's `` The World . '' During the interview , Omar attempted to blame the Trump administration for Border Patrol and ICE 's drained resources , as if the White House wants to see the border crisis taking place .
`` We have to look at our immigration process through a humane lens and what this administration is doing really truly is inhumane and extremely unAmerican and it goes against our values , '' Omar said . `` We 're talking about people who are coming to our border , seeking asylum , and there 's nothing illegal about seeking an asylum . We have an opportunity to use the resources that we have to properly process people and we have an administration that is hell-bent on making people seem as if they are breaking laws when they are just within the borders of what is allowed by international law . ''
Omar has her facts so wrong it 's not even funny , but she is right about one thing . It 's not illegal for people to seek asylum . But they 're supposed to seek asylum in the first safe country they land in . For those who rode the caravan from Central America , the first safe country for them would be Mexico . Legally speaking , they should be seeking asylum in Mexico , not the United States . If they were truly worried about their safety , they would be focused on making a life for themselves in Mexico , not America .
That 's not the goal though . These people want to come to the United States because they want to build a better life for themselves . They know the U.S. is the land of opportunity and they want a piece of that .
Do n't be fooled though . Those who are flocking to our border are n't seeking asylum . They 're not showing up to port of entries where asylum-seekers are required to enter . Border Patrol insiders have said these illegal aliens are walking across the border and turning themselves in to the first agent they see . They know about catch-and-release . They know the system is overwhelmed . They go through the process , ask to see an immigration judge , are given a court date and then they 're dumped into America to never be seen again . After all , what incentive do they have to show up for court ? They face the possibility of being deported . They 're better off disappearing . It 's like a pass .
Not only that but agents are seeing an influx in `` exotics , '' those who are from non-Hispanic countries like Nepal , Senegal , Somalia and other areas in South Africa .
Our immigration crisis is no longer a matter of people fleeing for their lives and escaping a dangerous , tyrannical government and country . This is now everyone and everyone taking advantage of our broken immigration system as a means of obtaining the American dream .