The U.S. Army has halted the process of discharging immigrants who enlisted under a program designed to recruit people with critically needed skills .
Reports emerged in July that the Pentagon had canceled the enlistment contracts of dozens of these recruits .
`` Effective immediately , you will suspend processing of all involuntary separation actions , '' says the memo from Marshall Williams , the acting assistant secretary of the Army for manpower and reserve affairs .
The program is known as Military Accessions Vital to the National Interest .
`` This in no way reflects a change in the Army 's compliance with DOD 's MAVNI program , '' said Lt. Col. Nina Hill , an Army spokesperson . `` We continue to abide by all requirements to include completing a thorough background investigation on all MAVNI applicants . ''
`` [ MAVNI ] was established in 2009 to create an opportunity for the military to enlist people with specialized knowledge , including highly sought-after language and medical skills . `` Those enrolling had to reside in the U.S. legally , such as under student visas , or seek asylum but could not be green card holders . Enlisting gave them a fast-track path to citizenship , sometimes even before beginning basic training . ''
The MAVNI program has been officially suspended since 2016 , after the Pentagon said its security protocols should be reviewed . But that has left hundreds of people in limbo — and at risk of seeing their visas run out in addition to having their military contracts canceled .
As of April 2018 , `` roughly 1,100 people who had signed contracts but had not gone off to basic training '' were still in the pipeline , Maj. Carla Gleason , a spokeswoman for the Pentagon , told NPR last month .
In July , dozens of enlistees were told they were n't eligible to serve in the U.S. military , with officials citing the results of security screenings . But in the case of two recruits who spoke to NPR , those problems seemed to be the existence of any ties outside the U.S .
A reservist who spoke to NPR — and who filed a Freedom of Information Act to discover the reason for his discharge — learned that foreign ties were to blame . His fiancée and his parents live in Pakistan . And despite a reviewer 's positive impression of the man and his loyalty to the U.S. , he was turned down for service .
Another enlistee , Panshu Zhao , signed up after moving from China to the U.S. for school . He is now pursuing a doctorate in geography at Texas A & M University — but after the military rejected him , he told NPR , `` This is a whole disaster . This is a total mess — a big mess . ''