As immigration advocates struggle to help more than 1,600 children taken from their parents , Trump refuses to back down
Families divided at the border : 'The most horrific immigration policy I 've ever seen '
One month before Donald Trump ’ s administration enacted a policy that allowed the government to take thousands of migrant children from their parents , the president twice told crowds at his rallies that immigrant gang members were not people .
“ These are animals , ” he said in May . Over the weekend , video and photos emerged of the cage-like detention centers where children , separated from their parents , are housed .
His comment was directed at violent MS-13 gang members , and he deplored the idea that he had been talking about all immigrants . Today , however , as criticism mounts about a draconian set of immigration polices , advocates and attorneys are left wondering just how far Trump and his team are willing to go to stop immigrants from entering the country .
The most extreme example yet is the practice of family separation , which has seen more than 1,600 children taken from parents . Advocates say the practice had quietly been taking place for months before the government adopted it as policy in April .
Quick guide Why are families being separated at US border ? Show Hide Why are children being separated from their families ? In April 2018 , the US attorney general , Jeff Sessions , announced a “ zero tolerance ” policy under which anyone who crossed the border without legal status would be prosecuted by the justice department . This includes some , but not all , asylum seekers . Because children can ’ t be held in adult detention facilities , they are being separated from their parents . Immigrant advocacy groups , however , say hundreds of families have been separated since at least July 2017 . More than 200 child welfare groups , including the American Academy of Pediatrics and the United Nations , said they opposed the practice . What happens to the children ? They are supposed to enter the system for processing “ unaccompanied alien children ” , which exists primarily to serve children who voluntarily arrive at the border on their own . Unaccompanied alien children are placed in health department custody within 72 hours of being apprehended by border agents . They then wait in shelters for weeks or months at a time as the government searches for parents , relatives or family friends to place them with in the US . This already overstretched system has been thrown into chaos by the new influx of children . Can these children be reunited with their parents ? Immigration advocacy groups and attorneys have warned that there is not a clear system in place to reunite families . In one case , attorneys in Texas said they had been given a phone number to help parents locate their children , but it ended up being the number for an immigration enforcement tip line . Advocates for children have said they do not know how to find parents , who are more likely to have important information about why the family is fleeing its home country . And if , for instance , a parent is deported , there is no clear way for them to ensure their child is deported with them . What happened to families before ? When an influx of families and unaccompanied children fleeing Central America arrived at the border in 2014 , Barack Obama ’ s administration detained families . This was harshly criticized and a federal court in 2015 stopped the government from holding families for months without explanation . Instead , they were released while they waited for their immigration cases to be heard in court . Not everyone shows up for those court dates , leading the Trump administration to condemn what it calls a “ catch and release ” program . By Amanda Holpuch Read more
“ It goes totally against what this country was founded on , ” Janet Gwilym , an attorney who has been representing children in Washington state , said . “ We have a moral responsibility to take them in . It ’ s international law to take in refugees ; that ’ s who these people are – and instead we are just adding to the trauma that they are going through . ”
Gwilym , managing attorney for the Seattle branch of Kids in Need of Defense ( Kind ) , an advocacy group for unaccompanied immigrant children , said children aged 12 to 17 had been comforting toddlers who , like them , had just been taken from their parents .
She said children had said they were told by immigration officials that they would see their parents again in a few minutes but hadn ’ t seen them for months .
In the face of widespread , bipartisan condemnation , and warnings from medical bodies about the long-term consequences these separations have on children , Trump and his cabinet have stood firm . “ The United States will not be a migrant camp and it will not be a refugee holding facility . It won ’ t be , ” Trump said during remarks at the White House on Monday .
This strident defense comes with November ’ s midterm elections looming , and two years into Trump ’ s failed attempt to fulfill a key campaign promise : expanding the border wall between Mexico and the United States .
Play Video 1:04 Separated migrant families held in cages at Texas border – video
Congress has not given Trump funds for any new stretches of wall , but in the interim , his administration has created an invisible wall of policies that advocates and attorneys say are meant to stem all types of immigration . The separation of children from their parents is just the most dramatic of many measures the Trump administration has taken to tackle illegal immigration across the United States .
Those affected include refugees , undocumented adults and children , who have also been targeted with a slate of actions such as the cancellation of a refugee program for children traveling from the dangerous Central American northern triangle countries .
There are now daily stories of undocumented people , resident in the United States for decades and with children born in the country , being targeted at their places of work and being forcibly returned home .
When it comes to the undocumented population living in the US , in the administration ’ s eyes , there appears no longer to be any distinction between violent criminals and people who have been living quietly without legal status for decades .
From October 2016 to September 2017 , US Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( Ice ) said , it had apprehended nearly 38,000 individuals who had no criminal convictions – a 146 % increase from the previous year .
And in a similar style to the family separation policy , the administration abruptly canceled a program that provided temporary deportation relief for undocumented immigrants who had been raised in the US ( known as Dreamers ) : Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( Daca ) .
After the revoking of Daca and termination of a special deportation relief measure called Temporary Protected Status for six countries , 1,038,600 people are no longer protected from deportation , according to government figures .
The policy crackdown has advanced on many fronts , but the most extraordinary turn was in April , when the Trump administration made family separation possible , by saying there would be “ zero tolerance ” for people who cross the border illegally .
At the border , those parents are deemed criminals and separated from their children , who can not be held in adult detention facilities .
The administration ’ s position , which includes blaming Democratic opponents , and defending family separation on biblical grounds , ignores warnings from the country ’ s top child welfare and health organizations , including the American Association of Pediatrics .
Parents were also suffering from the separation , said Lee Gelernt , deputy director of the ACLU ’ s Immigrants ’ Rights Project .
Gelernt filed a class-action lawsuit in March against the Trump administration ’ s family separation practice after meeting with a Congolese woman who hadn ’ t seen her seven-year-old daughter for four months . She and her child were reunited after Gelernt filed a lawsuit on their behalf .
“ This is as shocking an immigration policy as we ’ ve seen from this Trump administration , but frankly , I ’ ve been doing this work for approaching three decades , and this is the most horrific immigration policy I have ever seen , ” Gelernt said .
Gelernt said the detained parents he had been speaking with were afraid to ask immigration agents too much about their children for fear their children would face retaliation .
Gelernt said one family told him that since they were reunited , their four-year-old has repeatedly asked if the government is going to take him away again .
The ACLU ’ s lawsuit seeks to reunite families who have been separated and stop families from being separated in the future .
As the case works through the court , the impacts of family separation have been compounded by the lack of infrastructure built to support the policy . The administration has left behind a system so chaotic that children ’ s ’ advocates are making desperate gambits to locate parents .
“ What we ’ re finding is that there is no mechanism , no policy , for communicating or even finding the parents once the child has been separated , ” said Megan McKenna , Kind ’ s senior director of communications and community engagement .
Trump administration scrambles as outrage grows over border separations Read more
McKenna said when parents and children were separated , they each got individual case numbers that their mother , father , daughter or son did not have access to .
On the chance that these numbers would be sequential , Kind advocates started putting educated guesses into the case tracking system in the hopes it would lead them to parents they were seeking .
“ You just play around : maybe the child ’ s number ends in five , so the adult ’ s number could end in six , ” McKenna said . “ So you put that in the system and see if you get a hit . Or it could be the other way around . ”
That tactic has worked in some instances , but not often enough to be a solution .
She said other problems included that children might not know why their family was fleeing in the first place , which could affect the outcome of their immigration case .
Another challenge is that advocates don ’ t know what separated parents want for their children . For instance , if a parent is deported , they might want their child returned with them . Or there may be so much danger in their home country , they would prefer the child stay with immigration authorities in the US . And even if the parent ’ s preferences were known , there is no clear procedure for reuniting parents , especially if a parent has already been deported .
McKenna said Kind was advocating on behalf of a two-year-old who was separated from her father in March . The father was deported within a month , but as of 12 June , the girl was still in the custody of the US government .
“ The consequences in terms of human suffering can ’ t be overestimated , ” McKenna said . “ Toddlers are being taken from their parents . ”