Prosecutors last week announced a second sanctuary city-related murder case involving an illegal immigrant in the Seattle area , but that has yet to shake local officials who despite the brutality of the slayings say they are not yet ready to begin working with ICE .
The latest homicide was particularly vicious , with police saying Carlos Orlando Iraheta-Vega , an MS-13 gang member , bashed his 16-year-old friend ’ s head with a baseball bat .
He then assisted as another confederate took a machete to the boy ’ s body , chopping off an arm and a leg and hacking at his neck .
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement says if local authorities had cooperated with them , Mr. Iraheta-Vega — who goes by the name nickname “ Joker ” — could have been deported long ago , after an arrest last November .
But King County refused to notify ICE that Mr. Iraheta-Vega was being released from jail , and instead freed him into the community . He would have more run-ins with the law , each time escaping ICE ’ s clutches , until his arrest last week on suspicion of murder .
That came just a week after another arrest of yet another illegal immigrant , Carlos Daniel Carillo-Lopez , who was shielded multiple times from deportation this year , and who now stands accused of being part of a murder posse that killed a teen after his girlfriend posted an online photo of herself making signs for a rival gang .
Security specialists say both cases are at the crux of the illegal immigration-crime-sanctuary city debate .
Both Mr. Iraheta-Vega and Mr. Carillo-Lopez snuck into the U.S. as juveniles and were deemed Unaccompanied Alien Children ( UAC ) , which qualified them for lenient treatment under American law , earning quick release to sponsors in the community .
Both made their way to the Seattle area where , police say , they hooked up with transnational criminal gangs that increasingly rely on illegal immigrant teens to boost their ranks . They built their own criminal records , all while being shielded from deportation by liberal local governments ’ non-cooperation policies .
“ This scenario , where sanctuary policies shield criminal aliens who prey on people in the community from immigration enforcement , is becoming all too common , ” said Tanya Roman , a spokeswoman for ICE . “ As Iraheta-Vega ’ s crimes increased in severity , local officials chose to release him , time and time again , without notification to ICE , a simple process that could have potentially prevented this crime . ”
Police described a horrifying scene of death in the crime Mr. Iraheta-Vega now stands accused of .
The body of 16-year-old Juan Carlos Con Guzman had been bashed with a bat , then chopped to pieces with a machete . Detectives found one of his arms and one of his legs severed and lying away from the body , and also found signs that someone had hacked away at his neck .
Police say Mr. Iraheta-Vega , 20 , admitted to the killing , saying he ’ d arranged to fight Juan Carlos but somewhere along the way he and a fellow MS-13 confederate , nicknamed “ Inferno , ” decided to kill him instead .
“ The defendants beat the victim with a baseball bat and mercilessly chopped his neck repeatedly with a machete before dismembering the body , ” prosecuting attorney Mary H. Barbosa told a judge . “ The extraordinary brutality of this crime demonstrates the threat the defendants pose to the community . ”
In the case of Mr. Carillo-Lopez , police say he was part of a group of Surenos gang members who went looking to fight a boy who had been a friend . They feuded after the boy ’ s girlfriend posted photos online suggesting fealty to the rival 18th Street gang .
ICE said Mr. Carillo-Lopez had multiple run-ins with police , both before and after the April murder he now stands accused of , yet each time local authorities refused requests to notify deportation agents of his release .
In Mr. Iraheta-Lopez ’ s case , he was arrested by the Kent Police Department on Nov. 8 for stealing a car and ICE placed a detainer request on him . It was ignored .
Detainers are requests that deportation targets be held for pickup or , at the least , that ICE be notified of an impending release so it can have someone on hand to take custody .
That first arrest was followed five days later by a drunken-driving arrest , then yet another DUI arrest this summer . In both those cases , ICE says he was released before their officers could encounter him .
The two murders have not sparked much soul-searching among Seattle officials .
A number of law enforcement and elected officials ignored requests for comment from The ███ , while King County Executive Dow Constantine released a statement after the Carillo-Lopez case in which he blasted ICE for “ seeking to sow fear and division for political gain . ”
“ ICE is now on a public relations offensive against jurisdictions that follow the rule of law , alerting the media to instances when agents send civil immigration detainers that are prohibited by county policy , ” he said in his statement .
He said if ICE obtains a warrant signed by a judge , the county would comply , but otherwise they will continue to reject requests to help facilitate deportations .
“ To be clear , we do not hold people against their will in our detention facilities unless ordered to do so by a judge . We will continue to honor the Constitution , rather than the extrajudicial orders of any person , including the president , ” Mr. Constantine said .
Mr. Constantine did not respond to a follow-up inquiry after the Iraheta-Lopez charges .
ICE says Mr. Constantine is intentionally misleading the public about the immigration system .
“ They know full well NO such warrant exists for immigration purposes , ” said Nathalie Asher , director of removal operations at ICE ’ s Seattle field office .
Besides , she said , King County doesn ’ t need a warrant to notify ICE when it ’ s about to release someone — yet the county refuses that step , too .
“ King County ’ s willful refusal of ICE warrants only protects those who harm the community , ” she said .