For the first time , the legislation would create a merit-based program to award the visa for legal permanent residents , known as a green card , based on a point system . When the merit system takes effect , five years after the bill is passed , at least 120,000 foreign-born people each year would be able to gain green cards by accumulating points based on their skills and education , as well as their family ties and the time they have lived in the United States .
Over a decade , the balance in the immigration system would gradually shift away from the 75 percent of visas that now go to family members of immigrants already here . As a result of the merit program , closer to 50 percent of visas annually would go to immigrants based on their family ties , while about half would be based on job skills .
As part of the border security triggers , the bill would require all employers , within five years , to verify the legal status of new hires using a federal photo-matching system . It would also require the federal government to create an electronic system within 10 years for checking foreigners as they leave the country through airports and seaports .
The bill also would also create two new guest-worker programs , one for farmworkers and another for low-wage laborers .
It would give employers in technology and science fields tens of thousands of new temporary and permanent resident visas annually , which they have been urgently seeking for computer engineers and foreign graduates with advanced degrees from American universities . It raises current annual caps on temporary high-skilled visas , known as H-1B , to 110,000 from 65,000 , while adding 5,000 more of those visas for the foreign graduates . The cap would gradually rise to 180,000 .
And the bill would allow young illegal immigrants who came to the United States as children , known as Dreamers , to become citizens after only five years .
The senators are gambling that the bill would repair enough longstanding problems to attract support from a broad array of groups that would benefit , including Latinos , religious groups and labor unions ; big technology companies like Microsoft and Facebook , which have been clamoring for more visas ; agricultural growers and other employers in labor-intensive businesses ; and immigrant families who stand to be united more quickly with family members coming here legally .