President Donald Trump on Tuesday claimed it was the Obama administration that began the practice of separating migrant children from adults at the U.S.-Mexico border , a contention nonpartisan fact-checkers call “ misleading . ”
“ Just so you understand , President Obama separated the children . Those cages that were shown — I think they were very inappropriate — were by President Obama ’ s administration , not by Trump . President Obama had child separation .
“ Take a look . The press knows it . You know it . We all know it . I ’ m the one who stopped it . President Obama had child separation , ” he told reporters alongside his Egyptian counterpart in the Oval Office .
[ Democrats worry Trump will replace Nielsen with an immigration hard-liner ]
The independent group FactCheck.org has examined this claim , which has been expressed before by Trump administration officials . The organization labeled it “ misleading . ”
“ Experts say there were some separations under previous administrations , but no blanket policy to prosecute parents and , therefore , separate them from their children , ” FactCheck concluded .
Jeh Johnson , who was DHS secretary under former President Barack Obama , told NPR last June that he could not say definitively that separations “ never happened ” during the Obama years .
“ There may have been some exigent situation , some emergency . There may have been some doubt about whether the adult accompanying the child was in fact the parent of the child , ” Johnson said . “ I can ’ t say it never happened but not as a matter of policy or practice . It ’ s not something that I could ask our Border Patrol or our immigration enforcement personnel to do . ”
The Washington Post ’ s Fact Checker staff has found the president has uttered over 9,400 false or misleading statements since taking office .
Some reports have surfaced since Trump ousted Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen that the two clashed over the president ’ s desire to restart the program . He sent mixed signals about that on Tuesday .
“ We ’ re not looking to do it , ” Trump said of reviving his administration ’ s policy of separating migrant children from adults at the southern border . But he also described it as an effective deterrent against illegal migration and contended the Obama administration started the policy .
“ I ’ ll tell you something , once you don ’ t have it that ’ s why you have many more people coming , ” the president said . They are coming like it ’ s a picnic , like , ‘ Let ’ s go to Disney Land . ’ ”
Commander Jonathan D. White of the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps , a branch of the Department of Health and Human Services , told senators on Tuesday that the White House has not consulted with him about reinstating the zero tolerance policy , which resulted in more than 2,700 children being separated from their parents .
“ I would never support the use of family separation and the systematic traumatization of children as a tool for immigration policy , ” White said .
With Nielsen on her way out , U.S Secret Service Director Randolph “ Tex ” Alles fired on Monday and the White House last week withdrawing the nomination of Ron Vitiello to lead the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency , Trump was asked Tuesday if he is purging DHS ’ s senior leadership .
“ I never said I ’ m cleaning house , ” Trump claimed . “ We have a lot of great people over there . ”