WASHINGTON – President Donald Trump says his executive order ending the practice of separating families at the border shows compassion while still pursuing his zero-tolerance policy on migrants entering the country illegally .
`` I did n't like the sight or the feeling of families being separated , '' he said . `` It 's a problem that has gone on for many years , as you know , for many administrations and we are working very hard on immigration . ''
`` It 's been left out in the cold , '' he continued . `` People have n't dealt with it and we are dealing with it . ''
The White House was under intense pressure to make a move after images showing children being taken from their parents and held in detention facilities .
While Trump made it clear the zero-tolerance policy of detaining those entering the country illegally continues , migrant children will now stay in detention centers with their parents instead of being separated from them .
The president talked about how he got pressure from first lady Melania Trump and his daughter , Ivanka to amend the policy ,
`` Ivanka feels very strongly ; my wife feels very strongly about it ; I feel very strongly about it , '' Trump said . `` I think anybody with a heart would feel very strongly about it . ''
Meanwhile , the president hopes lawmakers will match his executive order with legislation addressing the problem of illegal immigration on a broader scale – and lawmakers agree .
`` Ultimately , we need a large-scale solution on immigration , '' Sen. James Lankford ( R-OK ) told ███ News . `` Immigration is not an issue that you can just look at and say we pick one area and ignore all the rest . ''
A group of Republican senators introduced a quick , legislative fix aimed at keeping families together at the border . But it does not address other immigration issues , like protecting the so-called Dreamers or reforming the visa lottery program .
`` All those are important issues to be resolved that Congress has talked about and dropped and talked about and dropped . It 's time to be able to resolve those , '' continued Lankford .
Senators are still frustrated that they failed to pass four bipartisan immigration reform bills in February , one of which would have kept separating families from ever being an issue .
The House plans to vote on two immigration bills Thursday . Republican Conference Chairwoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers told ███ News that while she 's pleased with the executive order , it 's time for Congress to act .
`` I believe we have put forward a really strong proposal that will make sure our border is secure but also provide a DACA ( Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program ) solution , '' says McMorris Rodgers .
House Democrats argue the DACA protection in one of the House GOP bills is limited in scope and cuts back on legal immigration and asylum provisions .
`` I do n't support Speaker ( Paul ) Ryan 's proposal because what he 's really doing is putting forward an authorization for a $ 25 billion wall and closing access and protections to our Dreamers , '' Rep. Anthony Brown ( D-MD ) told ███ News .
Brown supports border security but wants to see it accomplished through technology and additional personnel – not a wall .
`` A wall that is built is a wall or obstacle that eventually there will be workarounds and go-arounds , '' he warned . `` What we need to do is focus on comprehensive immigration reform . ''