A major speed bump on the path to comprehensive immigration reform appears to have been removed . That ’ s the issue of guest workers – low-skilled immigrants who come to the United States under a temporary visa program .
Over the weekend , senior business and labor representatives came to an agreement on how many such workers could enter the US each year , what jobs they could hold , and what the pay scale would be .
The agreement was reached in a phone call late Friday night with AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka , US Chamber of Commerce head Tom Donohue , and Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D ) of New York , who 's been mediating the dispute , reports CBS News .
By Sunday morning , senior lawmakers of both parties were confirming that a deal had been reached , and that this was an important step toward reform – including how to address the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants in the US today .
`` I think we 've got a deal , ” Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R ) of South Carolina said on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union. ” “ We 've got to write the legislation , but 2013 , I hope , will be the year that we pass bipartisan immigration reform . ”
`` It will pass the [ Republican-controlled ] House because it secures our borders , it controls who gets a job … [ and ] the 11 million [ undocumented immigrants ] will have a pathway to citizenship , but it will be earned , it will be long , and it will be hard , '' Senator Graham said .
Graham and Senator Schumer are members of the bipartisan “ Gang of Eight ” senators working to achieve immigration reform .
“ I am very , very optimistic that we will have an agreement among the eight of us next week , ” Schumer said on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press. ” “ [ Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick ] Leahy has agreed to have extensive markup and debate on the bill in April , and then we go to the floor in , God willing , in May . So I think we 're on track . This is a major , major obstacle that 's overcome . ”
Another member of the Gang of Eight – Sen. Marco Rubio ( R ) of Florida – issued a more cautionary statement Sunday morning .
“ I ’ m encouraged by reports of an agreement between business groups and unions on the issue of guest workers , ” he said . “ However , reports that the bipartisan group of eight senators have agreed on a legislative proposal are premature . ”
Senator Rubio then laid out what he sees as the legislative road ahead :
“ We have made substantial progress , and I believe we will be able to agree on a legislative proposal that modernizes our legal immigration system , improves border security and enforcement and allows those here illegally to earn the chance to one day apply for permanent residency contingent upon certain triggers being met . However , that legislation will only be a starting point .
“ We will need a healthy public debate that includes committee hearings and the opportunity for other senators to improve our legislation with their own amendments . Eight senators from seven states have worked on this bill to serve as a starting point… . But arriving at a final product will require it to be properly submitted for the American people ’ s consideration , through the other 92 senators from 43 states that weren ’ t part of this initial drafting process . In order to succeed , this process can not be rushed or done in secret . ”
Schumer acknowledged the challenges in changing an immigration system that has major economic , political , and social implications across the country .
“ As Senator Rubio correctly says , we have said we will not come to final agreement till we look at all of the legislative language , ” he said on “ Meet the Press ” Sunday . “ And he 's correctly pointing out that that language has n't been fully drafted . There 'll be little kerfuffles . But I do n't think any of us expect there to be problems . ''
The other members of the gang of eight senators are John McCain ( R ) and Jeff Flake ( R ) of Arizona , Dick Durbin ( D ) of Illinois , Bob Menendez ( D ) of New Jersey , and Michael Bennet ( D ) of Colorado .
Immigration reform is one of President Obama ’ s top priorities , and White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough was kept informed of the business-labor negotiations on guest workers by Schumer , who facilitated those discussions .
“ The president continues to be encouraged by progress being made by the bipartisan group of senators , ” White House spokesman Clark Stevens said in a statement Saturday . “ We look forward to seeing language once it is introduced , and expect legislation to move forward as soon as possible . ”
Even if the group of senators reaches a deal , the legislation faces a tough battle , The Wall Street Journal notes . A bipartisan group in the House is working on its own immigration effort . Some Republicans there have been critical of any path to citizenship for illegal immigrants in the US today .
Here are some details on the weekend agreement as reported by Politico :
Employers would be required to pay either the prevailing wage in the area of employment or the actual wage level received by individuals with similar experience and qualities – whichever is greater .
The size of the program would ramp up over time , from 20,000 visas in the first year to 75,000 in the fourth year . In the fifth year , the program would shrink or grow based on the unemployment rate , the ratio of job openings to workers seeking employment , and other factors . The cap can never go below 20,000 or above 200,000 in any year .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
To resolve the standoff with the construction unions , the deal includes a cap of 15,000 visas for certain higher-skilled professions in their industry .
The visa holders could petition for permanent status after a year , and they would not be tied to a single employer .