California Rep. Lucille Roybal-Allard was tapped Wednesday to manage for House Democrats the annual Homeland Security budget bill — a decision that gives Latino voters a human face and voice at the bargaining table as never before in Congress .
Roybal-Allard ’ s selection , approved by her fellow Democrats on the House Appropriations Committee , must still be ratified by the party ’ s leadership and full caucus . But as the first Latino to hold this post , her approval is certain and she represents a powerful historic symbol at a time when the same bill is caught in a bitter fight over immigration policy between Republicans and President Barack Obama .
A veteran lawmaker in her own right , Roybal-Allard is the daughter of the late Rep. Edward Roybal , who preceded her in the House and was one of the founders of the Hispanic Caucus . More important perhaps , she brings to the table the credentials of a Mexican-American mother and grandmother whose focus is on the children left behind when their parents are deported .
“ That ’ s a huge part for me because … a large percentage of these children are American citizens who end up in foster care and lose their parents , ” Roybal-Allard said in a brief hallway interview . “ And so that is going to definitely be a focus of mine , not just in terms of children but as much as possible , holding families together . ”
These same tensions are very much part of the partisan fight now over Obama ’ s executive order in November that temporarily lifted the threat of deportation from millions of undocumented workers and promised them permits this summer to gain legal employment .
The president would argue that this is within his discretion and a humane way to deal with the families , many of whom have been in the U.S. for years . Republicans counter that it is a gross overreach under the Constitution and have seized the Homeland bill as a vehicle with which to deny funding to implement Obama ’ s order .
A debate in the House Appropriations Committee last June was very much a prelude to this battle — only then Democrats wanted to deny funding for the deportations . But Roybal-Allard ’ s comments in that meeting are telling as she repeatedly hit home on this point : children caught in the middle .
“ These children can not wait until we get around to doing that , ” she said of long-promised immigration reforms . “ Their families and their lives are being impacted right now . Because their parents are being deported , right now we have approximately 5,000 American children who are currently in the child welfare system because of the deportation of a parent . The fear of losing a parent to deportation has a number of negative consequences for the mental health of American children including severe anxiety and withdrawal . ”
“ She very much reflects the human side of immigration , ” said one person who has worked with her closely on Appropriations .
But this human side includes a natural shyness that Roybal-Allard will have to shed if she is to play the leadership role now demanded of her .
Elected to the House in 1992 , the congresswoman went on to lead the Hispanic Caucus herself in the late 1990s but like her father before her , secured a seat on Appropriations that suited her style to work more in the background .
“ Attentive , conscientious — she ’ s low key , ” said Rep. David Price ( D-N.C. ) . “ You ’ re not going to see her breaking headlines , but she has been a very faithful subcommittee member . She ’ s quite outspoken in particular about detention practices , a great champion of alternatives to detention when that is possible . ”
Roybal-Allard ’ s district in Southern California is among the most Hispanic in the nation and a stark contrast with the much whiter , home turf of Rep. John Carter ( R-Texas ) , who will continue to chair the Homeland panel on Appropriations . But the two have worked together respectfully in the past , and despite the confrontation now with the White House , she credits the Republican — popularly known as “ Judge ” — for being “ sensitive to the plight of the immigrant . ”
“ He doesn ’ t , like others , demonize them , ” Roybal-Allard said . “ We think differently , but I think we approach it from the standpoint of respecting the individual . He ’ s been very good in terms of trying to find some balance . ”
Her own family history can only be described as old stock . Her father was born in New Mexico where “ the Roybals came like in the 16th century , ” she said . On her mother ’ s side , the roots are more in the border area between Mexico and San Diego .
“ I grew up in a time where in Los Angeles you actually got punished in school if you spoke Spanish , ” she said . “ The thinking back in those days — because my parents were fluent in both English and Spanish — was to speak English at home so your children can compete at school . But the minute my grandmother , who understood and could speak English , walked into the house , we spoke Spanish . ”
These roots give her a perspective on the fact that for much of its history the United States did not set formal limits on immigrants from the Americas — and this only changed in the 1960s as part of a deal to win passage of what was billed then as immigration reforms .
“ I have young Dreamers who because of the president ’ s policy have been able to go to college and get education and they come back to the community as teachers and attorneys . There ’ s tremendous value , ” Roybal-Allard said . “ That doesn ’ t mean we shouldn ’ t protect our borders , but I think everything depends on the premise , where we start . ”
“ Too often , ” she said , “ the premise is that immigrants come to our country , we need to ship everyone back . And we end up with punitive unrealistic policies . But if you start with the premise that recognizes the value of immigrants and how they add to the value of our country … then we come out with a different kind of policy that tries when it makes sense to keep families together and respect the value that they give to this country . ”
“ You hear this silly premise that they are trying to make the United States another Mexico , for example . The reality is we have long waiting lists for people trying to learn English . ”