Unless you have been comatose for the past week , it is highly likely that you have seen a statistic or a headline that would lead you to believe that the Trump administration has lost track of nearly 1,500 illegal immigrant children . If true , such a report would be absolutely horrifying . But as with much of what we read , quite simply , it is not true .
The hysteria was caused by partisan Democrats mistakenly linking to a 2014 article in The Arizona Republic , thinking that the photos in the article were current . Trump Derangement Syndrome led to a textbook self-own by the left . As is the case these days , the outrage outran the facts .
Unaccompanied alien children ( UAC ) enter the country , and when they are apprehended , current law and court precedent requires that they be transferred into the custody of the Department of Health and Human Services through their Office of Refugee Resettlement ( ORR ) . The law then requires the department to quickly locate a parent , relative or sponsor to take in the children .
According to HHS Deputy Secretary Eric Hargan , “ approximately 90 percent of the children ’ s sponsors are parents or close relatives , and , historically , ORR has not tracked children once released . ”
But in 2016 , ORR began proactively and voluntarily calling sponsors one month after placing the unaccompanied minors with them , to inquire whether additional assistance was needed .
The statistic published in The Arizona Republic that “ the feds lost — yes , lost — 1,475 migrant children , ” is false .
In a recent report , 14 percent of those called did not respond . They did not answer the call . This does not mean the children are “ missing. ” It means the sponsor did not answer the call or return it .
Does anyone remember similar hysteria in 2016 when President Obama was in office ? Of course not .
Immediately , Rep. Joaquin Castro , a Democrat from San Antonio , chose not to let a manufactured crisis go to waste , organizing what he called a “ National Day of Action for Children. ” Thousands of messages have been shared online with the hash tag , # WhereAreTheChildren .
Actively surveil these homes where vetted sponsors take in the unaccompanied minors ?
The Health and Human Services Department does not have the legal authority to return the minors back to government custody .
According to HHS , “ if there ’ s a reason why our providers believe that the child is unsafe or that there has been a change in circumstances that they think that it ’ s warranted , then yes , they reach out to the local child welfare entities to get them involved on this . ”
An unanswered phone call clearly does not meet the standard of a child being “ unsafe . ”
You may ask yourself a sensible question : Why would the national media and the Democratic Party actively mislead the public about this bogus crisis ?
Because it ’ s at the heart of the Democrats ’ turnout strategy for the midterm elections .
Democrats desperately want to take back the House , so they can investigate the Trump administration and impeach him , effectively shutting down his legislative agenda and weakening him for re-election . This is their top priority . To do this , they need high Latino turnout . Democrats must believe the only way to excite the base is to create false narratives and peddle them to constituency groups .
Here is the reality : Thousands of unaccompanied alien children are apprehended every month . This is not safe for a child and it is often the result of a human smuggling operations from Central America .
There are two separate issues : First , we should discourage unaccompanied minors from entering the U.S. illegally . Second , we should humanely and legally handle these children once they arrive here . I have no reason to believe this is not being done currently , but if it is , Congress should step in by providing oversight and changing the law .
Currently , approximately 10,000 unaccompanied children are in the system , on top of more than 100,000 who have been released into the country previously .
It is shameful that some would falsely spread conspiracy theories about the Trump administration as part of political strategy for win a few more votes in November .
• Matt Mackowiak is president of Austin , Texas , and Washington , D.C.-based Potomac Strategy Group . He ’ s a Republican consultant , a Bush administration and Bush-Cheney re-election campaign veteran and former press secretary to two U.S. senators . His “ Mack on Politics ” podcast is available on iTunes , Google Play , Stitcher and on WashingtonTimes.com .