In North Carolina , a husband left his house to start a car , only to be handcuffed by an Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent . In Los Angeles , a man was arrested at the Walmart where he worked . In Garden City , Kansas , whole apartments of people were fingerprinted and taken into custody .
They ’ re three of the more than 680 people that ICE agents around the country — from the Midwest to the Southeast , California to New York — have arrested in the past week . Department of Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly , in a statement Monday , calls it “ a series of targeted enforcement operations , ” and maintains it ’ s no different from what ICE has done “ for many years. ” Critics call it a series of nationwide raids — and claim it ’ s the first step toward President Donald Trump fulfilling his promise to deport millions of unauthorized immigrants .
The reality is somewhere in the middle . Nothing that ICE did last week was unprecedented . But it feels different with President Trump in the White House — and that ’ s something that ICE agents and immigrants alike know all too well .
For the most part , last week ’ s raids wouldn ’ t have been out of place in the early years of the Obama administration . ICE agents didn ’ t ( despite rumors to the contrary ) set up street-level checkpoints to demand proof of citizenship of anyone in passing cars . They didn ’ t sweep through whole apartment buildings and arrest whole blocks ’ worth of immigrants . They didn ’ t deliberately target immigrants simply for being in the country without papers .
What distinguished last week ’ s raids from the Obama era were three things : First , ICE agents broke with years of Obama-administration policy by making “ collateral arrests ” — arresting unauthorized immigrants who happened to be in the place they were raiding , even if they didn ’ t have a warrant for them . Second , the agency deliberately coordinated a series of nationwide raids , scooping up more people in less time than ICE raids typically do .
Finally , of course , President Obama — who spent much of his presidency attempting to reassure unauthorized immigrants that if they hadn ’ t committed crimes in the US , they were safe from deportation — isn ’ t in office anymore . In his place is a president who got elected promising a new , tougher era in immigration enforcement , one in which immigrants were more broadly targeted and ICE agents less restrained .
Last week ’ s raids don ’ t necessarily represent that new era yet . But it ’ s not surprising that they ’ re being seen that way .
According to the Department of Homeland Security , more than 680 immigrants were arrested in the past week — in regions spanning the country .
The New York Times reported Monday that 160 were arrested in the Los Angeles area , with another 40 or so arrested in the New York area . “ An additional 200 were arrested last week in Georgia , North Carolina and South Carolina , ” the Times reports , and “ about 200 were arrested across Illinois , Indiana , Kansas , Kentucky , Missouri and Wisconsin ” ( including Gardenville , Kansas ) .
Other enforcement sweeps were reported in the Baltimore and DC metro areas ; in Austin , Dallas , and Pflugerville , Texas ; in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma ; in Plant City , Florida ; and elsewhere .
For the most part , the raids appear to have been targeted efforts to catch individual immigrants that ICE had gotten warrants to arrest . DHS ’ s statement claimed that “ approximately 75 % ” of the immigrants arrested were “ criminal aliens , ” implying they had criminal convictions — though many of those convictions were almost certainly for minor crimes ( or simply for reentering the country illegally ) .
Confusingly , another DHS official told the Washington Post that anyone who ’ d entered the country illegally or overstayed a visa counted as a “ criminal alien ” — but that definition would fit all 680 of the people arrested last week , not just 75 percent of them , so it doesn ’ t appear to be the definition used in the DHS statement .
Immigrants who had previously gotten orders of deportation also appeared to be targets in Los Angeles and Maryland .
But it ’ s also clear that when ICE agents encountered other unauthorized immigrants along with the person they were seeking — or when they didn ’ t find that person , but found other unauthorized immigrants instead — others were arrested too .
“ They show you some sort of warrant and they go in and fingerprint everybody , ” says Ambar Pinto , who manages a hotline for immigrants to report ICE activity to the advocacy network United We Dream . Anyone whose fingerprints reveal them to be unauthorized is arrested ; “ if there ’ s children in the house , ” Pinto says , “ they will leave the mother behind with an order to report to ICE for a check-in . ”
In other cases , ICE agents have reportedly used aggressive tactics . Maria Fernanda Durand of the advocacy group CASA de Maryland reports that , instead of attempting to enter houses to serve warrants , ICE agents waited outside houses and arrested people when they left the house to go to work . In Maryland and elsewhere , ICE agents made arrests out of uniforms — or while wearing a vest that said ICE on the back , but , as Pinto says , “ if they ’ re knocking on your door you can ’ t see that . ”
The truth of the raids , however , has sometimes been overshadowed by rumors that sound much worse than anything that ’ s been documented — but that have ultimately been debunked .
There is no evidence of street-level “ checkpoints ” where ICE agents stop drivers to ask for proof of citizenship , though rumors of such checkpoints are ubiquitous . ( The National Immigration Law Center , in a two-page document sent to its network warning them what to look for , didn ’ t include checkpoints in its list of “ practices ” in which ICE was engaging ; advocates in Austin , where the checkpoints were most widely rumored , say they don ’ t exist . ) Other , more specific rumors — like a widely-circulated Facebook post claiming that ICE agents in Kansas City planned to arrest immigrants on their way out of church — turned out to be baseless as well .
The current ICE raids may be more in line with the prior immigration policy than they seem
As a candidate and as president , Donald Trump has claimed that his predecessors didn ’ t do anything to enforce immigration law . He ’ s wrong . He ’ s actually continuing an era of aggressive enforcement that started under George W. Bush and continued under Barack Obama .
One of the key tactics used by both the Bush and Obama administrations was the immigration raid . Often , under Obama in particular , targeted “ surges ” were used to track down individuals who met enforcement priorities : immigrants who ’ d been convicted of crimes , immigration “ fugitives ” who had already been given orders of deportation , or people who ’ d been deported and re-entered the United States . In Obama ’ s last year in office , ICE conducted 18 “ surges ” ( according to press releases on the agency ’ s site ) . In the biggest , a month-long sweep of several Midwestern states , it arrested 331 people . A Los Angeles raid netted 112 immigrants in a week .
Obama used increased enforcement as a credibility-building tool with the public as he attempted to push Congress to enact an immigration overhaul that would have given millions of undocumented Americans a path to citizenship .
Trump , by contrast , appears to be using raids , and enforcement , as an end in themselves .
An executive order Trump signed in his first week in office redefined enforcement priorities to include , in practice , pretty much every unauthorized immigrant in the US .
But ICE is claiming that last week ’ s raids were in line with the old priorities issued by Obama — and that the raids were just a continuation of what the agency has been doing .
On a press call , ICE officials in Los Angeles claimed that , of the 161 arrests they made , “ all but 5 would ’ ve been people we would ’ ve prioritized for enforcement previously. ” Another ICE official told the Times , “ The president has been clear in saying that D.H.S . should be focused on removing individuals who pose a threat to public safety , who have been charged with criminal offenses , who have committed multiple immigration violations or who have been deported and re-entered the country illegally. ” This sounds like the “ priorities ” issued by President Obama circa 2011 — not the ones issued by President Trump in 2017 .
ICE ’ s claims don ’ t exactly line up with the reports from advocacy groups on the ground — but they ’ re not that far off , either . Advocates claim that ICE is going after people that it could have deported in the past , but explicitly decided not to — like Guadalupe Garcia de Rayos , who was deported from Arizona last week — or people who have years-old final orders of deportation .
Obama , in a November 2014 memo , told ICE agents to focus on people who ’ d been ordered deported since the beginning of 2014 . Now , Pinto says , “ they are going after anyone who has ever had a removal order. ” That ’ s a shift from the most recent Obama administration policy — but it ’ s identical to the policy that the Obama administration carried out over its first term , in which any “ fugitive , ” no matter how long ago they were ordered deported , was a priority .
ICE agents are now free to make “ collateral arrests ” — something they ’ ve been demanding for years
When Kelly maintained in Monday ’ s statement that “ The focus of these enforcement operations is consistent with the routine , targeted arrests carried out by ICE ’ s Fugitive Operations teams on a daily basis , ” he wasn ’ t necessarily wrong .
But he was only telling half the story . His department has changed its policy toward the immigrants it ’ s not explicitly “ focusing ” on — which make up the overwhelming majority of unauthorized immigrants in the United States . To millions of immigrants and their communities , last week ’ s raids represented a potential threat of the type they hadn ’ t seen in years : the threat of becoming a “ collateral ” victim of an ICE raid simply for being in the wrong place at the wrong time .
The immigrants caught up in “ collateral arrests ” last week aren ’ t authorized to be in the US , but have never had a criminal record or been deported or ordered deported . In some cases , they happened to be in the same apartment as someone ICE was looking for . In others , ICE had the wrong address but fingerprinted and arrested anyone who was there anyway .
Collateral arrests were known to happen under the Obama administration . But generally , ICE agents were under instructions to arrest people identified in advance , and only those people .
In 2011 , the president of the ICE union , Chris Crane , testified to Congress that agents “ were not permitted to arrest or even speak to confirmed or suspected illegal aliens encountered in the field during operations , and were prohibited from running standard criminal record checks for wants and warrants . ”
Crane testified before Congress that the policies were prohibiting ICE from “ enforcing many laws enacted by Congress ; laws they took an oath to enforce. ” He cited them as evidence that the agency ’ s policy was being controlled by “ powerful special interest groups that advocate on behalf of illegal aliens. ” When his union backed Donald Trump for president in the 2016 election , it was in large part based on Trump ’ s promise to take the “ handcuffs ” off ICE agents and allow them to do their jobs the way they saw fit .
The raids were designed to send a message — and the rumors that followed were inevitable
The United We Dream hotline for immigrants to report ICE activity —which has been up and running for over a year — has never seen anything like last week .
“ For the past six months , ” Pinto says , “ our average of calls ” to the enforcement hotline “ is 30 to 50 calls a month. ” In the first 11 days of February , “ we have had more than 214 calls , ” Pinto told ███ — and “ most ” of those came during a 9-day period from February 3rd to February 11 .
But February 2017 doesn ’ t yet hold the record for monthly call volume . That record belongs to January 2016 — when unauthorized immigrants around the country were panicked by reports of household raids directed by the Obama administration .
Those raids were designed to target only Central Americans ( mostly families ) who ’ d been ordered deported in the past 2 years and hadn ’ t left . Most unauthorized immigrants didn ’ t fit that description , but the traumatic nature of raids — and the knowledge that , if ICE agents did make collateral arrests , there would be no legal recourse — sent the entire community of unauthorized immigrants and their neighbors into a panic spiral for several weeks .
The Trump administration has shown no interest in quelling the fears of otherwise law-abiding unauthorized immigrants . To the contrary , the purpose of Trump ’ s executive order broadening immigration priorities was to make it easier to deport unauthorized immigrants — to turn Trump ’ s campaign declaration “ Anyone who has entered the United States illegally is subject to deportation ” into government policy .
Last week ’ s raids were , indeed , designed to reinforce that message . They wouldn ’ t have been so big , or so coordinated , if they weren ’ t . One ICE spokesperson told reporters that “ the fact that they coincided is not entirely a coincidence ; ” a different official told the New York Times that the coordinated action was in the works for several weeks , and “ New York was late to the game . ”
Under Obama , ICE conducted one “ surge ” larger than the one conducted by Trump last week — it arrested 2,000 people over only a few days . But most enforcement “ surges ” were more likely to net 200 people over the course of a month . And the combination of nationwide , coordinated raids and collateral arrests is something immigrants didn ’ t see in the Obama era .
High-profile raids are designed to affect not only the people who are physically being arrested , but anyone else who could be in a similar position . They ’ re supposed to serve as a deterrent to anyone who might be considering coming to the US without papers , and to increase the pressure on anyone who is currently here and could be persuaded to leave .
But raids are an extremely blunt instrument for this purpose . Inevitably , they inspire fear in many , many more people than those who are likely to be targets . And where there is fear , rumors about raids can easily spread , putting vulnerable people on high alert .
This is especially true if people already used to living in fear of deportation . For immigrant communities , what they are experiencing today is simply a return to what they felt under George W. Bush in 2005 , or when Obama was setting deportation records in 2010 while claiming he wasn ’ t deporting law-abiding unauthorized immigrants .
Now , as then , there ’ s nothing concrete that local leaders and advocates can offer immigrants to ensure they won ’ t be deported . Indeed , they have little ability to dismiss the worst rumors — because under Trump , no one knows what is possible .
While ICE agents did not , in fact , arrest people going to or from church in Kansas City , they could have . There ’ s a 2011 memo that tells ICE agents not to conduct enforcement activities at “ sensitive locations ” like churches and schools , but it ’ s not clear whether ICE is following that memo under Trump . In most cases , ICE agents weren ’ t sweeping through whole neighborhoods or stopping drivers at random — but there wasn ’ t anything stopping them from doing so , and no indication they won ’ t start in future .
CORRECTION : This article originally referred to the nonexistent city of Gardenville , KS instead of the real city of Garden City , KS . The author apologizes for her carelessness .