At the same time that the federal , Texas , and Houston governments were all working together to respond to the historic disaster that Hurricane Harvey and its aftermath have caused , they ’ ve all been at each other ’ s throats over a state immigration law that was poised to go into effect before the waters receded .
But Texas ’ s cities have just won a huge victory over the state ( and the feds ) . On Wednesday night , federal judge Orlando L. Garcia of the Western District of Texas issued a ruling stopping most of the state ’ s “ anti-sanctuary-city ” law SB4 — which attempted to force local police departments to assist federal immigration enforcement — from going into effect as scheduled on Friday .
The ruling signals that the judge is likely to find that the provisions put on hold are unconstitutional . In the meantime , he ’ s stopping the state from enforcing them while he considers them more fully .
Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton has already vowed to appeal , arguing that the judge ’ s ruling — which essentially maintains the status quo — is making Texas “ less safe. ” The plaintiffs who sued to stop the law , meanwhile , including the governments of Texas ’ s major cities and immigrant-rights advocacy groups , are celebrating the ruling as a near-complete victory .
The ruling doesn ’ t stop every part of the law that had local police officers concerned . But it does prevent the Republican-dominated Texas state legislature from using immigration to punish Texas ’ s Democratic-controlled city governments . And it substantially reduces the scope of a law that , all told , would have expanded state enforcement of immigration law more than any other bill since Arizona ’ s SB 1070 “ show me your papers ” law from 2010 . ( The Arizona law made being in the state as an unauthorized immigrant a state offense and allowed officers to question people about their immigration status to enforce it ; it was also largely put on hold by the courts , including the Supreme Court in 2012 . )
For cities that are currently fighting both state and federal attempts to push them into collaborating with immigration authorities — not to mention the city in Texas currently trying to make sure its residents don ’ t literally drown in their homes — that ’ s a crucial respite .
The court ruled that local police must be allowed to ask people about their immigration status — but they can ’ t do anything beyond sharing information with ICE
The Texas law , Senate Bill 4 , originated when the state government of Texas got angry with the new sheriff of Travis County ( the county that includes state capital Austin ) who decreed that county jails would stop honoring federal requests , known as detainers , to hold immigrants after they ’ d otherwise be released from jail so that federal agents could pick them up .
In retaliation , the governor stripped funds from the county government , and the legislature designed SB4 — a law that would have allowed them to criminally charge local officials for doing something the state felt would limit immigration enforcement .
SB4 doesn ’ t directly tell police officers and jail officials what they can and can ’ t do . Instead it prohibits local governments and police departments from setting policies which would set limits on helping the federal government deport unauthorized immigrants .
But the court , for the most part , said that the state ’ s efforts to dictate local policies were likely enough to be unconstitutional that they ’ d better not go into effect Friday .
Among the parts of SB4 that have been put on hold :
A provision that would have forced local jails to honor federal agents ’ requests to hold immigrants after they ’ d otherwise be released , so that ICE could pick them up .
A provision that would have barred any local official from “ endorsing , ” or even appearing to endorse , any policy that would have materially limited immigration enforcement ( including , possibly , standing on stage with advocacy groups that were advocating for such limits ) .
A provision that would have required local police to allow their officers to cooperate with federal agents whenever possible , including “ enforcement assistance ” of federal immigration law .
The court did not , however , enjoin one of the parts of SB4 that attracted the most controversy when the bill was passed earlier this summer : the provision that forces local police departments to allow officers to ask about the immigration status of residents during a detention or arrest .
The court ’ s ruling emphasizes that SB4 doesn ’ t allow officers to stop someone solely because they suspect the person to be an unauthorized immigrant . And if they ask about immigration status , the law doesn ’ t allow them to do anything with that information beyond sending it to ICE — they can ’ t hold onto someone they would otherwise let go while they wait to hear back from ICE about the detainee ’ s immigration status , for example .
But it ’ s not entirely clear , in practice , how much those safeguards actually mean . There ’ s some evidence that being able to ship people into ICE custody encourages racial profiling to begin with .
The cities and advocacy groups that sued over SB4 , however , don ’ t see this as a huge setback . They argue that in practice , many police officers are already asking people about their immigration status , so SB4 doesn ’ t change much . The parts of the law the plaintiffs were worried about weren ’ t the parts that assisted cops who wanted to help enforce federal immigration law , but the parts that punished cops and departments who wanted to limit their cooperation with the feds to protect their relations with immigrant communities . And on that count , they believe they ’ ve won a huge victory .
Trust between immigrants and the government is still precarious in Texas
You could argue that Judge Garcia ’ s ruling is a rebuke not only of the state of Texas , but also of the Trump administration . After all , the Department of Justice submitted a brief in favor of SB4 .
More importantly , the argument about whether local jails can be made to hold people for pickup by immigration enforcement is also at the crux of the ongoing “ sanctuary city ” battle between cities and the federal government , which is trying to withhold the biggest federal law-enforcement grant from any city that limits cooperation with detainer requests .
But this is just the first ruling in what ’ s sure to be an ongoing legal battle over SB4 . Texas is sure to appeal the ruling to the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals — a fairly conservative circuit court that may overturn some of Wednesday ’ s ruling . And the federal-local battle over defunding “ sanctuary cities ” is still in its very early stages .
In the meantime , law enforcement officials have to try to maintain good relationships with immigrant communities that have been worried about both SB4 and ICE raids . In Houston , that fear has been compounded with the emergency posed by Hurricane Harvey — local and state officials have tried to assure residents that shelters won ’ t check for immigration status , despite the fact that Border Patrol checkpoints remained open during the evacuation last week .
Legal battles over laws like SB4 can change at a moment ’ s notice — and laws can be stopped 36 hours before going into effect . But retaining the often-fragile relationship between unauthorized immigrants and local government , and repairing it if it ’ s broken , takes much longer .