EL PASO , Texas ( ███ ) - Potential White House hopeful Beto O ’ Rourke accused Donald Trump of fear-mongering on Monday and the Republican president mocked the Democrat as a “ young man who lost ” in dueling rallies that could preview the tenor of the 2020 election campaign .
O ’ Rourke , who narrowly lost his 2018 bid for a U.S. Senate seat , accused Trump of stoking “ false fear ” about immigrants and telling “ lies ” about his hometown El Paso , which Trump said was a dangerous place before it had a border fence .
“ We stand for America and we stand against a wall , ” O ’ Rourke told a crowd of several thousand supporters , many waving “ Beto 2020 ” signs and wearing “ Immigrants Make America Great ” baseball caps . “ Walls do not save lives , they end lives . ”
Two hundred yards away in El Paso County Coliseum , Trump told his supporters that O ’ Rourke had “ little going for himself , although he ’ s got a great first name . ”
“ We are all challenged by a young man who lost an election to ( Republican Senator ) Ted Cruz , ” said Trump .
He said that O ’ Rourke ’ s rally was smaller than his , and that was a bad sign : “ That may be the end of his presidential bid . ”
███ could not verify Trump ’ s claim that 35,000 people attended his rally , with about 10,000 inside . The city ’ s fire department allowed only the capacity 6,500 inside , the El Paso Times reported . Police estimated between 10,000 and 15,000 attended the O ’ Rourke march and rally , the newspaper said .
As the two men spoke , U.S. congressional negotiators said they had reached a tentative deal to try to avert another partial government shutdown . Aides said it did not contain the $ 5.7 billion Trump wanted for his wall that triggered the shutdown last month .
Trump made clear on Monday he would not drop the demand for a border wall that delights his followers , first made in his campaign in the 2016 election . Giant banners at his rally read “ Finish The Wall . ”
Beto O'Rourke , the Democratic former Texas congressman , addresses supporters before an anti-Trump march in El Paso , Texas , U.S. , February 11 , 2019 . ███/Loren Elliott
National polls show the wall is not popular with the majority of voters . A ███/IPSOS survey found 43 percent of the U.S. public supported additional border fencing .
Trump said he had heard about a possible deal in Washington before he took the stage , but added : “ Just so you know - we ’ re building the wall anyway . Maybe progress has been made - maybe not . ”
It was Trump ’ s first direct clash with a potential 2020 rival , albeit on separate stages .
O ’ Rourke relished the prime-time national platform , sometimes breaking into Spanish , in what sounded like a campaign speech . He decried the Trump administration ’ s separation of immigrant children from their parents at the border .
He said Dreamers - undocumented people brought to the United States by their parents when they were children - should be given citizenship , and their parents a pathway to citizenship .
“ With a president who describes Mexican immigrants as rapists and criminals , we have a chance to tell him and the country that immigrants commit crime at a lower rate than Americans who are born in this country , ” he said to shouts of “ Beto , Beto . ”
Trump was pressing his case on immigration in the Democratic bastion of El Paso county , where the population is over 80 percent Hispanic .
“ I will never sign a bill that forces the mass release of violent criminals into our country , ” he said , referring to a Democratic proposal in the Washington talks to lower the cap on detentions of criminal aliens by Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) .
Under Monday ’ s tentative agreement , the cap would likely stay around the same as in previous years , a congressional aide said .
Although O ’ Rourke ’ s full-throated denunciation of the president sounded like he planned to run against Trump , the two-time congressman declined to discuss a potential bid when asked by reporters on a conference call on Monday .
O ’ Rourke told Oprah Winfrey last week he would make a final decision about running for president by the end of the month .