President Trump announced on Sunday that the former head of the U.S. Border Patrol under President Barack Obama will be his administration ’ s new chief of Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) .
Trump in a tweet on Sunday announced that Mark Morgan will take over as head of ICE -- replacing former acting ICE Director Ronald Vitiello , who resigned earlier this month .
“ I am pleased to inform all of those that believe in a strong , fair and sound Immigration Policy that Mark Morgan will be joining the Trump Administration as the head of our hard working men and women of ICE , '' Trump tweeted Sunday . `` Mark is a true believer and American Patriot . He will do a great job ! ''
Trump wrote Sunday night that the agency 's acting director , Matt Albence , would remain in his job until Morgan is confirmed . “ Matt is tough and dedicated and has my full support to deploy ICE to the maximum extent of the law ! ”
Morgan has been critical of attempts – of the lack thereof -- by Congress to end the migration crisis at the U.S. ’ southern border with Mexico .
MARK MORGAN : TRUMP CRITICS SAY THERE 'S NO EMERGENCY AT THE BORDER . THE NUMBERS SHOW THEY ARE WRONG
Speaking on “ America ’ s Newsroom ” last week , Morgan said that Congress has “ shown again and again their failure to do what ’ s right ” to fix the problem .
“ They want to eat the elephant in one bite instead of looking at what they need to do right now , ” he said .
Morgan said what Congress should be doing is fixing the so-called Flores Settlement , which prevents migrant families and children caught crossing the border illegally from being detained for more than 20 days .
Morgan also said during a previous interview on ███ that he supports an idea floated by President Trump to send immigrants from the border to sanctuary cities .
“ Border Patrol , ICE , their facilities are overwhelmed , the faith-based organizations and other non-governmental organizations are overwhelmed , ” Morgan said . “ They have no choice . They ’ re going to have to start pushing these individuals out . Should n't we kind of share the burden throughout the country ? ”
Morgan , who served in the last six months of the Obama administration and a seemingly unlikely source of support for President Trump , said in response , “ I ’ m here and I 've broken my silence for one reason : because it ’ s fact . ”
He added , “ What the president is saying and what they 're trying to do as far as the policy goes , it ’ s based on reality and fact and I know that because he ’ s listening to the experts . Not political pundits , not talking heads , he is listening to experts . Anyone who says this a manufactured crisis is absolutely misleading the American people . ”