It ’ s not “ abolish ICE , ” but House Democrats took their best shot Monday , announcing a bill to slash the Department of Homeland Security ’ s deportation operations by 25 % , blocking new hiring of Border Patrol agents and trying to erase dozens of miles of President Trump ’ s border wall .
The fiscal 2021 spending bill introduced by the House Appropriations Committee would claw back the $ 1.4 billion Congress agreed to this year and would ban any new construction .
Democrats said the measure also would eliminate detention of families by the end of the year , forcing U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement to release them into the community .
Homeland Security would be ordered to expand access to lawyers for people facing deportation , and watchdogs would receive new funding to police ICE ’ s operations .
Top Democrats made no bones about their goal of handcuffing Mr. Trump , particularly when it comes to wall construction , which one called a “ racist … boondoggle . ”
“ Our bill fights for a more humane immigration approach , including the more restricted use of civil detention , expanded alternatives to detention , and the phase-out of family detention this year , ” said Rep. Lucille Roybal-Allard , chairwoman of the subcommittee that oversees Homeland Security funding .
The bill is national Democrats ‘ first law enforcement ante amid Black Lives Matters ’ “ defund the police ” crusade . Still to come later this week is Democrats ‘ proposal for funding for the Justice Department .
ICE became a flashpoint in the immigration debate over the last decade , though it has become particularly intense under Mr. Trump and his battle with sanctuary cities .
Calls to abolish the agency picked up steam in 2018 , during the government ’ s zero-tolerance border policy , which led to criminal charges against parents who jumped the border with children — and led to separation of those families , without adequate measures in place to reunite them .
Democrats , who took control of the House in 2019 , didn ’ t have much luck cutting the agency in their first year , but the new bill signals they aren ’ t discouraged .
The measure would slash $ 1.1 billion from ICE ’ s deportation and detention division , cutting it to $ 3.3 billion . That ’ s $ 2.4 billion less than Mr. Trump asked for .
At this point last year , ICE had more than 50,000 people in detention , and as of late last month still had 22,805 people in detention , even after coronavirus releases . The bill would cut that to just 10,000 during the pandemic , and just 22,000 in normal times . Instead , it pumps money into ankle bracelets and phone check-in programs .
Cesar Vargas , an immigrant-rights activist and advocate for abolishing ICE , called that “ a right step to diminish the power of a rogue agency that has a bloated budget and doesn ’ t keep our country safe . ”
“ The main goal , however , is to completely abolish this agency and allocate these millions of dollars to USCIS to help immigrants become tax paying citizens and help their adjustment in the U.S. better , ” said Mr. Vargas , who became one of the first “ Dreamers ” to practice law .
Other groups that have called for abolishing ICE , though , were silent on the new bill .
Those who want to see stricter enforcement said the legislation was an attempt to “ dismantle immigration enforcement . ”
“ Making catch and release the law of the land will ensure the next border surge , ” said Rosemary Jenks , vice president at NumbersUSA .
The bill also imposes a general 20-day limit on detention — far shorter than most deportations take — and sets an even higher standard for detaining transgender migrants , limiting them to five days in detention .
Ms. Roybal-Allard has slated the bill for action in her subcommittee Tuesday .
Overall , Mr. Trump had asked for $ 15.8 billion for Customs and Border Protection . The bill allocates $ 14.6 billion . He wanted $ 10 billion for ICE , while the legislation gives him just $ 7.4 billion . Last year the agency received more than $ 8 billion .
Mr. Trump asked for $ 2 billion for border wall construction this year , less than the $ 5 billion he sought for 2020 — but still more than the $ 1.375 billion Congress allocated for 2020 .
Angered by Congress ‘ decision , Mr. Trump claimed emergency powers and shifted billions from Pentagon accounts to go to his wall .
That transfer of money is under litigation , with opponents arguing he is violating Congress ’ s power of the purse by directing money to places lawmakers didn ’ t intend . The administration counters that Congress never specifically banned the transfer of money , and it was legal under both Defense Department spending law and the National Emergencies Act .
Democrats ‘ new bill seeks to remove all doubt , explicitly barring any new wall construction and rescinding even the $ 1.375 billion included in the 2020 bill .
The bill does include $ 75 million for the Fish and Wildlife Service to mitigate effects of past wall construction .