EL PASO – Lyda Ness-Garcia listened with stunned dismay last week as President Donald Trump said her hometown was “ once considered one of our nation 's most dangerous cities , ” then announced a campaign rally here to draw support for his border wall and re-election next year .
On Monday , she and other activists will lead protestors in a counter rally to the president ’ s gathering that will include former congressman Beto O ’ Rourke , local leaders , taco trucks and teams of mariachisplaying Bob Marley ’ s “ Get Up , Stand Up . ”
Their message : El Paso is safe , vibrant and open for business .
“ People are so eager to believe the worst of us in border towns , '' said Ness-Garcia , a family law attorney and founder of Women ’ s March El Paso . “ We are proud El Pasoans . We will show America and the world who we really are . ”
Once again , a border community along the Texas-Mexico border finds itself at the center of a divisive national debate over immigration and border security – and defending itself from perceptions of rampant criminality .
Last month , Trump traveled to McAllen , 800 miles southeast on the Texas border , to meet with officials from U.S. Customs and Border Protection amidst a government shutdown that centered on his demands for $ 5.7 billion to build a border wall . McAllen residents were quick to remind the world they live in a safe community with a relatively low violent crime rate , prompting one theater owner to display on his theater ’ s marquee : `` WELCOME TO MCALLEN , 7TH SAFEST CITY IN AMERICA . ''
On Monday , the president will speak in front of several thousand supporters at the El Paso County Coliseum , located a short stroll from the U.S.-Mexico border . As in his McAllen 's visit , Trump ’ s trip to El Paso will be rife with political undertones : It ’ s a campaign event in a strongly Democratic county , the hometown of O ’ Rourke – considered a potential challenger to Trump in 2020 – and just four days before another partial government shutdown could begin .
A bipartisan group of lawmakers were negotiating ahead of Friday ’ s deadline , but on Sunday , those talks appeared to stall , setting up another face-off over funding .
Many here seethed at Trump ’ s characterization of El Paso during his State of the Union address last week , when he said the border city had “ extremely high rates of violent crime ” until a border fence was installed . The peak of violent crime in El Paso – at about 6,500 violent crimes per year – was recorded in 1993 , well before the fence was erected in 2008 , and has fallen steadily since , according to an analysis by the El Paso Times .
But even at its violent peak , El Paso recorded lower levels of violent crime than comparably-sized cities , such as the 22,000 violent crimes reported by the Baltimore City Police Department and 16,600 reported by police in Washington , D.C. , the same year , according to the Times .
The president ’ s remarks felt like another dagger aimed at border communities who have lived in harmony with their Mexican neighbors for generations , said state Sen. José Rodriguez , whose district represents El Paso .
Besides the misleading perception that danger lurks in El Paso at the hands of immigrants , such comments erode trust built up over the years between local law enforcement and immigrant communities , said Rodriguez , who spent 20 years as the county ’ s top prosecutor .
That cooperation helped law enforcement break up migrant smuggling rings , drive out gangs and significantly lower crime , he said .
“ What I fear is that , with the kinds of statements Trump makes , people will conflate violence with Mexico , ” Rodriguez said . “ El Paso is a very safe community . It ’ s just simply outrageous people like President Trump will depict us as living in a dangerous area . ”
Falling crime stats aside , El Paso is struggling with a growing immigration crisis . The number of immigrant families apprehended by the Border Patrol ’ s El Paso Sector has soared in recent years , from 562 in fiscal year 2014 to 8,609 in fiscal year 2017 and 12,312 last fiscal year . Over Christmas , hundreds of immigrants released from federal immigration custody were dropped off at downtown bus shelters , sending churches and activist groups scrambling to assist them .
Adolpho Telles , chairman of El Paso County Republican Party , said he feels the area has become safer since federal authorities erected the border fence in El Paso , limiting the streams of migrants who were crossing into the community .
Shortly after Trump ’ s State of the Union , Telles received a request from the president ’ s campaign for 150 volunteers to help at the rally , which he secured within two days , he said .
In McAllen last month , more than 100 Trump supporters lined a busy street near the airport in a well-organized rally to welcome the president . Telles said he does n't expect a similar pro-Trump rally to materialize in El Paso , but he hoped both sides of the divisive debate could respect the other on Monday .
“ I hope El Paso gives the president an extremely El Paso-friendly welcome , ” he said . “ I hope the president spends more time talking about unity in the nation and I hope we as a city could show that unity . ”
Silvestre Reyes , a former Border Patrol sector chief here and ex-Congressman representing El Paso , said he was taken aback by the inaccuracy of Trump 's recent comments . Illegal crossings into El Paso dropped from around 10,000 a day to less than 200 after he launched Operation Hold the Line -- more than a decade before the security fence went up .
He said he found Trump 's comments -- followed by his decision to hold a campaign rally here -- distasteful .
`` ‪It ’ s very frustrating to have someone at that level who could misrepresent what actually goes on '' Reyes said .
Ness-Garcia , the march organizer , said she and others are dismayed that El Paso has been the site for controversial federal immigration practices . The Trump administration launched a pilot program here for family separations before expanding the program , she said . The policy drew fierce criticism and was ultimately dropped , though it remains unclear how many children were separated from the families and are still being separated .
And the Tornillo faciltiy , a tent city housing migrant youth that also later closed under withering criticism , was operated nearby .
`` El Paso , unfortunately , has been the testing grounds for some of the most inhumane policies of this administration , '' Ness-Garcia said . `` Yes , there 's a lot of anger , but there 's allo a lot of positivity . That 's what we want to focus on : being peaceful and passionate . ''
Perception is important in a place like El Paso , the nation 's 10th largest exporter and whose retail stores rely heavily on shoppers crossing over from Mexico .
Local leaders are continuously fighting negative portrayals of El Paso , not just arising from Washington but from Hollywood , as well , said Jon Barela , chief executive of the Borderplex Alliance , an El-Paso-based economic development group .
Movies , like Oscar-nominated `` Sicario , '' have portrayed El Paso as struggling to rebuff the carnage spilling over from cartel violence across the border in Ciudad Juarez , Mexico .
“ That ’ s the image we have to fight every single day , and it ’ s a false image of our area , '' Barela said .
At Lucy ’ s Coffee Shop near downtown El Paso , diners munched on breakfast burritos and debated which of the two rallies they ’ d rather attend : Trump ’ s or O ’ Rourke ’ s .
Jessica Kludt , 34 , an attorney , said she was definitely going to the latter .
“ I ’ m hoping the Beto rally will be full and the Trump rally is empty , ” she said . “ That ’ s my hope . ”