President Obama used a naturalization ceremony Monday at the White House to put pressure on an absent Congress to “ finish the job ” of immigration reform .
Mr. Obama has presided over such ceremonies in the past , but the White House used this event in the East Room to ratchet up pressure on lawmakers whose leaders are nearing agreement on a sweeping immigration bill despite misgivings among some rank-and-file legislators .
“ The time has come to fix it once and for all , ” Mr. Obama said of the nation ’ s immigration system at the ceremony for 28 new U.S. citizens . “ We ’ ve just got at this point to work up the political courage to do what ’ s required to be done . ”
Congress is on a two-week recess for Easter , during which time aides are continuing to draft the legislation that likely will be introduced next month , a process that has the support of both parties ’ leaders in both chambers .
A bipartisan group of senators is working on a proposal that would put 11 million illegal immigrants on a path to citizenship while allowing tens of thousands of new high- and low-skilled workers into the country . It would include a boost in the number of visas for high-tech workers , a new guest-worker program and elimination of some categories of visas for extended family members .
One of the sticking points has been a dispute over wages for lower-skilled temporary workers , which pits the U.S. Chamber of Commerce against the AFL-CIO . Under the proposal , as many as 200,000 immigrants would be granted visas each year for low-skilled jobs that U.S. employers have difficulty filling .
In the House , Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican , has said that a bipartisan bill could be introduced in the next few weeks .
Mr. Obama called the progress “ good news , ” but he said Congress needs to complete its work soon .
“ I expect the debate to begin next month , ” he said . “ I want to sign that bill into law as soon as possible . We know that real reform means continuing to strengthen our border security and holding employers accountable . ”
The legislation will call for increased border control , though U.S. Customs and Border Protection last week stunned lawmakers by telling them that it does not have a way to effectively measure border security .
Not all powerful lawmakers are on board with the “ speedy bill ” approach favored by Mr. Obama and Capitol Hill ’ s leaders , either .
Sen. Jeff Sessions of Alabama and five other Republican senators fired a letter off last week to Judiciary Committee Chairman Patrick J. Leahy saying they want more hearings and time to study before any bill is pushed through the committee . They pointed out that 43 new senators have joined the chamber since 2007 , when the last major congressional push on immigration happened .
While in the past the issue divided each party and its constituents , Democrats are increasingly united behind Mr. Obama ’ s push . But Republicans are split between concerns about border security and a desire to win over Hispanic voters , who have been reluctant to vote for GOP presidential candidates the past two elections .
In 2007 , President George W. Bush tried to pass a comprehensive immigration-reform bill with the help of the new Democrat-controlled Congress . But the fragile left-right coalition snapped when voters flooded the Senate switchboards calling for the focus to be on border security , and when those in both parties split over how to handle future foreign workers .
The president has made immigration one of the top priorities of his second term , mindful of a long-standing promise to Hispanic voters that he would achieve the goal . The movement on the issue since November ’ s elections also reflects concern among Republican lawmakers about Hispanics ’ growing support for Democratic candidates , and the perception among Hispanics that the GOP is anti-immigration .
“ If we want to keep attracting the best and the brightest that the world has to offer , then we need to do a better job of welcoming them , ” he said .
Thirteen of the people who took the oath of citizenship at the White House are members of the U.S. military . The president praised them for “ a willingness to risk their lives in defense of a nation that was not yet their own . ”
“ That ’ s a remarkable act , ” he said . “ It made each of them in some ways American even before it was official , because that kind of service and sacrifice has defined our nation for more than two centuries . ”