President Trump is reportedly furious that his border wall is not being fully funded . In a private meeting with members of the U.S. Senate , Trump was frustrated that the funds for his $ 25 billion project are not being served upfront . The president also threatened to shutdown the government in order to get the funds he needs for this critical campaign promise ( via Politico ) :
In a private meeting regarding the wall Monday , Trump fumed to senators and his own staff about the $ 1.6 billion the Senate is planning to send him this fall , according to two people familiar with the meeting . Trump wants the full $ 25 billion upfront and doesn ’ t understand why Congress is going to supply him funds in a piecemeal fashion — even though that ’ s how the spending process typically works . “ He ’ s focused on border security . And like all presidents , he wants it done now . But we ’ re part of the legislative process , it ’ s slower and deliberate , '' said Senate Appropriations Chairman Richard Shelby ( R-Ala. ) , who met with Trump . The president said at the meeting that if Congress doesn ’ t give him the resources he needs for border security , he will shut down the government in September , according to one of the people familiar with the meeting . He did not give a specific number , but has been fixated on getting the $ 25 billion in a lump sum . GOP lawmakers are loath to see a government shutdown on their watch just weeks before the midterm elections .
Is that bad for the GOP ? Oh yeah—but let ’ s not forget that the Trump agenda benefits the GOP , but also his core group of voters who aren ’ t all Republicans . Trump was able to navigate a checkered path with his base , building off of GOP voters—90 percent of whom voted for him in 2016—and millions of Democrats and Independents who liked his attitude . He was change . He was different . And Hillary looked like the same old movie , only that it would yield more economic pain . A lot of Obama voters flipped for Trump ; you don ’ t bury Clinton the way Trump did in Ohio without help from the other side of the aisle . If Trump is seen as bashing both parties to check off another action item from his agenda , he will be rewarded .
This is an easy item to understand . It ’ s funding for a wall , a wall that has been unable to be scaled by U.S. Special Forces . Obamacare was a tricky task . There are market factors to contend with , the IRS code due to the new taxes , the regulations , etc . it was a mess . And after nearly a decade of campaigning for its repeal , the GOP failed . There are no such strings attached with a wall . In politics , if you promise a simple thing like building a wall and fail , then you need to do something else . Trump is not like that . He ’ ll find a way to win .
Trump ’ s go-to shouldn ’ t be to put his party , most of which agree with most of his agenda items , in a terrible position so close to the midterms . Trump wants more GOP members elected , but that doesn ’ t mean Trump won ’ t do this . He will .
The immigration issue is one the splits the GOP , Democrats know this , which leads us to this discharge petition nonsense . It would have allowed the Left to hold immigration votes without the blessing of the House GOP leadership if they found 218 signatories . This effort was three votes shy , so we ’ re going to have a vote on two bills that probably won ’ t pass this week . Who got Democrats so close to success on this push ? Well , that would be moderate Republicans .