In the end , immigration reform really was a done deal in the Senate . Debates come down to numbers on Capitol Hill , and the Gang of Eight reform team had the numbers . Needing 60 votes to overcome a filibuster , they started with the Senate 's 54 Democrats and then added the four Republican Gang members . With 58 votes in the bag , it was n't hard to get to 60 . So most of the 14 Republicans who ultimately voted for the bill were extras , not needed for passage but helpful to allow the reformers to claim a broad mandate .
From the beginning , many Senate Republicans were terrified of immigration reform . They knew a large part of their base opposed any measure that smelled of `` amnesty . '' But they were also deeply shaken by last November 's election results , in which Mitt Romney won just 27 percent of the Hispanic vote . Some GOP strategists , and some Senate colleagues , told them the Republican Party would be finished unless it supported reform .
What to do ? First , they tried not to stick their necks out . For several months , if you asked a Republican senator a substantive question about immigration , the answer was , `` Let 's see what Marco comes up with . ''
Florida Sen. Marco Rubio has been more than the GOP point man on immigration . From January , when the Gang of Eight announced its intentions , until April , when it unveiled its bill , Rubio was the man Republicans hid behind . `` We 're waiting for Marco '' became the Senate Republican caucus 's unofficial position on immigration .
After the Gang unveiled its bill , one might have expected GOP lawmakers to take a stand . Instead , many still deferred to Rubio , saying they were waiting to see what kind of improvements he might deliver .
Republicans were able to keep their heads down in part because there was n't a lot of pressure coming from the anti-reform conservative base . And that owed a great deal to the Gang 's decision to dispatch Rubio , elected as a Tea Party favorite in 2010 and viewed as a future leader of the Republican Party , on a mission to allay conservative suspicions about the bill .
`` Menendez told me that Rubio 's role was to 'work over the conservative universe , particularly the conservative opinion-maker universe , ' in order to 'neutralize them ' and , in some cases , 'proselytize them , ' '' The New Yorker 's Ryan Lizza reported recently , referring to Democratic Gang member Robert Menendez . The leader of the Gang , Democrat Charles Schumer , `` was delighted to have a Tea Party conservative who could sell an immigration bill to the right , '' Lizza wrote .
The plan worked brilliantly . Conservative talk-radio hosts who might have instinctively opposed immigration reform as conceived by Schumer gave Rubio a respectful hearing and a lot of room . When Rubio told them the bill would secure the border first , they believed him .
Later , when it became unavoidably clear that , in fact , the bill would first legalize millions of currently illegal immigrants , and only after that start the work of securing the border , some conservatives began to express skepticism , disappointment and opposition . But Rubio 's neutralization campaign had bought the Gang precious months to write the bill and gather momentum before conservatives began to realize what was actually in it .
The Gang also got lucky . During the time the bill was under consideration , a lot of Republicans became distracted by various Obama administration troubles -- IRS targeting of conservatives , Justice Department spying on the press , NSA spying on everyone else , Benghazi . Immigration reform was simply less exciting than the latest scandal that might bring down the president . Then came Edward Snowden 's catch-me-if-you-can flight , and , lastly , two big Supreme Court decisions that overshadowed immigration reform 's final week in the Senate .
All that news tended to obscure the deep divisions inside the GOP over reform . Even with 14 Republicans voting yes on the Gang bill , more than twice that number , 32 , voted no . And then , of course , there is the GOP-controlled House , where reform might well die .
But the Senate is finished , at least for now . Over the last several months , beyond deferring to Rubio , the only other thing some Republicans would say about immigration was , `` We need to put this issue behind us . '' They were speaking politically , in the hope that they could vote for the Gang of Eight bill and then begin to reap benefits with Hispanic voters .
That 's highly unlikely , but one thing is for sure : They have disappointed a lot of their conservatives supporters , most likely for a long time .