John McCain nearly immolated himself within the party with his support for amnesty , Lowry writes . The amnesty fantasy
The networks had barely called the election for President Barack Obama before GOP elites rushed to embrace an amnesty for illegal immigrants .
Getting killed by almost 3-to-1 among Latino voters understandably concentrates the mind , but it ’ s no reason to lose it . The post-election Republican reaction has been built on equal parts panic , wishful thinking and ethnic pandering .
It ’ s one thing to argue that amnesty is the right policy on the merits . It ’ s another to depict it as the magic key to unlocking the Latino vote . John McCain nearly immolated himself within the Republican Party with his support for amnesty and did all of 4 percentage points better among Latino voters in 2008 than Mitt Romney did in 2012 , according to exit polls .
What is the common thread uniting McCain , the advocate of “ comprehensive ” immigration reform , and Romney the advocate of “ self-deportation ” ? They are both Republicans supporting conservative economic policies . Surely , that had more to do with their showing among Latinos than anything they did or didn ’ t say about immigration .
According to Census Bureau data , among native-born Hispanics , 50 percent of all households with children are headed by unmarried mothers . About 40 percent of all households receive benefits from a major welfare program . This doesn ’ t mean that the GOP shouldn ’ t try to appeal to voters in these households . It does mean that they aren ’ t natural Republican voters .
Latinos tend to have liberal attitudes toward government . Take health care . An ImpreMedia/Latino Decisions poll of Latinos conducted on the eve of the election found that 61 percent of Latinos support leaving Obamacare in place . Sixty-six percent believe government should ensure access to health insurance . This might have something to do with the fact that 32 percent of nonelderly Latinos lack health insurance , about twice the national average .