The White House announced that President Donald Trump will declare a national emergency at the U.S.-Mexico border in an attempt to secure his long-desired wall on Thursday .
Congressional aides indicated Trump could seek to divert as much as $ 21 billion from the Pentagon in order to build the wall he has claimed Mexico would fund , an aggressive move that has already drawn intense criticism from both parties .
Though Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-SC ) and Rep. Steve King ( R-IA ) expressed their support for the plan , other Republican lawmakers immediately raised concerns about the president ’ s latest attempt to save face with his base — questioning both the legality and the precedent it may set for a future Democratic president .
Sen. Susan Collins ( R-ME ) told reporters that declaring a national emergency to build a border wall would be “ a mistake on the part of the president ” of “ dubious constitutionality . ”
Sen. Rand Paul ( R-KY ) voiced similar criticisms , noting , “ The Constitution ’ s pretty clear : spending originates and is directed by Congress , so I ’ m not really for it . ”
In a statement , Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-FL ) said “ no crisis justifies violating the Constitution ” and warned that “ a future president may use this exact same tactic to impose the Green New Deal . ”
Rep. Cathy McMorris-Rodgers ( R-WA ) , who was the chair of the House Republican Caucus until last month , also tweeted a warning about potential implications of Trump ’ s precedent .
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D-CA ) seemingly affirmed those concerns , as did Sens . Kamala Harris ( D-CA ) and Elizabeth Warren ( D-MA ) , both 2020 presidential candidates , on Twitter . Pelosi , for instance , noted that a Democratic president could use the precedent Trump sets with his fabricated emergency to declare gun violence a national emergency .
“ That ’ s a national emergency , ” Pelosi told reporters Thursday , the anniversary of the Parkland school shooting . “ Why don ’ t you declare that emergency , Mr. President ? … A Democratic president could . ”
Rep. Jerry Nadler ( D-NY ) , the chair of the House Judiciary Committee , told the Washington Post that Democrats are prepared to take the president to court if he goes through with his plan to circumvent Congress . And they ’ re not alone — multiple organizations , like Public Citizen and Protect Democracy , said Thursday that they are preparing to file lawsuits challenging an emergency declaration .
Trump ’ s own Justice Department reportedly told the White House that an emergency declaration for a border wall is “ nearly certain to be blocked by the courts on at least a temporary basis , preventing immediate implementation of the president ’ s plan to pay for the wall . ”
But since Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-KY ) announced the president ’ s plan , after previously urging him not to take such a step , it seems unlikely that Trump will face any real consequences from his party .
Trump accused President Barack Obama of using executive actions to “ subvert the Constitution ” in 2014 “ because he is unable to negotiate w/ Congress . ”