The renewed flood of illegal immigration children anticipated this year hasn ’ t materialized , as children are crossing at far lower rates than last year and even lower than 2013 , according to new Border Patrol statistics that suggest some of the things the Obama administration did are helping .
Thousands of children are still being caught , but it ’ s a slower and more regular pace than 2014 ’ s wild spike , which saw 7,700 apprehended at the southwest border in April alone , and more than 10,000 each in May and June . By contrast , this April saw just 3,272 unaccompanied minors caught — a drop of 58 percent year to year .
Through the first seven months of the fiscal year , just 18,919 children were caught total , down from the 36,280 a year earlier at the same time .
Agents accused of abusing the children last year have been cleared , and the government is now even meeting its legal 72-hour deadline for processing the kids at the border and releasing them to social workers , who are quickly placing the children with their relatives or foster families here in the U.S .
Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson has been clear that he ’ s not declaring mission accomplished yet , but officials are hopeful the downward trend is permanent after taking myriad steps , including stiffer detention rules here at home , a public relations campaign back in Central America and leaning on the governments of Mexico , El Salvador , Guatemala and Honduras to do more to stanch the flow at their ends .
“ It ’ s a combination of all the things , ” Ronald D. Vitiello , deputy chief of the Border Patrol , told The ███ .
Last year ’ s surge dominated headlines in the early summer , and the administration ’ s efforts to find places to house the children sparked protests in communities across the country , and even forced President Obama to delay his plans to expand his deportation amnesty .
The children , officially dubbed Unaccompanied Alien Children — or UAC in government-speak — came chiefly from three Central American countries : Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador . They were traveling without their parents , though often were in large groups with siblings and shepherded by “ coyotes , ” who are paid upwards of $ 6,000 per head to get them into the U.S. , where they were usually pointed toward agents .
As the surge took hold last spring , internal Border Patrol estimates guessed as many as 90,000 children would cross the border in fiscal year 2014 , and possibly 120,000 this year .
But it never materialized . By the end of last year , just 68,541 had been caught .
Mr. Johnson said they can pinpoint the exact day — June 10 , 2014 — when the spike of children peaked . The numbers fell steadily from then , bottoming out in January , with only slightly more than 2,100 unaccompanied minors caught .
This year the numbers have risen as the weather has improved , but are nowhere near their level of last year . If the current pace holds , fewer than 40,000 will be caught .
Chief Vitiello said the efforts the U.S. made to convince would-be immigrants there were no “ permisos , ” or free passes , at this end of the journey — and that they could be detained and sent back home — helped .
“ Being able to message out to the sending countries and to the individuals that would be coming to the border that there was not a free ride , that they were being exploited by the public perception and the smugglers themselves I think they all recognized that , ” the chief said .
Among the other steps the Homeland Security Department took were assigning agents to go after the smuggling networks themselves , in something dubbed Operation Coyote , and working with Central American countries so they are ready to accept their own citizens when the U.S. deports them .
Officials from Mr. Obama and Vice President Joseph R. Biden on down also urged Central American governments to do more to convince their citizens to stay home .
Jessica Vaughan , policy studies director at the Center for Immigration Studies , said the numbers are running lower , but there are other parts of the story that aren ’ t told in those numbers .
“ It could be because many more are being interdicted in Mexico and sent home ; it could be because more succeeded in getting past the Border Patrol ; it could be because the smugglers are laying low ; it could be because of more violence in some parts of northern Mexico from the drug cartel mayhem distracting or interrupting the smugglers ; it could be because people heard that the president ’ s big amnesty was blocked in the courts , ” Ms. Vaughan said . “ Without more information , it ’ s impossible to know for sure . ”
She said a better measure of the government ’ s response is how many of the children caught in last year ’ s surge have shown up for their hearings and have been deported .
A recent report by the Congressional Research Service said 62 percent of children failed to show up for cases before immigration judges from July through February . All of them were ordered deported , but that is unlikely because deportation officers have been told to focus on other “ priority ” immigrants .
Ms. Vaughan also said that families crossing — a parent with at least one child — are now as big a problem as the children , and that both populations present major challenges for the communities that have to resettle them .
Last year ’ s surge was accompanied by an acrimonious debate in the U.S. about the causes . Those who wanted to see a crackdown on illegal immigration blamed Mr. Obama ’ s policies , saying word got back to Central America about his 2012 deportation amnesty for Dreamers , which was pulling more illegal immigrants here .
Top Obama administration officials and human rights advocates initially dismissed those claims , arguing that the illegal immigrants were being pushed out of Central America by increasing violence .
But the apprehension numbers have dropped this year even though crime rates remain high in the region . Honduras is under a new U.S. State Department crime warning , Guatemala is reporting a continued high murder rate , and El Salvador is seeing a major spike in murders , with March topping a 10-year high , according to news reports from the region .
That bolsters critics who blamed the administration ’ s policies of releasing most Central American illegal immigrant children and families into the community on the hope — often unrealized — that they would show up for deportation hearings .
Chief Vitiello said they don ’ t have the ability in hindsight to pinpoint the root of the surge , but he said “ clearly violence did drive some of this traffic. ” He also said that fellow agencies bolstered their ability to process the children and to detain families , and that word has gotten back to Central America that the journey could end up in a quick turnaround and deportation for some .
“ We ’ d like to make it sustainable and continue that message , ” he said .
The flow of children has dropped from each of the three countries . Honduras has seen a major dip , and is running only about a fifth of its rate of last year . El Salvador is a third its previous rate , and Guatemala is about half . Mexico , which has special rules for its unaccompanied children who reach the U.S. , is also down .
It ’ s not just Homeland Security that ’ s ready for this year . The social workers at Health and Human Services , who take the children once they ’ re processed by the Border Patrol , say they almost always place children in a facility the same day and find homes for them with relatives or other sponsors within a month .
So far this year , about 15,000 children have been referred to HHS , and 14,000 of them have been placed with sponsors , a department spokesman said .
During last year ’ s surge , the Border Patrol faced complaints of abuse and mistreatment aimed at some children . The American Civil Liberties Union and several other immigration advocacy groups filed a report with details of 116 illegal immigrant children who said they ’ d been pushed , kept in cold rooms and denied sleep , or were verbally abused .
Mr. Johnson and Customs and Border Protection Commissioner R. Gil Kerlikowske asked for an internal investigation into the complaints , and the department ’ s inspector general quickly dismissed most of them as unsubstantiated . Instead , officials found agents and officers made near-heroic efforts to handle the situation , digging into their own pockets to provide toys or clothing for the children , even as they themselves sometimes contracted chicken pox or lice .
The internal investigation into the complaints has apparently been closed . As of Monday , the investigators weren ’ t looking at the issue anymore , a spokeswoman said .
Mr. Vitiello said his agents got a bad rap from the accusations , and said their heroic efforts should be recognized .
“ We see people in dire straits on a regular basis , and you can ’ t serve the American people in this work without having compassion , ” he said .