Congressional Republicans on Sunday criticized a White House plan on immigration reform that allows illegal immigrants to become legal , permanent residents within eight years -- saying Congress will never pass such a proposal and questioning President Obama ’ s intent .
Kentucky Republican Sen. Rand Paul said the plan is untenable and so outside of what the country wants that it suggests Obama is not sincere about passing immigration reform .
“ The president is torpedoing his own plan , ” Paul told “ ███ Sunday. ” “ It shows me he is really not serious . … The bill won ’ t pass . ”
The draft immigration bill being circulated by the White House also includes plans for a new visa for illegal immigrants living in the United States , as first reported by USA Today .
Obama 's bill would create a `` Lawful Prospective Immigrant '' visa for the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants living in the country . The bill includes more security funding and requires business owners to adopt a system for verifying the immigration status of new hires within four years , the newspaper said .
On Saturday , Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio called the White House proposal `` half-baked and seriously flawed . ''
Rubio -- part of an eight-member , bipartisan Senate panel working on an immigration reform bill -- also said the proposal was disappointing to those “ working on serious solutions ” and repeats failures of past legislation .
He said the White House also erred in not seeking input from Republican lawmakers .
`` If actually proposed , the president 's bill would be dead on arrival in Congress , leaving us with unsecured borders and a broken legal immigration system for years to come , '' Rubio said in a statement .
Obama Chief of Staff Denis McDonough said Sunday the White House is working with members and staffers of the so-called “ Gang of Eight ” and that the White House hasn ’ t proposed anything so far to Capitol Hill on immigration .
McDonough declined to answer repeated questions on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” about why the White House didn ’ t first consult Rubio , consider the key Republican on the issue .
“ We are doing exactly what we said we would do , which is we will be prepared in the event that the bipartisan talks on the Hill … do not work out , ” he told NBC .
USA Today also reported that the bill would require that immigrants pass a criminal background check , submit biometric information and pay fees to qualify for the new visa .
Immigrants who served more than a year in prison for a criminal conviction or were convicted of three or more crimes and were sentenced to a total of 90 days in jail would not be eligible . Crimes committed in other countries that would bar immigrants from legally entering the country would also be ineligible .
Those immigrants facing deportation would be eligible to apply for the visa , the newspaper reported . Immigrants would be eligible to apply for a green card within eight years , if they learn English and U.S. history and government , and they would later be eligible to become U.S. citizens .
House Budget Committee Chairman Rep. Paul Ryan took back the praise he gave Obama for his State of the Union remarks on immigration .
“ Putting these details out without a guest worker program , without addressing future flow , by giving advantage to those who cut in front of line for immigrants who came here legally , not dealing with border security adequately , that tells us that he 's looking for a partisan advantage and not a bipartisan solution , ” The Wisconsin Republican told ABC ’ s “ This Week . ”
Last month , the group of senators announced they had agreed on the general outline of an immigration plan .
Obama has said he would not submit his own legislation to Congress so long as law makers acted `` in a timely manner . '' If they failed , he said , `` I will send up a bill based on my proposal and insist that they vote on it right away . ''
Paul also told Fox he will submit an amendment to the upcoming Senate bill calling for a General Accounting Office report stating U.S. borders are secure that must be periodically updated .
Clark Stevens , a White House spokesman , said Saturday that Obama still supports a bipartisan effort to craft a comprehensive immigration bill . `` While the president has made clear he will move forward if Congress fails to act , progress continues to be made and the administration has not prepared a final bill to submit , '' he said in a statement .
Ali Noorani , executive director of the National Immigration Forum , described the draft bill as a `` very moderate '' proposal . While the path to citizenship was welcomed by Noorani , he said not enough attention was being paid to future immigration .
`` Commonsense immigration reform must include a functioning immigration system for the future , '' Noorani said in a statement . `` Reform does not begin and end with citizenship and enforcement alone . ''