Perhaps no issue divides Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump more sharply than what to do about illegal immigration . Part 2 of a five-part series on the view from the US-Mexico border .
McALLEN , TEXAS – When she stepped off the smuggler ’ s raft on the north shore of the Rio Grande and took her first tentative steps into the United States , Carolina didn ’ t quite know what to expect .
There was no guide to lead her beyond the river ’ s edge . The coyote pointed up the steep bank and then pushed off to paddle the empty raft back across the river to Mexico .
The 46-year-old grandmother made the perilous month-long journey from El Salvador with her 28-year-old daughter , Elena , and her 3-year-old granddaughter , Julianni .
They had traveled more than a thousand miles from Central America , eluding capture by Mexican authorities , and surrendering $ 14,500 to thieves and smugglers .
Now , in a dusty no-man ’ s-land at the southern edge of Texas ’ Rio Grande Valley , came their moment of truth .
When Carolina and Elena spot a Border Patrol truck a few hundred yards away , they do not run for cover to try to avoid being caught and sent home . Instead , they shout and wave their hands above their heads to attract the agents ’ attention .
They are not alone in using this counterintuitive tactic . It has become a reliable method to gain entry to the United States for more than 137,000 unauthorized migrants this year from troubled parts of Central America .
In an election year dominated by harsh talk about illegal immigration and criminals flooding across the Mexican border , the scene on the north bank of the Rio Grande is far different than one might expect .
Instead of rapists and drug traffickers , these new arrivals are babies and toddlers , boys and girls , and young teens . They are moms and dads , and even the occasional grandmother .
The vast majority of them are coming by raft across the Rio Grande in south Texas – more than 200 a day , every day from El Salvador , Guatemala , and Honduras . Many of them are children arriving unaccompanied , some as young as two .
Once inside the US , virtually all of them are turning themselves in .
This tactic reached unsustainable proportions in 2014 , overwhelming the Border Patrol ’ s ability to handle the crush of humanity . It fell off a bit in 2015 , but this year the numbers rose sharply again , matching levels of the 2014 crisis .
“ It is crazy . It has gotten to the point where we are running out of Border Patrol agents , ” says Christopher Cabrera , an agent based in the Rio Grande Valley and vice president of the National Border Patrol Council , the agents ’ union .
“ They are turning themselves in to deputy sheriffs , to the constables ; there have even been a couple of cases where they turned themselves in to the grounds crew cutting the grass at a state park . ”
Some analysts argue that President Obama ’ s unilateral executive action offering special legal status to millions of children of unauthorized immigrants already living in the US has sent a strong signal encouraging would-be immigrants from Central America to try to gain the same benefits for their own children .
Others say the rising tide of migrants from Central America is driven by the intense threat from violent criminal gangs and widespread corruption in that region . People are fleeing out of desperation in the face of extortion rackets and soaring murder rates .
Still other analysts point to lies made by smugglers in Central America promising wonderful benefits for any child who makes it to the US .
“ Flat-out lies , that ’ s what ’ s bringing people by the trainload into the United States , ” says Juanita Molina , a migrant rights activist in Arizona . “ It is not that we [ in the US ] are creating opportunities for them or we are taking them in , ” she says . “ People are being lied to and exploited . ”
The Obama administration has tried to create a credible deterrent to this illicit trafficking by detaining and deporting some families and children . But the glacial pace of the US immigration system seems incapable of sending a single unified message of deterrence .
While some migrants are being sent home , others are winning their cases in immigration court and being allowed to stay .
Perhaps most important from the migrants ’ perspective , once they arrive in the US and are processed by the Border Patrol , they are being released and permitted to travel in the US pending a formal removal hearing before an immigration judge . Such hearings can take years , analysts say . In the meantime , the children and parents are safe in the US .
The paradox here is that the lies told by the smugglers appear to have come true , at least for some migrants .
“ What the smugglers will do is say , you pay me $ 5,000 and I ’ ll take your kid to the border , ” says Jason De Leon , a University of Michigan anthropology professor studying Central American smugglers . “ They ’ ll go into detention and then they ’ ll get released to a family member – which oftentimes is actually what happens . ”
The legs of Carolina ’ s pants below the knees are still damp from her watery arrival in the US . After spotting the two women with the toddler , the responding Border Patrol agents hand them bottles of ice-cold water from their personal cooler , rather than from the case of unchilled water in the back of the truck .
Carolina and her daughter immediately start drinking . The fear and apprehension on their faces begins to melt away . Elena even manages a brief , slight smile .
Carolina is asked what she and her daughter were thinking upon arriving in the US . “ We knew that they would not kill us , ” she says , referring to the Border Patrol agents . “ The United States has always been supportive and protective of rights . ”
Elena says they paid $ 9,000 to a smuggler who abandoned them in Mexico . They paid a second smuggler $ 4,500 . “ It was our life savings , ” she says . “ We sold our house and everything . ”
For Carolina , the trip to the US has a double objective . She says it is aimed at improving her daughter ’ s life and saving Julianni ’ s .
The criminal gangs in El Salvador begin recruiting at age 10 or 12 , she says . But they had already started demanding money .
Carolina , Elena , and Julianni weren ’ t the only new arrivals in the Rio Grande Valley that morning . About three hundred yards away and around a corner , other Border Patrol agents were busy with a different group of 23 , also from El Salvador .
Oscar , 30 , stands in the shade with his 7-year-old son , Daniel . He says he paid the smugglers $ 4,000 for him and $ 1,000 for his son . They ’ d been on the road 28 days .
Asked why he came to the US , Oscar says simply : “ The future of my child . ”
Warren Richey/The ███ Danel ( left ) and Oscar crossed the US border near McAllen , Texas , with a group of 23 unauthorized immigrants from El Salvador .
The trip was necessary , he says , because a criminal gang had killed his two brothers . Afterward , gang members came to him and demanded $ 5,000 , he says .
Instead of paying the gang , he decided to pay smugglers . “ The risk is much higher to stay there than to come here , ” he says .
And your wife , he is asked . Where is she ? He does not answer . He is unable to speak the words . His eyes have filled with tears .
“ I will work here as much as I can , ” Oscar says , “ and send money back [ to her ] . ”
What happens next for the newly arrived has become an established routine .
After turning themselves in , the unauthorized migrants are interviewed by Border Patrol agents who must verify their identities . They check to make sure she or he isn ’ t on a terror watch list or have a criminal record . Then they are interviewed by other federal agents . When that review is complete , most are given a notice to appear before an immigration judge . It is in that hearing that they must prove why they should not be deported .
Most unauthorized migrants from Central America are seeking refugee status .
Mr. Cabrera says Border Patrol agents recognize a familiar pattern among new arrivals from Central America . He says they appear to have been coached on how to make a claim for asylum . To do so , they must demonstrate they have a credible fear of persecution or severe mistreatment if returned to their home country .
“ They ’ ll tell you three or four times their story and all their stories are cookie-cutter stories , ” he says . “ I ’ m sure there are quite a few bona fide asylum cases , but when you hear the same story 100 times a day word-for-word exactly the same way , you start to doubt it after a while . ”
Cabrera says the smugglers and their clients are exploiting a loophole in US immigration policy . He calls it a new version of “ catch and release . ”
“ If someone comes in and claims a credible fear , we give them [ a notice to appear in immigration court ] , and now they are free to move about the country for an indefinite period of time until their case can be adjudicated , ” he says .
The agent says that years ago it took six months to convene that hearing . Now it can take years because of a shortage of immigration judges and a growing backlog of immigration cases – even when Central American cases are supposed to be expedited .
In the meantime , the migrant is living and working in the US . In effect , the so-called unauthorized immigrant is nonetheless authorized to remain in the country – pending her deportation .
Some walk through that open door with no intention of ever showing up for their court hearing or complying with a removal order , analysts say . Given the government ’ s priority of focusing on noncitizen criminals for deportation , they are unlikely to face serious consequences for gaming the immigration system in this way provided they are not convicted of committing a serious crime , these analysts say .
“ The single biggest factor driving our illegal immigration right now is our catch and release program , ” Brandon Judd , president of the National Border Patrol Council , told a Senate panel in May .
He said once a notice to appear for an immigration hearing is issued to an individual , other legal constraints fall away . “ If you are an unaccompanied minor we will not only release you , but will escort you to your final destination , ” he said .
“ If you are a family unit , we will release you . If you claim credible fear , we will release you , ” he added .
It is not merely a policy preference . Under a longstanding federal court order , this release process must be expedited when migrant children are involved .
The government is not without tools to force compliance with immigration laws . In some cases , officials are requiring unauthorized migrants to wear a tracking device on their ankle to guarantee court appearances and , if necessary , departure from the country .
Nonetheless , critics say inconsistent US policies are sustaining a lucrative black market in the smuggling of children .
It is the policy of the US government to help a child who arrives alone at the border to reunite with a parent in the US , even if that parent does not have legal authorization to live or work in the US .
This creates a strong incentive for unauthorized migrants in the US to pay smugglers to bring their children across the border illegally , often at great risk to the children . Once the child surrenders to the Border Patrol , the US government helps facilitate the reunion with the parent .
“ So for the smugglers all they have to do is drop someone off ” on the US side of the border , says Professor De Leon .
It is a money-making machine for Central American smugglers and the Mexican cartels that control the south side of the US-Mexico border , officials say .
It is also an effective way for the cartels to divert Border Patrol resources that might otherwise be in position to intercept illicit narcotics , human trafficking victims , or other unauthorized migrants with criminal records who are still being smuggled into the US , these officials say .
Nonetheless , the US government itself is helping to complete the final stage of child-smuggling operations run by criminals in Central America and Mexico . It is an illicit smuggling operation in which parents themselves are also complicit .
“ How could any parent put their child to that risk , ” Cabrera asks . “ It would have to be pretty dire circumstances at home for me to risk my child ’ s life . And if I thought such a trip was necessary you can bet I am going with them , ” he says . “ I am not going to leave them in the care of a stranger . ”
“ You can ’ t leave kids in a car alone for 20 minutes in a Wal-Mart parking lot , and yet we are having parents put their kids on top of a train and travel through three countries to get here and then [ the US government ] is reuniting them with their parents , ” he adds .
Cabrera says a US citizen who engaged in similar conduct would lose his or her parental rights . “ But here we are giving the child back to that parent who put them in that situation , ” he says .
“ Are there dire circumstances [ in Central America ] ? Yes , but still you can ’ t make that child go it alone , ” he says . “ It is just inconceivable . ”
In April , a 2-year-old girl was deposited on the north bank of the Rio Grande by a smuggler . He had used a Sharpie to write the girl ’ s name , her mother ’ s name , and the mother ’ s US-based telephone number on the girl ’ s white T-shirt .
“ We have seen kids 2- and 3-years-old , who are by themselves , ” says Cabrera . “ When you see an 11-year-old or a 6-year-old by themselves , it is scary . But to have a 2-year-old abandoned alone on the riverbank is just insane . ”
Border Patrol agents have a responsibility as law enforcement officers to uphold the law . But most of them are parents , too .
“ I remember a little girl in downtown Nogales [ Arizona ] , she was maybe 10 years old , ” says Border Patrol Agent Felipe Jimenez .
“ She was walking up the street towards me . She had a little backpack and I thought she was getting ready to go to school , ” he says .
“ She knocks on the side window [ of the Border Patrol truck ] . I rolled down the window . She asked , ‘ Can you help me ? I ’ m trying to find my mom . ’ ”
The agent says he started to reach for his cellphone to call the Nogales Police Department . But then the girl added : “ I think she ’ s in the Carolinas . ”
“ I said , ‘ Hold on , you think she ’ s in the Carolinas ? ’
“ Then I asked her , ‘ Did you just come across the border illegally ? ’ ”
“ She said , ‘ Yeah. ’ The girl pointed to a spot down the street in the shadow of the 20-foot rust-colored fence that divides the US side of Nogales from the Mexican side . ‘ I spent the night over there in that ditch . ’ ”
“ I had to actually break away from the situation for a little bit , ” to collect his emotions , Agent Jimenez says . The agent ’ s daughter was about the same age at the time .
Jimenez said he was wondering how she did it , how she could make it all the way from Honduras to Arizona . That ’ s when she pulled a Bible out of her backpack .
“ Jesus protected me , that ’ s what she told me , ” Jimenez said . “ She was 10 , and it broke my heart . ”
US Border Patrol A 2-year-old girl was dropped on the American side of the Rio Grande in this T-shirt , which stated her name , her mother 's name , and her mother 's phone number in the US . ( The personal information has been blurred out for the photo . )
Such stories are hardly unusual . Ms. Molina tells of a 19-year-old Honduran woman who crossed the desert in Arizona two years ago in the middle of the summer with her newborn son in her arms .
“ I asked her why would she take such a huge risk with her infant son , ” Molina says .
The woman told Molina that when she was late in her pregnancy , criminal gang members killed her husband and threatened that the moment she gave birth they would return , kill the child , and force her into sex industry work . “ They wanted to make her a sex slave within the cartel , ” Molina says .
Desperate , the woman formed an escape plan . “ Every day after she gave birth she got up and started walking around and walking around , ” Molina says , describing a makeshift training regimen . “ About three days after giving birth she felt she was strong enough to make the journey. ” And she did .
The young mother told Molina : “ I would rather die trying to live than to just sit there [ in Honduras ] and wait for a horrible fate . ”
There are two kinds of smuggling operations involving parents and children from Central America .
One facilitates a mother or father traveling with their own child .
In the second , parents already living or working in the US without legal authorization are paying smugglers to transport their child away from that dangerous region and across the US-Mexico border . These children are traveling unaccompanied .
As director of Catholic Charities in the Rio Grande Valley , Sister Norma Pimentel rejects the suggestion that parents are wrong to put their lives and the lives of their children in the hands of smugglers .
She recalls the biblical story of Moses and what his mother did to save his life , placing him in a floating basket and trusting that the river would carry him to safety .
“ I think parents [ in Central America ] are having no other option than saying this is a death sentence if they stay here . I can only have compassion for a mother or a father who finds themselves with no other option but to send the child into the unknown and danger , and to not know whether he or she will be alive . ”
She says that people who doubt this truth should travel to the Rio Grande Valley and witness what is happening .
“ They need to see for themselves that mother , that child , that face , and tell them that they wouldn ’ t help them , ” she says .
In the summer of 2014 , with thousands of Central American children and families arriving in the US , the Border Patrol was overwhelmed trying to process them all . Some families released into the community were overwhelmed , too .
What they needed was a safe place where they could rest and have a nutritious meal before starting the next phase of their journey .
Seeing that need , Sister Norma “ borrowed ” the parish hall adjacent to the Sacred Heart Catholic Church and opened the Immigrant Relief and Welcome Center . It is two blocks from the bus station in downtown McAllen .
She put out an invitation on social media to the community for all those who wanted to help . The response was overwhelming .
“ Everybody , every denomination , doctors , nurses , students , families , the county government , even the Border Patrol , thought let ’ s be part of this response , ” she says .
The effort was positive and unifying across the community because it focused on helping individuals in need . “ We are all about helping that family , that child , that mother – it is a human response to a human crisis , ” Sister Norma says .
The families arrive at the center after being released from Border Patrol processing . They have been given a date to appear in immigration court . In addition , they ’ ve had time to contact a family member or friend in the US to send money to pay for a bus ticket .
They are permitted to spend one night at the immigrant relief center while waiting for their bus . The center serves sandwiches and the Salvation Army provides soup every day . They are also provided sandwiches for their bus trip .
Warren Richey/The ███ The shelves of the Immigrant Relief and Welcome Center in McAllen , Texas , hold items donated from members of the community .
The relief center is jammed with tables overflowing with donated clothing sorted by size for children and adults , shoes , baby supplies , and other essentials . Two large , air conditioned tents have been set up outside in the parking lot . Each contains 30 cots . One tent is for men and one for women .
Volunteers at the center say that more than 100 family members pass through the center on an average day . On the day in mid-September when a news reporter visited , the count was 170 .
In the past two years , Sister Norma estimates that the Immigrant Relief and Welcome Center has helped 45,000 individuals .
Among them is Jose , a 40-year-old baker from El Salvador , who made the month-long trip to the US with his 16-year-old daughter . They crossed much of Mexico inside the refrigerated trailer of an 18-wheeler . That part of the trip was very difficult , he says . “ It was cold . ”
After six days in a Border Patrol detention facility , they were dropped off at the immigrant relief center and had tickets for a midnight bus to Oakland , Calif. , where Jose ’ s brother lives . The brother sent money for bus fare .
His plan is to work in Oakland and eventually raise enough money to return to El Salvador to bring the rest of his family – a wife and a daughter , 14 , and son , 12 – to the US . “ We are not members of a gang , we just want a better life , ” he says .
Also part of the plan ; his eldest daughter will attend high school in the US – and , hopefully , college . “ She would be the first . ”
Warren Richey/The ███ Jose made the monthlong journey to the US from El Salvador with his 16-year-old daughter . He now has to work off $ 7,000 in debt .
Jose had to borrow the $ 7,000 to pay the smuggler . It is an enormous amount of money in El Salvador , and before anything else , he has to pay back that loan or it will fall to his wife and children .
For Jose it is not just getting to America , it is being able to stay in America long enough to work and pay off that debt .
Before being released to travel to Oakland , Jose was instructed that he and his daughter must appear at a future hearing before a US immigration judge to determine if they can remain in the US or be removed immediately to El Salvador .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Asked about this , Jose nods , knowingly . He lifts the cuff of his pants leg . A thick black bracelet with a tracking device encircles his ankle .
Part 1 : Trump ’ s wall on the border : Will it work ?
Part 2 : The hopes and lies driving children to the US
Part 3 : Alejandra , age 7 , is facing a judge alone . Is that due process ?
Part 4 : Nature ’ s wall : the human toll of crossing the US border
Part 5 : A drop of water in the desert , and a flood of migrants