Melania Trump ’ s spokeswoman has said the first lady “ hates to see children separated from their families ” , in what at first appeared to be a rare public statement at odds with her husband ’ s policy of separating children from their parents at the Mexico border .
Separation at the border : children wait in cages at south Texas warehouse Read more
Stephanie Grisham said the first lady believed “ we need to be a country that follows all laws ” , but also one “ that governs with heart ” . She added : “ Mrs Trump … hopes both sides of the aisle can finally come together to achieve successful immigration reform . ”
Former first lady Laura Bush has made a similar plea , writing in the Washington Post that a zero-tolerance policy was “ cruel ” and “ immoral ” . But unlike Melania Trump , Bush placed responsibility firmly on the Trump administration ’ s policy , not “ both sides ” .
“ The reason for these separations is a zero-tolerance policy for their parents , who are accused of illegally crossing our borders , ” she wrote .
Play Video 1:38 US immigration protests as hundreds of children held in Texas facility – video
Melania Trump ’ s intervention came as reports emerged of children being held in cages at a warehouse in Texas after being separated from their parents . One cage had 20 children inside .
By blaming “ both sides ” , Melania Trump effectively endorsed her husband ’ s false claim that Democrats are responsible for his administration ’ s practice of separating parents and children . The administration announced its “ zero-tolerance ” enforcement policy in April and has publicly defended the practice as a vital tool for deterring unauthorized migration across the southern border .
Conditions for children separated from their parents or arriving alone and being held in secure facilities were reported by media briefly allowed into the facility by the US border patrol . But Donald Trump ’ s secretary of homeland security , Kirstjen Neilsen , criticised what she called “ misreporting ” by politicians and the press .
Elaborating on her statement that “ we do not have a policy of separating families at the border ” , she tweeted : “ DHS takes very seriously its duty to protect minors in our temporary custody from gangs , traffickers , criminals and abuse . We have continued the policy from previous administrations and will only separate if the child is in danger , there is no custodial relationship between ‘ family ’ members , or if the adult has broken a law . ”
Play Video 1:15 Kellyanne Conway : 'Nobody likes seeing babies ripped from their mothers ' arms ' – video
A chorus of Trump ’ s allies have joined in criticising the policy , including the Reverend Franklin Graham , who called it “ disgraceful ” , former White House communications director Anthony Scaramucci , who said it was not “ the Christian way ” or “ the American way ” , and Republican senator Lindsey Graham , who said : “ President Trump could stop this policy with a phone call . ”
Meanwhile the outgoing UN human rights chief , Zeid Ra ’ ad Al Hussein , called the separations “ unconscionable ” .
According to DHS figures , since the announcement of the “ zero tolerance ” policy by the attorney general , Jeff Sessions , almost 2,000 children have been separated from their families .
2,000 children separated from parents in six weeks under Trump policy Read more
There is no law mandating separation of families . But White House policy is to maximize criminal prosecutions of people caught trying to enter the US illegally . That means more adults are jailed , pending trial , so children are removed from them . Before the Trump policy , many without a criminal record were referred for civil deportation , which generally did not break up families .
Amid outcry , Donald Trump has stuck to the untrue claim that Democrats are to blame . On Saturday , the president tweeted : “ Democrats can fix their forced family breakup at the Border by working with Republicans on new legislation , for a change ! This is why we need more Republicans elected in November … ”
Trump has repeatedly referred to a Democratic law . He appears to be referring to one enacted in 2008 that was signed by a Republican president , George W Bush . It was focused on freeing and helping children who come to the border without a parent or guardian and did not call for family separation .
Quick guide Why are families being separated at US border ? Show Hide Why are children being separated from their families ? In April 2018 , the US attorney general , Jeff Sessions , announced a “ zero tolerance ” policy under which anyone who crossed the border without legal status would be prosecuted by the justice department . This includes some , but not all , asylum seekers . Because children can ’ t be held in adult detention facilities , they are being separated from their parents . Immigrant advocacy groups , however , say hundreds of families have been separated since at least July 2017 . More than 200 child welfare groups , including the American Academy of Pediatrics and the United Nations , said they opposed the practice . What happens to the children ? They are supposed to enter the system for processing “ unaccompanied alien children ” , which exists primarily to serve children who voluntarily arrive at the border on their own . Unaccompanied alien children are placed in health department custody within 72 hours of being apprehended by border agents . They then wait in shelters for weeks or months at a time as the government searches for parents , relatives or family friends to place them with in the US . This already overstretched system has been thrown into chaos by the new influx of children . Can these children be reunited with their parents ? Immigration advocacy groups and attorneys have warned that there is not a clear system in place to reunite families . In one case , attorneys in Texas said they had been given a phone number to help parents locate their children , but it ended up being the number for an immigration enforcement tip line . Advocates for children have said they do not know how to find parents , who are more likely to have important information about why the family is fleeing its home country . And if , for instance , a parent is deported , there is no clear way for them to ensure their child is deported with them . What happened to families before ? When an influx of families and unaccompanied children fleeing Central America arrived at the border in 2014 , Barack Obama ’ s administration detained families . This was harshly criticized and a federal court in 2015 stopped the government from holding families for months without explanation . Instead , they were released while they waited for their immigration cases to be heard in court . Not everyone shows up for those court dates , leading the Trump administration to condemn what it calls a “ catch and release ” program . By Amanda Holpuch Read more
The president of the American Academy of Pediatrics warned this week that forcibly separating children from their parents is a traumatic experience that will cause “ irreparable harm ” . On Sunday , the senior White House adviser Kellyanne Conway told NBC ’ s Meet the Press : “ As a mother , as a Catholic , as somebody who has a conscience … I will tell you that nobody likes this policy . ”
Conway echoed Trump in saying Democrats must negotiate over immigration reform and border security . But when NBC host Chuck Todd said it “ sounds like you ’ re holding the kids hostage to get the Democrats to the table ” , Conway objected “ very forcefully ” and said : “ I certainly don ’ t want anybody to use these kids as leverage . ”
That was not what an unnamed White House official told the Washington Post this week , saying : “ The thinking in the building is to force people to the table . ”
The New York Times reported on Saturday that Stephen Miller , a hardliner who wrote the original travel ban on a list of Muslim-majority countries , is the chief driver of the separation policy .
When the US government snatches children , it 's biblical to resist the law | Daniel José Camacho Read more
As the president headed to his golf club on Sunday , Democrats staged protests at detention facilities . One party rising star , from Texas , said events at the border were the responsibility of all Americans .
“ I ’ d like to say it ’ s un-American but it ’ s happening right now in America , ” Beto O ’ Rourke , a US representative who in November will challenge Ted Cruz for his Senate seat , told CNN ’ s State of the Union . “ It is on all of us , not just the Trump administration . This is on all of us . ”
O ’ Rourke organized a march to Tornillo , Texas , and what has been described as a “ tent structure ” for 16- and 17-year-olds .
• This article was amended on 20 June 2018 to correct the spelling of Anthony Scaramucci ’ s last name from Scaramuicci .