President Trump on Thursday denied reports that he struck a `` deal '' overnight with top Democrats to protect so-called “ Dreamers , ” while insisting “ massive border security would have to be agreed to in exchange for consent . ”
Trump ’ s Twitter post was in response to Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , announcing after a dinner meeting at the White House that they had `` agreed to a plan to work out an agreement to protect our nation ’ s DREAMers from deportation . ''
They also said `` we would review border security measures that didn ’ t include building a wall . ''
The president clarified Thursday morning that he intends for the wall to be built -- and while he wants to helps Dreamers , there 's no deal yet .
`` No deal was made last night on DACA . Massive border security would have to be agreed to in exchange for consent . Would be subject to vote , '' Trump tweeted . `` The WALL , which is already under construction in the form of new renovation of old and existing fences and walls , will continue to be built . ''
Trump , on the ground in Florida to survey hurricane damage , later told reporters they were “ fairly close ” on a deal but insisted a border wall “ is vital. ” He said they must have an understanding in some legislation to fund the wall , “ otherwise we ’ re not doing anything . ”
Pelosi and Schumer called Wednesday night 's dinner at the White House “ very productive . ''
Shortly after their statement , the White House issued its own statement agreeing that the sit-down was productive , but the exclusion of the border wall `` was certainly not agreed to . ''
Trump , before and after the dinner meeting , has voiced concern about the fate of the young illegal immigrants who had been protected under the Obama-era DACA program that he aims to reverse . The program shielded illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. as children from deportation . While Trump is rolling back the executive action that allowed it , he is giving Congress time to pass a legislative alternative -- a point he underscored Thursday .
`` Does anybody really want to throw out good , educated and accomplished young people who have jobs , some serving in the military ? Really ! ... They have been in our country for many years through no fault of their own - brought in by parents at young age . Plus BIG border security , '' he tweeted .
Pelosi and Schumer , though , tried to dial down tensions by mid-morning , releasing a joint statement suggesting they ’ re actually all on the same page .
“ President Trump ’ s Tweets are not inconsistent with the agreement reached last night , ” they said . “ As we said last night , there was no final deal , but there was agreement on ” working to protect Dreamers with legislation .
They said they agreed the wall would not be part of this agreement , though Trump wants to pursue it later , and both sides agreed to “ work out a border security package . ”
Tensions between the White House and top Democrats remain on the issue , despite the dinner meeting .
Pelosi 's Twitter account still has a pinned tweet that reads : `` Trump ’ s cowardice is on full display today . His cruelty must not stand ! # ProtectDREAMERS . ''
White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said earlier Wednesday that Trump was “ committed to the wall . It doesn ’ t have to be tied to DACA , but it 's important and he will get it done . ”
Matt House , Schumer ’ s communications director , responded on Twitter : “ The President made clear he would continue pushing the wall , just not as part of this agreement . ”
The New York Times cited a White House official who said Trump pushed for border wall funding at the meeting .
Beside the border wall issue , the Democrats said Trump agreed to enshrine protections for the nearly 800,000 immigrants brought illegally to this country as kids who had benefited from the DACA program .
House Speaker Paul Ryan , who also sat down with Pelosi to talk immigration Wednesday , said in an interview that deporting the so-called Dreamers was “ not in our nation ’ s interest , ” and said the president had “ made the right call . ”
“ I wanted him to give us time . I didn ’ t want this to be rescinded on Day One and create chaos , ” Ryan said , arguing the time would allow Congress to “ come up with the right kind of consensus and compromise to fix this problem . ”
The dinner took place in the White House ’ s Blue Room , sources told ███ . The Congress members sat at a rectangular table with Trump at the head with Pelosi to his right , and Schumer to his left . Eleven people were in the room , sources said . The first half-hour addressed trade issues with China .
The meeting between the three came shortly after Trump overruled congressional Republicans and cut a deal with Democrats to raise the federal debt ceiling for three months . Some conservatives criticized the deal as a capitulation by Trump .
Trump , however , appears to see bipartisanship as a key to get legislation out of the starting gate .
“ More and more we ’ re trying to work things out together , ” Trump explained Wednesday , calling the development a “ positive thing ” for both parties .
“ Some of the greatest legislation ever passed , it was done on a bipartisan manner . And so that is why we ’ re going to give it a shot , ” Trump said .