Want the best of ███ News straight to your inbox ? Sign up here .
Two years after surviving a gunshot wound to the head , a Guatemalan asylum-seeker fled to the U.S. as part of the so-called migrant caravan , all while suffering from headaches and possible brain hemorrhaging . Once he made it to America , 27-year-old Rolando was put in immigration detention and given only ibuprofen to treat his headaches , nosebleeds , and constant dizziness , The Guardian reported .
Rolando fled torture and persecution in his country , he told the Guardian , only to end up stranded in Tijuana because of the Trump administration ’ s metering policy , which limits how many people can ask for asylum at U.S. ports of entry each day . His problems didn ’ t end when he gained admission into the U.S. , where he was transferred to the Otay Mesa Detention Center in San Diego , run by the private company CoreCivic .
Although Rolando ’ s health reportedly worsened in detention , he told the Guardian that he was regularly put in solitary confinement and hardly had access to medical staff .
“ I feared I was going to die , ” Rolando said . “ I thought in this country , there is really good medical care… but I wasn ’ t getting any treatment . ”
Rolando ’ s medical records show that the facility ’ s staff tried to treat his bleeding eyes , ears , and nose with higher and higher doses ibuprofen , according to the Guardian .
“ It seems unbelievable , almost too absurd to be true , but it ’ s not only documented , it ’ s the government ’ s own records , ” Anne Rios , an attorney with Al Otro Lado representing Rolando , told the Guardian .
There have been several allegations of medical neglect at the Otay Mesa facility . In February , more than 70 detainees signed on to a letter speaking out against conditions there , in which they alleged they had experienced racism , discrimination , and medical neglect . In 2018 , a coalition of immigration advocacy groups released a report finding that substandard medical care contributed to the deaths of eight immigrants in ICE custody between December 2015 and April 2017 , including one death at Otay Mesa .
Cover image : In this June 9 , 2017 , file photo , a vehicle drives into the Otay Mesa detention center in San Diego . ( AP Photo/Elliot Spagat , File )