WASHINGTON—President Trump on Sunday took aim at Democrats , a day after he outlined a proposal designed to jump-start shutdown negotiations , calling for $ 5.7 billion in funding for steel barriers on the southern border in exchange for a three-year protection from deportation for some undocumented immigrants .
Democrats had already rejected the proposal , details of which were reported in advance , suggesting no immediate change in the dynamics over the monthlong shutdown .
In a series of tweets , Mr. Trump focused largely on Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi ( D. , Calif. ) , who had called the White House proposal a “ non-starter ” and said it lacked a permanent solution for efforts to codify protections for young immigrants illegally brought to the U.S. as children , known as Dreamers .
“ Nancy Pelosi and some of the Democrats turned down my offer yesterday before I even got up to speak . They don ’ t see crime & drugs , they only see 2020—which they are not going to win . Best economy ! , ” he wrote .
The offer is seen as a major concession inside the White House . Mr. Trump also proposed $ 800 million in humanitarian assistance , $ 805 million in new drug-detection technology , 2,750 more border agents and law-enforcement officials , 75 new immigration judge teams and a new system to allow Central American minors to apply for asylum in their home countries .
“ This is a common-sense compromise both parties should embrace , ” Mr. Trump said from the White House on Saturday .
Democrats weren ’ t consulted on the idea , two party aides said , and they have rejected similar proposals in the past , instead advocating for a path to permanent citizenship for Dreamers . The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program , known as DACA , provides temporary protections .
Both Vice President Mike Pence and Jared Kushner , Mr. Trump ’ s son-in-law and senior adviser , described the offer as the most the president was willing to offer for Dreamers in order to get money for his border wall . Both expressed hope that Democratic lawmakers would trust the White House to continue immigration negotiations after first reopening the government .
“ At this moment in time , this is a good path forward , ” Mr. Kushner said during a briefing with reporters after the president ’ s speech . “ If we can get through this , I think there is a way towards having a lot of next steps on that . ”
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R. , Ky. ) said he would give Mr. Trump ’ s proposal a vote in the Senate this coming week , calling it a “ fair compromise. ” The plan would need Democratic support in the chamber to clear procedural hurdles . Until now , Mr. McConnell has stayed on the sidelines in the shutdown impasse , urging House Democrats and the White House to negotiate .
Mr. McConnell previously said he would only allow a vote in the Senate when the president and Democrats were on the same page . On Dec. 22 , the first day of the shutdown , Mr. McConnell said : “ We ’ ve pushed the pause button until the president , from whom we ’ ll need a signature , and Senate Democrats , from who we ’ ll need votes , reach an agreement . ”
The Democratic-controlled House next week will vote on a package of six funding bills that would fund most closed government agencies and would allot money for various aspects of border security such as an increase in immigration judges and enhanced infrastructure at some ports of entry .
Some conservative commentators were unhappy with Mr. Trump ’ s new stance .
“ Trump proposes amnesty . We voted for Trump and got Jeb ! , ” Ann Coulter wrote on Twitter , referring to Jeb Bush , who espoused more moderate views on immigration as a 2016 presidential candidate . Michelle Malkin , another conservative , wrote , “ Ugh . ”
The proposal mirrors many of the provisions already in legislation , known as the Bridge Act , that would offer three-year protections and work permits to people enrolled in or eligible for the program .
DACA was created by President Obama in 2012 , who said he was stepping in because Congress failed to act on behalf of those affected .
The program has shielded hundreds of thousands of immigrants from deportation and given them work permits . Republicans criticized the program because of Mr. Obama ’ s use of executive authority . Some support the action ’ s aim while others say the protections are unwarranted given those protected are in the U.S. illegally , even if they were arrived as children of immigrants .
Mr. Trump announced a winding down of DACA in September 2017 , triggering a legal fight that is still ongoing . He has talked about resolving the issue in favor of the undocumented immigrants but had refused to consider it as part of a deal to end the shutdown because of the litigation .
“ If the Supreme Court overrules that wrong executive order , we ’ ll have a deal very quickly on DACA and other things . And the Democrats want that , and so do we , ” Mr. Trump said in a Jan. 4 news conference .
The president offered legal protections , including citizenship , to young immigrants as part of immigration negotiations last year .
Mr. Trump on Saturday also offered a three-year extension of the Temporary Protected Status program that acts as a shield on deportation from unauthorized immigrants from certain countries , saying that he was open to allowing a reprieve for up to 300,000 people in it .
The Trump administration had moved to cancel the program for people from several Central American nations who had been granted the reprieve years ago after natural disasters in their home countries ; critics had said the program should be as “ temporary ” as its name suggested .
Supporters of greater protections for participants in the TPS program , and DACA , have said that they are especially necessary because of violence and instability in those Central American countries , such as El Salvador , Honduras and Nicaragua .
— Alex Leary and Andrew Duehren contributed to this article .