WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Democrats said on Tuesday they had withdrawn an offer to fund U.S. President Donald Trump ’ s border wall , as tough negotiations over the future of young illegal immigrants known as “ Dreamers ” resumed in the Senate .
A day after the end of a government shutdown linked to wrangling over immigration , Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer said he pulled the offer because of what he said was Trump ’ s failure to follow through on the outlines of an agreement the two men discussed on Friday .
“ So we ’ re going to have to start on a new basis and the wall offer is off the table , ” Schumer told reporters . An aide said the offer was withdrawn on Sunday .
Trump said on Twitter late on Tuesday night : “ Cryin ’ Chuck Schumer fully understands , especially after his humiliating defeat , that if there is no Wall , there is no DACA . We must have safety and security , together with a strong Military , for our great people ! ”
The Congressional Hispanic Caucus expressed fears on Tuesday that Republicans in the House of Representatives would pursue a harsh immigration bill written by Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte .
The House measure would allow Dreamers to renew their legal status for three years , instead of putting them on a pathway to citizenship , and would call for hiring 10,000 more agents at U.S. borders while shutting down some visa programs and taking other steps to find people who are in the country illegally .
Republican Trump said during the 2016 election campaign Mexico would pay the cost of building a wall along the southwestern border of the United States to keep out illegal immigrants . Mexico has rejected the idea .
As a result , Trump has been forced to ask Congress for U.S. taxpayer funds for the wall . Government estimates are that it could cost more than $ 21 billion .
With Democrats and many Republicans arguing there are more effective border enforcement tools than a wall , the proposal has become a major sticking point in immigration negotiations , which in turn have complicated talks about funding federal agencies .
The Senate ’ s No . 2 Democrat , Dick Durbin , asked by a reporter whether Schumer offered Trump $ 25 billion for the wall in a major concession to the president , did not dispute the figure , but said : “ He did it in the context of a negotiation . ”
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , accompanied by Sen. Dick Durbin ( D-IL ) and Sen. Patty Murray ( D-WA ) , speaks with reporters following the party luncheons on Capitol Hill in Washington , U.S. January 23 , 2018 . ███/Aaron P. Bernstein
Democrats have been spearheading an effort to protect about 700,000 young Dreamers after Trump announced in September the end of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA , program instituted by his Democratic predecessor , Barack Obama .
The program , which began in 2012 , gave qualified Dreamers , who were brought illegally to the United States as children , temporary protection from deportation and the ability to study and work in the United States .
Senator John Cornyn , the No . 2 Senate Republican , criticized Schumer for pulling the wall funding offer .
“ That basically sets the DACA discussion back , ” he told reporters .
Cornyn said there had been discussions of he and Durbin being a “ clearing house ” for suggestions from senators on legislation to rescue Dreamers from the threat of deportation and provide permanent protections for them .
In agreeing on Monday to end a three-day government shutdown - the first since 2013 - and fund the government until Feb. 8 , Senate Democrats got a promise from Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell that he would allow an immigration debate on the Senate floor in the near future .
Durbin said a similar commitment was now needed from Paul Ryan , the Republican speaker of the House of Representatives , where a Dreamer bill would presumably face a much harder path to passage than in the Senate .
The White House on Tuesday rejected the idea that a bipartisan bill sponsored by Durbin and Republican Senator Lindsey Graham could be the core of a solution .
White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said the proposal was “ totally unacceptable to the president and should be declared dead on arrival . ”
Trump himself has vacillated on immigration between tough rhetoric demanding a U.S. border wall and a softer tone urging a “ bill of love ” for Dreamers .
“ Nobody knows for sure that the Republicans & Democrats will be able to reach a deal on DACA by February 8 , but everyone will be trying , ” Trump tweeted .