CALEXICO , Calif.—President Trump made his case for more barriers as he visited the border with Mexico on Friday , while continuing to say the U.S. immigration system is being overwhelmed by Central Americans seeking asylum .
“ We can ’ t take you anymore . I ’ m sorry . Can ’ t happen . So turn around , ” Mr. Trump said of the migrants .
He made the comments during a discussion with border officials that was followed by a visit to a proposed border wall at one of two international ports of entry in California ’ s Imperial Valley . Mr. Trump recently declared a border emergency to redirect more funding for a border wall .
Mr. Trump blasted the asylum system , asserting that people are making up stories of being threatened by violence at home to be able to stay in the U.S. “ It ’ s a scam . It ’ s a hoax , ” Mr. Trump said . “ I know about hoaxes , I just went through a hoax . Our system is full . ”
Gang violence remains a problem in Central America , and Mr. Trump ’ s recent call to cut off financial aid to Honduras , Guatemala and El Salvador has been criticized by members of both parties as counterproductive .
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen recently said the department estimated about 100,000 migrants crossed the border illegally or asked for refuge at legal border crossings in March , a level not seen in more than a decade .
Despite the tough rhetoric Friday , Mr. Trump has backed off a threat to close the border entirely , saying Mexico had made progress in apprehending migrants and stopping their journey to the U.S. border .
Before leaving Washington , however , he reiterated a new threat : If the situation doesn ’ t improve , he will impose tariffs on Mexican-made vehicles entering the U.S .
“ If for any reason Mexico stops apprehending and bringing the illegals back to where they came from , the U.S. will be forced to Tariff at 25 % all cars made in Mexico and shipped over the Border to us . If that doesn ’ t work , which it will , I will close the Border , ” he wrote on Twitter . “ This will supersede USMCA , ” he added , referring to the revised North American trade pact .
He also said Ron Vitiello , a veteran border official , is no longer being considered to lead the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement . He has been serving in an acting director role since June 2018 . The nomination was withdrawn unexpectedly on Thursday . “ Ron ’ s a good man , ” Mr. Trump said . “ But we ’ re going in a tougher direction . ”
The move leaves the agency without a leader at a crucial time , and Mr. Trump didn ’ t mention any potential replacements .
The president has sent mixed signals . He said Thursday he would give Mexico a year to show action before leveling tariffs , but later said he could still close the border . On Friday he said , “ I never changed my mind at all . I may shut it down at some point , but I ’ d rather do tariffs . ”
Mr. Trump said the tariffs would work “ 100 % . ” He said he was also looking at an economic policy for drugs coming over the border .
Mexico ’ s recent shift in its migration policies has caused tensions at the U.S.-Mexico border . The administration of Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador has begun offering humanitarian visas to Central American asylum seekers making the trek across Mexico and has also has cut back on deportations . Meanwhile , the number of illegal immigrants detained by U.S. Customs and Border Protection has risen .
Mexico hasn ’ t commented on whether it had stepped up migrant apprehensions in recent days as Mr. Trump has asserted , but government officials have said they believed trade and migration issues should be kept separate .
Mr. Trump didn ’ t immediately clarify how he would carry out potential levies against Mexico . The Commerce Department has studied applying global tariffs on automobiles and auto parts on the grounds that such imports constitute a threat to national security .
The U.S. , Mexico and Canada in November signed a new pact overhauling their 25-year-old trade zone , concluding a year and a half of diplomacy after Mr. Trump was on the verge of pulling the U.S. out of the bloc .
The pact needs congressional approval and has encountered some opposition . Mr. Trump scoffed at that as “ purely political ” in remarks to reporters Thursday . “ The USMCA , everybody wants to see it passed , ” he said . “ But we ’ ll see . Whatever they want to do is OK with me . ”
After the border tour , Mr. Trump was scheduled to hold a series of fundraisers in California and Nevada on Friday and Saturday . He is also to deliver a speech at the Republican Jewish Coalition conference in Las Vegas .
—Juan Montes in Huehuetenango , Guatemala , Santiago Pérez in Mexico City and Louise Radnofsky in Washington contributed to this article .