WASHINGTON—Two senior senators said that immigration negotiations in Congress wouldn ’ t be stalled by an injunction temporarily barring the cancellation of the Obama-era program that shielded hundreds of thousands of young undocumented immigrants from deportation .
Sen. John Cornyn of Texas , the No . 2 Senate Republican , said Wednesday that the Tuesday court ruling didn ’ t lessen the urgency of reaching an immigration deal on Capitol Hill .
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D. , N.Y. ) agreed . “ The ruling last night in no way diminishes the urgency of resolving the DACA issue . On this we agree with the White House , ” he said on the Senate floor , referring to the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . “ The iron is hot . We should strike now . ”
President Donald Trump said in September he was ending the DACA program , which many Republicans had criticized as executive overreach by his predecessor , President Barack Obama . Mr. Trump said he hoped the move would spur Congress to take more action on immigration .
Late Tuesday , San Francisco-based U.S. District Judge William Alsup temporarily blocked the ending of the program , ruling that until the cases challenging Mr. Trump ’ s move were resolved , the administration must consider renewal applications from the young immigrants known as Dreamers enrolled in the program when Mr. Trump announced its ending on Sept. 5 .
Mr. Trump on Wednesday tweeted : “ It just shows everyone how broken and unfair our Court System is when the opposing side in a case ( such as DACA ) always runs to the 9th Circuit and almost always wins before being reversed by higher courts . ”
Mr. Trump also reiterated on Wednesday that he wouldn ’ t sign an immigration deal involving DACA that didn ’ t include funding for a border wall : “ It ’ s got to include the wall , ” he said .
Lawmakers and Mr. Trump agreed at a Tuesday White House meeting to focus their negotiations on four areas : new limits on family-based immigration , the diversity visa lottery that admits immigrants from underrepresented countries , the fate of the Dreamers , and border security .
On Wednesday , new clusters of lawmakers dove into the negotiations , raising questions over which group might produce the sought-after deal .
In addition to a bipartisan Senate group that has been meeting for months , a quartet of House Republicans unveiled a new immigration bill and a group of the No . 2 leaders of both parties in both chambers began a new set of discussions .
Meanwhile , the business community is again urging lawmakers to pass a bill to allow some young immigrants a legal path to stay and work in the U.S .
Leaders of more than 100 corporations , including International Business Machines Corp. , General Motors Co. , Intel Corp. and Facebook Inc. , signed on to the letter to congressional leaders , including House Speaker Paul Ryan ( R. , Wisc . ) , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R. , Ky. ) , House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D. , Calif. ) and Mr. Schumer .
The companies said delaying a bill or failing to pass legislation “ will cause a significant negative impact to businesses. ” They cited an estimate by economists with the Cato Institute that failing to act could cost the economy about $ 215 billion .
California Attorney General Xavier Becerra on Wednesday praised the court ruling , but said it was time for Congress to act and create “ a lasting solution that will leave no doubt that the Dreamers are Americans and they are here to stay . ”