The administration warned a federal judge Monday to stay out of the debate over President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty , saying decisions about whom to deport fall squarely within the executive ’ s job description , “ which this court lacks authority to review . ”
In its first extended legal filing in one of the court challenges to the new amnesty , the Justice Department says courts have long held that an agency ’ s decision whether or not to prosecute someone or to enforce the law is entitled to “ absolute discretion . ”
“ Federal courts sit to decide cases and controversies , not to resolve disagreements about policy or politics , ” said Joyce R. Branda , the acting assistant attorney general who took the lead on filing the brief .
Ms. Branda said the administration had to impose the new deportation amnesty because immigration enforcement has become too costly in recent years , outpacing the amount of money Congress provides , so picking and choosing which illegal immigrants to deport is the best use of taxpayers ’ money .
Administration lawyers said the new policy is designed to carry out , not to thwart , what they believed was Congress ’ s intent that the Homeland Security Department only go after recent border crossers and more serious criminals in the interior of the U.S .
SEE ALSO : Ted Cruz : ‘ Open question ’ on whether GOP defunds amnesty next year
And Ms. Branda also said the policy could be “ revoked at any time , ” arguing that uncertainty also means the program is beyond the court ’ s scope .
The filing came in a case filed by Sheriff Joe Arpaio from Maricopa County , in Arizona . Sheriff Arpaio argues the president ’ s amnesty will lead to more illegal immigrants in the future , which means his department will have to deal with more crime and a higher workload . That higher workload , he argues , is an injury that gives him standing to sue .
But the Justice Department said it was speculative to believe the policy would lead to more illegal immigration . Homeland Security has announced it will pull resources from the interior , where they were going after illegal immigrants , and send them to the border , where they may be able to aid the fight against new illegal border crossers .
The case is being heard in federal district court in Washington , D.C. A hearing on Sheriff Arpaio ’ s request for a preliminary injunction takes place next week .
Another case , filed by Texas and 19 other states , is pending in federal district court in Texas .
In Monday ’ s filing , administration lawyers bristled at the term “ amnesty , ” arguing that because officials will have to approve every case , it ’ s not a blanket forgiveness . They also argued the amnesty “ does not grant legal status to any alien . ”
The administration considers them “ lawfully present , ” and eligible for work permits , but says that doesn ’ t equate with “ lawful status . ”