After seeming to debut a more forgiving stance on immigration last week , Donald Trump arrived in Phoenix on Wednesday brandishing a resolutely hardline plan , warning of an undocumented criminal menace and promising deportations on an unprecedented scale .
`` We will begin moving them out Day One . As soon as I take office . Day One . In joint operation with local , state , and federal law enforcement , '' he said , according to transcripts .
As he has in the past , Mr. Trump tied his promise to carry out deportations to anti-globalist economic ideas . But he also drew a direct line between the fortunes of the country 's native-born laborers and the presence of undocumented immigrants – a connection he has rarely made in his remarks on the topic .
`` While there are many illegal immigrants in our country who are good people , many , many , this does n't change the fact that most illegal immigrants are lower skilled workers with less education , who compete directly against vulnerable American workers , and that these illegal workers draw much more out from the system than they can ever possibly pay back , '' he said .
`` We will reform legal immigration to serve the best interests of America and its workers , the forgotten people . Workers . We 're going to take care of our workers . ''
But the globalization that Trump denounces has also contributed to a decades-long reshaping of unions – a traditional voice for workers , and often vocal opponents of globalization – toward greater inclusion of immigrants , even those without legal status . And the reasons behind organized labor 's shifting stance on immigrant workers , now decades in the making , may undercut Trump 's narrative of foreigners arriving to America to crowd out the native-born .
`` If you have a union job , you know that immigrants are not stealing your jobs , '' says Lowell Turner , a professor at Cornell University ’ s School of Industrial and Labor Relations , in an interview with The ███ . `` You see your reality around you and know that 's not happening . ''
This electoral season , Trump has seen greater support among union members than any Republican candidate in recent memory – enough to spook Democrats and union leaders . His core support in the primaries , surveys showed , was from white men who worked with their hands , and they tended to look favorably upon both unions and economic policies typically considered progressive .
He has also bragged of having `` tremendous support '' with union members .
`` Manhattan is a hundred percent – you 're building a building , it 's essentially a hundred percent union . So I 've worked with unions over the years – I 've done very well with unions , '' he told a crowd in New Hampshire in February , according to The Washington Times .
But he has garnered endorsements from only two unions – those representing border patrol and New England police – and his low approval among Hispanics and other minorities has likely helped ensure that the vast majority of union endorsements have chosen to remain firmly in the Democrats ' camp .
One of those Hillary Clinton supporters is Richard Trumka , president of the AFL-CIO , who was the guest at a Monitor Breakfast earlier this week :
Trumka expressed confidence in organized labor ’ s ability to turn out votes for Clinton , despite Mr. Trump ’ s inroads into the white working class . “ We ’ re probably about where we were with Barack Obama at this point with the election , ” Trumka said , adding that the more organized labor gets information out to workers , “ the better off we get . ”
For much of their early history in the United States , unions viewed certain groups of immigrants with suspicion , if not outright animus . Perhaps the most notoriously xenophobic law in US history , the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 , was passed largely at the behest of the organized labor . The fear of job replacement faded after the passage of a 1924 national-origins quota , as immigration levels fell for several decades . When national reform came up for passage again in 1986 , unions ' focus was on winning sanctions against employers that hired the undocumented , whom they saw as potential strikebreakers .
But by then , changes in unions ' attitudes were already beginning . Starting in the late 1970s , deregulation measures had sent membership numbers reeling . And in urban areas like Los Angeles , deteriorated wages , benefits , and working conditions caused many native-born workers to abandon certain lines of low-skilled manual jobs , according to the 2000 book `` Voices from the Front Lines , '' edited by sociologists Ruth Milkman and Kent Wong .
When they left , immigrants stepped in to take their place , mostly from Central America and Mexico .
`` They were soon replaced by low-wage immigrants , and as employment skyrocketed [ in those sectors ] , vigorous new organizing efforts emerged among the newly recruited foreign-born workers , '' Dr. Milkman and Mr. Wong write .
Union leaders in favor of organizing immigrants thought they were likely to be too nervous for collective action , however . Campaigns like the Service Employees International Union 's Janitors for Justice , first conceived in 1985 , won important victories from employers and showed unions that immigrants , including the undocumented , were capable of loud advocacy , Dr. Milkman tells the Monitor .
`` I myself was very surprised at the successes that occurred in that area , '' she says . `` The whole thing – immigrant unionization – is one of the few bright spots in a bleak story . ''
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
As those efforts were replicated across labor , especially in meatpacking , hospitality , restaurants , and other service industries , immigrants and native-born Hispanics began to exercise growing clout within the ranks . In 2000 , the AFL-CIO , the largest union confederation in the country , called for an end to employer sanctions , and for legal status for 6 million undocumented immigrants . The move came largely as a result of pressure from an immigrant-led coalition known as the Change to Win Federation , and it caused a sea change in thought .
`` I think there was a shift in consciousness , '' says Mae Ngai , a historian at Columbia University who specializes in immigration and labor . `` Even if some of these older unions like the Machinists were not organizing immigrants , they could see other people doing it . They could see that immigrants were not their enemy , not their competition , not their enemy they had to fear . ''