President Obama ’ s executive action to protect millions of unauthorized immigrants from deportation is an act that both follows and departs from precedents set by his predecessors .
As immigrant advocates — and the White House itself — point out , presidents have a long history of using their discretionary enforcement powers to allow people to enter and remain in the country outside the regular immigration laws . But Obama ’ s move offers relief to more people than any other executive action in recent history — about 3.9 million people , or roughly 35 % of the estimated total unauthorized-immigrant population — a point that some opponents have used to differentiate Obama ’ s action from those of past presidents .
Obama ’ s announcement follows his decision in June 2012 to grant temporary reprieves from deportation for 1.5 million eligible unauthorized immigrants who ’ d been brought to the U.S. as children — the program known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals , or DACA . In the memorandum announcing DACA , then-Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano framed it as part of the executive branch ’ s role “ to set forth policy for the exercise of discretion within the framework of the existing law. ” Obama ’ s action expands that program , and protects other groups , using a similar rationale .
Most previous executive actions on immigration were targeted fairly narrowly , according to a summary compiled by the American Immigration Council . The 39 “ executive grants of temporary immigration relief ” since 1956 listed by the council covered , among other groups , Ethiopians fleeing that country ’ s Marxist military dictatorship in the 1970s , Liberians who escaped their country ’ s brutal civil wars , and foreign students whose academic eligibility was interrupted by Hurricane Katrina .
Other actions taken by prior administrations affected considerably more people . Most of them were eventually formalized or superseded by legislation , though sometimes — as often happens with complicated subjects such as immigration — the new laws led to new issues .
Cubans fleeing Castro : In early 1961 , at a time when thousands of Cubans were trying to escape the new Castro government , President Kennedy directed Health , Education and Welfare Secretary Abraham Ribicoff to set up a “ Cuban Refugee Program ” to provide federal assistance to Cuban refugees , including medical care , financial aid , help with education and resettlement , and child welfare services . That program was formalized the following year by the Migration and Refugee Assistance Act , and by subsequent legislation . By 1971 , 600,000 Cuban refugees had entered the U.S. ; as of 2012 there were more than 1 million Cubans living in the U.S. who had immigrated since 1959 ( representing 97 % of all Cuban immigrants ) , according to the 2012 American Community Survey .
The Cuban program , however , sparked a lawsuit from would-be immigrants from elsewhere in the Western Hemisphere , who argued that the immigrant visas given to Cuban refugees unfairly limited spots that otherwise would be available for them . In 1977 , a federal court in Chicago ordered what was then the Immigration and Naturalization Service to issue so-called “ Silva letters ” to about 250,000 people — nearly all Mexicans living in the Southwest , according to a 1985 Los Angeles Times article — giving them temporary protection from deportation and letting them work while the complex case worked its way through the courts . Eventually , about 145,000 Silva letter holders received visas ; the rest ( at least those who were still living in the U.S. ) remained in administrative limbo until the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act enabled them to apply for legal permanent residency .
Refugees from the Indochina wars : In early 1975 , when it became clear South Vietnam was going to fall to the communist North , the Ford administration evacuated around 130,000 Vietnamese from Saigon . Ford and his successor , Jimmy Carter , subsequently allowed more Vietnamese , Cambodian and Laotian refugees to come to the U.S. ; between 1975 and 1979 , about 360,000 people from the countries of Indochina were allowed to remain in the country .
Mariel boatlift : Between April and October 1980 , approximately 125,000 Cubans and 25,000 Haitians ( who were trying to escape that nation ’ s grinding poverty and the brutal Duvalier dictatorship ) arrived in south Florida by boat . The Carter administration used its discretionary authority to admit most of them into the country ; those migrants eventually were made legal permanent residents by the 1986 immigration-reform law .
Spouses and children : The 1986 law , however , created a new dilemma : how to deal with spouses and children of newly-legalized immigrants who didn ’ t themselves qualify for legal status . In October 1987 , the Reagan administration said it wouldn ’ t seek to deport minor children living with their parents as long as both parents qualified for amnesty under the 1986 law . Reagan ’ s successor , George H.W . Bush , expanded that policy in February 1990 : Under the new “ family fairness ” rules , all spouses and unmarried children of people who gained legal status under the 1986 law could apply for permission to remain in the country and receive work permits . Bush ’ s policy was formalized later that year as part of the Immigration Act of 1990 .
Central American refugees : The conflicts in El Salvador , Nicaragua and elsewhere in Central America in the 1980s and early 1990s led to a new series of executive actions on immigration . In July 1987 , Attorney General Edwin Meese announced that the approximately 200,000 Nicaraguan exiles then living in the U.S. would not be deported so long as they had a “ well-founded fear of persecution. ” Meese also encouraged them to seek work permits and reapply for asylum if they ’ d been denied before .
A similar number of Salvadoran refugees were allowed to remain in the country in “ temporary protected status ” under the provisions of the 1990 immigration law . When that status expired two years later , Bush extended it ; his successor , Bill Clinton , extended it again , until the end of 1994 . Eventually , the Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act of 1997 allowed Nicaraguans , Salvadorans , Guatemalans and others to apply to become legal permanent residents . This opportunity was eventually extended to several thousand Haitian migrants ( estimates range from 20,000 to 40,000 ) who ’ d been left out of the 1997 law — first by executive action from President Clinton , and ultimately through passage of the Haitian Refugee Immigrant Fairness Act enacted in October 1998 .
Chinese in U.S. : On at least one occasion , a president actively discouraged Congress from carving out an exception to the immigration laws . In November 1989 , the first President Bush vetoed a bill that would have provided emergency immigration relief for Chinese nationals in the United States following the Tiananmen Square massacre . In his veto message , Bush said that he was already providing greater protections to the Chinese through administrative actions and “ opposed congressional micromanagement of foreign policy. ” In April 1990 , Bush formalized and extended his policy by Executive Order 12711 .
Correction : This posting has been updated with a revised total of 3.9 million unauthorized immigrants affected by the president ’ s order .