Tucson Sector Border Patrol agents apprehended a record 16,199 migrant family members during Fiscal Year 2019 . This represented an increase of 227 percent over the previous year ’ s total .
During Fiscal Year 2019 , which ended on September 30 , Tucson Sector Border Patrol agents set a new record in the apprehension of migrant families . The agents apprehended 16,199 Family Unit Aliens , according to information obtained from Tucson Sector Border Patrol officials . This represents an increase of 227 percent over the previous year ’ s total of 4,954 FMUAs .
Additionally , agents apprehended 5,105 unaccompanied children . Officials reported the children ranged in age from infant to 17-years-old . The apprehension of Unaccompanied Alien Children jumped two percent from the previous year ’ s total of 5,023 .
Single adult men seeking to avoid apprehension continued to be the largest migrant demographic faced by Tucson Sector agents . The Tucson Sector reported the arrest of 42,186 single adult men . This accounts for 66 percent of all migrant apprehensions in the sector , officials reported .
“ Human smugglers continue to put migrants ’ lives in danger by abandoning them in the desert , ” Tucson Sector officials said in a written statement . “ Tucson Sector saved the lives of 924 people from vast desert and wilderness areas , many of whom called 911 . ”
This accounts for nearly 20 percent of all migrant rescues conducted along the southwest border with Mexico .
In addition to the migrants , Tucson Sector agents also seized large quantities of drugs at inland immigration checkpoints and other locations . The agents seized 2,700 pounds of methamphetamine , 150 pounds of heroin , 13 pounds of fentanyl , and 59,000 pounds of marijuana . Officials report the marijuana seizures were down by 50 percent — a trend noted in all other southwest border sectors .
“ Supplemental funding , cooperation with the Government of Mexico , and new agreements made with Central American countries are credited with a decrease in illegal entries along the Southwest border since May 2019 , ” sector officials reported . “ Officials are counting on new border infrastructure to further prevent human smuggling and drug trafficking . ”
Officials cited the construction of new border wall segments near Lukeville , Arizona . This is the region where the largest numbers of migrant family units crossed illegally from Mexico . Other segments are being constructed near Douglas , Arizona , officials stated .