Facing rising outrage from some Republicans as well as Democrats over the forced separation of migrant children and parents at the U.S.-Mexico border , President Donald Trump dug in Monday , again blaming Democrats and declaring he would keep the U.S. from becoming `` a migrant camp . ''
Democrats have turned up the pressure over the administration policy , and some Republicans have joined the chorus of criticism . Former first lady Laura Bush has called the separation policy `` cruel '' and `` immoral '' while GOP Sen. Susan Collins expressed concern about it and a former adviser to Trump questioned using the policy to pressure Democrats on immigration legislation .
Trump continued to cast blame on Democrats Monday , as he detoured from planned remarks on U.S. space policy to defend his administration 's policies . `` I say it 's very strongly the Democrats ' fault , '' he said at the White House .
`` The United States will not be a migrant camp and it will not be a refugee holding facility , '' he added . `` Not on my watch . ''
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen rejected criticism accusing her department of inhuman and immoral actions .
`` We are doing none of those things . We are enforcing the laws passed by Congress , '' she said in an appearance before the National Sheriffs ' Association in New Orleans . Like Trump , she called on Congress to reform immigration laws .
Nearly 2,000 children were separated from their families over a six-week period in April and May after Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a new `` zero-tolerance '' policy that refers all cases of illegal entry for criminal prosecution . U.S. protocol prohibits detaining children with their parents because the children are not charged with a crime and the parents are .
Nielsen said that releasing parents with their children amounts to a `` get out of jail free card '' policy for those in the country illegally .
Speaking at the same conference , Sessions echoed Nielsen 's defense of the policy , and called on Congress to act .
`` We do not want to separate parents from their children , '' Sessions said . `` If we build the wall , if we pass legislation to end the lawlessness , we wo n't face these terrible choices . ''
Trump asserted Monday that children `` are being used by some of the worst criminals on earth '' as a way to enter the United States . He tweeted : `` Has anyone been looking at the Crime taking place south of the border , '' calling it `` historic . ''
Criticism is rising from both sides of the political aisle . In a guest column for The Washington Post Sunday , Mrs. Bush made some of the strongest comments yet from a Republican .
`` I live in a border state . I appreciate the need to enforce and protect our international boundaries , but this zero-tolerance policy is cruel . It is immoral . And it breaks my heart , '' she wrote . She compared it to the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II , which she called `` one of the most shameful episodes in U.S . history . ''
Underscoring the emotional tension , first lady Melania Trump , who has tended to stay out of contentious policy debates , waded into the issue . Her spokeswoman said that Mrs. Trump believes `` we need to be a country that follows all laws , '' but also one `` that governs with heart . ''
`` Mrs. Trump hates to see children separated from their families and hopes both sides of the aisle can finally come together to achieve successful immigration reform , '' spokeswoman Stephanie Grisham said .
The Rev . Franklin Graham , a longtime Trump ally , called the policy `` disgraceful . '' Several religious groups , including some conservative ones , have pushed to stop the practice of separating immigrant children from their parents .
Former Trump adviser Anthony Scaramucci said Monday on CNN that it `` does n't feel right '' for the Trump administration to blame Democrats and use the issue as a way of pressuring Democrats into negotiating on a Republican immigration bill .
Republican Sen. Susan Collins of Maine said she favors tighter border security , but expressed deep concerns about the child separation policy .
`` What the administration has decided to do is to separate children from their parents to try to send a message that if you cross the border with children , your children are going to be ripped away from you , '' she said . `` That 's traumatizing to the children who are innocent victims , and it is contrary to our values in this country . ''
House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi said the policy `` leaves a dark stain on our nation . ''
`` Ripping vulnerable little children away from their parents is an utter atrocity that debases America 's values and our legacy as a beacon of hope , opportunity and freedom , '' she said Monday .
Trump plans to meet with House Republicans on Tuesday to discuss pending immigration legislation amid the election-season debate over what has been one of his favorite issues . The House is expected to vote this week on a bill pushed by conservatives that may not have enough support to pass , and a compromise measure with key proposals supported by the president . The White House has said Trump would sign either one .
Both House proposals face broad opposition from Democrats , and even if a bill does pass , the closely divided Senate seems unlikely to go along .
Trump 's former chief strategist said Republicans would face steep consequences for pushing the compromise bill because it provides a path to citizenship for young `` Dreamer '' immigrants brought to the country illegally as children . Steve Bannon argued that that effort risks alienating Trump 's political base and could lead to election losses in November , when Republicans hope to preserve their congressional majorities .