Don ’ t look for a quick deal when President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE meets with Democratic leaders of Congress at the White House on Tuesday .
Neither side appears in the mood to offer concessions on a proposed border wall . Trump is pushing for $ 5 billion to fund one of his top priorities , but House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiJohn Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump Ocasio-Cortez blasts McCarthy as a 'bumbling , sloppy , dishonest mess ' over Trump defense DOJ says Trump contacted foreign countries to assist Barr 's Russia inquiry MORE ( D-Calif. ) is under intense pressure not to give in just weeks after her party ’ s midterm victories . She also has the Speaker ’ s gavel on the line .
Trump , for his part , has plenty to stew over : He just saw his pick for the next White House chief of staff turn down the position , and investigations of the 2016 campaign came to his doorstep last week , with prosecutors implicating him in illegal payments to silence women alleging affairs .
“ It could be really important ; it ’ s likely not to be very important , ” Sen. Roy Blunt Roy Dean BluntRepublicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump Congress hunts for offramp from looming shutdown fight Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran MORE ( Mo . ) , a member of the Senate Republican leadership , said ahead of Tuesday ’ s meeting .
That means another week of brinkmanship , with a possible partial government shutdown at the end of next week , is growing more likely .
“ I hope there is some holiday spirit that prevails . It shouldn ’ t take a miracle , but it will definitely take some good luck , ” said Rep. Jamie Raskin Jamin ( Jamie ) Ben RaskinLiberals keep foot on the gas on impeachment Democrats bicker over strategy on impeachment Overnight Defense : Trump says he has 'many options ' on Iran | Hostage negotiator chosen for national security adviser | Senate Dems block funding bill | Documents show Pentagon spent at least 4K at Trump 's Scotland resort MORE ( D-Md. ) . “ We ’ ve got our fingers crossed . ”
Senate Democratic Leader Charles Schumer Charles ( Chuck ) Ellis SchumerSchumer : Trump 's reported Russian meddling remarks among 'most disturbing things ' yet Senate Democrats say top NRA officials knew about Kremlin ties Office of Director of National Intelligence not planning to release whistleblower complaint MORE ( N.Y. ) and Pelosi are scheduled to sit down with Trump at 11:30 a.m. to discuss a year-end spending package , and they aren ’ t inclined to cut the president any slack .
They will urge him to accept a long-term funding measure for the Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) or for all of seven remaining spending bills , which cover about 25 percent of the federal government , according to a senior Democratic aide familiar with internal discussions leading up to Tuesday ’ s meeting .
$ 1.3 billion through Sept. 30 for border fencing and barriers .
Republican leaders on Monday predicted that Trump will reject the Democratic offer .
“ I don ’ t expect the president would go along with that . He ’ s not getting the border funding that he wants and that just really postpones the pain , it doesn ’ t solve the problem , ” said Senate Republican Whip John
He said Trump hasn ’ t shown any hint that he might be willing to budge from his $ 5 billion request , setting up a standoff that could last until funding expires on Dec. 21 .
Cornyn said he would be willing to consider deportation protections for immigrants who came to the country illegally at a young age and lost such protections after Trump rescinded the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program .
But Democratic leaders have dismissed the chances of swapping a key piece of immigration reform for border wall funding .
Democrats feel they have the upper hand after winning control of the House and seven governorships last month . They argue that Republicans will get the blame for a partial government shutdown since the GOP still controls Congress and the White House .
At the same time , Schumer and Pelosi have to worry about internal party politics .
More than a half-dozen Senate Democrats are mulling presidential bids , meaning any deal that lets Trump declare victory would be panned by those prominent members of the Democratic caucus .
Meanwhile , Pelosi has to focus on keeping her caucus unified behind her leadership , while she feels pressure from the left amid her bid for the Speaker ’ s gavel .
House Majority Whip Steve Scalise Stephen ( Steve ) Joseph ScaliseScalise defends Trump Ukraine call : ' I 'm glad President Trump continues to look into [ Russian ] interference ' Sunday shows lineup : Trump impeachment dominates the talk circuit Trump lashes out at 'Do Nothing Democrat Savages ' MORE ( R-La . ) on Monday said liberals in the House Democratic Caucus have effectively tied Pelosi ’ s hands .
“ The president was willing to put a lot of things on the table to negotiate with Democrats in exchange for wall funding and they walked away , ” Scalise told Fox News . “ They said they don ’ t want to do anything because the extreme left doesn ’ t want to do anything . They want open borders . That ’ s the dilemma Nancy Pelosi is in right now . ”
Trump is insisting on $ 5 billion for a border wall , down from the $ 25 billion he initially demanded . Democratic leaders , however , feel they have a solid argument , as Senate Republicans have already agreed to increase border security funding by $ 1.6 billion .
Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Richard Shelby Richard Craig ShelbyTrump signs stopgap measure , funding government through November On The Money : Trump signs stopgap spending bill | Shutdown fight delayed to November | Deutsche Bank reveals it has two individual tax returns tied to House subpoena | House Dems demand documents on Ukraine aid ███ 's 12:30 Report : Pelosi attacks Barr over Ukraine call MORE ( R-Ala. ) has floated the possibility of spreading out $ 5 billion in border security over two years , but Trump has yet to endorse that proposal .
After two years of negotiating with Trump , Democratic leaders aren ’ t optimistic about striking a deal Tuesday that will stick .
“ Pelosi and Schumer thought they had a deal with the DREAM Act back in 2017 , but then suddenly it evaporated , ” Raskin said . “ That is what everybody is afraid of happening [ again ] . ”
Democrats are dismissing the prospect of any immigration deal that would grant Trump border wall funding .
“ As we ’ ve seen , the president ’ s a very poor negotiator on those issues , ” Schumer told reporters last month after the midterm elections . “ He makes agreements and he backs off , so we ’ re sort of dubious of sitting down with the president and making that kind of exchange again when twice he ’ s shaken hands and backed off . ”
When asked last week if she would support some wall funding in exchange for a permanent solution on DACA , Pelosi said , “ No . ”
Republicans consider Schumer to be in a better position than Pelosi to reach a deal with Trump . They ’ re looking for an agreement that strikes a balance between the $ 1.6 billion Senate Democrats and Republicans negotiated in their Homeland Security appropriations bill and the $ 5 billion requested by Trump .
“ What the president is saying is , ‘ I want a deal. ’ That ’ s why Schumer has a process in this , ” House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyOcasio-Cortez blasts McCarthy as a 'bumbling , sloppy , dishonest mess ' over Trump defense ███ 's Morning Report - Dems to hit gas on impeachment GOP senators attack whistleblower 's credibility MORE ( R-Calif. ) told Fox News on Sunday . “ Now , Nancy Pelosi is in a different position . She ’ s having a battle to become Speaker . ”
A group of House Democrats , worried that Schumer could undercut Pelosi by striking a weak deal with Trump , sent a letter to the Senate Democratic leader last month urging him to stay strong .
“ Any appropriations for a border wall would have unequivocally deleterious economic , diplomatic and environmental effects on the region , ” the group of 12 House Democrats wrote in a letter dated Nov. 28 . “ We believe the Democrats should oppose all funding for a physical wall along the U.S.-Mexico border . ”
Rep. Henry Cuellar ( D-Texas ) , who helped organize the letter , told ███ that he could agree to $ 1.6 billion for border security as long as it didn ’ t go toward building a wall .
“ Schumer has been saying a fence is not the same as a wall . But for some of us down there , a fence is a wall . That ’ s where he and I differ , ” he said on Monday .
Pelosi told reporters last week that she views a border wall as “ immoral , ineffective [ and ] expensive . ”
Rep. Nita Lowey Nita Sue LoweyOn The Money : Trump signs stopgap spending bill | Shutdown fight delayed to November | Deutsche Bank reveals it has two individual tax returns tied to House subpoena | House Dems demand documents on Ukraine aid House Democrats demand White House turn over docs on Ukraine aid Trump administration imposes 18K limit on refugees , the lowest ever MORE ( N.Y. ) , the top Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee , said Trump will have to come off his $ 5 billion funding demand to avoid a partial shutdown .
“ Democrats are ready to negotiate on how best to secure our border but , as we do so , we will always stand strong against the Trump administration ’ s cruel immigration policies , ” she said in a statement .
Shelby , who met with Trump at the White House before Thanksgiving , said Trump will threaten to veto any bill that provides less than $ 5 billion .
Senate Republicans , who are looking at a tougher electoral map in 2020 than they had in 2018 , worry they would take a political hit over a partial shutdown , and they ’ re trying to steer Trump away from a standoff .
GOP senators buttonholed Vice President Pence at a recent lunch meeting and warned him that a shutdown would be a political mistake .
Shelby said GOP leaders will schedule another meeting with Trump after he talks with Pelosi and Schumer .
Some House conservatives appear to be agitating for a shutdown .
“ Why set your sights on $ 5 billion ? I ’ d be asking for $ 25 billion , ” Rep. Paul Gosar Paul Anthony GosarOvernight Energy : House moves to block Trump drilling | House GOP rolls out proposal to counter offshore drilling ban | calls mount for NOAA probe House approves two bills to block Trump drilling House GOP rolls out energy proposal to counter Democrats offshore drilling ban MORE ( R-Ariz. ) , a member of the far-right House Freedom Caucus , told ███ . “ I hope [ Trump ] doesn ’ t cut a deal , unless it ’ s favorable to the American people . His credibility is on the line here . ”
Some Republicans say their best leverage with Democrats is to threaten a medium-term funding resolution for the seven unfinished appropriations bills . If successful , that would crowd the 2019 House Democratic agenda at a time when they will be pushing other priorities like election reform and prescription drug legislation .
Pelosi and Schumer , they say , would have an incentive to increase funding for border security in order to secure funding increases for other federal departments and agencies before January , freeing up the 2019 schedule for other priorities .
“ If I were the Democrats negotiating the end of this Congress , I wouldn ’ t want to start the next Congress any further behind than I had to be . So I think that ’ s the leverage , ” said Blunt , a member of the Senate Appropriations Committee . “ I continue to think some DACA relief and border security is the way out of this for everybody . ”