Spending on immigration ads has only recently passed the $ 5 million mark . Where 's the immigration air war ?
With all the 1-percenter support for immigration reform , proponents of a comprehensive overhaul should be able to run enough pro-reform TV ads to block out broadcast prime time — if not the sun itself — from coast to coast .
Up to this point , the national air war over immigration — perhaps the highest-stakes legislative debate of President Barack Obama ’ s second term — has really yet to leave the runway . Groups on both sides of the issue have invested real resources in television ads , but it only amounts to the faintest echo of the 2012 election ’ s paid-media cacophony .
According to figures compiled by two different media-tracking sources , the total spending on immigration ads by significant political groups has only recently crossed the $ 5 million mark , including broadcast and cable television , and radio spending .
That ’ s no small figure in absolute terms . But when you think about the financial resources of reform supporters – including much of the business and tech communities , big labor , the Chamber of Commerce , New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg , News Corp mogul Rupert Murdoch and more – it ’ s remarkably modest .
As a point of contrast : another tracking source said the debate over guns has cost over $ 3 million just in the state of New Hampshire , where Bloomberg ’ s Mayors Against Illegal Guns and the Gabrielle Giffords-backed Americans for Responsible Solutions have clashed on air with the conservative American Action Fund .
There ’ s no single explanation for the modest price tag for immigration : many donors are skeptical that Washington can accomplish anything of significance , or that outside-group activity can make the difference with a terminally dysfunctional Congress . Even some heavily funded groups — including many labor unions — think grass-roots pressure can be more effective than ads . And activists on both sides say the sensitivity of the issue means it ’ s smarter for pro-reform groups to deliver their message to targeted , persuadable constituencies with methods other than the costly and undiscriminating medium of broadcast television .
There is also the issue of timing ; immigration reform has had relatively clear sledding in the Senate . Yet while supporters of immigration reform say they ’ re confident things are on the right track there , they ’ re also hoping for heavier-duty backup as the debate moves toward the House .
“ As you look over the horizon to the coming House debate , I think it ’ s obvious we ’ ll need more support from stakeholders , ” said Dan Conston , communications director for the American Action Network , one of the largest pro-reform spenders . “ If proponents really want immigration reform to go from an idea to a law , now is the time to become stakeholders because much more will be needed . ”
Americans for Tax Reform President Grover Norquist , a vocal backer of immigration reform , said more ad spending to support reformers could only help “ show House Republicans that if somebody takes a cheap shot on this , there are resources ” on their side . He emphasized that such spending wasn ’ t “ absolutely necessary ” at this point .
“ The people you ’ re communicating with in the pews , in the business community have shifted , and polls show Republicans are willing to have a path toward legal status , ” said the upbeat Norquist . “ All of the guys who collect resources and help challengers and the Republican Party — guys like us , [ the ] Faith and Freedom [ Coalition ] — they ’ re all pro-immigrant . ”