President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE threatened during a meeting with GOP senators and White House officials to shut down the government over full funding for his border wall , according to multiple reports .
Politico reported Tuesday that Trump is uninterested in the Senate ’ s plan to provide $ 1.6 billion on Trump ’ s wall along the U.S.-Mexico border . Instead , according to the news outlet , he wants the full $ 25 billion for the project funded all at once .
Trump told meeting attendees on Monday that he will shut down the government in September if he does not receive the full funding , Politico reported .
Sen. Richard Shelby Richard Craig ShelbyTrump signs stopgap measure , funding government through November On The Money : Trump signs stopgap spending bill | Shutdown fight delayed to November | Deutsche Bank reveals it has two individual tax returns tied to House subpoena | House Dems demand documents on Ukraine aid ███ 's 12:30 Report : Pelosi attacks Barr over Ukraine call MORE ( R-Ala. ) , who attended Monday ’ s meeting , said he considers the $ 1.6 billion in funding a minimum that could increase during negotiations .
“ He ’ s focused on border security . And like all presidents , he wants it done now . But we ’ re part of the legislative process , it ’ s slower and deliberate , ” Shelby told Politico .
The government last shut down for three days in January as a temporary spending bill stalled in Congress .
Trump 's hard-line stance over his border wall comes as his administration faces overwhelming opposition from Republicans and Democrats to its `` zero tolerance '' immigration policy , which has led to the separation of thousands of migrant children from their parents .
Trump has refused to cave on the policy , blaming Democrats for it . Other administration officials have said it falls on Congress to address the issue , despite the Trump administration implementing the zero tolerance policy .
The House is expected to vote soon on a pair of GOP immigration bills that include broader reforms . Meanwhile , some members of Congress have crafted legislation that would specifically end the practice of family separation .