An illegal immigrant who received positive press coverage during his fight against deportation earlier this year struck and killed a father of five in Colorado on Aug. 2 while driving without a license .
According to press reports , Miguel Ramirez Valiente was charged with careless driving with a revoked license after he over-corrected his truck while driving on a state highway near Colorado Springs , hitting Sean Buchanan .
Buchanan was riding a motorcycle when he was hit by Ramirez Valiente , who came to the U.S. from El Salvador 14 years ago .
Ramirez Valiente has several prior charges on his arrest record .
According to Denver ’ s ABC news affiliate , The Denver Channel , Ramirez Valiente was charged with reckless endangerment in 2011 and domestic violence in 2016 . Both cases were dismissed by the El Paso County district attorney .
Last year , Ramirez Valiente ’ s driver ’ s license was revoked after he pleaded guilty to a charge of driving under the influence , according to The Denver Channel . His probation for that charge was extended Aug. 1 , a day before he hit Buchanan , because he had not finished his community service and therapy for alcoholism . ( RELATED : Every Dem Says Illegal Aliens Should Get Health Insurance )
It is not clear if Ramirez Valiente was inebriated when he struck Buchanan , but a close acquaintance of Ramirez Valient ’ s says he has a history of alcohol abuse .
“ He ’ s an alcoholic and an abuser , ” the person told The Denver Channel .
“ This family deserves to know who they ’ re dealing with , ” the person said .
CNN did not cite Ramirez Valiente ’ s rap sheet when the network published a sympathetic profile of him in January , after he took refuge in a Colorado Springs church to avoid deportation .
Ramirez Valiente said during a press conference at the church that he came to the U.S. 14 years ago from El Salvador , where he says he fled gang violence .
He first came on the radar of U.S. immigration authorities in 2011 , following a traffic stop . He claimed in the press conference that he had been fighting his immigration case for eight years , and that he had never missed an immigration hearing .
Buchanan ’ s family has set up a GoFundMe page to raise money for his funeral and other expenses .
He is survived by his wife and five children , ages six through 15 .