CLOSE One week in , President Trump is doing exactly what he said he would do ... sort of . ███
MIAMI — President Trump is hailing the first victory in his fight against `` sanctuary cities '' after a South Florida mayor ordered his employees on Thursday to begin working more closely with federal immigration authorities .
For years , Miami-Dade County has refused to hold some undocumented immigrants in its jails for federal immigration agents . But after Trump signed an executive order threatening to withhold federal funding from sanctuary cities , Miami-Dade County Mayor Carlos Gimenez changed his mind .
Gimenez signed an executive order Thursday ordering the director of his corrections department to begin honoring all requests by Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) to hold immigration suspects in Miami-Dade County jails .
`` Miami-Dade County complies with federal law and intends to fully cooperate with the federal government , '' the order read .
Gimenez said he made the decision to ensure that the county does not lose out on $ 355 million in federal funding it has coming in 2017 .
Trump was quick to praise the decision , tweeting on Thursday : `` Right decision . Strong ! ''
The term `` sanctuary city '' is a broad term that describes up to 300 communities that have policies protecting the nation 's 11 million undocumented immigrants from deportation .
Some refuse to share any information with ICE agents . Some will share information , but refuse to hold undocumented immigrants for the sole purpose of giving ICE agents time to pick them up .
Trump vowed throughout the campaign to crack down on those cities . He often cited the example of Kate Steinle , a San Francisco woman who was shot and killed by an undocumented immigrant who had been released by the city 's sheriff 's department .
On Wednesday , Trump signed an executive order that directed the Department of Homeland Security to identify and label `` sanctuary cities '' in the U.S . It ordered the department to publish a weekly roundup of crimes committed by undocumented immigrants , including any local police departments that had custody of those immigrants but chose to release them .
The order also directed the departments of Justice and Homeland Security to identify federal grants that can be withheld from sanctuary cities that continue their practices . Those federal departments give out millions of dollars in grants each year to help local communities hire police officers , hold undocumented immigrants , improve community policing practices and crack down on violence against women .
`` These jurisdictions have caused immeasurable harm to the American people and to the very fabric of our Republic , '' Trump 's order read .
Big city mayors responded forcefully to Trump 's order , with mayors from San Francisco to Chicago to New York vowing to fight back . Boston Mayor Marty Walsh said he would even allow undocumented immigrants to seek refuge in city hall .
`` They can use my office , '' Walsh said . `` They can use any office in this building . ''
CLOSE After President Donald Trump signed an executive order exploring cutting off funding to so-called sanctuary cities , mayors on both coasts of the U.S. say their cities will not be bullied . ( Jan. 25 ) AP
A collection of police chiefs and sheriffs on Thursday also criticized Trump 's attacks on sanctuary cities .
They say the practice of holding suspects in their jails solely for ICE has been ruled unconstitutional by federal courts . And they say the federal government should not try to force cities to carry out the federal responsibility of immigration enforcement .
`` Law enforcement has a responsibility to work with federal immigration authorities . And the vast majority of police departments do , '' said Montgomery County ( Md . ) Police Chief Tom Manger . `` But this notion that the federal government would cut funding to coerce local policies to change is troubling . ''