Guest-worker programs are a thorny issue that has complicated the debate . Immigration reform 's other hurdle
The Republican divide on whether undocumented immigrants can become citizens is consuming most of the headlines . But there ’ s a trickier issue at play that ultimately could prove to be a bigger stumbling block for immigration reform : a guest-worker program for future immigrants .
Last March , the AFL-CIO and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce reached a delicately crafted deal on the number of low-skilled workers — such as hospitality employees — who can legally come into the country . That deal is a major reason why the Senate reform bill was able to pass in June .
But House Republicans have not yet resolved this thorny problem — the GOP principles released last week only broadly touch the issue — and Republicans are split over whether to raise or reduce the number of guest workers coming into the country , according to several top sources close to the issue .
Meanwhile , Democrats will be reluctant to depart from the high-stakes agreement struck between labor and business .
“ There are serious divisions because there are some people who , frankly , just don ’ t want a lot of folks coming from the outside , ” said Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) on Wednesday . Pointing to the current jobless rate , he added : “ They have some very legitimate arguments . ”
If a House solution veers too far from the Senate deal on guest workers , key officials believe the entire reform effort could collapse . That ’ s because it risks losing support from the pivotal constituencies who helped pass comprehensive immigration reform last year .
One person close to the Senate negotiations said one of the key reasons for the success of the Senate bill is because of “ very carefully crafted compromises ” on the guest-worker programs . These pacts formed a marked change from the previous failed effort at comprehensive immigration reform in 2007 , the person noted .
“ Attempts to unravel these deals will not only show bad faith , they will likely prove fatal to the overall effort , ” the person warned .
Rep. John Yarmuth ( D-Ky. ) , who was part of a group of eight House lawmakers who tried to write a comprehensive immigration bill last year , added that if either major constituency backed out of the reform effort , “ it would make it very difficult ” to do an overhaul .
“ We don ’ t know why [ guest workers ] should be a difficult issue , ” said Yarmuth , encapsulating the thinking among Democrats . “ When you ’ ve got labor and the U.S. Chamber agreeing … it seems to me that it shouldn ’ t be tough . ”
Still , the divide over a guest-worker program is something that had already tripped up that House group long before the secretive negotiations were disbanded last year . Last spring , Democrats and Republicans had agreed to present separate proposals — Democrats would stick to the Chamber-labor agreement while Republicans would write a plan that was more business-friendly .
Since the House GOP leadership released a set of broad principles last week , immigration reform has gained some momentum as key lawmakers and the White House said they were encouraged by the GOP blueprint and indicated some openness on certain policy provisions . For instance , President Barack Obama signaled in a CNN interview last week that he can be flexible on a new , “ special ” pathway to citizenship that Republicans oppose but Democrats generally favor . House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) also said she welcomed the release of the principles .
But underneath that optimism lies a web of complicated details that will have to be sorted out as lawmakers draft language to accompany the principles . What to do with a new guest-worker program will be one of the thorniest issues .
“ It ’ s hard to figure out how this issue gets resolved in the House when Republicans are split between those that want low visa numbers and those who want a market-based system , while Dems are unlikely to undermine a deal between archenemies — labor and the Chamber of Commerce , ” said one senior House GOP aide close to the issue .