So , the rain falls every day here in Los Angeles now . Every single day . And Jerry Brown , our governor , told us we would have a drought for 500 years . Politicians are not good weather forecasters . No one is a good weather forecaster . The forecasters can not tell what the weather will be tomorrow . How can they possibly , conceivably know what the weather will be like in 10 or 20 years ?
Back in the 1960s and 1970s , we were told that a new Ice Age was coming because man-made particles would block the sun . Now it ’ s man-made something that ’ s going to bake the earth .
The key , the absolute key , is that the left is always looking for a reason why the government has to control you . The left is all about controlling other people over their guns or their bathrooms or their cars or their schools . It ’ s not about the weather . It ’ s about control .
That ’ s what passed through my woolly old head as I drove through L.A. with my pal , Judah Friedman , the columnist .
But I was also thinking about immigration . Just for myself , I know beyond a shadow of a doubt that Mr. Donald Trump has the power to set immigration policy to keep the nation safe . That ’ s in the law . That ’ s in cases decided by courts . It ’ s not even a remotely close case .
But — and this is a big but — we learned at Yale that “ legal realism ” is the way the law works . Legal realism says that courts are made up of human beings called judges ( “ so-called judges… ” ) . They have every human frailty . They want to please their friends . They want to be folk heroes . They want to be loved by the media , which in America today is the Supreme Judge .
They can decide the case before them any darned way they please . In any important case , there will be precedent ( or so-called “ precedent ” ) on both sides . They can pick and choose to please themselves or the media or their cousin in Brooklyn . So , Seattle has very left-wing judges who want to be heroes in the left-wing city . That ’ s the Ninth Circuit . They can rule on Mr. Trump ’ s immigration plan any way they choose .
They have already given us a big clue — as my immigration law expert Nolan Rappaport has told me — by asking completely irrelevant questions from the bench about Mr. Trump ’ s comments about immigration during the campaign . That ’ s to show that Trump is a mad man and a dangerous racist , so they can throw that into their opinions .
Again , they can do anything they want . Nolan points out that no court has ever restricted a President ’ s immigration power . So far . We ’ re about to see the first of its kind , I sadly suspect .
But meanwhile , the omnipotent media is missing something huge : the whole world wants to come to America . The Muslims want to leave their Muslim countries and come to Christian America . Doesn ’ t that tell us something about how valuable this country is as it is ? If we ’ re a fascist , racist state , why do the people from Yemen and Iran want to come here ?
Anyway , I got to grow up in an America where no one seriously questioned that this was the best place God had ever made . This was taught to us by parents and schools . I wonder what my granddaughter will be taught .
It ’ s still raining . And by the way , has anyone seen a Korean movie from 2012 called Eungyo ? It ’ s about the saddest movie I have ever seen . It ’ s on Netflix . It has a few seconds of sex so not for kiddies . But it will break your heart .