CLOSE A Donald Trump win in the presidential election could be detrimental to one city 's efforts to build trade ties with Mexico . Video provided by TheStreet Newslook
BROWNSVILLE , Texas — Despite the 18-foot-tall iron security fence cutting through her family ’ s citrus farm , Bonnie Elbert still sees a relentless flow of undocumented immigrants and smugglers carrying trash bags full of drugs sneaking into this southern tip of the USA .
Elbert considers herself politically conservative and wants lawmakers to do something about illegal immigration . But the proposal to build a wall between the U.S. and Mexico to make America safer — a cornerstone of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump 's campaign — is unrealistic , she said .
“ The one we have doesn ’ t really work , ” Elbert said as she drove recently through Loop Farms , more than 700 acres of orange and grapefruit orchards the family has tended since the 1920s . “ What makes them think a new one will ? ”
Trump 's proposal to build a 40-foot-high wall across the U.S. border with Mexico and make Mexico pay for it sparked a Twitter clash between the GOP candidate and Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto .
Residents on the border have lived for years with a close facsimile : 650 miles of metal fencing and other barriers erected in 2009 and stretching , in sections , from this Texas border city to the California coast . The fence , created through the 2006 Secure Fence Act , is nearly continuous along the border with Arizona , New Mexico and California , due to long stretches of federal land along the border . But in Texas , the fence is chopped up into multiple sections because the state 's border with Mexico is comprised mostly of private property , which is harder to acquire and build on .
Trump has said he needs to build only about 1,000 miles of wall along the nearly 2,000-mile border with Mexico , due to natural barriers . But the current fence sparked costly legal fights with property owners , disrupted communities that straddle the border and has proven largely ineffective in stemming the flow of undocumented immigrants , according to residents , community leaders and border patrol officials .
Whoever pays for it , a newer , bigger wall would waste more money and be just as futile in preventing illegal crossings , Brownsville Mayor Tony Martinez said .
“ It ’ s gibberish , ” Martinez said . “ It doesn ’ t prevent people from coming in or drugs from coming in . It ’ s not a deterrent and it ’ s not effective . ”
He noted that Mexican drug lord Joaquín Guzmán , known as El Chapo , tunneled his way out of prison last year before being recaptured by Mexican marines . “ We should learn from El Chapo , ” he said . “ They could always build tunnels . ”
Days after the fence went up along the border near McAllen , border agents there realized the smugglers ’ answer to the barrier : ladders .
Agents began collecting the 19-foot ladders — some wooden and homemade , others construction-grade aluminum — propped up against the 18-foot fence , said Chris Cabrera , a McAllen-based border patrol agent and vice president of the local chapter of the National Border Patrol Council , the agents ’ union .
So many ladders piled up in their station that supervisors told the agents to stop bringing them in , he said . Meanwhile , the flow of immigrants and drugs continued unabated . Apprehensions in the Rio Grande Valley sector of the Border Patrol , which sees the largest number of crossings in the USA , has more than doubled from 60,989 in fiscal year 2009 to 147,257 last fiscal year , according to Border Patrol statistics .
The Border Patrol union has endorsed Trump because of his focus on border security and immigration reform , Cabrera said . But the concept of building a bigger wall without other measures , such as increased manpower and technology , is ill-informed , he said .
“ If you ’ re in the business of selling ladders , it ’ s a good idea , ” Cabrera said . “ If you build a bigger wall , they ’ re going to come with bigger ladders. ” He added : “ If they ’ re thinking of putting up a wall as a be-all , end-all ... they ’ re looking in the wrong place . ”
The security fence project also ran into a litany of private property lawsuits and environmental opposition that ran up costs and led to delays , said Denise Gilman , director of the Immigration Clinic at the University of Texas-Austin School of Law , who has studied the fence ’ s impact on the border . Most of the land along the Texas border is privately owned , making it much harder for the federal government to acquire and build on , she said .
After long legal challenges from property owners , federal officials built the fence in sections along the winding Texas border , bypassing some land owned by richer and politically connected owners and building through poorer neighborhoods , she said . A new wall will face similar challenges .
“ I was frustrated to see the lessons from the last experience had not been learned effectively , ” Gilman said . “ It ’ s important for the public to understand that it ’ s not going to be possible to build a wall along the entire border . ”
The current wall snakes through the Rio Grande Valley just south of Highway 281 , at times cutting right through residents ' lawns , and through old town Brownsville , where some of the city ’ s most historic buildings sit . Mark Clark bought his two-story brick building a decade ago and enjoyed the view of the Rio Grande he had from his second-story balcony . Today , the view is of a sprawling , rust-colored fence .
The fence has broken up the continuity and goodwill between Brownsville and Matamoros , its sister city across the river in Mexico , and created an eyesore that rankles most locals , Clark said . Across the river , Mexicans call it “ El Berlin , ” alluding to the 27-mile concrete wall that once divided East and West Berlin during the Cold War , Clark said .
“ It ’ s just embarrassing , ” Clark said . “ This has been a psychological disaster and a colossal waste of money . When ’ s it going to end ? ”