'Our goal is to get 70 votes , ' said Chuck Schumer . Immigration vote hunt on in Senate
Getting immigration reform to the Senate floor took hours of negotiations and committee hearings , hundreds of amendments , a careful orchestration of public statements and backroom pressure to hold the Gang of Eight together .
Many of the almost two dozen Republicans identified as possible supporters by the Gang of Eight are demanding changes that would make the bill significantly more conservative . They want stricter border security , tighter control on government benefits for newly-documented immigrants and tougher requirements along the pathway to citizenship .
Go too far on any of those elements , and liberal Democrats — who aren ’ t thrilled with many aspects of the bill already — begin to pull away .
Meanwhile , a handful of conservative Democrats , who have been asked to cast several tough votes this year already , won ’ t commit to the bill unless they secure many of the same fixes that Republicans are seeking .
And even if the Senate approves a bill , the route through the House is a puzzle for reform proponents . Their only game plan , at this point , is to run up the numbers in the Senate , sending an emphatic message to the House that it needs to act .
“ Our goal is to get 70 votes . It is going to take a lot of work , ” said Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) , a leader of the Gang of Eight . “ This is one of the most important bills to pass for America . It ’ s one of the hardest bills to pass for America . And we got a long way to go , we don ’ t have any doubts about that . But so far , at each step of the road where it ’ s been difficult , we ’ ve been able to overcome . ”
No one ’ s expecting final commitments until just before the vote as the senators look to extract compromises and concessions . But Schumer said the Gang of Eight would meet Thursday to begin plotting out a strategy for the floor debate , which is expected to begin soon after senators return from the Memorial Day recess .
The group heads into the next phase of the fight with the strength that comes from sticking together .
Predictions that a drawn-out debate would kill the bill haven ’ t come to pass . It ’ s been more than four months since the Gang of Eight released its principles and more than one month since it offered the bill . And coming out of a three-week-long Judiciary Committee markup Tuesday , the legislation picked up one more Republican vote — Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah — although his support isn ’ t guaranteed on the floor .
The debate has yet to turn unusually heated , in part because it ’ s been repeatedly overshadowed by a string of headline-grabbing news events including the Boston Marathon bombings , the Benghazi investigation , the IRS scandal , and the Oklahoma tornadoes .
This has all given the Gang of Eight a chance to start on favorable terrain , with undecided senators as open-minded as they may ever be to tackling the controversial issue .
“ I want to see an immigration reform bill , I really do , ” said Sen. Jim Risch ( R-Idaho ) . “ I think everybody up here does . I think that the gap between all parties is a lot narrower than it was . ”