President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE said Sunday that the program protecting immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children is “ probably dead , ” placing the blame on Democrats .
“ DACA is probably dead because the Democrats don ’ t really want it , they just want to talk and take desperately needed money away from our Military , ” Trump wrote on Twitter .
DACA is probably dead because the Democrats don ’ t really want it , they just want to talk and take desperately needed money away from our Military . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 14 , 2018
Trump announced last year that he would rescind the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program , but provided Congress with six months to craft a legislative fix .
Lawmakers , however , have yet to reach a deal with the White House , and the president has said that a wall on the U.S.-Mexico border “ must be part of any DACA approval . ”
U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services on Saturday said it would begin taking new requests for immigrants seeking protections under the Obama-era program following a preliminary injunction last week that blocked Trump 's decision to end DACA .
Trump on Sunday also said he wants immigrants coming to the U.S. `` based on merit . ''
`` I , as President , want people coming into our Country who are going to help us become strong and great again , people coming in through a system based on MERIT . No more Lotteries ! # AMERICA FIRST , '' Trump said .
I , as President , want people coming into our Country who are going to help us become strong and great again , people coming in through a system based on MERIT . No more Lotteries ! # AMERICA FIRST — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 14 , 2018
That tweet comes after heated controversy over a report that said Trump during a White House meeting with lawmakers last week referred to immigrants from African nations , El Salvador and Haiti as coming from `` shithole countries . ''
“ Why are we having all these people from shithole countries come here ? ” the president reportedly said .