SAN FRANCISCO — The parents of Kathryn Steinle on Monday told a cable television host that they support his proposal to give mandatory prison time to deported people who return to the U.S. illegally .
Steinle , 32 , was walking along a waterfront in San Francisco when she was shot by a gun allegedly fired by Juan Francisco Lopez Sanchez , a Mexican national who was in the country illegally .
Sanchez , 45 , who has pleaded not guilty , had been released from jail months before the shooting , despite a federal immigration order asking local authorities to hold him .
Jim Steinle and Liz Sullivan of Pleasanton were interviewed by Fox News talk-show host Bill O ’ Reilly for a segment that aired Monday on “ The O ’ Reilly Factor . ”
Their daughter ’ s death has fueled a national debate on immigration , with advocates of stricter border control and even some Bay Area Democrats denouncing San Francisco as a city whose immigrant “ sanctuary ” protections harbor people who are in the country illegally .
Supporters of sanctuary protections have jumped on O ’ Reilly and others for politicizing the death . They say public safety is improved when immigrants can work with local police without fear of deportation .
To that , Jim Steinle said , “ We ’ re getting a little tired of the finger pointing , and we want to see some action . ”
Steinle , who was at his daughter ’ s side when she was shot , and his wife said the proposed “ Kate ’ s Law ” would be a good way to keep her memory alive . O ’ Reilly is collecting signatures for a petition supporting the proposal , which would impose a mandatory five years in federal prison for people who are deported and return and 10 years for people caught a second time .
“ We feel the federal , state and cities , their laws are here to protect us , ” Jim Steinle said . “ But we feel that this particular set of circumstances and the people involved , the different agencies let us down . ”
Liz Sullivan said she hopes some good might come out of her daughter ’ s death .
“ You want to make it so much better for everybody in the United States that this , as you say , would never happen again , ” she said .
Federal records show Lopez-Sanchez had been deported three times before being sentenced to about five years in federal prison in 1998 . He had finished his third stint in prison for re-entering the country illegally when he was sent to San Francisco March 26 on an outstanding 1995 drug charge .
The San Francisco district attorney ’ s office declined to prosecute , given the age of the case and the small amount of marijuana involved .
The San Francisco Sheriff ’ s Department released Lopez-Sanchez on April 15 , declining to honor a request by federal immigration authorities to keep Lopez-Sanchez in custody for 48 hours until they could pick him up for deportation proceedings .
San Francisco Sheriff Ross Mirkarimi has strenuously defended his decision , saying he was following city law , including a broader 1989 city “ sanctuary ” law and a more specific 2013 ordinance that applies specifically to federal immigration detainers .