Buried within the 844 pages of the bipartisan immigration bill—amid historic shifts in policies such as a path to citizenship for 11 million unauthorized immigrants—are pet provisions of the senators who crafted it .
South Carolina Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham wants more visas for the meat industry , a major employer in his state . Sen. Charles Schumer ( D. , N.Y. ) pushed for special treatment for Irish workers ; his state is home to a large population with Irish ancestry .
Republican Sen. Marco Rubio sought help for the cruise-ship industry , a big business in his home state of Florida . And Democratic Sen. Michael Bennet of Colorado wove in a boost for ski areas .
Timeline : Immigration Law in America Review legislative milestones and key shifts in immigration policy .
Washington Wire Top 10 : Pet Projects in Immigration Bill l
After months of difficult negotiations—which nearly derailed an immigration deal—the business community and labor unions hashed out a new work-visa program to allow up to 200,000 low-skill workers to come to the U.S . Adding extra visas for meat , poultry and fish cutters was n't part of that deal . Including it was the work of Mr. Graham , said people familiar with the negotiations .
The final bill sets aside up to 20,000 additional visas for meat cutters and trimmers . The industry employed 158,480 Americans nationwide in May 2012 , according to the Labor Department .
In Mr. Graham 's state , broilers—chickens raised for meat—are the number one commodity . The industry generated $ 698 million in South Carolina in 2011 , nearly 27 % of all agricultural cash in the state , according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture . Turkeys were the second-largest commodity in the state .
The United Food and Commercial Workers International Union is n't pleased about the visas to bring in more foreign workers , saying there is no labor shortage in the industry .
`` The way we view this is it 's an earmark for meat and poultry and we strongly , strongly oppose it , '' said Tim Schlittner , a spokesman for the labor union . `` It appears to have been dropped in the bill at the 11th hour.Quite frankly , we 're taken back by its inclusion . ''
Mr. Schlittner said the UFCW supports comprehensive immigration reform , but will fight the meat-visa provision . `` We do n't want this provision to poison what is otherwise a giant step forward towards comprehensive reform , '' he said .
As for inserting the provision , `` Sen. Graham appreciates the credit , but he 'd like to share it with his other seven colleagues , '' Kevin Bishop , Mr. Graham 's spokesman , said in an email .
Meantime , Mr. Bennet , working with an association that represents most of Colorado 's ski resorts , crafted a provision to make it easier for them to hire foreign ski instructors . Instead of using a visa program for temporary , low-skilled workers , ski instructors would be eligible to come to the U.S. under the same program that professional athletes use . Current law allows those athletes to stay in the U.S. for up to a decade .
Ski areas are hiring fewer foreign workers for jobs such as housekeeping and lift-operating since the recession because more Americans have been eager to take those jobs , said Melanie Mills , president of Colorado Ski Country USA , which represents 21 of Colorado 's 25 ski areas . But finding certified ski instructors , especially ones who speak other languages and can communicate with foreign tourists , has been a problem .
`` The perfect example of this is a certified ski instructor that speaks Portuguese , '' said Ms. Mills , noting it is a safety hazard if instructors ca n't communicate with their students . `` We can advertise anywhere , and we just ca n't find somebody who meets those qualifications . ''
An aide to Mr. Bennet said tourism is an important industry for Colorado—and therefore an important priority for Mr. Bennet—and that the provision would benefit ski resorts nationwide .
For Mr. Schumer , the immigration bill was an opportunity to weave in an extra 10,500 visas for Irish people with at least a high-school degree . An aide to Mr. Schumer said the provision would right a 1965 change to immigration law that was supposed to end bias against Latin American , Asian and African immigrants but `` inadvertently made it difficult for Irish immigrants to obtain visas , despite their strong cultural ties to the U.S . ''
Mr. Rubio , from hurricane-prone Florida , inserted an opportunity for foreigners to come to the U.S. for 90 days to work on relief operations after state or federal disasters .
Mr. Rubio also gave a nod to the recently embattled cruise industry with a provision allowing certain foreigners to repair cruise ships made abroad , as well as other transportation equipment . Florida drew $ 6.7 billion in direct spending from the cruise industry in 2011 , according to the Cruise Lines International Association .
Few business sectors have been more critical of immigration-bill provisions than the construction industry , but even it fared better than expected . Mr. Rubio and Sen. Jeff Flake ( R. , Ariz. ) , who both advocated for the construction industry during negotiations , were n't able to get a cap lifted that limits construction visas to 15,000 . But they did include a provision , which many in the construction industry had feared dead , allowing foreigners to work in such higher-skilled jobs as electricians , plumbers and welders .
`` There was some back and forth on that for a while , '' said Marco Giamberardino , executive director of government affairs at the National Electrical Contractors Association .
Despite the victory , various construction groups said in interviews they would fight the overall cap on construction jobs . `` Obviously , this is just the first step of a long road , '' Mr. Giamberardino said .