Republicans held out hope that a deal can be reached allowing young undocumented immigrants to remain in the U.S. , despite President Donald Trump saying the effort is “ probably dead ” amid growing tensions about keeping the government funded past Friday .
Trump escalated his rhetoric on immigration in a pair of early-morning Sunday Twitter messages that appeared to move away from what a few days ago seemed to be a potential deal with Democrats and moderate Republicans on legislation to continue the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program .
“ DACA is probably dead because the Democrats don ’ t really want it , they just want to talk and take desperately needed money away from our Military , ” Trump tweeted on Sunday from Florida , where he ’ s spending the weekend at his club .
“ I , as President , want people coming into our Country who are going to help us become strong and great again , people coming in through a system based on MERIT . No more Lotteries ! ” Trump said . His comments followed four tweets on the same topic on Saturday .
The immigration debate involving young undocumented immigrants brought to the country as children and Trump ’ s demand for funding to build a wall on the southern U.S. border is playing out days before a potential government shutdown as soon as the end of this week .
Shortly after Trump ’ s tweets , he was contradicted by key Senate Republicans and even his own Homeland Security Secretary , Kirstjen Nielsen , who said on “ Fox News Sunday ” that there ’ s still hope for a solution if Democrats would agree to close immigration loopholes .
“ I do not believe DACA is dead , ” Nielsen said . She said the Trump administration and congressional Republicans want “ a security-immigration deal. ” She also said it would be “ completely irresponsible ” for Democrats to demand that a deal be tied to keeping the government funded .
Republican Senator David Perdue of Georgia also expressed optimism on ABC ’ s “ This Week ” about finding a fix for DACA , but only if “ the Democrats get serious about negotiating ” on securing U.S. borders and family reunification or “ chain migration . ”
Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona , also a Republican , said senators from both parties support a proposed compromise on legislation that he has helped write .
“ We ’ re working now to add more Republicans to that list , and we will have more this coming week , ” Flake said on ABC . He said his bill was the only way to get the 60 votes required for passage in the Senate .
Flake also rejected the president ’ s claim that “ Democrats don ’ t really want ” a deal . “ I ’ ve been negotiating and working with the Democrats on immigration for 17 years , ” he said . “ The Democrats are negotiating in good faith . ”
The immigration debate is taking place against a backdrop of controversy after Trump reportedly called Haiti , El Salvador and African nations “ shithole countries ” during an Oval Office meeting with senators . Trump denied making the comment in a Twitter posting on Friday , although the White House didn ’ t dispute the quotations after they were widely reported on Thursday . Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois , the second-ranking Democrat , said the denial was “ not true . ”
Perdue of Georgia attended the meeting and called the comments as reported “ a gross misrepresentation. ” “ He did not use that word , ” said Perdue , a top ally of Trump . Nielsen was also in the meeting but said she didn ’ t recall that specific phrase being used .
Republican Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas also said on CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation ” that he didn ’ t hear Trump use the word in the meeting , and that Durbin “ has misrepresented what happened in White House meetings before . ”
An email message seeing comment was left with Durbin ’ s office . Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer said on Twitter that to impugn Durbin ’ s integrity was “ disgraceful , ” and that “ whether you agree with him on the issues or not , he is one of the most honorable members of the Senate . ”
Flake said he was in a meeting immediately following the one in which the president made the alleged comments , with some of the same participants . “ They said those words were used before those words went public , ” Flake said .
Asked on CNN whether Trump ’ s comments were racist , Republican Representative Mia Love of Utah , a child of Haitian immigrants , paused and said , “ yes. ” She also said , “ I can ’ t defend the indefensible . ”
But Love , who ’ s called on Trump to apologize , said the episode can ’ t derail efforts to address DACA and leave families in limbo .
“ The worst thing that can happen right now is for there not to be a fix at all , ” Love said on “ State of the Union. ” “ We need to make sure that both sides aren ’ t using this for political gain and we do our job and fix this issue . ”
Less than a week ago Trump said during a televised , bipartisan meeting with lawmakers that he wanted a “ bill of love ” on immigration . He appeared to endorse a “ clean DACA ” bill sought by Democrats .
Since then , a hard-right flank of the Republican Party , led by White House senior adviser Stephen Miller and Cotton , pulled the president back from the center .
Even so , 70 percent of Americans favor continuing DACA , including a slim majority of Trump ’ s backers , according to a CBS News/YouGov poll released Sunday . In follow-up polling , 76 percent said Trump ’ s comments on U.S. immigration from Africa and Haiti were inappropriate .
Republican Senator Cory Gardner of Colorado said he still thinks a deal can be struck . While some members of both parties may want to continue fighting , “ that ’ s not where a lot of the Democrats that I ’ ve been working with are , that ’ s not where the Republicans that I ’ ve been working with are . Where we are is trying to find a real solution , ” Gardner said on CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation . ”