Former Florida Gov . Jeb Bush , blanketing the Sunday talk shows , vigorously denied charges leveled at him in the past week that he ’ s shifted his views on immigration reform as other Republicans eyeing potential 2016 presidential bids jockey for position on the issue .
Mr. Bush said he still favors a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants and is on the same page with a bipartisan group of senators crafting such a bill after his new book outlining a “ pathway to residency ” for those in the country illegally drew fire from both the right and the left last week .
“ I … think that a path to citizenship , so long as the ability of someone to come legally is easier and less costly than coming illegally , then a path to citizenship is appropriate , and I applaud the work of the senators and others in the Congress that are working to try to craft a consensus and a compromise on this issue , ” Mr. Bush said on “ Fox News Sunday . ”
But in his new book , “ Immigration Wars : Forging an American Solution , ” Mr. Bush writes that he favors a path to residency , rather than citizenship , for the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants already in the country , and that they should have to leave the country and reapply if they truly want to get U.S. citizenship .
Sen. Lindsey Graham , South Carolina Republican and a member of the “ Gang of Eight , ” said last week that such a stance “ undercuts ” what the senators are trying to accomplish .
But Mr. Bush said he had talked with Mr. Graham and they are on the same page — and that his views on the issue have been consistent despite backing a pathway to citizenship earlier in his career .
“ I haven ’ t changed , ” he said on CBS ’ “ Face the Nation. ” “ I support a path to legalization or citizenship so long as the path for people that have been waiting patiently is easier and costs less , the legal entrance to our country , than illegal entrance . ”
“ Let ’ s wait for a few minutes and see how Jeb Bush changes his mind , again , ” Mr. Reid told reporters last week . “ His opinion on immigration is not evolving ; it ’ s devolving . He keeps going backwards . ”
President Obama , who had pledged to pass comprehensive immigration reform in his first term , has made the issue one of his top priorities for his second .
But Republicans working on the issue have a tricky needle to thread between distancing themselves from the president and potentially alienating Latino voters . Republican Sens . Marco Rubio of Florida and Rand Paul of Kentucky immediately blasted a framework for immigration reform leaked by the White House last month that included a path to citizenship as part of the plan . Mr. Rubio has been widely viewed as a potential 2016 nominee , and Mr. Paul ’ s stock rose tremendously in that regard after waging a filibuster that lasted nearly 13 hours last week and ended up as a scathing critique of the White House ’ s policy on drone aircraft . Mr. Rubio , whose parents emigrated to the United States from Cuba , favors a pathway to citizenship for those currently in the country illegally , and Mr. Bush said his views “ absolutely ” coincide with those .
“ I applaud what Senator Rubio ’ s doing , the other members of the so-called Gang of Eight — they ’ re making a major contribution , ” Mr. Bush said on “ Face the Nation. ” “ And there ’ s also efforts in the House of Representatives as well . This is a very encouraging time , because if we can get immigration right , imagine , there ’ s possibilities of cats and dogs living with one another in other policy areas as well . ”
But Mr. Bush flatly dismissed the notion that the events of the past week or his book had anything to do with political maneuvering for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination .
“ Yeah , see , that ’ s the Washington world , the world of everything has to have a personal political ambition , motive , ” he said . “ That ’ s not the case . The book was written last year at a time when the tenor of the debate on immigration was dramatically different than it is today . ”