“ The truth of the matter is that the politics did shift midsummer because of that problem , ” Mr. Obama said in an interview aired Sunday on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press , ” referring to the surge of Central Americans , including thousands of unaccompanied children , across the border .
“ I want to spend some time , even as we ’ re getting all our ducks in a row for the executive action , I also want to make sure that the public understands why we ’ re doing this , why it ’ s the right thing for the American people , why it ’ s the right thing for the American economy , ” he said .
In the meantime , Mr. Obama has earned bitter outrage from Latinos , who make up one of his party ’ s strongest political constituencies . Already angered by the president ’ s move during his first term to accelerate deportations , activists have called the delay of promised executive action a betrayal .
“ Given the string of broken promises from this president to the Latino community on immigration , there is a real question as to whether he will follow through , ” said Frank Sharry , the executive director of America ’ s Voice , an immigrant-rights group . “ There are important segments of the Latino community , particularly Latino immigrant voters , where there ’ s a sense that the Republicans hate us , and the Democrats like us , but they don ’ t fully respect us yet — and I think that will have to be overcome going forward . ”
Angela M. Kelley , vice president for immigration policy at the Center for American Progress , said Latinos — like an aggrieved girlfriend who has waited in vain for a marriage proposal — are going to expect Mr. Obama to take even more expansive executive action later this year , given the delay .
“ A guy says he ’ s going to propose , and then he decides he ’ s going to delay and not propose for a couple of months , so you go , ‘ O.K. , I want a two-carat ring now instead of a one-carat ring , ’ ” Ms. Kelley said . “ The cost is high for what he ’ s done in terms of a delay . He ’ s asking the community to pay now , and to some extent , he ’ ll have to pay later . ”
It took about one month for Mr. Obama ’ s promise to begin crumbling . By early August , the start of Congress ’ summer break , Representative Tom Cotton , Republican of Arkansas , had released an attack ad charging that Senator Mark Pryor , Democrat of Arkansas — one of his party ’ s most at-risk candidates in November ’ s midterm congressional elections — was ignoring an immigration crisis on the United States-Mexico border , where thousands of Central American migrants were streaming into the United States .