Asked whether he minded Mr. Kelly telling lawmakers he had not been fully informed about immigration , Mr. Trump said : “ No , he did not say that . He didn ’ t say it the way you would like him to say it . ”
But according to one person familiar with the president ’ s thinking , Mr. Trump was livid when he learned that Mr. Kelly had described him as “ evolving ” in his immigration position . Throughout the evening on Wednesday , Mr. Trump fielded calls from allies who described Mr. Kelly ’ s comments to Congress as undermining the president , stoking Mr. Trump ’ s fury .
The president — who never likes it when someone characterizes his thinking — vented his anger to Mr. Kelly and to allies , according to the person familiar with the president ’ s thinking . It was similar to a moment during the campaign in April of 2016 , when Paul Manafort — who had just been hired to the Trump campaign — was caught on tape at a meeting with Republican National Committee members saying of Mr. Trump , “ the part he ’ s been playing is evolving . ”
When a president ’ s chief of staff speaks to members of Congress , it should be a “ consistent message , ” Representative Henry Cuellar , a Democrat of Texas , said on Thursday in an interview with CNN . Mr. Cuellar , who attended Wednesday ’ s meeting with Mr. Kelly , said the inconsistency “ makes it hard ” to negotiate .
Lawmakers who attended the meeting on Wednesday described Mr. Kelly ’ s remarks . Representative Luis V. Gutiérrez , a Democrat of Illinois who was at the meeting , said Mr. Kelly told the group that “ a 50-foot wall from sea to shining sea isn ’ t what we ’ re going to build . ”
Mr. Gutiérrez told reporters that Mr. Kelly referenced Mr. Trump ’ s campaign promises to build a wall and said , “ There were statements made about the wall that were not informed statements . ”
In an interview with Fox News on Wednesday night , Mr. Kelly defended his comments to the Democratic lawmakers and said , “ There ’ s been an evolutionary process that this president has gone through , as a campaign , and I pointed out to all of the members that were in the room that they all say things during the course of campaigns that may or may not be fully informed . ”