The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com .
Some 100 members of an American Mormon community in northern Mexico , nine of whom -- women , children , toddlers -- were massacred a week ago on a lonely stretch of highway , just crossed over into Arizona .
Other family members who have lived there for decades will follow .
The atrocity was the work of one of the cartels battling for control of the drug traffic into the United States .
In Mexico 's Sinaloa state in October , an arrest of Ovidio Guzman Lopez , son of `` El Chapo , '' who sits in a New York prison , brought a military-style cartel attack on the state capital , Culiacan , followed by a surrender to the cartel gunmen by national guard and army troops , and a release of the captive .
`` Is Mexico a failed state ? '' asks The Washington Times . Its editorial describes `` Another Blood-Soaked Year in Mexico '' where 17,000 people were murdered by July and the 2019 death toll is expected to reach 32,000 .
USA Today reports : `` Through August of the current fiscal year , the Border Patrol apprehended 457,871 migrants arriving as 'family units ' ... a 406 % increase compared to the 90,554 family unit apprehensions during the same period the previous year . Migrant families from Guatemala , Honduras and El Salvador made up almost 92 % of the total . ''
With cartel battles escalating into a war that Mexico City has no stomach for fighting , and a record number of migrants from Central America crossing Mexico to flood into the USA , what is the Democratic Party 's policy for halting the rising tide ?
Democrats are moving toward an `` open door '' policy on the U.S. border , an open borders embrace of any and all who wish to come .
America , apparently , does not belong to those who live here and love the country . America belongs to anyone who chooses to come . America belongs to the world .
Consider Bernie Sanders ' immigration proposal , outlined the week of the massacre of Mormon women and children .
On Day One , President Sanders would declare a moratorium on deportations and offer a `` swift pathway to citizenship '' for all illegal migrants who have been here for five years .
Bernie would break up ICE . Border-jumping would cease to be a crime and become a civil offense like jaywalking . The `` Muslim ban '' would be abolished .
President Sanders would back sanctuary cities that refuse to work with U.S. law enforcement . Asylum seekers would not have to wait in Mexico as their claims were processed but would be welcomed into the USA .
Family separations would end . Trump 's wall , which Bernie calls `` racist , '' would be history . The administration 's treatment of illegal immigration `` as a criminal and national security matter is inhuman , impractical and must end . ''
Migrants who enter illegally would qualify for federal health care and the same social welfare benefits as U.S. citizens . Immigrant officials say Sanders ' proposals would create an irresistible magnet for millions of migrants from all over the world to stampede into the USA .
The Nation magazine calls Sanders ' plan `` one of the boldest immigration plans any major politician has put forward in years , and comes amid a campaign season that has seen a major shift to the left among Democratic candidates on immigration .
`` With calls for a total moratorium on deportations , abolishing ICE and providing a path to citizenship for undocumented migration , the plan serves as a road map for what a fair and just immigration can be . ''
From another standpoint , Sanders ' proposal is a surrender to the reality that a leftist regime lacks the conviction or will to stop an endless stream of people from migrating here .
Americans troubled over what is happening on the Syrian-Turkish border , or Ukrainian-Crimean border , might take a closer look at what will happen at our own border , and to our own country , if Democrats win the presidency and throw open the doors to unrestricted immigration .
The federal budget , already running trillion-dollar deficits , and state budgets , too , will see huge increases in the cost of social programs , without the commensurate income tax revenues to pay for them .
Even at present levels , illegal immigration is bringing in millions of people without the work , education or language skills to compete and assimilate rapidly in a first world , Western economy .
These migrants pay virtually no income taxes , yet , would qualify for the same benefits as U.S. citizens . The inevitable result : another run-up in an annual deficit already running $ 1 trillion in the red .
Politically , so massive a migration of peoples who , once they become citizens , vote 70 % -90 % Democratic means an end of the GOP as a truly national party .
If we open the borders , how do we stop the drugs from coming in ? How do we stop the cartels from following MS-13 , which is already here ?
Socially , this country is as splintered as it has been since the 1960s .
Will a barrage of migrants add to its diversity , or deepen the ethnic , racial and cultural divides that are turning us into two , three , many Americas ?
Patrick J. Buchanan is the author of `` Nixon 's White House Wars : The Battles That Made and Broke a President and Divided America Forever . '' To find out more about Patrick Buchanan and read features by other Creators writers and cartoonists , visit the Creators website at www.creators.com .