Americans believe in the value of immigration . We are the most generous nation on earth to immigrants , allowing over one million people a year to come here legally . They come here in pursuit of what we recognize as the American dream – the chance to live in freedom and have the opportunity to work hard to make a better life for themselves and their families .
The problem is that our legal immigration system has been broken for decades . It has enabled 11 million people to come here illegally or overstay visas . It is a bureaucratic and inefficient system that does not address the needs of our economy .
All this has further deepened the American people ’ s mistrust in the ability of their government to perform basic functions .
Leaving in place a broken immigration system -– and the millions of people whose identities are a mystery to us –- is simply not an acceptable option . This must be fixed .
More On This ... Senators say bombings should spark immigration reform , not halt process
That is why I am advocating for securing our borders , improving enforcement , modernizing our legal immigration system and changing it so that it prioritizes welcoming people to the U.S. based on skills , not just on whether they have a family member already living here .
And that is why I support a process to identify and register those who are here illegally . They will have to submit biometric data in order to pass multiple national security and criminal background checks , pay $ 2,000 in fines , pay taxes , and learn English and American civics . They won ’ t be able to get any federal benefits like welfare or ObamaCare .
Before they can even apply to become permanent residents , they will have to wait at least ten years . They will have to get in line behind those who are trying to come the right way .
They will have to wait until we have a system in place to prevent illegal immigrants from being hired .
They will have to wait until we have a system in place to track people who overstay their visas .
And they will have to wait until we implement plans to spend at least $ 5.5 billion dollars to secure the border through more border patrol officers , more technology and more fencing .
I thought long and hard before taking on this issue . I understand how divisive it can be . I ’ ve seen how the left has used it to accuse opponents of their version of reform of being bigots and racists . And I would much rather be having a debate on the more fundamental ways we can grow our economy and get our debt and spending under control . But with or without us , the president and the Democrats who control the Senate were going to bring this issue up .
And I believe conservatives need to fight for the ideas and policies we believe are critical to fixing our immigration system .
The opponents of reform raise important points about not rewarding the violation of the law . I , too , have felt the frustration many feel that our nation ’ s generosity has been taken advantage of by some .
But policy-making is about solving problems . And to pick the right solution , you have to weigh the realistic alternatives . Deporting all illegal immigrants is not a practical solution . But ignoring the fact that they are here is just as bad .
For example , passing a law that only focuses on modernization and enforcement and leaves for another day the issue of those here illegally is not a good idea . Because as the enforcement measures kick in , millions of people living here illegally will be unable to work and provide for themselves and their families . The resulting humanitarian impact will then force us to scramble to address it . It is better to address it now as part of an orderly and measured process .
The only solution I know that can work is to reform legal immigration in a way that is good for the economy , do everything we can to secure the border , and allow illegal immigrants to eventually earn permanent residency by passing background checks , paying a fine , learning English and waiting at the back of the line for at least 10 years , at the same time that border security and enforcement measures are put in place to prevent this problem from happening again .
The bill I helped write is a good starting point , but it is not a take it or leave it proposition . I am open to any ideas others may have on how to do this , and I ’ ve been listening to the legitimate concerns people have raised with the expectation that we will be able to improve the bill as this debate continues .
We must do something to end today ’ s de facto amnesty , and conservative Republicans should lead on this issue . Because without conservatives at the table and in the fight , we are ceding this issue to President Obama and his allies in Congress . And as the last four years have proven , that is never a good idea .