President Trump 's political dalliance with `` Chuck and Nancy '' already is running into problems , as the top congressional Democrats balk at the president 's new terms for a deal to help the roughly 800,000 young illegal immigrants known as 'Dreamers . '
“ This proposal fails to represent any attempt at compromise , ” House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi and Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer said in a joint statement , after the administration announced the demands Sunday night .
The friction comes roughly three weeks after Pelosi and Schumer left a White House dinner with Trump saying they ’ d agreed to a framework deal to help the young illegal immigrants , as Trump moves to end their protections under the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program ( DACA ) .
The Trump administration outlined an extensive list of conditions late Sunday .
“ The administration ca n't be serious about compromise , ” Pelosi , of California , and Schumer , of New York , also said in their Sunday night statement . “ We told the president at our meeting that we were open to reasonable border security measures … but this list goes so far beyond what is reasonable . ”
Kellyanne Conway , counselor to the president , on Monday questioned what Schumer thinks is “ reasonable . ”
“ You have people who are losing loved ones because they are killed by an illegal immigrant , ” Conway said on “ Fox & Friends. ” “ What 's reasonable is to stop the flow of illegal immigrants and drugs over the border . I 'd like to know what Chuck Schumer thinks is reasonable . ”
Trump in recent weeks has turned to Schumer and Pelosi amid frustration with Senate Republicans , after they repeatedly failed to repeal and replace ObamaCare , denying him a major legislative victory and the ability to fulfill a top campaign promise .
Trump left the earlier meeting touting his efforts with “ Chuck and Nancy ” but was not specific about whether wall funding was a necessity .
The administration 's requirements announced Sunday include additional crackdowns on “ sanctuary cities ” that protect illegal immigrants ; reducing the number of incoming refugees ; 10,000 more Customs and Border Patrol agents ; and new initiatives curbing the number of unaccompanied immigrants who come to the U.S. illegally as children .
“ Over the last several decades , respect for the rule of law has broken down and immigration enforcement has been sacrificed for the sake of political expediency , ” Attorney General Jeff Sessions said after the announcement . “ This plan will work . ”
House Speaker Paul Ryan ’ s spokesman Doug Andres said the GOP-controlled chamber ’ s immigration working group would review the roughly 70-point White House list , then consult with the entire Republican caucus and the administration .
The White House plan is considered a starting point for congressional negotiations .
While the plan is already being embraced by Capitol Hill ’ s most conservative members , including a number of immigration hawks , backlash is growing among Democrats .
“ It is immoral for the president to use the lives of these young people as bargaining chips in his quest to impose his cruel , anti-immigrant and un-American agenda on our nation , ” said New Mexico Rep. Michelle Lujan Grisham , chairwoman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus .
The House Freedom Caucus , the chamber ’ s most conservative wing , is backing the plan .
“ We applaud the administration 's leadership on principles that will be critical to any immigration policy changes , ” said caucus Chairman Mark Meadows , R-N.C. “ We look forward to the administration 's insistence on these principles in any deal that is signed into law . ''
In dismantling DACA , the administration has argued it was forced to act because federal courts were ready to rule the program was unconstitutional , which would have put the Dreamers ’ future in jeopardy .
Trump , in announcing the end of DACA , gave Congress six months to find a legislative alternative .
The White House on Sunday night also asked to limit family-based green cards to spouses and the minor children of U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents , in addition to creating a point-based system .
And it called for boosting fees at border crossings , making it easier to deport gang members and unaccompanied children , and overhauling the asylum system .
Conway also said Monday that the White House requests are the result of collaborations with such agencies as the departments of Justice , Homeland Security and Health and Human Services as well as Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Border Patrol .