Noun – a light sandal , typically of plastic or rubber , with a thong between the big and second toe .
On Sunday , Bernie Sanders held a town hall meeting in Iowa .
According to Politico , “ During a town hall in Oskaloosa , Iowa , Sanders was asked by an attendee about how the United States can afford to fund social services such as health care , with an open borders policy . ”
For anyone familiar with Bernie ’ s views on immigration , it should not be surprising how he answered , though it does call into question his previous ambiguity .
The attendee also claimed the Vermont senator is “ an advocate for open borders. ” “ I ’ m afraid you may be getting your information wrong . That ’ s not my view , ” Sanders said . “ What we need is comprehensive immigration reform , ” he continued . “ If you open the borders , my God , there ’ s a lot of poverty in this world , and you ’ re going to have people from all over the world . And I don ’ t think that ’ s something that we can do at this point . Can ’ t do it . So that is not my position . ”
As I mentioned , that is not a new position for the Bern .
Back in 2015 , he did this interview with Vox ’ s Ezra Klein , where he called open borders a “ Koch brothers proposal . ”
It appears that Bernie is going back to this talking point . It is said that during 2016 , the democratic mothership called Bernie away from his previous stances on immigration . The fact that he supports amnesty is contradictory and frankly too risky to ever think about him being serious on immigration , but we can always wonder if this position is sincere or a result of having to pander to democratic voters .
This is why even Ann Coulter has said that Bernie used to be good on immigration .
We can argue about whether the democrats advocate open borders or not . There is a clear distinction between the de facto open borders policies of the left and the closed borders policies of Trump or Bernie ( depending on whether you believe his commentary ) .
While some libertarians devolve into absurdities associated with sovereign citizens , the rest of us know that immigration can not be unfettered . There must be restrictions , regulations , and a process . If Bernie is trying to get the left back to some semblance of order on the topic , that is better for the nation .
A month ago , Newsweek ran a story on Ann Coulter ’ s assessment of this easiest path forward . “ Conservative political commentator and author Ann Coulter on Tuesday said that Democrats would “ slaughter ” President Donald Trump in the 2020 election if they revived what she said were Bernie Sanders ’ s “ long forgotten ” positions on immigration and workforce issues . ”
If Dems revived Bernie Sanders ' ( long forgotten ) pro-worker , anti-immigration position , they 'd slaughter Trump . Now , who 's the `` Stupid Party '' ? https : //t.co/EiIJhGHcVl — Ann Coulter ( @ AnnCoulter ) March 5 , 2019
Yet 2020 might involve an independent candidate who is not controlled by the democratic mothership .
Also over the weekend , Former Starbucks CEO and independent running for president in 2020 , Howard Schultz , took up a comparatively tough stance on immigration .
The border crisis can be solved . If we put partisanship aside and lived our American values and common humanity , we can secure the border , offer a fair path to legal status , and create a better visa process for our country and economy . pic.twitter.com/eegmHV0AUi — Howard Schultz ( @ HowardSchultz ) April 7 , 2019
He says , “ Now , the issue that we have to recognize is this . President Trump is correct , and the Republican leadership is correct that we need fierce , strict levels of control on that border to keep bad people from coming in . Illegal immigrants should not come in . I don ’ t want to get into a wall or anything , but I agree we should fund whatever we need to do to secure the border . I get that . ”
Schultz has managed to take a far more reasonable stance on immigration than any of the democrats have .
And as these policy ideas work themselves out over the next year , we have to wonder what Americans are willing to compromise on . Will the American people take a chance again on someone who may be lying about their immigration policies ? Will the American people be willing to accept this dynamic between enforcement and humanitarian concerns raised by Schultz ? Can Bernie reasonably claim to care about American workers and their wages if he also supports amnesty ? What is an open borders policy if not amnesty ? Will Americans see how the right has failed to secure the border ?
If Trump has any interest in winning the 2020 election , he can not let Bernie or Schultz get to the right of him on immigration . Trump may talk a good game , but the implementation of policy hasn ’ t really gone past what Obama was already doing .
Trump may want a wall , ( or fence , sorry ) , but unless he moves past simply replacing existing fence , voters will flock to someone else who offers some hope for curtailing immigration .
Except this time , the price for failing to secure the border will be much higher .