The Trump administration unveiled new rules Wednesday that would allow officials to detain migrant families indefinitely while U.S. judges consider whether to grant them asylum .
Acting Homeland Security Secretary Kevin McAleenan announced the new rules in a news conference Wednesday morning .
They are part of the administration 's effort to stem the swelling tide of families and unaccompanied minors crossing the U.S.-Mexico , and are certain to draw legal challenges .
Administration officials blame the so-called Flores Settlement Agreement for a spike in immigration , saying it encourages migrants to bring children with them so they can be released into the United States while their court cases are pending .
`` By closing this key loophole in Flores , the new rule will restore integrity to our immigration system and eliminate the major pull factor fueling the crisis , '' he said .
The rules , which will be published in the Federal Register later this week , will take effect 60 days later .
“ President ( Donald ) Trump has made it clear that he ’ s going to secure America ’ s border at all cost and this rule plays a vital role in the strategy to restore the integrity to our immigration system and our national security , ” an unnamed senior administration official told The Washington Times before the announcement .
Currently , the government can only detain children for less than 20 days under the federal court ordered Flores settlement . Trump and Republicans say the limit encourages undocumented immigrants to bring children to the border in the hope that will increase their own chances of release , reports ABC News .
Changing the rules would allow the government to hold children and their families indefinitely pending their court proceedings , rather than follow the guidelines set in the 1997 Flores settlement . That agreement at first listed specific conditions for holding unaccompanied migrant children , and was expanded later to apply th conditions to migrant children accompanied by family members could be held .
Last September , the administration proposed a similar plan to detain children for longer than 20 days , saying that it had the authority to `` terminate '' some of the Flores agreement restrictions , including the time limits .
However , the rule was n't enacted at that time because of the lack of space in detention centers to house the children for longer periods of time .