Washington ( CNN ) - Americans overwhelmingly favor a bill that would give most undocumented immigrants a pathway towards citizenship , according to a new national poll .
And a CNN/ORC International survey also indicates that a majority of the public says that the government 's main focus should be legalizing the status of the undocumented rather than border security .
The poll was released Thursday , the same day that House Speaker John Boehner signaled any action on immigration is unlikely this year because House Republicans do n't trust President Barack Obama on the issue .
According to the poll , 54 % say the top priority for the government in dealing with the issue of illegal immigration should be developing a plan that would allow undocumented immigrants with jobs to eventually become legal U.S. residents . Just over four in ten questioned say the main focus should be developing a plan for stopping the flow of undocumented immigrants into the U.S. and for deporting those already here .
`` The Republicans ' insistence that border security be the primary focus of U.S. immigration policy may have been a popular stand in 2011 , but not necessarily in 2014 , '' said CNN Polling Director Keating Holland .
`` American attitudes toward undocumented immigrants have changed . Starting in 2012 , most Americans have said that the government 's focus should be on a plan that would allow those immigrants to become legal U.S. residents . A majority has consistently taken that position since that time - 56 % in 2012 , 53 % in 2013 , and 54 % in the current poll , '' added Holland .
The Democratic-controlled Senate last year passed a bipartisan illegal immigration bill that included an eventual pathway towards citizenship for most of the 11 million undocumented immigrants in the U.S . According to the poll , more than eight in 10 support such a plan . There is little partisan divide , with 88 % of Democrats , 81 % of independents and 72 % of Republicans in agreement .
The Senate bill stalled in the GOP dominated House . Republicans said they preferred to address the matter incrementally rather than in one comprehensive measure .
One idea House Republicans are considering is giving undocumented immigrants legal status to stay in the U.S. , but not allow them a pathway towards citizenship . According to the survey , only 35 % support such an idea , with just over six in 10 opposed . Again , there was no partisan divide , with two-thirds of Democrats and around six in 10 independents and Republicans opposing such a plan .
The poll was conducted for CNN by ORC International from Jan. 31-Feb. 2 , with 1,010 adults nationwide questioned by telephone . The survey 's overall sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points .