The states challenging President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty have already won the first round in court after the case landed in the lap of Judge Andrew S. Hanen , a Bush appointee who issued a scorching rebuke to the Department of Homeland Security last year , accusing it of refusing to follow border security laws .
It could hardly have been a worse outcome for Mr. Obama , who , in order to preserve his policy , will now have to convince a judge who is on record calling his previous , less-extensive nondeportation policies “ dangerous and unconscionable . ”
Led by Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott , the 20 states challenging the new policy filed their case in Brownsville . It could have gone to one of two judges — the other a Clinton appointee — but it landed in the lap of Judge Hanen last week , putting Mr. Obama on the defensive early .
“ It ’ s the Constitution itself that is under assault by the president of the United States by this executive order , ” Mr. Abbott told NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” this weekend . “ This lawsuit is not about immigration . The issue in this lawsuit is abuse of executive power . ”
Analysts on both sides of the issue said Mr. Obama ’ s opponents were fortunate to draw Judge Hanen , who has already shown a deep distrust of Homeland Security officials , questioning both their policies and their legal arguments .
In a 10-page order last December , just as the surge of illegal immigrant children was beginning , he blasted the Obama administration for refusing to get tough on enforcement and instead shipping children caught at the border to live with their illegal immigrant parents here in the U.S. — and refusing to even try to deport those parents .
“ The DHS should cease telling the citizens of the United States that it is enforcing our border security laws because it is clearly not , ” Judge Hanen wrote . “ Even worse , it is helping those who violate these laws . ”
Judge Hanen , who took his spot in the federal bench in 2002 , was quick to say in his order that he didn ’ t take a “ position on the topic of immigration reform , ” but said he was dismayed at “ the failure by the DHS to enforce current United States law . ”
Even more striking was his reasoning : Judge Hanen said the government was wasting money , not saving it , by refusing to deport illegal immigrants and instead paying to connect children and their illegal immigrant parents .
The states that sued to halt Mr. Obama ’ s policy say they too will incur hundreds of millions of dollars in costs if they have to police , educate and provide care for the thousands of new illegal immigrants they expect to be enticed to enter the U.S. illegally based on the new amnesty . The states argue they have been injured by Mr. Obama ’ s order — or , in legal terms , have “ standing ” to sue in court — because of those economic consequences .
A number of legal experts , however , doubt that will be enough to convince a judge to take the case .
“ It ’ s not enough to say you would be harmed . You have to prove it with evidence , ” said Stephen H. Legomsky , a professor at the Washington University School of Law .
Mr. Legomsky spent two years as chief counsel at U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services during the time when that agency was implementing Mr. Obama ’ s deferred action policy for “ dreamers ” — which was the testing ground for this year ’ s broader policy — and the professor said both have solid legal underpinnings .
First , the states would have to prove conclusively that Mr. Obama ’ s program will lead to a new surge in illegal immigration — something that is speculative . Mr. Legomsky said another federal court has already rejected that argument in a challenge to the “ dreamer ” policy .
He also said the drafters of the policies , known in the immigration world as “ deferred action , ” were careful to make sure that nobody has a right to tentative legal status . Each case is supposed to be reviewed carefully by an immigration officer , who is to use discretion .
Speaking Sunday , Mr. Abbott said he believes the fiscal impact on states will be enough to earn a day in court .
And Kris W. Kobach , secretary of state in Kansas and one of those who has been instrumental in devising legal attacks on Mr. Obama ’ s immigration enforcement policies , said there are other potential challengers as well .
Mr. Kobach said a U.S. citizen who could show he lost in a job competition to one of the newly legalized workers under the amnesty could also go to court — if he could prove that he lost the job specifically because of competition with an illegal immigrant .
Mr. Kobach also said immigration agents who enforce the law could have standing to sue over the new policy .
He is leading a previous case filed by immigration agents that challenged Mr. Obama ’ s 2012 amnesty for “ dreamers. ” In that case a judge ruled that the administration did likely break the law — but the judge also ruled he didn ’ t have jurisdiction over the case since another part of the law said the agents needed to take their complaints to a personnel board , not the federal courts .
Mr. Kobach and the agents are fighting that case in the personnel board , and both he and the Obama administration have also appealed the initial judge ’ s ruling to the 5th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals .
That case is tentatively slated for oral arguments on Feb. 2 .
In the Texas case , Judge Hanen has set a pretrial conference for March 31 .
To win their case , opponents must not only win standing but must also show the president acted outside his powers .
They argue Mr. Obama has gone broader than previous presidents in using his prosecutorial discretion , and they said the president gave them ammunition last month when he twice said during a speech he had taken action to “ change the law ” in halting deportation . The states , in their lawsuit , pointedly cited Mr. Obama ’ s comments as a prominent part of their complaint .
Mr. Legomsky , though , said that while the comments may present a political problem for the president , “ from a legal standpoint it ’ s totally irrelevant . ”
The professor said deferred action is explicitly authorized in statutes , regulations and in a long line of court cases , giving Mr. Obama solid legal backing .
The states aren ’ t the only ones to file a challenge to the latest Obama action . Maricopa County , Arizona , Sheriff Joe Arpaio filed a lawsuit just minutes after Mr. Obama announced his policy Nov. 20 . That lawsuit is pending in District Court in Washington , D.C .
Both the states and Sheriff Arpaio have sought preliminary injunctions in their cases , hoping to head off Mr. Obama ’ s policy before it can get up and running . The administration envisions taking applications within 180 days .
Sheriff Arpaio ’ s lawsuit is being heard in Washington by Judge Beryl A. Howell , an Obama appointee .
Her immigration record differs from that of Judge Hanen . Earlier this year she issued a ruling in an open records case seeking documents on the construction of the border fence , and in her decision she speculated that construction of the fence could have a “ disparate impact on lower-income minority communities . ”