Barack Obama put the cat among the pigeons Thursday night , but he may be surprised by how big that cat could get , and with it a big cat ’ s appetite for more than pigeons .
His “ executive orders ” demanding a stop to deportations is no doubt good news for millions of illegal immigrants — 5 million at last count — he wants to preserve and protect for Democrats looking to replenish a depleted constituency . But it ’ s not such good news for anyone who appreciates law and order on the border . Amnesties can be good , but they must be written carefully lest they invite more of the same misery that led to amnesty . The president ’ s invitation to the millions south of the border — “ Come on in , I ’ ll find a way to make you legal later ” — guarantees that hell on the border will continue , and probably get worse . The hell on the Potomac will get a lot worse .
The president and his lawyers are clever . By not actually issuing an executive order called an executive order — he can call it a “ memo ” to his prosecutors but it ’ s still an order from the executive — he will make it more difficult for the Republicans to find a way to overturn it .
Just the anticipation of the president ’ s big speech set off cries and celebrations . Rep. Nancy Pelosi , having abandoned her dream of ascending once more to speaker of the House , and who knows no more of the nation ’ s history than the president apparently does , got lost Thursday afternoon in a history book . She mistook Barack Obama for Abraham Lincoln , and his immigration amnesty for the Emancipation Proclamation . “ Does the public know that the Emancipation Proclamation was an executive order ? she asked . ( Does the public know that the Emancipation Proclamation preserved slavery in the four slave states still in the Union , and freed no slaves in the departed Confederate states ? The public could look it up . ) The only similarities in Mr. Lincoln ’ s proclamation and Mr. Obama ’ s order is that neither was intended to resolve anything , but to set loose that cat among the pigeons . The Civil War circa 1861-1865 ground bloodily on , and the immigration system circa 2014 is still broken and bleeding , and probably farther from resolution than ever .
Civil war is the metaphor of the day . Phyllis Schlafly , who almost single-handedly defeated the feminist crusade for an equal-rights amendment , now calls Mr. Obama ’ s executive order “ a modern-day Fort Sumter . ”
Pat Buchanan , the columnist and onetime presidential candidate , hints not of civil war but of revolution . “ Our rogue president has crossed a historic line , ” he says , “ and so has the republic . Future presidents will cite the ‘ Obama precedent ’ when they declare they will henceforth not enforce this or that law , because of a prior commitment to some noisy constituency . We have just taken a monumental step away from republicanism toward Caesarism . For this is rule by diktat , the rejection of which sparked the American Revolution . ”
Mr. Obama ’ s “ prior commitment to some noisy constituency ” has already set off noisy celebrations . Watch parties of the noisy constituency were held in Hispanic communities across the land , with many people who know better , or should , gloating that Mr. Obama ’ s signature puts an end to the argument over amnesty . Rep. Luis Gutierrez of Illinois said he had two words for the dissenters : “ Stop whining . ”
“ Mitch McConnell , ” he told NBC News , “ they should stop whining , and start legislating , and start saying what they ’ re going to do . They have an incredible victory in the Senate , an incredible new majority in the House of Representatives . Use it to do something constructive . ”
Geraldo Rivera , the former Jerry Rivers , who identifies himself as senior correspondent of Fox News , celebrated with screeds against the very idea of securing the border , lest it stem the flood of more illegals . “ The Grand Old Party , ” he says , “ has zero intention to do anything on immigration except build higher fences and hire more border guards my only beef is that he is late , but better late than never . ”
The president will dispatch Cabinet officers and other high administration officials to strike out across the country to promote his executive orders alias memorandum . If these are open meetings , and not carefully plotted closed meetings , they ’ ll get an earful .
Mr. Obama invites that earful . The construction of his orders — “ memos , ” as he insists — hints that he expects the Republicans to eventually deploy the “ nuclear option , ” and having had so much to say about his “ racist ” enemies , invites a showdown that he can cast as racist . The impeachment talk has so far been the talk of Democrats , not Republicans . But it ’ s not difficult see that he is setting up the ultimate shootout : “ You want to impeach a black president ? Bring it on . ”
• Wesley Pruden is editor emeritus of The ███ .