WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - The Trump administration moved on Thursday to make permanent a new questionnaire that asks some U.S. visa applicants to provide their social media handles and detailed biographical and travel history , according to a public notice .
A sign warns of surveillance at the International Arrival area at Logan Airport in Boston . ███/Brian Snyder
The questionnaire was rolled out in May as part of an effort to tighten vetting of would-be visitors to the United States , and asks for all prior passport numbers , five years ' worth of social media handles , email addresses and phone numbers and 15 years of biographical information including addresses , employment and travel history . ( See : bit.ly/2v0qsR2 )
A State Department official declined to provide data on how many times the form had been used or which nationalities had been asked to fill it out since May , only stating that it estimates 65,000 visa applicants per year “ will present a threat profile ” that warrants the extra screening .
President Donald Trump ran for office in 2016 pledging to crack down on illegal immigration for security reasons , and has called for “ extreme vetting ” of foreigners entering the United States . On Wednesday , he threw his support behind a bill that would cut legal immigration to the United States by 50 percent over 10 years .
The Office of Management and Budget , which must approve most new federal requests of information from the public , initially approved the form on an “ emergency ” basis , which allowed its use for six months rather than the usual three years .
The State Department published a notice in the Federal Register on Thursday seeking to use the form for the next three years . The public has 60 days to comment on the request . ( See : bit.ly/2uZNXJD )
The questions are meant to “ more rigorously evaluate applicants for terrorism , national security-related , or other visa ineligibilities , ” the notice said .
While the questions are voluntary , the form says failure to provide the information may delay or prevent the processing of a visa application .
Trump ordered a temporary travel ban in March on citizens of Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen . After months of legal wrangling , the Supreme Court in June allowed the travel ban to go forward with a limited scope .
Seyed Ali Sepehr , who runs an immigration consultancy in California serving Iranian clients applying for U.S. visas , said that since late June , all of his clients who have been referred for extra security checks have also been asked to fill out the new form .
Kiyanoush Razaghi , an immigration attorney based in Maryland , said he knows of Iraqis , Libyans and Iranians who have been asked to fill out the form .
Immigration attorney Steve Pattison said one of his clients , who is not from one of the six travel ban countries , had been asked to fill out the new form when applying for a visitor visa , indicating that consular officers are using it broadly .
“ It could be that everyone is missing another consequence of the use of the form – its deployment in a far wider sense to cover all sorts of individuals , ” Pattison said .