Immigration must be a frustrating subject for President Obama . He ’ s been battling Republicans – those in Congress , and those trying to take his job in 2012 – for years .
But now , one senses a sort of serenity about immigration for Obama .
He never has to run for election again . And the newly-powerful GOP on Capitol Hill has yet to sort itself out on a clear immigration policy and message – not least because it has at least three US Senators with strong presidential ambitions ( Ted Cruz , Marco Rubio , and Rand Paul ) .
Remember how Republican presidential hopefuls two years ago got twisted up trying to out-tough-guy each other on illegal immigrants ? Mitt Romney ’ s “ self-deportation ” was classic . When Rick Perry tried to explain state tuition breaks for young illegal immigrants in Texas , the others pounced .
As Newt Gingrich said at the time , “ It ’ s a very complicated situation . ”
Today , of course , it ’ s only gotten more complicated . Meanwhile , Republican Party leaders know they need to do a lot better attracting Latino voters , the great majority of whom ( 71-27 percent ) went for Obama over Romney two years ago .
Soon , Obama is expected to issue an executive order removing the threat of deportation for upward of 5 million immigrants in the US illegally – mainly the parents of children born in this country and therefore US citizens .
Since the US Department of Homeland Security has the resources to deport only a few hundred thousand illegal immigrants a year ( of the estimated 11 million in the country today ) , the order in essence would move those 5 million to the bottom of the list of those eligible for deportation .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and some other Democrats say Obama ’ s promised executive action on immigration should wait until Congress passes a funding bill , which would avert another government shutdown .
But immigration reform advocates argue otherwise , and the recent midterm election may have pushed Obama to move sooner rather than later .
“ Democrats no longer have to worry that the Senate runoff in Louisiana will tip the balance of power , ” Seung Min Kim and Carrie Budoff Brown write in Politico.com . “ The West Wing assumes Republicans will use immigration to gum up the government funding bill no matter when Obama announces the executive actions . And the pressure to move quickly only intensified this week as details of the plan leaked , giving Republicans free rein to bloody it . ”
A Pew Research Center survey in July found 61 percent said it is important to pass significant immigration legislation this year .
‘ But there is a wide partisan gap among the public as to how immigration reform should be approached , ’ Pew reported . “ More than half ( 53 percent ) of Republicans said the priority should be on better border security and stronger law enforcement , compared with just 19 percent of Democrats who said the same… . By contrast , 33 percent of Democrats favored prioritizing a path to citizenship for unauthorized immigrants , compared with 9 percent of Republicans . ”
Some 45 percent of Democrats and 36 percent of Republicans said both approaches should be given equal priority , according to Pew , which adds up to comprehensive immigration reform – the thing that has eluded the White House and Congress .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ There is a very simple solution to this perception that somehow I 'm exercising too much executive authority : pass a bill I can sign on this issue , ” Obama Sunday said at a news conference at the conclusion of the G20 Summit in Brisbane , Australia .
If Congress does act , Obama said , “ Metaphorically , I 'll crumple up whatever executive actions that we take and we 'll toss them in the wastebasket because we will now have a law that addresses these issues . ”