No one seems to know what Donald Trump ’ s position on immigration is anymore . That ’ s a bit of an imprecise assessment , as his position was never really fleshed out to any great detail beyond “ build a wall ” and “ get tough. ” But Trump ( in concert with his campaign staff and advisers ) has done much of late to further obscure his already uncertain position , which he 's ostensibly planning to flesh out in a big speech in Arizona on Wednesday .
Much of the recent analysis of Trump ’ s immigration maneuvering puts forward the idea that Trump is “ softening ” on the issue , which is true in the sense that he no longer speaks quite so openly about pursuing a flagrantly illegal and unconstitutional enforcement policy that would create a massive humanitarian disaster . A year ago , Trump ’ s stated position on deportations was that he would deport all undocumented immigrants and their family members , even if these people were U.S. citizens by birth . ( He based this on an exotic and tendentious reading of the 14th Amendment that would , in Trump ’ s view , negate claims to birthright citizenship . ) That was the sort of hardline posturing that endeared him to the Republican primary electorate and helped him sink candidates like Sen. Ted Cruz , whose own immigration extremism just couldn ’ t keep pace with Trump ’ s .
Now with the general election a scant two months away , Trump ’ s immigration position is under scrutiny as a result of some contradictory statements emanating from his campaign . Trump told Fox News host Sean Hannity that he was open to “ softening ” on immigration while also still being “ aggressive ” in the application of deportation laws . The candidate floated the idea of a “ touch back ” policy ( undocumented immigrants who are deported can re-enter and be put on a path to legalization ) while his campaign manager definitely ruled out that option . On birthright citizenship , Republican vice presidential nominee Mike Pence said on CNN this past weekend , “ The whole question of anchor babies , as it 's known , the whole question of citizenship , of natural-born Americans is a subject for the future. ” And after briefly expressing openness about “ softening ” on immigration , Trump reversed himself a few days later and suggested that he was actually “ hardening ” his stance .
Perhaps Trump has come to the ( belated ) realization that the general electorate doesn ’ t have the same appetite for immigrant bashing that Republican primary voters do , and he ’ s trying to deliberately sow confusion so that voters can simply pick and choose which statements they want to believe . Either that or his campaign is fantastically inept and confusion is the by-product of good old-fashioned incompetence . ( With the Trump campaign , incompetence is usually a stronger bet than strategic guile . ) Whatever the explanation , Trump ’ s muddling of his stand on immigration has left policy experts unconvinced that he ’ s moderating and they are clamoring for something resembling clarity .
“ We haven ’ t really seen much change at all , ” said Jacinta Ma of the National Immigration Forum Action Fund . “ We would really just like [ Trump ] to be more clear about the immigration policies that he ’ s talking about. ” With Trump ’ s big immigration speech in Arizona set for later this week , Ma said , “ The expectation should be that , as president , he should be able to articulate the policies in a clear manner so that we understand what . . . he wants to do in terms of the direction of the country as it relates to immigration policy . ”
Other experts aren ’ t so sure that such clarity is even possible at this point , given how deeply Trump has dug himself into the anti-immigrant hole . “ A lot of what [ Trump ] is saying is either completely wrong or completely contradictory , ” said Ben Johnson of the American Immigration Lawyers Association . “ I don ’ t see a way out for him on this issue unless he makes a really significant , clear change in [ his ] policy position because so much of the language he ’ s been using so far has just been unworkable and broadly opposed by the majority of the American people . I don ’ t know how he undoes that . ”
Based on conversations I ’ ve had with Trump supporters , the Republican nominee should have a bit of wiggle room when it comes to his die-hard fans , since the aspect of his immigration policy that they seem to care about the most is building “ the wall. ” I ’ ve had pro-Trump people tell me they sympathize with undocumented immigrants who are already in the country and leading productive lives but a wall must be constructed to stop new immigrants from crossing the border . So if sticks to his guns about his plans to build a 20- , 30- or 40-foot wall along the southern border , he might be able to ratchet back a few of his other more draconian ideas without angering too many individuals in his base .
But those hardliners are already in his corner . His articulation of slightly more moderate rhetoric or making minor tweaks to his policy platform aren ’ t going to help him much at this point , as he ’ s been running for 14 months now as a anti-immigrant , “ law and order ” candidate . So even if Trump has it in mind to moderate his views ahead of Election Day , it ’ s way too late for this to make any sort of difference .