Rubio said immigration reform is necessary to keep the border secure . On immigration , Rubio is everywhere
Sen. Marco Rubio on Sunday began his public campaign to win over conservative support for overhauling the nation ’ s immigration laws , appearing on a record-setting seven network news programs .
Rubio offered a finely calibrated pitch designed to alleviate conservative concerns about reform . He pushed back against claims that a pathway to citizenship is tantamount to amnesty . He rebutted arguments that an agreement would impose dramatic new costs on taxpayers . And he defended the changes as necessary to keep the border secure .
“ What we have in place today , the status quo , is horrible for America , ” the Florida Republican said on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press. ” “ The only people benefiting from the status quo in immigration today are the people trafficking human beings across the border , and the people who are hiring illegal labor for cheap purposes . ”
Rubio ’ s appearances launch a pivotal week in the efforts of the Gang of Eight , the bipartisan group of senators working on immigration legislation . The group is expected to unveil its compromise plan on Tuesday , bringing an end to months of speculation about what the final bill will look like .
In addition to appearing on the usual five network Sunday morning programs — on CBS , NBC , ABC , CNN and Fox — Rubio also appeared on Univision and Telemundo .
The high-profile push from Rubio is sure to stoke talks that he ’ s positioning for a run for president in 2016 . He ’ s considered a favorite in the field of potential Republican candidates .
But he brushed off questions — neither confirming or denying — about whether being out front on immigration is an effort to bolster his national appeal , or possibly a tactic that risks upsetting primary voters .
“ I haven ’ t even thought about it in that way and I know , ” he said on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union . ”
“ I have a job , ” Rubio said . “ My belief has always been that if I do my job and I do my job well , I ’ ll have options and opportunities in the future to do things , whether it ’ s run for reelection , run for something else or give someone else a chance at public service . ”
His sales pitch was simple : This immigration plan is better than the status quo and it isn ’ t going to cause any of the harm that opponents are saying it will .
“ They will have to come forward and pass a rigorous background check . If they ’ re criminals they won ’ t qualify , ” Rubio said on CBS ’ s “ Face the Nation . ”
“ If they pass that background check , they will be given an opportunity to pay an application fee and a fine and in exchange for that , they will be given a guest worker permit allowing them to stay in the U.S. , work , travel and pay taxes , ” he added .
Rubio said that the 11 million undocumented immigrants are effectively receiving amnesty because no one is prosecuting them .
“ Let ’ s bring these people out , so we can figure out who needs to leave and who we ’ re going to give a chance toward one day being able to apply for a green card the same way everyone else does , ” Rubio said . “ That ’ s why that ’ s a better approach . ”