President Trump 's executive order on immigration late Friday ignited nationwide protests — and a slew of legal challenges .
At least four federal judges across the country have blocked part of the order and temporarily ensured refugees and travelers who reached U.S. soil would not be deported .
Here 's an explanation of what happened so far and what could come next .
The order suspended new refugee admissions for 120 days . It capped the total number of refugees allowed into the country this year at 50,000 , far lower than the Obama administration had allotted . And travelers from seven countries — Iraq , Iran , Syria , Yemen , Sudan , Libya and Somalia — are barred for 90 days . Border Patrol agents and lawyers said the order and statements by top White House officials have not made clear how Green Card holders , or lawful permanent residents , are to be treated .
The American Civil Liberties Union sued in Brooklyn over the detention of two Iraqi clients at John F. Kennedy International Airport . Late Saturday , Judge Ann Donnelly issued a temporary restraining order barring the deportation of as many as 200 people . Judge Donnelly cited `` irreparable harm '' they would face , and she demanded that the Trump administration provide a list of all affected refugees and travelers . Later , a federal judge in suburban Virginia ordered that travelers be allowed to consult with volunteer attorneys . And another judge in Massachusetts ruled the travelers not only were free from deportation , but that those being held must be released from federal detention . There are reports from pro bono lawyers that border agents may not be complying with some of those directives from the federal judiciary .
White House officials said the policy is designed to protect U.S. borders and to restrict the entry of terrorism suspects . The Department of Homeland Security said fewer than 1 percent of the average 325,000 people who journeyed to the U.S. on Saturday were `` inconvenienced . '' DHS said the president 's order remains in place and `` the U.S. government retains its right to revoke visas at any time if required for national security or public safety . ''
On NBC 's Meet The Press on Sunday , White House chief of staff Reince Priebus said Green Card holders would not be affected `` moving forward , '' but he went on to say that they would `` be subjected to further screening '' at the border .
The president has sweeping authority on matters of immigration . Federal law allows the president to suspend people or classes of people if he determines their entry is `` detrimental '' to the nation . But a 1965 update to that law , the Immigration and Naturalization Act , clarifies that people should not experience preferences or discrimination on account of their `` race , sex , nationality , place of birth or place of residence . ''
Trump 's order appears to grant some religious preference to Christians and to target seven majority-Muslim countries , though his order points out that people from those countries had already been singled out for extra vetting during the Obama years .
Lawyers from the American Civil Liberties Union , immigrants rights groups and other advocates are likely to file more lawsuits in the coming days on the grounds that the order violates the 1965 immigration law , the right to due process , and the First Amendment clause that bars Congress from establishing a religion , among other things .
White House officials insisted they did not set out to create a `` Muslim ban . '' But Trump associate Rudy Giuliani told Fox News that Trump had reached out to him and others about how to make such a ban , which Trump proposed on the campaign trail in December 2015 , legal . And the son of national security adviser Michael Flynn tweeted about a `` Muslim ban , '' as well . Those statements could be used by refugee advocates to demonstrate the administration 's intent .
5 . What happens with Trump 's nominees for key Cabinet posts ?
Democrats argue that key offices within the State Department and the Justice Department were in the dark about the immigration order before it was made public . They want to know if Alabama Republican Sen. Jeff Sessions , the nominee to be attorney general , advised Trump on the order — and whether Sessions will commit to making sure Justice Department lawyers are consulted in the future . The Senate Judiciary Committee is supposed to vote on Sessions ' nomination on Tuesday . If he passes that vote , Sessions could be confirmed by the full Senate by the end of the week .