A funny thing happened on the way to stringing razor wire , splitting up families , and sending the military to police the United States ' border with Mexico : The number of illegal immigrants—especially from Mexico—in America continued its decade-long decline . Via Pew Research :
The number of unauthorized immigrants in the U.S. fell to its lowest level in more than a decade , according to new Pew Research Center estimates based on 2016 government data . The decline is due almost entirely to a sharp decrease in the number of Mexicans entering the country without authorization .
Note that we reached peak illegals ( and peak illegal Mexicans ) back in 2006 or 2007 , right around the time the housing bubble popped and what eventually become the financial crisis started kicking into high ( low ? ) gear . Between 2007 and 2016 , the number of unauthorized Mexican immigrants declined from about 6.9 million people to 5.5 million people . These days , illegals are most likely to come from Asia ( especially China and India ) and to enter the country with legal documents , such as a tourist , student , or work visa and then overstay . Deportations peaked in 2013 , when Barack Obama was running the show .
Why has illegal immigration from Mexico declined ? According to Pew 's Jeffrey Passel and D'Vera Cohn , illegals missed their families . One also presumes that the sluggish U.S. economy presented fewer opportunities .
According to Mexican government survey data [ from 2009 to 2014 ] , most returnees said they left the U.S. of their own accord , and the majority cited family reunification as the main ███ for going to Mexico . However , 14 % said they came back because they were deported .
At the same time , the number of illegals from Central America ( chiefly Honduras , El Salvador , and Guatemala ) has increased over the past decade , from 1.5 million people to about 1.85 million .
Why might more Central Americans ' be heading north ? Mostly because those countries have gotten poorer over time , often due to U.S. intervention . ███ 's Shikha Dalmia explains , in the 1980s ,
President Ronald Reagan , eager for a showdown with the [ Soviet Union , funded ] …the Contra insurgency against the Nicaraguan Sandinistas and paramilitary operations to prop up the U.S.-friendly regimes of El Salvador , Honduras , and Guatemala . The upshot was civil war and a complete social breakdown from which these countries have never recovered . As Princeton 's Doug Massey noted at a recent immigration conference ( that I co-organized on behalf of ███ Foundation ) , in the 1960s , the GDP of these `` frontline countries '' was equivalent to those of `` non-frontline states '' such as Costa Rica , Belize , and Panama . Now the latter cohort 's GDP is almost three times greater . Likewise , while the homicide rate of non-frontline states is 19.7 per 100,000 , it is 43.5 per 100,000 for the frontline states . San Pedro Sula , the Honduran city where the caravan started , has become the murder capital of the world . Prior to Reagan 's intervention , migration from Central America was negligible .
People troubled by illegal immigration may find comfort in the trend line of the past decade . But to me , the decline is worrisome . Our problems are only beginning when people stop choosing to come here , whether legally or not . Increased living standards follow economic growth , which follows population growth . And population growth follows immigration . Contra nativist Rep. Steve King ( R–Iowa ) , the only proven way you can maintain your `` civilization '' is with somebody else 's babies . And for all the fears of literal and figurative invasions by supposedly unassimilable Mexicans and Central Americans , crime and most other social pathologies have been declining regardless of the flow and ebb of immigration ( both legal and illegal ) . The real immigration crisis is when newcomers stop showing up .