President Trump signed a directive Friday ordering the government to end the so-called “ catch-and-release ” policy at the border , moving to combat what the administration says is a growing “ crisis ” of illegal immigration .
He called for illegal immigrants nabbed at the border to be held in custody , to the fullest extent possible . He also ordered more asylum officers to head to detention centers so they can rule on cases faster , calculating that if they can clear the cases they can send undeserving migrants home without having to release them .
In a memo to his attorney general and secretaries of the State , Defense , Homeland and Health and Human Services departments , Mr. Trump also demanded regular updates on progress , and told them to submit requests for any new resources they need .
“ The safety and security of the American people is the president ’ s highest priority , and he will keep his promise to protect our country and to ensure that our laws are respected , ” White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said .
Catch-and-release is the name Border Patrol agents and others involved in the immigration debate have given to the practice of arresting illegal immigrants , processing them and then having to set them free in the U.S. , with the order that they return for a deportation hearing some time in the future .
They disappear into the shadows and most never bother to show for their hearings , which can be years later .
The Bush administration had tried to end catch-and-release by speeding up deportations of Mexicans . But a shift in migration patterns , with a surge in people from Central America — particularly children and families — has caused the issue to raise its head again .
U.S. law , court cases and Obama administration decisions have made it much tougher to deport those people , with a host of legal protections built up around them pushing for them to be released from custody if their cases can ’ t be cleared quickly .
Earlier Friday Attorney General Jeff Sessions ordered prosecutors along the southwest border to bring criminal misdemeanor charges against people who jump the border .
Mr. Trump ’ s new memo calls on Mr . Sessions and the other departments to crack down on abuse of the asylum system , after illegal immigrants have learned how to game the system by using “ magic words ” indicating they fear being sent back home .
Before 2013 , only about 1 percent of migrants showing up on the border claimed asylum . Now the number is higher than 10 percent , Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said this week .
“ Smugglers themselves are gaming the system , pure and simple . They take advantage of the loopholes in our laws . They know that we can not prosecute as we need to to stop their behavior , ” she said .