Trump ’ s Ace of Trumps . President Trump ’ s November 1 immigration address ( 21:13 ) described America as “ a welcoming country ” whose generosity to immigrants is without parallel anywhere , but one facing limits on what we can absorb . His main points :
( a ) America needs immigrants on a merit basis , waiting their turn ;
( b ) our immigration laws are “ incompetent and Democrats are obstructionist ;
( c ) we will not allow “ large , well-organized ” caravan migration—if we allow caravans now , more and bigger caravans will follow ;
( f ) caravan marchers refused asylum offer by Mexico , showing that they are migrants , not refugees ;
( g ) billions of poverty-level people around the world — asylum restricted to specific emergencies ;
( h ) court rulings are writing the laws — “ catch and release ” is a disgrace , and it will end ;
( i ) millions of people never show up for court hearing — biggest loophole is fraudulent asylum seekers , “ using well-coached language by lawyers and others ” : they read prepared script to border officials ;
( j ) court process can take years — as much as three and a half years for a single case , and only about 3 percent show up — we will now keep migrants at border in tents , holding them at designated ports of entry ;
( k ) caravans professionally organized and funded , with minimal number size of Vermont , maximum over 10 million ;
( l ) other countries tell migrants to get out , about one million aliens have received final orders of removal , yet remain at large ;
( m ) “ This endemic abuse of the asylum system makes a mockery of our immigration system — displacing legitimate asylum seekers… while rewarding those who abuse or defraud our system ” ;
( n ) “ illicit and deadly ” narcotics trade is inflicting great damage on our country ;
( o ) human trafficking now at highest level globally than ever , because of the Internet ;
( p ) Democrats ’ vision is to offer them “ free health care , free welfare , free education and even the right to vote ” — taxpayers get the tab — “ No nation can allow itself to be overwhelmed by uncontrolled masses of people rushing their border ” ;
( q ) Congress must “ overcome ‘ open borders ’ obstruction ” to address crisis and “ endurance of our nation as a sovereign country . ”
Statistical support for the president ’ s speech is in this White House Fact Sheet .
Thousands Near . In 1973 French author Jean Raspail published The Camp of the Saints , his prophetic novel about France being overrun in the 21st century by a wave of Third World migrants . An armada of one million immiserated souls sets sail from India , headed for France . Morally disarmed by the values of Western civilization , France can not stop the invasion , and is overrun by migrants who overwhelm the French and destroy their civilizational culture .
The thousands forming caravans headed across Mexico from Central America are not the million migrants of Raspail ’ s novel . But they are a harbinger of many more to come if America does not act . President Trump , to his credit , has mobilized the military and National Guard at the border , deploying Jersey barriers . The posse comitatus laws — in force in America for 140 years — bar interior use of the military , though federal troops have been deployed to tamp down civil unrest , after natural disasters or riots . Initially thousands on foot , now buses are being provided , especially for those unable to walk long distances .
My own views on immigration have shifted since the Reagan era immigration , due to the abject failure of the 1986 Simpson-Mazzoli bill that legalized with amnesty three million illegal aliens then resident . Part of that change stems from personal experience , plus secondary knowledge derived from stories of friends . Part of this change comes from knowing that all walls are not created alike . Some aim to keep people out ( China ’ s Great Wall ) , while others aim to trap people already resident within ( Berlin Wall ) ; and many walls have gates , to selectively admit visitors and migrants , and allow exit of same .
Born here , in my 56 years of international travel I ’ ve had to pass through gated walls , in the form of passport control — at airports , on boats , trains , cars , even on foot . Had I on any of those occasions attempted to rush past or jump over barriers , the local authorities would have taken a rather dim view of my conduct , with jail likely .
Aliens and Apportionment . As for those illegally living in “ sanctuary ” cities or states , if the government can find me — the IRS has never had any trouble doing so — I want ICE to find those living in the shadows . And to make good policy it would be nice if we knew how many illegal aliens are here . Recently , the number estimated to be here has risen from 11 million to 22 million , according to a Yale study , with a range of 16.5 to 29.5 million .
The presence of illegal immigrants — at least , those who live out of the shadows — affects the decennial apportionment of seats in the House of Representatives . This holds true even if they do not vote . In 2000 , there were an estimated 18 million non-citizens resident in the U.S. ( this includes those legally present here but not citizens ) ; of these , 70 percent lived in six states , and 50 percent in three ( California , Texas , and Florida ) . The 18 million then represented , at 650,000 , nearly 29 Congressional seats . Fox ’ s Tucker Carlson provides historical perspective , focusing on ( 5 min . ) how Democrats shifted their views on illegal immigration over the past half century . Put simply , the Democrats pushed aside concern over adverse impact on domestic workers in favor of the prospect of gaining more by getting massive numbers of enfranchised immigrant votes , versus losing fewer voters displaced by the new illegal arrivals .
Stand In , or Jump Over , the Line . Nor is standing in line too much to ask , save in emergencies — refugees with specific , imminent fear of persecution : the Iraqis and Afghans who have helped our military in post-9/11 wars are a prime example of those we should allow to jump to the head of the line . But not for economic migrants , not with nearly half the world living on less than $ 5.50 per day . Kirstjen Nielsen recently told ( 4 min. ) . Chris Wallace that the administration will not let the caravan in .
Much is made of the “ dreamers ” whose parents came to America illegally , and that now they should not be punished for sins committed by their parents . Generally we accept such arguments . But not always . If mom or dad commits a serious crime , one or both might wind up in jail . Thus dreamers can be told to apply for citizenship and get in line . They can also be asked to meet certain conditions — lack of criminal record , etc . Doing so may not be fair , but neither was it fair for their parents to jump the line .
And there are the stories of those who waited patiently in line , some for ten years , to emigrate legally . One not-so-lucky acquaintance of mine applied about 25 years ago for a green card . She graduated Columbia University , and while waiting for a decision was teaching students in the Bronx . A pretty Italian girl going to the Bronx when the crime rate stood at astronomical levels took no small risk of joining the roster of millions of victims of violent crime .
But the Clinton administration rejected my friend ’ s application for a green card — probably due to her being European and Caucasian , not the priorities for Democrats since passage of the 1965 law that favored non-white migrants from non-European countries . So my friend was forced to seek employment elsewhere ; she wound up teaching for several years in Cape Town , South Africa ; then she emigrated to northern England . Her one mistake : playing by the rules . Not for her the benefits that President Clinton promised people who were working hard and “ playing by the rules. ” Said he in 1992 :
For more than two years now , the average middle-class family has worked harder for less money to pay more for health care , for housing , for education , for taxes . Poverty has exploded , especially among working people . I just got out of a rather bruising campaign in New York State . You might have read about it . But one of the things that really moved me about that was that I met so many courageous people , people you never see on television , who live in the Bronx and Brooklyn , who live in high-crime neighborhoods and get up every day and literally risk their physical security , going to and from jobs that still pay them less than top-level wages , to support children in difficult circumstances , playing by the rules .
Birthright Bypass . Another touchstone is “ birthright citizenship ” — the protection given by the 14th Amendment to those born on U.S. soil . A widely held view has been that anyone born here , regardless of how parents got here — is a citizen , with an automatic right to stay . This view has led to “ birthright tourism ” and “ anchor babies ” — children born here , who later use “ chain migration ” to reunify the family . A recent report from the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) tallies 4.5 million anchor babies currently resident in the U.S. , a number greater than the 4 million annual births in the U.S .
Were Trump to alter the traditional view by executive order the chance that the courts will uphold this are slim . NRO ’ s Andy McCarthy explains the legal arguments . He points to section 1401 of the Immigration and Naturalization Act , as showing that Congress in 1952 understood jurisdiction more expansively than the Framers of the 14th amendment did in 1868 ; and also , Congress in 1952 in stating its new understanding indicated its intent to retain legislative control over the question of birthright citizenship . Hans von Spakovsky counters that neither the 1952 statutory amendments nor existing court precedent apply directly to children of those whose parents arrive illegally :
As John Eastman , former dean of the Chapman School of Law , has said , many do not seem to understand “ the distinction between partial , territorial jurisdiction , which subjects all who are present within the territory of a sovereign to the jurisdiction of that sovereign ’ s laws , and complete political jurisdiction , which requires allegiance to the sovereign as well. ” In the famous Slaughter-House cases of 1872 , the Supreme Court stated that this qualifying phrase was intended to exclude “ children of ministers , consuls , and citizens or subjects of foreign States born within the United States. ” This was confirmed in 1884 in another case , Elk vs. Wilkins , when citizenship was denied to an American Indian because he “ owed immediate allegiance to ” his tribe and not the United States . American Indians and their children did not become citizens until Congress passed the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 . There would have been no need to pass such legislation if the 14th Amendment extended citizenship to every person born in America , no matter what the circumstances of their birth , and no matter who their parents are . Even in U.S. v. Wong Kim Ark , the 1898 case most often cited by “ birthright ” supporters due to its overbroad language , the court only held that a child born of lawful , permanent residents was a U.S. citizen . That is a far cry from saying that a child born of individuals who are here illegally must be considered a U.S. citizen .
In sum : the 19th century distinction between partial — territorial — jurisdiction and political — shift of allegiance — jurisdiction is a superior statutory interpretation . A casual tourist submits to territorial jurisdiction ; if the tourist robs a bank while visiting our shores of course America as host country can subject the errant visitor to the operation of our laws . But no one believes visitors become loyal Americans — shifting allegiance — when coming here as tourists . Naturally , our State Department , as Spakovsky notes , is on the wrong side .
The WSJ editors suggest that the president issue a narrow executive order , instructing the executive departments to decline to extend blanket birthright citizenship pending clarifying action by Congress :
With this judicial and legislative lack of clarity , an executive order is perfectly proper , perhaps even necessary , to instruct executive-branch officials and agencies not to confer birthright citizenship except when Congress or the Supreme Court has mandated it . To say that an executive order is necessary and proper , though , does not mean it fully settles the matter . The issue of birthright citizenship should be part of a larger legislative package focused on strengthening the U.S. , its security and its economy . Few developed nations — and none of the countries of Europe , which many Americans want to emulate — practice the rule of jus soli , or “ right of the soil. ” More common is jus sanguinis , “ right of blood , ” by which a child ’ s citizenship [ is ] determined by parental citizenship , not place of birth . After first securing the nation ’ s safety , America ’ s immigration policy should be an extension of America ’ s liberating first principles . That means it should be based on the consent of the governed and the rule of law , and a deliberate and self-confident policy of patriotic assimilation . Birthright citizenship does not meet this rubric . It ignores the principle of consent annunciated in the Declaration of Independence , undermines the rule of law established in the Constitution , and belittles the idea of citizenship and naturalization — the source of America ’ s uniquely successful immigration story .
In any event , it is doubtful that Trump justices Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh will sally forth into the politically explosive task of altering the nation ’ s immigration patterns . Nor will Chief Justice Roberts pitch the Supremes into an issue where the public is so deeply divided . Such a judicial venture would be most injudicious , and likely damage the Supreme Court ’ s reputation , as well as the reputations of overly adventurous justices . The Trump “ newbie ” justices will focus on separation of powers , scope of judicial review , and other law-nerd weeds of great legal significance , yet far removed from political wars .
President Trump ’ s address seeks to involve Congress . He is using the birthright issues for the legitimate political purpose of energizing GOP voters to turn out come Tuesday . But the president seems not to realize a counterweight political implication of his birthright statements :
By asserting his right to use presidential authority to issue executive orders on immigration , to an electorate largely unschooled in the finer points of arcane legal matters , he risks that voters who support his immigration policy may turn out in lower numbers on Election Day . After all , if the president can do this on his own , then — at least on this issue — he does not need control of either house of Congress .
Bottom Line . Let us return to what three Democrats have said as to illegal immigration : Sen. Harry Reid ( 0:42 ) in 1993 — “ no sane country would do that ” — reward illegal immigration ; President Clinton ( 1:24 ) in 1995 — “ We are a nation of immigrants , but we are also a nation of laws. ” ; and President Obama numerous times , that he lacked authority to act on immigration without Congressional approval . Here is a 2011 Obama statement :
With respect to the notion that I can just suspend deportations through executive orders , that ’ s just not the case , because there are laws on the books that Congress has passed — and I know that everybody here at Bell is studying hard , so you know that we ’ ve got three branches of government . Congress passes the law . The executive branch ’ s job is to enforce and implement those laws . And then the judiciary has to interpret the laws . There are enough laws on the books that are very clear in terms of how we enforce our immigration system that for me to , simply through executive order , ignore these constitutional mandates would not conform with my appropriate role as president . That does not mean , though , that we can ’ t make decisions , for example , to emphasize enforcement on those who ’ ve engaged in criminal activity .
Leave us end this dismal picture with a chuckle : TAS writer Jeffrey Lord suggests places inside the U.S. of A. where caravan folks should be housed .
To which I add these palatial pleasure places : gazillionaire mega-yachts , jumbo jets.…
John C. Wohlstetter is author of Sleepwalking With the Bomb ( 2d Ed . 2014 ) .