The Senate immigration bill will be good for the U.S. economy as a whole , but for individual workers the picture is not as good — in fact , unemployment will rise slightly and average wages will drop over the next decade , according to the Congressional Budget Office ’ s analysis Monday .
While good news for the federal budget is getting most of the attention , CBO ’ s official review of the bill being debated in the Senate provides an in-depth look at many of the working parts and found that it would raise the cost of President Obama ’ s health law .
In particular , the bill will cost $ 87 billion more in subsidies for immigrants who qualify to buy insurance on the new health exchanges . Newly legalized immigrants are excluded from the exchanges , but several other categories , including guest-workers , would be eligible , CBO said .
Overall , CBO says the bill will benefit the federal budget by nearly $ 200 billion in the first decade and another $ 700 billion in the second decade . That ’ s because , while illegal immigrants will be using more services , they ’ ll be paying even more in taxes .
CBO says that the bill would end up costing taxpayers if just income taxes were calculated , but the real benefit comes in higher payroll taxes . Those are meant to fund Social Security and Medicare , but the government regularly raids those funds to spend on basic government services .
For workers , the bill is a decidedly mixed picture . Those at the bottom of the economy — essentially , high school dropouts — would see their wages drop as they faced competition from future immigrants and newly legalized workers . Those at the very top , who are usually highly educated , would also see their pay cut .
SEE ALSO : Speaker John Boehner : House GOP majority must back any immigration bill
Those in the middle would likely benefit , though , according to CBO ’ s analysis .
CBO and the Joint Committee on Taxation , which calculates scores for tax legislation , offered a number of fascinating takeaways , including that illegal immigrants who had been paying taxes while working on-the-books will be less likely to come forward because they might have to pay back-taxes .