WASHINGTON—President Trump is likely to sign the border-security legislation finalized Wednesday that would keep the government from closing this weekend , people familiar with his plans said , but he continues to look for ways to supplement the modest funding it contains for barriers .
Mr. Trump said he would take a serious look at the legislation , which includes far less money for barriers on the U.S.-Mexico border than he has demanded , but gave no assurance he would sign it . He said he doesn ’ t want to see another government shutdown , while also indicating he continued to seek ways to find more funding for the wall beyond what Congress is allocating .
“ We have got a lot of funds for a lot of other things , ” Mr. Trump said , without providing details . “ With a wall , they want to be stingy . We have options that most people don ’ t really understand. ” In the past , Mr. Trump has floated declaring a national emergency to redirect funds to the wall , bypassing Congress .
Democrats are expected to challenge any efforts to move money around without congressional approval .
The text of the bill was released late Wednesday after lawmakers sorted out some last-minute complications . The biggest snag focused on whether to include back pay for federal contractors to make up for lost compensation during the record-long partial government shutdown that ended last month . Democratic lawmakers supported the back pay , but the White House balked at it .
Lawmakers also debated an extension of the Violence Against Women Act , which provides funding for programs to prevent domestic violence and bolster prosecutions . House Democrats pushed instead to reintroduce later a new version of the bill that would prevent people under protective orders from possessing firearms and would bar evictions of victims of domestic violence based on the actions of abusers .
When negotiations had wrapped up Wednesday night , lawmakers had decided not to include a reauthorization of VAWA or back pay for contractors in the bill , according to a senior Democratic aide .
The Senate and House were expected to vote Thursday on the spending package . It is expected to pass both chambers , though it will face opposition from lawmakers on both the left and right ends of the political spectrum .
The people familiar with Mr. Trump ’ s plans said that unless something unexpected emerged that made the bill less palatable , they expected him to back it . “ We ’ ll be looking for land mines because you could have that , ” the Republican president said Wednesday , referring to the legislation .
Administration officials cautioned that no final decision has been made , and that the White House was still reviewing the deal .
The deal , backed by congressional leaders in both parties , would fund the Department of Homeland Security , which oversees the border , and a group of other federal agencies through September . It would allocate $ 1.38 billion for 55 miles of physical barriers—including bollard fencing and levee walls , but not concrete walls—along the Rio Grande Valley of the U.S.-Mexico border , according to congressional aides . That marks a far lower funding level than the $ 5.7 billion that Mr. Trump had sought for a wall .
Some conservative lawmakers and commentators have bashed the deal for not having more wall funding , including Fox News host and Trump adviser Sean Hannity , who called it a “ garbage compromise. ” But an administration official cast the deal as a win for Mr. Trump ’ s border-security agenda .
“ We are a long way from Pelosi ’ s $ 1 , ” the official said , referring to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D. , Calif. ) joking last month that she would allot $ 1 for Mr. Trump ’ s wall .
Still , a person close to Mr. Trump expected him to make clear that he isn ’ t happy about the bill when he ultimately signs it . Mr. Trump has resigned himself to the fact that lawmakers won ’ t agree on more wall funding , the person said , but is confident that he can divert funds from elsewhere in the administration to the wall .
“ As long as he ’ s fighting for any mechanism , I would think it plays well , ” the person said . “ No one in the U.S. gives a crap how you do it.…They don ’ t read that part of the stories . ”
In an interview Wednesday with Fox News , White House press secretary Sarah Sanders pointed to some benefits that the administration sees in the deal , such as that it provides a total of $ 23 billion in funding for the budgets for Customs and Border Patrol and Immigration and Customs Enforcement .
Like Mr. Trump , she also suggested that the White House could augment the border-wall money provided by Congress through other means . Mr. Trump “ and his team have been looking at everything possible to get the funding they need in order to complete the wall , ” she said .
Liberal Democratic lawmakers raised concerns Wednesday over the number of ICE detention beds funded in the bill and ICE ’ s continued ability to transfer money to fund more beds than Congress had authorized . Democrats had hoped to place limits on the number of ICE beds .
Rep. Pramila Jayapal ( D. , Wash. ) , co-chairwoman of the Congressional Progressive Caucus , said she leaned “ very strongly ” against the bill “ unless we have a guarantee from the administration that they ’ re actually going to listen to what Congress does and our appropriated amounts . ”
A bipartisan group of 17 lawmakers has been trying to cut a deal since the end of the five-week shutdown . Mr. Trump has pressed for a spending bill that includes funding for a border wall , which Democrats have opposed , instead backing other forms of barriers .
The bill provides far less funding for border barriers than deals that Mr. Trump had previously rejected . In January 2018 , Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York , the Democratic leader , offered Mr. Trump $ 25 billion over an unspecified period to be used for a border wall , paired with a path to citizenship for young immigrants .
Funding for many government agencies is set to expire at 12:01 a.m. Saturday unless Congress passes spending legislation and Mr. Trump signs it into law . A lapse in funding would force hundreds of thousands of federal workers again to go on unpaid furlough or to work without pay .
A sticking point in the final stretch of negotiations has been providing back pay for federal contractors . While Congress has provided back pay to federal employees who worked without pay or were furloughed during the shutdown , many contractors have so far not been compensated for the weeks they couldn ’ t work .
Democratic lawmakers had pushed to include a back-pay provision for federal contractors in the funding deal , but the White House has resisted the move . A Trump administration official familiar with the legislation said that providing back pay to the private employees would be costly and complicated to administer .
“ They just won ’ t accept it , ” Mrs. Pelosi said of Republicans blocking efforts to get federal contractors back pay . “ It ’ s hard , but we ’ re still pushing . We have to keep trying , because it ’ s totally unfair . ”