Thanks to President Obama ’ s executive actions on immigration , thousands of illegal immigrants will soon be able to collect Social Security .
Starting in 2017 , the Social Security Administration expects that thousands of undocumented immigrants will begin collecting from the Old-Age , Survivor ’ s , and Disability Insurance ( OASDI ) program as a direct result of the president ’ s actions . In a letter to Republican senator Ron Johnson , chairman of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee , the SSA ’ s chief actuary Stephen Goss indicated that an additional 16,000 people will begin collecting OASDI benefits come 2017 , and that the number of beneficiaries would continue to increase for 40 years thereafter , topping out at 695,000 people . Goss ’ s projection may underestimate the number of potential beneficiaries , however , as it assumes that 50,000 fewer illegal immigrants will enter the country each year starting in 2016 . What ’ s more , the SSA is proceeding as if nothing has changed in the wake of a federal judge ’ s injunction against Obama ’ s November 2014 executive actions . Goss tells NRO that he expects 58,000 new workers will be covered under the OASDI program later this year , although they will not be eligible to collect benefits immediately .
In analyzing the Senate ’ s immigration bill last year , the Heritage Foundation ’ s senior policy analyst in economics and entitlements pointed out the problem with incorporating many undocumented workers into the system . ( Emphasis mine . )
“ While many undocumented workers operate off the books and do not pay taxes , a Heritage Foundation study estimates that 55 percent of undocumented workers are already contributing to Social Security , ” Rachel Greszler wrote . “ These undocumented workers are currently not entitled to any benefits based on the taxes they pay , but if they become legal through amnesty , they will be eligible for future benefits . ”
“ Thus , ” she continued , “ a majority of the undocumented workers who would be made legal through the proposed bill would be pure liabilities to the Social Security system ; they would pay little , if anything , more in taxes than they otherwise would , but they would be eligible for full Social Security benefits . ”
This news also comes on the heels of a report about the Social Security Administration ’ s glaring deficiency that has already opened up the system to errors and fraud , wasting millions of taxpayers ' money annually .