Donald Trump ’ s push to restrict immigration is clashing with policy goals in ways that detractors and even some supporters say could hurt his 2020 reelection bid .
It ’ s happened , they note , on everything from Trump ’ s effort to weaken Iran ’ s Islamist regime , to his attempts to strike a trade deal with Mexico , to his push to oust Venezuelan strongman Nicolas Maduro . And it could happen on gun control , if Trump tries to wed expanded background checks with an immigration overhaul .
To pro-immigrant advocates , Trump simply wants to inject immigration into as many discussions to keep it alive an election wedge issue . They argue he ’ s blind to the consequences that is having on his other major initiatives .
“ Everything you see is about 2020 , ” said David Leopold , a prominent immigration lawyer and Trump critic . “ He uses the issue — a very serious policy issue , a complicated policy problem , immigration — he uses it for purely selfish political reasons , to throw red meat to his base . ”
But others insist he is purely going off instinct . Mark Krikorian , the executive director of the Center for Immigration Studies , which favors curbing immigration , laughed when asked if there was a strategy behind some of Trump 's moves .
“ There are both supporters and detractors of his who imagine he ’ s playing 40-dimensional string theory chess , when in fact he ’ s just operating from his gut , '' he said .
Regardless , Trump ’ s approach to immigration has — intentionally or not — gotten mixed up with his administration 's other initiatives .
One major Trump foreign policy goal is forcing out Maduro , whom Trump no longer recognizes as Venezuela 's president . Trump and his aides have pointed to Venezuela ’ s misery — an economic collapse , food and medicine shortages and corruption — as reasons why Maduro should be ousted .
But even as the Trump team has detailed the horrifying conditions that have led millions of Venezuelans to flee , it has ignored calls to grant Venezuelans in the United States “ temporary protected status ” so that they can stay in America even if they lack legal status .
In fact , Trump has been trying to dismantle the entire TPS program , which has also covered people from several other nations riven with violence or natural disaster . Trump is also trying to cut down on the number of people granted asylum in the U.S. just as Venezuela has become a top source of asylum applications filed with U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services .
Another Trump foreign policy goal is to weaken the Islamist government in Iran . Using primarily economic sanctions , the president and his team are raising pressure on the clerical regime , and they say they ’ re doing it in part to end the oppression of ordinary Iranians .
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has even implied that deteriorating economic conditions in the country could cause Iranians to revolt against the regime . “ I think what can change is the people can change the government , ” Pompeo told CBS News earlier this year .
But Trump ’ s expressed love for Iranians — he ’ s called them “ great people ” — has been undercut by his decision to include Iranians in his infamous travel ban . Iranian activists point to the travel ban , and Trump ’ s tighter asylum policies , as evidence Trump doesn ’ t care about Iranians at all .
“ It ’ s like a slap in the face . The Trump administration is asking Iranians to rise up against their cruel regime , and at the same time they are not allowing them to take safe haven in the United States , ” said Leila Austin , executive director of the Public Affairs Alliance of Iranian Americans , a non-profit advocacy group .
Even some supporters of Trump ’ s overall tough policy toward Iran say the travel ban was a mistake , and that at the very least it should have been better tailored .
“ Lift the travel ban & give thousands of H1B [ visas ] & green cards to ordinary Iranians , ” Mark Dubowitz of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies , which has backed Trump 's `` maximum pressure campaign '' against the Iranian regime , tweeted in April. “ Ban regime connected officials & their families from entering US . ”
Morning Shift newsletter Get the latest on employment and immigration , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
Trump ’ s tough immigration policies have at times damaged his standing with people who voted for him . For instance , many members of America ’ s Iraqi Christian community supported Trump because he promised to do more to protect Christians overseas . That promise also led many evangelical Christians to support the president .
But as part of his immigration crackdown , Trump has been trying to deport hundreds of Iraqi Christians back to Iraq , where many fear they ’ ll face torture and death . Just this past week , a 41-year-old Michigan man deported to Iraq in June died , possibly because could not obtain insulin in Baghdad to treat his diabetes . While the man , Jimmy Aldaoud , was an Iraqi national , he had been in the U.S. since he was a young child and did not speak Arabic .
Aldaoud was one of an estimated 160,000 Chaldean Catholics in Michigan , many of whom supported Trump in 2016 . They now feel betrayed .
“ There ’ s a tremendous amount of anxiety in the community , ” said Martin Manna of the Chaldean Community Foundation earlier this week .
Also this past week , following deadly mass shootings in Texas and Ohio , Trump signaled that he might support expanding background checks for people seeking to buy guns . But he also briefly floated the idea of `` marrying '' gun control to an immigration overhaul . Such a linkage would likely kill chances for either proposal to succeed .
Trump ’ s campaign insists his strict approach to immigration is actually well-matched with the president 's other initiatives — both at home and abroad .
“ President Trump ’ s first priorities will always be the safety and prosperity of the American people , which is why he has focused on border security and the enforcement of immigration laws , ” a Trump campaign spokesperson said in a statement . “ He will also stand in support of freedom over tyranny around the world . These principles are compatible . ”
In the run-up to the 2018 midterm elections , Trump used immigration as a major talking point , regularly inveighing against “ caravans ” of migrants coming to the U.S. from Latin America . Despite Democrats racking up big wins in that election , Trump hasn ’ t abandoned his anti-immigration emphasis .
He shut down the federal government for a record 35 days in an unsuccessful bid to get Congress to fund the construction of a border wall with Mexico . The costly move angered workers in many industrial sectors , threatening a Republican talking point for 2020 about how well the U.S. economy is doing under Trump .
Trump then stunned Washington in May when he threatened to impose tariffs on Mexico if it didn ’ t do more to stop migrants from crossing into the United States .
Even Republican lawmakers warned that the tariffs could threaten congressional approval of what Trump considers a top achievement : His negotiation of a new trade deal with Canada and Mexico . They also noted the tariffs could hurt American workers , including many farmers who have supported Trump .
Mexico has avoided the threatened tariffs so far by stepping up efforts to deter migrants from entering the U.S . But Trump ’ s threats may also have spooked China , another country with whom he ’ s engaged in trade talks , about whether he ’ s reliable .
“ The message that was received was that deals that the president makes don ’ t stick . You ’ re always vulnerable to him coming back and wanting to change everything , ” said Bill Reinsch , an Asia expert with the Center for Strategic and International Studies .
Trump is surrounded by some top aides , such as Stephen Miller , who are known to favor much tighter restrictions on immigration . But former Trump aides and even some of his critics say that at the end of the day , it ’ s Trump ’ s own political instincts that drive his message .
Trump ’ s instincts apparently tell him that revving up anti-immigrant attitudes among some in the Republican base will work for him in 2020 — even after the 2018 setback and even if it means undercutting other policy goals .
“ I don ’ t think he cares about his legacy as much as he cares about the moment , ” said Frank Sharry , founder and executive director of America ’ s Voice , a liberal group advocating for immigration reform .
Sometimes Trump ’ s immigration policy appears to undermine his immigration policy .
Krikorian pointed out that while Trump talks of ensuring Americans have access to jobs , the president has also suggested that he wants to let in more immigrants to fill certain positions , such as temporary jobs in landscaping and housekeeping .
And in June , the State Department confirmed that the United States will cut off future foreign aid funds to El Salvador , Guatemala and Honduras — three Central American countries that are a major source of migrants to the United States .
Trump says those countries aren ’ t doing enough to stop their citizens from fleeing to America . But Republicans and Democrats in Congress have criticized his decision to cut off the funding . They argue that by ending support for programs that try to reduce violence and ease poverty , Trump ’ s decision could spur even more people to migrate to the U.S .
Some Trump critics wonder if Trump is intentionally trying to exacerbate the migration crisis through such moves so that he can point to it — and his self-declared toughness on immigration — as a reason why he should be re-elected .
“ I think it ’ s a terrible move , ” Leopold said . “ And he ’ s going to learn that in 2020 . ”