The House Republican whip team will canvass to see where lawmakers stand . House moves toward vote on border
After a day of embarrassing failures , House Republican leadership inched toward bringing a new emergency funding bill for the border crisis to the floor Friday .
The new legislation — described to GOP lawmakers in a closed-door meeting in the Capitol — uses revised language from Texas Rep. John Carter , Alabama Rep. Robert Aderholt and Georgia Rep. Jack Kingston that tightens a 2008 trafficking law that has made it more difficult to deport children from countries other than Canada and Mexico .
The bill is more costly than the legislation that had to be yanked from the floor Thursday . The latest version sends $ 35 million to governors to pay for the National Guard units involved in responding to the crisis , boosting the price tag to $ 694 million — still a far cry from the nearly $ 4 billion President Barack Obama requested . It is still fully offset by spending cuts , GOP sources said .
The House will also hold a separate vote that significantly reins in President Barack Obama ’ s power to shield undocumented immigrants from deportations — teeing off a popular 2012 administration initiative that protected so-called “ Dreamers . ”
The House is heading toward an evening vote on the border package . Friday ’ s changes seemed to build support for the package among House Republicans but prompted an angry response from Obama .
“ House Republicans as we speak are trying to pass the most extreme and unworkable version of a bill that they already know is going nowhere , that can ’ t pass the Senate , ” Obama told reporters at the White House . “ They ’ re not even trying to solve the problem . ”
Lawmakers and aides said the language regarding the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals is being changed so the roughly 550,000 current beneficiaries , who are granted a two-year reprieve from deportations , will be blocked from renewing their status in the program . That essentially makes those hundreds of thousands of young undocumented immigrants eligible for deportations .
That change is a clear nod to the conservatives in the conference , who have widely blamed the Obama administration program as the root cause of the steep increase in unaccompanied migrant children coming to the U.S.-Mexico border .
But the vote will put a handful of Republican lawmakers representing significant Latino constituencies in a tough political spot .
“ I think we should be very generous with those children who have not done anything wrong , ” said Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart ( R-Fla. ) , who plans to vote against the anti-DACA measure . “ I ’ ve always said the United States is a meritocracy … there ’ s no secret about my position . ”
The House held a procedural vote late in the morning to determine the level of support for the bill . Senior GOP leadership sources said Friday morning they expect to pass the bill , and leave town for the month at the end of the day .
Beyond the border bill , GOP leaders are talking about introducing another bill to plus up funding for the Iron Dome missile defense system in Israel .
As a policy matter , the border bill matters little because the Senate has already left town for the month and Obama would never support it .
Still , the Democratic response was immediate . On the other end of the Capitol , Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) said the House GOP was “ heading from bad to worse . ”