Breaking all of the usual taboos for a national tragedy , presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump said Monday that the shooting massacre in Orlando , Florida , should be a redefining moment for America ’ s relationship with Muslims overseas and at home , where he said they must do more to inform on potential terrorists .
In less than 24 hours , Mr. Trump called for President Obama to resign for mishandling the threat from radical Islam , congratulated himself for predicting another attack and revamped his own call for a temporary ban on Muslims from being admitted to the U.S .
Mr. Trump broke from his usual practice by delivering a speech from a teleprompter — but the tone was classic Trump , firing at both Republicans and Democrats for botching the war on terrorism .
He went a step further by arguing that gay rights supporters should withhold support for Democrats and their likely presidential nominee , Hillary Clinton , because the high levels of immigration that she supports is what allowed the parents of the attacker into the U.S. in the first place .
“ Ask yourself , who is really the friend of women and the LGBT community : Donald Trump with his actions , or Hillary Clinton with her words ? ” Mr. Trump said after calling for a temporary immigration freeze from countries with terrorist activity . “ Clinton wants to allow radical Islamic terrorists to pour into our country . They enslave women and murder gays . I don ’ t want them in our country . ”
The White House announced Monday night that Mr. Obama will take the more customary presidential route , traveling to Orlando on Thursday to express solidarity with the community there . Press secretary Josh Earnest provided no further details .
Mrs. Clinton also took a more traditional approach during a campaign stop in Ohio by saying “ today is not a day for politics ” and “ Americans woke up to a nightmare that ’ s become mind-numbingly familiar . ”
The former top diplomat expressed optimism in the nation ’ s ability to come together in the aftermath to deal with threats and voiced her support for stricter gun control laws and beefing up online surveillance .
Generally speaking , Mrs. Clinton ’ s approach has been the one preferred by politicians . On Capitol Hill , the House and Senate held moments of silence , and staffers behind the scenes bickered over how best to honor the memories of those killed .
Expressions of unity , vows of resolve and insistence that the U.S. will emerge proud and strong were standard fare .
But not for Mr. Trump , whose brash style has helped him ascend the Republican presidential dog pile this year and who shows no sign of changing tactics .
“ Normally , politicians do not make the contrast as strong as he did so soon after a tragedy , ” said Neil Levesque , executive director of the New Hampshire Institute of Politics and Political Library at St. Anselm College , which hosted Mr. Trump ’ s speech . “ But it is 2016 , and politics is different and it had changed and people want that .
“ Trump doesn ’ t necessarily stick with the standard rules of political procedure , ” Mr. Levesque said .
Jim Manley , a Democratic strategist , said Mr. Trump is “ trolling at the bottommost depths of the political discourse in this country ” and that the tycoon was “ trying to divide the country to score political points . ”
“ Any normal politician would express sympathy while encouraging the country to rally around each other at such a difficult time , ” Mr. Manley said .
“ The question is whether it is going to work , ” Mr. Manley said . “ If you look at social media , a lot of people are applauding this tough-guy rhetoric , but I think most Americans are absolutely appalled at what he is saying the last few hours . ”
Mrs. Clinton didn ’ t name Mr. Trump once in her speech . He , however , name-checked her 18 times and wrapped in Mr. Obama with those attacks .
“ The Obama administration , with the support of Hillary Clinton and others , has also damaged our security by restraining our intelligence-gathering and failing to support law enforcement . They have put political correctness above common sense , above your safety and above all else , ” Mr. Trump said . “ I refuse to be politically correct . ”
On Sunday , Mr. Trump demanded that Mr. Obama name “ radical Islam ” as the root of the problem . When the president delivered a statement without following Mr. Trump ’ s advice , the candidate said it was time for Mr. Obama to resign .
The White House waved off the Trump comments . Mr . Earnest said earlier Monday that they were beneath a president focused “ on something as big as helping the country respond to the worst mass shooting in our nation ’ s history . ”
Asked what he himself thought , Mr . Earnest took a pass . “ I took my own advice , and I ’ ve been focused on not being distracted by something so small , ” he said .
Beyond the usual political barbs , Mr. Trump did open an attack on Mrs. Clinton , saying she can not be a supporter of high immigration from terrorist-connected countries and claim to celebrate diversity in the U.S .
Mr. Trump said many immigrants from those countries hold “ oppressive views and values , ” including antipathy toward gay rights .
“ She can ’ t have it both ways , ” he said . “ She can ’ t claim to be supportive of these communities while trying to increase the number of people coming in who want to oppress them . ”