WASHINGTON—The Trump administration will allow refugee admissions to the U.S. to resume under a new executive order issued Tuesday , but people from 11 targeted countries won ’ t be allowed in unless they can show their arrival to be in the U.S. “ national interest , ” administration officials said Tuesday .
The result is that more than half of refugees will still be barred from admission during a fresh review period meant to assess risks posed by those 11 countries , officials said , in what some see as a de facto extension of the ban that has been in place since June .
Technically , the program will resume for all countries following a 120-day suspension that was ordered by President Donald Trump early this year . That pause gave officials time to write rules meant to better vet applicants , administration officials said .
But 11 countries will be subject to a 90-day further interagency analysis that will consider the threat posed . After that review , the administration will decide whether to resume standard refugee admissions for them , or not .
Administration officials didn ’ t name the 11 countries , citing “ law enforcement sensitivities , ” but one official said they account for 63 % of refugee admissions . The list is the same set of countries that currently trigger higher security screenings called Security Advisory Opinions , which is also not public .
People familiar with the refugee system said it likely includes Syria and other Middle Eastern nations that produce a large number of refugees .
During the 90-day review , refugee applicants from those countries will only be admitted if they pose no security threat to the U.S. and if their admission is “ deemed to be in the national interest , ” a senior administration official said . Other refugees don ’ t need to prove this second point .
The new executive order signed by the president allows for this review , saying that the secretaries of Homeland Security and State shall determine whether there are “ risks to the security and welfare of the United States presented by permitting any category of refugees to enter this country , ” and if so , to take appropriate action .
The refugee program was mostly put on hold in June for 120 days as part of the larger travel ban ordered by President Donald Trump designed to thwart potential terrorists . The reason given for the pause was to give the administration time to develop additional vetting rules . That period expires on Tuesday .
The new executive order out Tuesday has the effect of partly extending the original version . Ahead of the announcement , refugee advocates were already worried .
“ My fear and my expectation is that this will not be heightened scrutiny but rather an outright ban against refugees that have represented a majority of those coming into the United States in recent years , ” said Eric Schwartz , president of Refugees International , who ran the refugee program at the State Department during the Obama administration .
The administration also said that family members who are seeking to join refugees already resettled in the U.S. will face additional security measures and that these admissions will be suspended until these “ enhancements ” have been implemented .
Under the new rules , the administration also will collect more biographical data about all applicants , such as names of family members and places of employment , officials said . The administration will also do more to mine social-media posts to see , for instance , if refugees ’ public pronouncements are consistent with the stories they offer in their applications , administration officials said .
The Obama administration also sought to increase vetting of social-media posts , but officials involved say their efforts were limited in part because the process is labor intensive . It is unclear how the Trump administration will meet that challenge .
In addition , officials who do the screening at the U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services agency , which is part of the Department of Homeland Security , will be given new guidance and better training aimed at detecting fraud on the part of applicants . Officers from the citizenship agency will be sent abroad to help screen applicants in person .
In addition , officers will be allowed to look at “ broader inconsistencies and credibility issues ” posed by applications and not just information that is material to the refugee claim .
The refugee application process currently takes 18 to 24 months , and officials said they didn ’ t know how much longer it will take with the additional screening .
The vetting process can be particularly challenging because applicants have been forced to flee their home countries and often don ’ t have documents that are helpful in confirming identity and other details typically used in screening . In addition , their home countries are often unwilling or unable to cooperate .
Advocates for refugees have long pointed to the lengthy process that applicants undergo already and say the existing vetting process is more than adequate .
“ The U.S. already does more to screen and vet refugees than virtually anyone else entering the country , ” Jonathan Meyer , a senior Homeland Security official in the Obama administration , said Tuesday . “ Any improvement these measures can bring will be marginal because refugees are already so carefully screened . ”
But in his March executive order , Mr. Trump painted refugees as a much more dangerous group .
“ Since 2001 , hundreds of persons born abroad have been convicted of terrorism-related crimes in the United States , ” the order said . “ They have included not just persons who came here legally on visas but also individuals who first entered the country as refugees . ”
The order signed on Tuesday said the suspension had worked as intended . “ The review process for refugees required by Executive Order 13780 has made our Nation safer , ” it says .
The administration had already announced that it is limiting the number of refugees to be admitted this fiscal year 2018 to 45,000 . That is less than half the number President Barack Obama set for fiscal year 2017 and down from the revised 2017 figure set at 50,000 by Mr. Trump . Some in the Trump administration had pushed for the number to be set even lower .