WASHINGTON—President Donald Trump said Republicans should wait until they have more solid majorities in Congress to pursue an immigration overhaul , throwing cold water on a House bill that has been delayed until next week .
“ Republicans should stop wasting their time on Immigration until after we elect more Senators and Congressmen/women in November , ” he wrote on Twitter on Friday . “ Dems are just playing games , have no intention of doing anything that solves this decades old problem . We can pass great legislation after the Red Wave ! ”
Republicans currently hold majorities of 51-49 in the Senate and 235-193 in the House . Some election watchers see Democrats making gains in the House in the midterm elections this fall , and perhaps winning back majority control .
Rep. Patrick McHenry ( R. , N.C. ) , chief deputy whip , said Friday that the planned immigration vote will move ahead despite the flagging support for the effort , citing party leaders ’ promise to GOP moderates .
Speaker Paul Ryan ( R. , Wis. ) had agreed to hold the vote on what Republicans called a compromise bill to head off a special maneuver called a discharge petition that would have allowed centrist Republicans to join with Democrats to bring their own immigration bills to the floor .
” There ’ s no significant dynamic shift in our conference on immigration , ” Mr. McHenry said , when asked if there was sufficient support to pass the consensus bill . As for Mr. Trump ’ s tweet , he said : “ The president is speaking truth . If you want to fix immigration crisis in a holistic way , you ’ re going to need Democrats to participate in this process . ”
Rep. Nancy Pelosi of California , the Democratic leader , has rejected labeling the bill a compromise , saying its provisions on Dreamers—young immigrants brought to the country as minors and living in the U.S. without authorization—and the zero-tolerance policy of charging adult illegal immigrants are too harsh for her party to accept . No Democrats were expected to support the measure .
House Republican leaders had seen Mr. Trump ’ s salesmanship as essential to pushing an immigration plan through the House . The Republican president shifted his position on the compromise bill several times over the past week , first rejecting it , then supporting it , and now saying it should be put off until after the November election .
Mr. Trump also moved this week to change a policy that had resulted in thousands of children being separated from their parents at the border . Mr. Trump issued an executive order that keeps his zero-tolerance stance on arresting illegal border crossers in place but directs that families be kept together . While welcomed by many lawmakers , it again shifted the playing field for the legislative negotiations .
The president ’ s support of the compromise bill had given some Republicans political cover , particularly from conservative critics who charged that granting protected status to young immigrants amounted to amnesty . With that support now gone , the bill ’ s future was more in doubt .
“ I would say his tweet doesn ’ t help , ” said Rep. Don Bacon ( R. , Neb . ) , who is supporting the compromise bill . “ I just feel like this is an opportunity to get something done and I feel like we owe it to do our part in the House . ”
Rep. Louie Gohmert ( R. , Texas ) said the president was under pressure to back the compromise bill to bring hard-line immigration conservatives like himself on board and was glad to see Mr. Trump push back .
“ The president realized that this is not a bill that we ought to be dying on because it ’ s time to move on . We ’ ll get a better bill later , ” he said .
The compromise immigration bill would provide $ 23.4 billion for border security—including a wall and surveillance technology—and would cut family-based immigration and eliminate a diversity-visa lottery program . It would also provide six years of legal status to the young immigrants .
The vote on that plan was delayed Thursday after rank-and-file House Republicans pressed leaders to make additional changes to the measure . Some conservatives complained that the compromise omitted a requirement that employers use the E-Verify system to check workers ’ immigration status , while other lawmakers wanted reassurances on how the legislation addressed the parents of Dreamers .
Several Senate Republicans have introduced their own , narrow , legislation that focuses on how asylum cases are handled at the border . That bill would codify Mr. Trump ’ s zero-tolerance policy for border crossers and keep families seeking asylum united in detention centers . It would authorize 225 new immigration judges and require the Department of Homeland Security to prioritize resolving family cases . Sens . Ted Cruz ( R. , Texas ) and Dianne Feinstein ( D. , Calif. ) are also working on bipartisan legislation .