Negotiations over immigration in America have always been precarious , but Trump has complicated the picture even more
Greisa Martínez Rosas has seen it before : a rare bipartisan breakthrough on immigration policy , offering a glimmer of hope to advocates like herself . Then a swift unraveling .
' I am not racist , ' Trump says , after 'shithole ' nations remark fallout Read more
Martínez is a Dreamer , one of about 700,000 young undocumented migrants , brought to the US as children , who secured temporary protections through Barack Obama ’ s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals policy , or Daca .
She considers herself “ one of the lucky ones ” . Last year , she was able to renew her legal status until 2020 , even as Donald Trump threw the Dreamers into limbo by rescinding Daca and declaring a deadline of 5 March for Congress to act to replace it .
Martínez is an activist with United We Dream , the largest youth-led immigration advocacy group in the US . She has fought on the front lines .
In 2010 and 2013 , she saw efforts for immigration reform , and a pathway to citizenship for Dreamers , culminate in disappointment . She rode a familiar rollercoaster this week , as a bipartisan Daca fix was undermined by Trump ’ s reported – if contested – reference to African and Central American nations as “ shithole countries ” .
“ It feels like a sequel , ” Martínez told ███ , adding that Trump ’ s adversarial views underscored the need to hash out a deal . “ This same man is responsible for running a Department of Homeland Security that seeks to hunt and deport people of color . ”
Negotiations over immigration have always been precarious . Trump has complicated the picture . After launching his candidacy for president with a speech that called Mexican migrants “ rapists ” and “ killers ” , Trump campaigned on deporting nearly 11 million undocumented migrants and building a wall on the Mexico border .
He has , however , shown a more flexible attitude towards Dreamers – despite his move to end their protective status . Last Tuesday , the president sat in the White House , flanked by members of both parties . In a 45-minute negotiating session , televised for full effect , Trump ignited fury among his hardcore supporters by signaling he was open to protection for Dreamers in exchange for modest border security measures .
Quick guide What is Daca and who are the Dreamers ? Show Hide Who are the Dreamers ? Dreamers are young immigrants who would qualify for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrival ( Daca ) program , enacted under Barack Obama in 2012 . Most people in the program entered the US as children and have lived in the US for years “ undocumented ” . Daca gave them temporary protection from deportation and work permits . Daca was only available to people younger than 31 on 15 June 2012 , who arrived in the US before turning 16 and lived there continuously since June 2007 . Most Dreamers are from Mexico , El Salvador , Guatemala and Honduras , and the largest numbers live in California , Texas , Florida and New York . Donald Trump cancelled the program in September but has also said he wants Congress to develop a program to “ help ” the population . What will happen to the Dreamers ? Under the Trump administration , new applications under Daca will no longer be accepted . For those currently in the program , their legal status and other Daca-related permits ( such as to work and attend college ) will begin expiring in March 2018 – unless Congress passes legislation allowing a new channel for temporary or permanent legal immigration status – and Dreamers will all lose their status by March 2020 .
Technically , as their statuses lapse they could be deported and sent back to countries many have no familiarity with . It is still unclear whether this would happen . Fear had been rising in the run-up to last week ’ s announcement . Those with work permits expiring between 5 September 2017 and 5 March 2018 will be allowed to apply for renewal by 5 October . What does the recent ruling by Judge William Alsup mean ? In his ruling , Alsup ordered the Trump administration to restart the program , allowing Daca recipients who already qualify for the program to submit applications for renewal . However , he said the federal government did not have to process new applications from people who had not previously received protection under the program . When the Trump administration ended the Daca program , it allowed Daca recipients whose legal status expired on or before 5 March to renew their legal status . Roughly 22,000 recipients failed to successfully renew their legal status for various reasons . Legal experts and immigration advocates are advising Daca recipients not to file for renewal until the administration provides more information about how it intends to comply with the ruling . “ These next days and weeks are going to create a lot of confusion on the legal front , ” said Marielena Hincapie , executive director of the National Immigration Law Center , which has filed a separate lawsuit against the Trump administration ’ s termination of Daca . Joanna Walters
Then , less than 48 hours later , Trump ’ s reported comments about countries like Haiti and El Salvador prompted a fierce backlash .
“ People are picking their jaws up from the table and they ’ re trying to recover from feelings of deep hurt and anger , ” said Frank Sharry , founder and executive director of America ’ s Voice , a group which advocates for immigration reform .
“ We always knew we were climbing a mountain … but it ’ s improbable to imagine a positive breakthrough for immigrants with the most nativist president in modern America in charge . ”
As the uproar continued , it was nearly forgotten that on Thursday , hours before Trump ’ s remarks became public , a group of senators announced a bipartisan deal .
Under it , hundreds of thousands of Dreamers would be able to gain provisional legal status and eventually apply for green cards . They would not be able to sponsor their parents for citizenship – an effort to appease Trump ’ s stance against so-called “ chain migration ” – but parents would be able to obtain a form of renewable legal status .
There would be other concessions to earn Trump ’ s signature , such as $ 2bn for border security including physical barriers , if not by definition a wall .
The compromise would also do away with the diversity visa lottery and reallocate those visas to migrants from underrepresented countries and those who stand to lose Temporary Protected Status . That would help those affected by the Trump administration ’ s recent decision to terminate such status for some nationals of El Salvador , effectively forcing nearly 200,000 out of the country .
The bill would be far less comprehensive than the one put forward in 2013 , when a bipartisan group of senators known as the “ Gang of Eight ” proposed a bill that would have given nearly 11 million undocumented migrants a path to citizenship .
The bill passed the Senate with rare bipartisan support . In the Republican-led House it never received a vote .
Proponents of reform now believe momentum has shifted in their favor , despite Trump ’ s ascent . The Arizona senator Jeff Flake , part of the 2013 effort and also in the reform group today , said there was a clear deadline of 5 March to help Dreamers .
“ I do think there is a broader consensus to do this than we had before , ” Flake told ███ . “ We ’ re going have 700,000 kids subject to deportation . That ’ s the biggest difference . ”
Artists ' impressions : sculptors help to identify victims found on US-Mexico border Read more
Activists cited a grassroots movement grown much stronger . If immigration reform was once “ the stepchild that nobody wanted to talk about ” , Sharry said , today it is a priority of the entire progressive coalition .
Public opinion overwhelmingly favors Dreamers . According to a Quinnipiac poll released last week , 86 % of Americans ( including 76 % of Republicans ) want Dreamers to remain in the country .
How to achieve that goal , however , remains uncertain . Democrats are under pressure to force a vote as part of a spending bill that Congress must pass by Friday in order to avert a shutdown of the federal government . Republicans have dismissed the idea of tying immigration reform to funding .
For Dreamers like Martínez , who have seen friends and loved ones lose their protected status , there is no more time to waste .
“ Ultimately , members of Congress have to choose a side , ” she said . “ They ’ re either on the side of immigrant young people and our families … or they ’ re on the side of Trump .