Donald Trump ’ s revised travel ban will increase the woes of the world ’ s refugees , the United Nations has said , as some of the Muslim-majority countries affected by the ban expressed their disappointment , insisting they had fully cooperated with US anti-terrorist efforts .
The executive order blocks entry to the US for citizens from six of the seven countries named in Trump ’ s original order – Iran , Somalia , Sudan , Yemen , Syria and Libya – for a period of 90 days and suspends the US refugee programme for 120 days .
Research indicates Trump travel ban was based on misleading data Read more
The UN high commissioner for refugees , Filippo Grandi , said refugees were not criminals but “ ordinary people forced to flee war , violence and persecution in their home countries ” . The secretary general , António Guterres , pointedly made an emergency visit to Somalia , saying people were dying in the country due to famine .
But overall the reaction to the reordered ban was more muted than the outrage at the chaotic announcement of Trump ’ s original executive order on 27 January .
The subdued response is partly because it was widely expected , delivered with less fanfare and at least will not be implemented for a week , ensuring air passengers will not be thrown off planes just before takeoff in a repeat of the desperate scenes that accompanied the first ban .
On Tuesday , 6 Sudanese refugees in Cairo were permitted to travel to New York .
The Sudanese foreign ministry said it was disappointed with the revised executive order . Iranian foreign ministry spokesman Bahram Qasemi said Tehran would wait and see the details of the new executive order and “ would react in proportion ” .
Iran ’ s deputy foreign minister says Iran ’ s “ retaliatory decision ” over Trump ’ s initial travel ban is still in place.Iran ’ s semi-official ISNA news agency quoted the deputy foreign minister , Majid Takht-Ravanchi , saying the measures Iran implemented after the original ban on entry for US citizens were still in force and there was no need for a new decision .
Libya , currently gripped by renewed fighting to control its oil terminals , put out no fresh statement regarding the new executive order .
The revised ban now excludes Iraq , a country alongside which the US is currently fighting to defeat Islamic State in Mosul . The Iraqi prime minister , Haider al-Abadi , was advised not to take reciprocal action against Trump ’ s original order , despite significant pressure from the Iraq parliament to do so , and his self-restraint – and lobbying – appears to have paid off .
Some other small changes also make it less vulnerable to legal challenges . The new order clarifies that permanent residents , existing visa holders , people already admitted as refugees or granted asylum , and dual citizens can enter the US .
But Grandi said the UN remained concerned . “ The imperative remains to provide protection for people fleeing deadly violence , and we are concerned that this decision , though temporary , may compound the anguish for those it affects , ” he said .
“ Americans have long played a crucial role in promoting global stability while simultaneously exemplifying the highest humanitarian ideals , from support for refugee emergencies overseas , to welcoming some of the most vulnerable refugee families in the United States to rebuild their lives in safety , freedom and dignity , ” he said .
“ This is the gold standard in refugee protection and a powerful model for all countries that , at a time of record-high levels of forced human displacement , this kind of humane leadership is needed more than ever . ”
The largest concentration of refugees directly affected are likely to be nearly 15,000 Somalis in a Kenyan refugee camp who fled their war-torn country and hoped to resettle in the US .
The Somali president , Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed , who met Guterres in Mogadishu , called for the US ban to be lifted and insisted his country had the capacity to fight terrorism .
The main Gulf states , such as Saudi Arabia , remain exempt from the ban . Saudi Arabia , which is seeking better relations with Trump on issues such as Syria and Yemen , said very little about the ban when it was first announced and continued its policy of discretion on Tuesday .
The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation last month criticised the earlier order describing it as “ selective and discriminatory ” . The OIC said it was of the view that the ban will further complicate the grave situation that refugees find themselves .
In Britain the shadow foreign secretary , Emily Thornberry , described the ban as a retrograde step for the US despite what she called “ some cosmetic changes ” in its revised version .
“ By abdicating its responsibilities under international law , the administration continues to send a terrible message to the rest of the world on the refugee crisis , ” she said . “ While it remains to be seen whether or not this new executive order will stand up in court , nothing in this announcement changes the fact that these measures are unnecessary , divisive and wrong . ”
The Australian prime minister , Malcolm Turnbull , said the deal would not affect the US commitment to take refugees from the Manus Island and Nauru refugee centres .