The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com .
Donald Trump has served one-seventh of his constitutionally allotted term of office , and given his talent for self-destruction , there is no guarantee he will get to serve the remaining six-sevenths . But whether he does or not , one thing is a safe bet : When he leaves the White House , there will not be a wall running the length of our southern border .
This may come as a shock to his more devoted followers . They cheered madly , and still cheer madly , at his promises to build a wall that Mexico will pay for . `` Believe me , one way or the other , we 're going to get that wall , '' he told a rally in Phoenix on Tuesday -- even `` if we have to close down our government . ''
Between now and the end of September , Congress needs to pass legislation to raise the federal debt ceiling and extend funding to keep the government operating . Trump 's threat is to veto any such bill unless it features money for the wall .
Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell , however , said , `` There is zero chance , no chance , we wo n't raise the debt ceiling . '' House Speaker Paul Ryan scoffs at the idea of a government shutdown .
To get a bill with wall funds through the Senate would require 60 votes . Every Republican and eight Democrats would have to agree , and that is not going to happen . Both Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer and House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi have invited Trump to take a long walk off a short pier . They say they wo n't support the barrier under any circumstances .
This response no doubt makes many Republicans secretly grateful , because they regard the proposal as what the late Democratic Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan referred to as `` boob bait for Bubba '' -- a tough-sounding but dumb idea useful for appealing to a certain segment of the electorate that is not well-informed or discerning on matters of policy .
Plenty of GOP members would rather put Barack Obama on Mount Rushmore than underwrite this addled project . The Department of Homeland Security says it would cost $ 22 billion -- and a study by the Democratic staff of the Senate homeland security committee priced it at nearly $ 70 billion .
In April , The Wall Street Journal reported , `` Not a single member of Congress who represents the territory on the southwest border said they support President Donald Trump 's request for $ 1.4 billion to begin construction of his promised wall . '' That 's one reason he 's angry with Arizona 's two Republican senators .
Doubt has seeped out of Trump 's Cabinet room . As secretary of homeland security , before becoming White House chief of staff , John Kelly admitted , `` It 's unlikely that we will build a wall or physical barrier from sea to shining sea . '' Interior Secretary Ryan Zinke has also been equivocal .
Trump faces some daunting obstacles in trying to get his way . One is that the wall is not very popular . A poll by Rasmussen Reports found that only 37 percent of likely voters support the idea . Another is that Trump is not very popular , with an approval rating matching that of the wall . Those numbers wo n't intimidate many members of Congress .
Shutting down the government would be bad for GOP lawmakers , who recall the negative fallout when they did it in 2013 . But it would be worse for Trump . If the president threatens a closure and it happens , he will be slathered in blame from head to toe .
Let 's not forget the comical absurdity at the center of this dispute : Voters were assured by Trump that the cost of his barricade would fall exclusively on our southern neighbor . But Mexico has declined the opportunity .
In a Jan. 27 phone conversation with Mexican President Enrique Pena Nieto , Trump pleaded : `` I have to have Mexico pay for the wall . I have to . I have been talking about it for a two-year period . '' It did n't work . Pena Nieto said bluntly , `` My position has been and will continue to be very firm , saying that Mexico can not pay for the wall . ''
The impasse led to an unintended exercise in hilarity by White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders on Thursday . When a reporter noted that Trump no longer says Mexico is going to bear the cost , she replied , `` He has n't said they 're not , either . ''
Mexico is n't going to pay for the wall , and the U.S. Congress is n't going to pay for the wall . One of these days , Trump and his followers will have to face the truth : It was a 2,000-mile fraud .