Rubio 's support is crucial for the Gang of Eight 's success . Rubio : Immigration reports premature
Sen. Marco Rubio issued an Easter morning statement saying he is “ encouraged ” by progress in talks on immigration reform but added : “ Reports that the bipartisan group of eight senators have agreed on a legislative proposal are premature . ”
The headline of his statement , timed for release just before the Sunday talk shows : “ Rubio : No Final Agreement on Immigration Legislation Yet . ”
Rubio , whose support is crucial if the Senate ’ s Gang of Eight is to have a deal , spoke out one day after business and union groups signed off on a temporary worker program that appeared to be the biggest remaining hurdle for Senate negotiators .
Officials close to the negotiations say the Senate group is on track to announce a deal shortly after the Senate returns the second week of April . But Rubio made clear in his statement that he won ’ t be rushed .
“ I believe we will be able to agree on a legislative proposal , ” he said . “ However , that legislation will only be a starting point . … Arriving at a final product will require it to be properly submitted for the American people ’ s consideration through the other 92 senators from 43 states that weren ’ t part of this initial drafting process . ”
“ I ’ m encouraged by reports of an agreement between business groups and unions on the issue of guest workers . However , reports that the bipartisan Group of Eight senators have agreed on a legislative proposal are premature .
“ We have made substantial progress , and I believe we will be able to agree on a legislative proposal that modernizes our legal immigration system , improves border security and enforcement and allows those here illegally to earn the chance to one day apply for permanent residency contingent upon certain triggers being met . However , that legislation will only be a starting point .
“ We will need a healthy public debate that includes committee hearings and the opportunity for other senators to improve our legislation with their own amendments . Eight senators from seven states have worked on this bill to serve as a starting point for discussion about fixing our broken immigration system . But arriving at a final product will require it to be properly submitted for the American people ’ s consideration through the other 92 senators from 43 states that weren ’ t part of this initial drafting process . In order to succeed , this process can not be rushed or done in secret . ”