Illegal immigrants from Central America are surging across the U.S.-Mexico border because they believe they can take advantage of American immigration policy and gain at least a tentative foothold in the country , according to an internal Border Patrol intelligence memo .
The immigrants come seeking “ permisos , ” which apparently are the “ notices to appear , ” the legal documents given to non-Mexicans caught at the border , according to the memo , which was viewed by The Washington Times and raised several times Wednesday at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing .
Those notices officially put the immigrants into deportation proceedings . The immigrants usually are released to await a court date , giving them a chance to fade into the shadows in the interior of the U.S .
“ This information is apparently common knowledge in Central America and is spread by word of mouth and international and local media , ” the memo reads . “ A high percentage of the subjects interviewed stated their family members in the U.S. urged them to travel immediately , because the United States government was only issuing immigration ‘ permisos ’ until the end of June 2014 . ”
Agents on May 28 interviewed more than 200 non-Mexicans who were apprehended in the Rio Grande Valley , asking why they came to the U.S. and whether they had family in the country .
The memo conflicts with the Obama administration ’ s public stance that the surge of unaccompanied minors and young women with families is a result of spiking violence in Central America , not lax enforcement in the U.S .
“ These are countries which are experiencing a great deal of violence . What we hear from the children themselves is violence , ” a senior administration official told reporters this week .
The Border Patrol memo cites multiple reasons , including a rise in gang-related violence back home , but says the main factor is the rumor of a free pass in the U.S .
“ Although economic and security concerns also influenced their decision to travel to the U.S. , the issuance of ‘ permisos ’ to family units was the primary reason for leaving their countries , ” the memo says . “ The subjects also indicated that ‘ everyone ’ in their home countries is aware that ‘ permisos ’ are being issued to family units in south Texas . ”
Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson , testifying to the Judiciary Committee , was asked repeatedly about the memo but told lawmakers he hadn ’ t seen it . He did , however , dispute its conclusions .
“ I ’ m not sure I agree that that is the motivator for the children coming into south Texas . I think it is primarily the conditions they are leaving from , ” he said .
He also acknowledged that some of the border jumpers may be motivated by “ uncertainty ” stemming from U.S. policy and the bill the Senate passed last year that would grant legal status to most illegal immigrants in the U.S. — though not to recent arrivals .
Mr. Johnson said the solution is for House lawmakers to pass the Senate bill .
“ I do believe that if comprehensive immigration reform is passed , then the uncertainty that may be existing in people ’ s minds about our law will be resolved , ” he said .
All sides of the immigration debate say the situation with the children is untenable .
“ This intelligence report confirms what many experienced observers had feared and warned of — that not only the talk of amnesty , but also the reality that illegal crossers have been allowed to stay , is causing Central Americans and who knows who else to abandon their homes and risk their lives to take advantage of our lax policies , ” said Jessica Vaughan , policy studies director for the Center for Immigration Studies .
Civil liberties and immigrant rights advocates Wednesday filed a 25-page complaint with the Homeland Security Department about the treatment of some of the children in the care of U.S. Customs and Border Protection .
The complaint details dozens of stories from children who say they were denied food or water , insulted or threatened by officers , denied the chance to make an asylum claim , and physically abused .
“ More than half reported the denial of medical care , including two young mothers whose infant children became sick while detained in freezing temperatures , and another child whose asthma medication was confiscated while she suffered multiple asthma attacks , ” the advocacy groups wrote . “ Children consistently reported being held in unsanitary , overcrowded and freezing-cold cells , and roughly 70 percent reported being held beyond the legally mandated 72-hour period . ”
Although the Obama administration labels the flow of children a “ humanitarian ” crisis rather than an enforcement problem , Mr. Johnson said he has directed agents to go after the smuggling networks that control the traffic across the border and are thought to be responsible for encouraging Guatemalans , Hondurans and Salvadorans to cross the U.S. border .
He also said the U.S. needs a “ robust ” public relations campaign to discourage Central Americans from attempting the journey and to warn of the dangers along the way .
Some Republicans said Mr. Johnson and President Obama need to send a clear message .
“ The president needs to state unequivocally those who come here will not be able to stay , that they will not qualify under [ Deferred Action ] or under any other program , and any deportation policy review will not contemplate allowing them to stay , ” said Sen. Jeff Flake , Arizona Republican . “ That would be , I would think , incredibly helpful . And if you could relay that message back to the president , we ’ re trying to do so as well . ”