A new challenge confronts immigration reform proponents : the debt ceiling . Immigration reform 's No . 1 enemy
Immigration reform advocates have a new enemy : the congressional calendar .
Fall ’ s fiscal fights have lined up in a way that could delay immigration reform until 2014 , multiple senior House Republican leadership aides tell ███ , imperiling the effort ’ s prospects before the midterm elections .
The mid-October debt ceiling deadline — an earlier-than-expected target laid out Monday by Treasury Secretary Jack Lew — is changing the House GOP leadership ’ s plans to pass immigration bills that month .
“ If we have to deal with the debt limit earlier , it doesn ’ t change the overall dynamics of the debate , but — just in terms of timing — it might make it harder to find time for immigration bills in October , ” one House Republican leadership aide said .
That ’ s not the only scheduling challenge . There are fewer than 40 congressional working days until the end of 2013 — the unofficial deadline for passing immigration reform — and they ’ ll present some of the most politically challenging votes for lawmakers on both sides of the aisle . It will be difficult to add immigration reform to the list , senior aides say .
Government funding runs dry on Sept. 30 . The nine days the House is in session that month will be crowded with the debate over the continuing resolution to keep the government operating . The GOP leadership will have to reconcile the screams from conservatives who want to use the bill to defund Obamacare with their own desire to avoid a government shutdown . Of course , anything the House approves would need to pass the Democratic-controlled Senate , which will ignore attempts to weaken the law .
Immigration reform isn ’ t certain to die if it slips into 2014 , some in GOP leadership say . But major progress must be made in 2013 as it would be too difficult for the House to chart a course in 2014 , an election year .
At a fundraiser in Idaho on Monday , Speaker John Boehner predicted a “ whale of a fight ” over the debt ceiling . That skirmish will surface in October . The House is in session for 14 days during that month , but there is certain to be a good deal of debate over passing a bill that would extend the nation ’ s borrowing authority .
GOP leadership is mulling its initial negotiating position , which is sure to include some changes to entitlements , energy policy and the health care law . Boehner ’ s leadership team also seems open to discussing ways to soften the blow of the sequester in October , which would add yet another explosive issue to the mix .
The White House refuses to negotiate with Republicans over the debt limit , leaving little clarity on how the standoff gets resolved — and when .
“ Congress has already authorized funding , committed us to make expenditures , ” Lew told CNBC Tuesday . “ We ’ re now in the place where the only question is will we pay the bills that the United States has incurred . The only way to do that is for Congress to act — for it to act quickly . ”
A senior administration official said Tuesday that the increasingly crowded fall calendar was why Obama pressed the House to deal with immigration before the August recess . But the Republican leaders need to make time for it , the official said , and they should want to do it sooner rather than later because the pressure from the president and others isn ’ t going to let up .
But the scarce legislative days and the fiscal battles will be welcome to some House Republicans squeamish about voting on immigration reform . There is little support for passing the kind of comprehensive bill approved by the Senate . But even the piecemeal approach being pushed by the House leadership has its fair share of skeptics in the GOP conference .
November could provide a window for immigration reform — but two dynamics may interfere .
The debt-ceiling deadline could slip to November if tax receipts come in stronger than expected . If Congress votes on the debt ceiling during the eight-day November session , the Republican leadership is skeptical that it would be easy to turn around and vote on even a pared-back version of immigration reform .
The will just won ’ t be there , some aides say . A similar situation played out earlier this year , when Boehner delayed in January a vote on Hurricane Sandy relief because it came too soon after the tough vote when Congress raised taxes to resolve the fiscal cliff .
December will likely bring another government funding debate . The current plan for September is to pass a continuing resolution that lasts until Dec. 15 , setting up another year-end spending fight . The House is scheduled to be in session for just eight days in December before leaving for the holidays .
Frank Sharry , executive director of America ’ s Voice , said the new debt limit deadline “ is likely to push consideration of immigration to the latter part of October at the earliest . ”
But Sharry and Angela Kelley , vice president for immigration policy at the Center for American Progress , said the House won ’ t be able to use the fiscal fights as an excuse .
“ There are some in leadership who are going to look for any reason not to act , ” Kelley said . “ There will be a space where this issue is going to have to move . It ’ s not going to go away because other matters . ”