An audio recording in which migrant children in the US can be heard crying for their parents has been released as US President Donald Trump remains defiant over his immigration policy .
Some 2,000 migrant children have been separated from their parents in the past few months after their families tried to cross the US border illegally .
Mr Trump said he would not allow the US to become a `` migrant camp '' .
The UN high commissioner for refugees says the policy is `` unacceptable '' .
The recording was released by investigative US media outlet ProPublica on Monday , and was said to have been made from inside a US customs and border protection facility .
In it , several Central American children separated from their parents and thought to be aged between four and 10 can be heard sobbing and wailing , and calling for their mother or father .
One border patrol agent can be heard saying : `` We have an orchestra here . What 's missing is a conductor . ''
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees , Filippo Grandi , has told the BBC the Trump administration 's `` zero-tolerance '' policy towards illegal immigration is unacceptable .
`` It is absolutely wrong to separate children from their families in any circumstances and particularly when people are in distress as , for example , people that are fleeing from violence and persecution , as is the case for people in Central America , '' he said .
`` So , we are advising the government of the United States that this is not the right way to handle that particular phenomenon of people seeking asylum across the border . ''
On Monday , Mr Trump said the US would `` not be a migrant camp '' , or a refugee-holding facility .
`` You look at what 's happening in Europe , you look at what 's happening in other places .
`` We can not allow that to happen to the United States . Not on my watch . ''
The Republican president blamed Democrats for not coming to the table to negotiate immigration legislation .
Meanwhile , Mr Trump 's job approval rating averaged 45 % , according to Gallup polling conducted last week . This matches his previous peak , in the first week after his inauguration in January 2016 .
Nearly 2,000 children have been separated from their parents at the border between mid-April and the end of May .
The administration 's `` zero-tolerance '' policy entails criminally charging those entering the US illegally , including asylum seekers .
This has led to parents being separated from their children , who are not charged with a crime .
As a result , hundreds of children are being housed in detention centres , including warehouses and converted supermarkets .
Images from some of the border camps show children being held in caged areas separated by chain-link fencing .
Some shelters and foster homes have said they are running out of space .
Officials have also announced plans to erect tent cities that will hold hundreds more children in the Texas desert where temperatures regularly reach 40C ( 105F ) .
Democrats and some in Mr Trump 's own Republican Party have strongly condemned the administration .
The crackdown has even provoked fierce criticism from the president 's wife , Melania Trump , who said over the weekend she `` hates to see children separated from families '' .
Former First Lady Laura Bush meanwhile wrote in a Washington Post op-ed that the tactics were `` immoral '' and evoked Japanese-American internment camps during the Second World War .
Former Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton said Mr Trump 's widely debunked claims that the family separations were mandated by law was `` an outright lie '' .
Most congressional Republicans , however , have declined to criticise Mr Trump over the policy .
On Monday , US Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen defended the `` zero-tolerance '' policy , arguing that the government was simply following the law and it would be up to Congress to change it .
During a heated briefing at the White House , Ms Nielsen also insisted that migrants who attempt to cross the US border were putting their children in an unsafe situation .
Fox News host Laura Ingraham called the detention centres `` essentially summer camps '' , and praised Mr Trump for `` doing what we should have been doing all along , prosecuting all border crashers '' .
Conservative author Ann Coulter called the children `` child actors weeping and crying '' on TV networks .
`` Do not fall for it , Mr President , '' she warned in an interview on Fox News .
Please include a contact number if you are willing to speak to a BBC journalist . You can also contact us in the following ways :