The Senate immigration bill could nearly double the number of guest workers allowed into the U.S. , according to a new analysis the Center for Immigration Studies is releasing Wednesday that says the jump is four times the increase of the last immigration bill in 2007 .
That previous bill failed in part because liberal lawmakers felt the new guest workers would compete with Americans for jobs .
But this year , those concerns have been more muted as most Democrats have agreed to accept more workers in exchange for the chance to legalize illegal immigrants .
The CIS study says that when fully implemented , the Senate bill could mean 620,833 more temporary workers in the U.S. than right now . In 2012 there were nearly 700,000 temporary workers in the country .
“ Most of these temporary worker increases are just gratuitous and have no economic justification whatsoever , ” said Jessica Vaughan , director of policy studies for CIS , which pushes for stricter limits to immigration .
The eight senators — four Republicans and four Democrats — who wrote the Senate bill have not offered their own estimates for guest workers or the future flow of new legal permanent immigrants , leaving outside groups to try to make the calculations .
SEE ALSO : Sen. Marco Rubio : Immigration bill does not have votes to pass
CIS says the biggest boosts would come from the 170,000 high-skilled workers that would be let in under the H-1B program and another 155,000 that would be allowed in under free trade agreements the U.S. has signed .
The H-1B increases have already proved to be contentious . When the bill went through the Senate Judiciary Committee the bill ’ s authors struck a deal with a key Republican , Sen. Orrin G. Hatch , to raise the limits on high-tech workers . That deal earned Mr. Hatch ’ s support in the committee .
Businesses fought to secure a robust guest-worker program in the bill , while labor unions have pushed back . Several unions said they disappointed at the deal the bill ’ s authors struck with Mr. Hatch .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , an Alabama Republican who tried in the Judiciary Committee to cap the number of immigrants to be admitted under the Senate bill , called the report “ a bombshell . ”
“ This large increase in guest workers guarantees that Americans ’ wages will remain stagnant and that the unemployed will remain unemployed , ” he said . “ This legislation surges the number of low-wage workers at the expense of the poor and middle class . ”