For six long years the family of Jose Antonio Elena Rodriguez have been caught in a legal saga seeking justice for the 16-year-old who was killed by a US border patrol agent who fired 16 times from Arizona into Mexico .
Ending criminal proceedings that have dragged on since 2012 , a jury last week cleared agent Lonnie Swartz of second-degree murder and could not agree on a verdict for two lesser charges of manslaughter . The shooting has compelled judges up to the US supreme court to deliberate whether the American government can be sued in civil court for wrongful deaths on Mexican soil – placing the incident , among seven cross-border fatal shootings , at the center of scrutiny surrounding the use of force by agents in response to allegedly thrown rocks .
However , lesser known are similar shootings which have occurred inside the US . Such as that of Francisco Javier Dominguez Rivera , who was shot and killed “ execution-style ” , in the language of a wrongful death complaint the government paid $ 850,000 to settle . An Arizona agent responding to an alert from the National Guard in 2007 alleged Rivera threatened him with a rock .
Ten years later , the Department of Justice settled another wrongful death claim involving a rock-throwing allegation in California for $ 500,000 .
The shootings are only part of a larger litany of Customs and Border Protection agency-related violence inside the US . Encounters have proven deadly for at least 97 people – citizens and non-citizens – since 2003 , a count drawn from settlement payment data , court records , use of force logs , incident reports and news articles .
From Maine to Washington state and California to Florida , the deaths stem from all manner of CBP activity . Border agents manning land crossings and a checkpoint have used deadly force , as have agents conducting roving patrols – up to 160 miles inland from the border .
Quick guide The US border patrol force Show Hide How big is the force ? Already the largest and most funded federal law enforcement agency in its own right , the border patrol is part of the umbrella agency US Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) . CBP ’ s approximately 60,000 employees are split in four major divisions : officers who inspect imports ; an air and marine division ; agents who staff ports of entry – international airports , seaports and land crossings ; and the approximately 20,000 agents of the border patrol , who are concentrated in the south-west , but stationed nationwide . What are its powers ? The border patrol enjoys extraordinary police powers . Agents operate checkpoints where they stop motorists everyday without suspicion , and in the interior of the country up to 100 miles , they can board planes , trains and buses . There is no geographic limit to which agents can otherwise conduct stops amid roving patrols , though they are technically required to have reasonable suspicion to do so . Extending from not only land borders but also the Pacific , Atlantic , Gulf and Great Lakes coasts , the 100-mile zone encompasses two out of every three Americans , 12 states in their whole or near entirety and nine of the 10 biggest cities in the nation .
Pedestrians were run over by agents . Car chases culminated in crashes . Some have drowned , others died after they were pepper-sprayed , stunned with tasers or beaten .
But the majority of victims died from bullet wounds , including shots in the back . The bullets were fired not only by agents conducting border enforcement operations , but also those acting in a local law enforcement capacity and by agents off-duty , who ’ ve shot burglary suspects , intimate partners and friends .
Among the incidents , one agent also died following an exchange of gunfire with a family member who was found dead . Another agent was killed by friendly fire . Border agents sustained non-deadly shots in two incidents .
The picture compiled from official documents and news reports is incomplete , but indicates that at least 28 people who died were US citizens . Six children , between the ages of 12 and 16 , were among the victims whose ages were disclosed .
The federal government has paid more than $ 9m to settle a fraction of the incidents thus far . A Customs and Border Protection spokesperson did not comment on those cases but pointed to the agency ’ s National Use of Force Review Board , which has investigated 30 significant incidents since June 2015 . Each of its 17 reports made public have found the use of force to be compliant with agency policy in effect at the time . Local boards also review incidents , but only those that do not result in serious injury or death .
Here , ███ looks at eight fatal encounters with CBP agents that happened inside the United States and the larger patterns of incidents to which they relate .
A US citizen and mother of five , 32-year-old Valeria Munique Tachiquin Alvarado was shot and killed by Justin Tackett , a border patrol agent and former police officer , in a suburb of San Diego , California in the fall of 2012 . At the time of press , a wrongful death suit filed by Alvarado ’ s family was nearing judgement after four years of litigation . According to court records Alvarado attempted to drive away from an apartment where Tackett and six other plainclothes agents had begun questioning her and others without a warrant .
After Tackett climbed on and then off the hood of Alvarado ’ s car , her family ’ s suit alleges , she attempted to reverse away from the agent , who fired at Alvarado 10 times , hitting her nine .
“ A part of me was taken away and there hasn ’ t been justice , ” Alvarado ’ s mother Annabell Gomez told Guardian . “ Everyday I wish it was a dream , but I wake up and she ’ s not here . Life is not the same without her smile , ” said Gomez . “ She loved her kids and life . ”
As a sheriff ’ s deputy in neighboring Imperial county in the years prior , Tackett was suspended four times following a string of incidents that took place in the span of 19 months , involving unlawful searches , illegal detentions and reckless behavior , before he resigned upon receiving a termination notice , court documents detail .
A review of 15 CBP shootings , each targeting the drivers of moving vehicles over the course of two years , was conducted the year after Alvarado ’ s death by the Police Executive Research Forum ( PERF ) . A nonprofit overseen by a board of police chiefs , that was commissioned by CBP to study its use of force policy , PERF found that in many cases , border agents “ intentionally put themselves in the exit path of the vehicle ” , thereby “ creating justification for the use of deadly force ” , with some shots “ taken out of frustration ” .
Settled by the Department of Justice under attorney general Jeff Sessions for $ 500,000 in 2017 , the shooting of 41-year-old unarmed father of two Julian Ramirez Galindo took place near the California border in February 2014 . Agent Daniel Bassinger alleged that Galindo , who was a street musician in Tijuana , hurled a basketball-sized rock at him from above . But according to the family ’ s lawyer Scott Hughes , the medical examiner ’ s report is at odds with the agent ’ s version of events , detailing a man of slight stature who died from two downward trajectory bullet wounds .
PERF ’ s review of CBP ’ s use of force policy the year prior recommended a revision prohibiting deadly force against “ subjects throwing objects not capable of causing serious physical injury or death ” , citing that in some cases , “ agents put themselves in harm ’ s way ” instead of moving out of range . “ Too many cases do not appear to meet the test of objective reasonableness , ” the report notes , recommending corrective action be taken if agents use deadly force when alternative responses are possible .
Bassinger was back at work within six days , NBC San Diego reported . One month later , then CBP chief Michael Fisher enacted PERF ’ s recommendations . But the lawyer Hughes , a former military police officer , thinks the problem runs far deeper .
“ We can no longer tolerate shooting unarmed people in the United States , ” he told ███ . “ These officers are woefully under-trained , ” he said . “ They find themselves in situations they don ’ t know how to react in and they resort to shooting their way out . When in fact , they really don ’ t need to . ”
In May 2014 , unarmed 31-year-old Jose Luis Arambula died in a pecan grove in his native Arizona , shot behind his left ear . After bailing from a car later found to be filled with marijuana , Arambula ran from agents before one fired at him multiple times from a distance of 60-70ft , according to the local Pima county sheriff ’ s office , which investigated the shooting . That office , citing the agents ’ account that Arambula made a “ punching out ” motion towards them , found deadly force to be justified . But in the view of lawyer Jesus Romo Vejar , who filed a wrongful death suit on behalf of Arambula ’ s mother , the scenario was quite different . “ It was a bad shooting , ” he said .
The case is among a set of shootings that have been dismissed on technicalities or in favor of the defendant agents , including suits filed by the family of unarmed 18-year-old citizen Juan Mendez , who was shot in the back from a distance while running from an agent in Texas in 2010 ; unarmed 20-year-old Gerardo Lozano Rico , who was also shot in Texas in a fleeing car in 2011 ; unarmed 19-year-old citizen Carlos Lamadrid , who was shot in the back while climbing a ladder at the border fence in Arizona in 2011 .
In many cases , “ the facts are favorable ” , said the lawyer Vejar . “ But the judges are not favorably deposed . ”
In one of at least eight fatal encounters in northern border states , 30-year-old Alex Martinez , a US citizen from Washington state who had a mental illness , was shot 13 times after his Spanish-speaking father called 911 in 2011 , according to a complaint sent to the attorney general and secretary of homeland security in 2013 . Describing the border patrol ’ s arrival alongside local law enforcement officers , Martinez ’ s father told local community organizers : “ The first thing they asked was , ‘ Is he from here or is he from Mexico ? ’ ” Local law enforcement alleged that Martinez hit a sheriff ’ s deputy with a hammer , reported a Washington newspaper . But his family disputed that account , saying that Martinez held a flashlight and tripped . “ We saw it with our own eyes and without there being any need for it , ” said his father . “ They did something unjust . Something that should not be taken lightly , ” he said . “ And border patrol did it all. ” The local sheriff ’ s office found the shooting to be justified .
An agent stationed in Michigan shot and killed a person at a card game while off duty . In Minnesota , a pedestrian died after a fatal accident involving a car driven by a border agent .
On-duty border agents serving as back-up to local law enforcement have shot and killed two people in separate incidents in Maine , both involving armed men of whom one fired at agents , according to the state ’ s attorney general which found the shootings to be justified .
In Montana , agents on patrol shot Jeff Suddeth , a US citizen who they said had a stun gun . At the inquest which cleared agents of wrongdoing , Suddeth ’ s mother , who described her son as bipolar , told local media : “ He lived 36 years , and in 15 minutes they took his life . I guess that ’ s the law . ”
In an incident unrelated to immigration enforcement , 21-year-old US citizen Steven Martin was shot and killed in Yuma , Arizona in 2008 . An agent was driving by the gas station , where Martin was parked , when a friend , who was black , allegedly ran out of the store holding two cases of beer . The agent fired on Martin ’ s car , according to a wrongful death suit filed by his mother . The suit also alleged that the agent did not subsequently request medical help for Martin , who was bleeding on the scene and died four hours later , on Christmas Eve . The case settled for $ 350,000 in 2013 .
With the exception of “ regulations prescribed by the attorney general ” , border agents with reasonable grounds have the authority to make non-immigration arrests , “ for any felony cognizable under the laws of the United States ” , under the Immigration and Nationality Act . No such regulations can be readily identified however , and the Department of Justice did not respond to multiple requests for comment .
Every year over Memorial Day weekend , Martin ’ s family gathers to celebrate his memory . “ My son was an amazing person who had a heart of gold , ” his mother said . “ He would give his last dollar to help someone out . He was a hard worker , spent his money on his cousins and sister and brother . He loved being around his nephew and would have loved to meet his nieces . There are still times I don ’ t know how I can go on without him . ”
Picked up by agents more than 70 miles from the border , in Orange county , California , Tomas Orzuna was denied medical care after agents beat , pepper-sprayed and then handcuffed him in a suffocating , face-down position , according to a lawsuit brought by Orzuna ’ s parents , which does not specify his age .
Force considered non-lethal has proven otherwise in a variety of circumstances . A man was pepper-sprayed at the Rio Grande river and then drowned . A man was hit with a stun gun inside a rental car and it immediately exploded . Four men were Tasered or beaten in separate incidents and then died . Agents fired explosives at a boat filled with migrants and one woman drowned .
Deaths have also occurred through alleged neglect or malice . A mother and her 16-year-old daughter drowned after agents ordered them to swim back across the Rio Grande river . Another 16-year-old was compelled to drink liquid meth by agents , after telling them it was juice , and died . An on-site paramedic at a border patrol station assessed that a man in custody was faking a seizure , a report by the San Diego medical examiner ’ s office detailed , but he had ingested a packet of drugs and died after being left alone in his cell .
Among cases which have settled , payments vary widely . Orzuna ’ s parents received $ 15,000 in 2012 . The family of Anastacio Hernandez-Rojas received a $ 1m settlement in 2017 . Beaten and Tasered five times , at a land crossing in California , Hernandez-Rojas ’ cries for help were captured on video .
In August 2017 , 18-year-old Israel Caballero , a US citizen , was among three people killed in a crash following a high-speed border patrol pursuit outside of San Diego , California . Initially stating that a license plate check linked the car to a homicide , the border patrol has since said no one in the vehicle was wanted of any crimes . The father of a one-year-old , Caballero worked as a landscaper , following a stint of competitive boxing throughout his youth . “ What happened to him was totally devastating , ” coach Juan Medina said of the former champion . “ Israel was a very respectful young man . ”
The incident is the latest among a string of fatal crashes that raise questions about CBP ’ s stated vehicle pursuit policy , which dictates that agents can commence and continue emergency driving only as long as the benefits outweigh the immediate danger posed .
In an Arizona crash resulting in a $ 350,000 wrongful death settlement , a car flipped when agents in pursuit threw a tire deflation device in the road , killing a 40-year-old mother of three . In a Texas crash , an eyewitness testified in court that a CBP vehicle bumped into the van they were pursuing . The crash left bodies and personal belongings strewn across a highway , resulting in nine fatalities . “ When it comes to human smuggling it becomes tough , ” a Texas police chief told the AP regarding pursuits . “ You do look at it in a way that these people were just trying to come here to have a better life , ” he said .
Shot by an off-duty CBP agent using his service weapon , 15-year-old Darius Smith died near a train station in a suburb of Los Angeles in May 2015 . The Los Angeles county sheriff ’ s office said it would not release video of the incident , but that the video backed up the agent ’ s account that Smith and two other teens attempted to rob him . Conflicting details swirl around a bb gun investigators say they found “ close by ” Smith ’ s body – but was not spotted by a man who held the teen ’ s hand until paramedics arrived , the Los Angeles Times reported . A football player at his high school , Smith dreamed of making it to the NFL his mother told local media . “ He always had a smile on his face , ” said a friend who now plays college football , dedicating his games in Smith ’ s honor .
Border patrol violence : US paid $ 60m to cover claims against the agency Read more
The incident is among ten off-duty shootings by CBP agents since 2005 identified by ███ .
Since early 2018 , a Texas border patrol supervisor was charged with murdering his romantic partner and her one-year-old son . A CBP officer in Miami shot and killed a man who entered her home , suspected of burglary , and a Texas agent shot a man described as a childhood friend .
Previous years have seen the federal government pay a $ 750,000 settlement to the family of Bassim Chmait , a 20-year-old Arab American ; and an agent was incarcerated after shooting 27-year-old Adam Thomas , a father of two . Both men were the neighbors of agents , while a number of other off-duty fatal shootings have involved intimate partner violence and domestic disputes .