Illegal immigration across the southwest border plummeted in the weeks after President Trump took office , Homeland Security Secretary John F. Kelly announced Wednesday , calling the drop an early sign that Mr. Trump ’ s get-tough policies are working .
In addition to a drop in the number of illegal immigrants nabbed while attempting to cross , Mr. Kelly said , they have seen a dramatic spike in the rates charged by smugglers paid to sneak people into the U.S .
Routes that cost $ 3,500 in November now cost $ 8,000 , he said — another signal that smuggling cartels ’ business is suffering .
Mr. Kelly called the drop in apprehensions unprecedented . The number of people caught at the border is considered a good indication of the overall flow , so a drop in apprehensions is believed to signal a drop in total number of illegal crossings .
“ This trend is encouraging because it means many fewer people are putting themselves and their families at risk of exploitation , assault and injury by human traffickers and the physical dangers of the treacherous journey north , ” Mr. Kelly said .
All told , 23,589 people were caught trying to enter without permission at the border in February . That was the lowest number for the month in years and a 40 percent drop from the 42,504 caught in January .
In fact , it ’ s the lowest number for any month dating back at least to 2012 , when monthly statistics were first released .
The Obama administration and its allies among immigrant rights groups had long argued that the surge of illegal immigration in recent years , chiefly from Central America , was a result of people fleeing horrific conditions .
Those groups argued that there was little the U.S. could or should do to stem the flow .
But Border Patrol officials , in internal documents , had said the surge was a result of lax enforcement within the U.S . They had predicted that a policy imposing tougher consequences for illegal immigration could stem the flow .
Mr. Kelly said Wednesday that appears to be the case .
“ The early results show that enforcement matters , deterrence matters , and that comprehensive immigration enforcement can make an impact , ” he said .
The number of unaccompanied illegal immigrant children caught by the Border Patrol fell below 2,000 , while the number of people traveling as families was just 3,124 . In January , that number had been 9,300 , and in December , it had been more than 16,000 .
Even particularly tricky countries such as Haiti saw improvement . In January , more than 1,600 Haitians showed up at ports of entry demanding to be admitted . In February , that number dropped to 218 .
Mr. Kelly said the massive changes were the result of Mr. Trump ’ s policies , which have given agents at the border and in the interior more leeway to arrest and deport illegal immigrants .
Mr. Trump has also promised to hire 5,000 more border agents and to build a wall across the southwest border , though neither of those plans has taken shape .
Instead , would-be immigrants appear to be responding to Mr. Trump ’ s get-tough rhetoric .
Mr. Kelly said his department will be monitoring to see what happens in March , April and May , when the number of apprehensions — and therefore crossers — usually jumps .
President Obama oversaw a major drop in the number of Mexicans coming across the border during his time in office — a result of a sour U.S. economy , an improving Mexican economy and a willingness to impose penalties on those nabbed .
But U.S. policy was more relaxed toward illegal immigrants from Central America .
They were generally arrested , given court dates and released into the interior of the U.S. , where they often absconded , disappearing into the shadows with the estimated 11 million other illegal immigrants .