A short stretch of border fence in Nogales is a flashpoint for 'rocking ' attacks on U.S. law-enforcement agents .
Agents say cartels hire rock throwers to divert attention from smugglers
NOGALES , Sonora -- A scruffy dirt road runs along the U.S. border fence here , up and down several hilly , rugged blocks in the gritty , cartel-dominated Buenos Aires neighborhood . Anyone standing on higher ground here can watch the white-and-green Border Patrol vehicles on the U.S. side and see where the agents are at any moment .
A short stretch across the fence from this road , just a few hundred yards long , is perhaps the onespot along the entire U.S.-Mexico border where Border Patrol agents are most likely to be attacked with rocks and to respond with force .
Roughly one in every six incidents along the 2,000-mile U.S.-Mexico border in which agents used force against rock throwers in recent years occurred here , across the fence from three adjacent streets leading to the fence in Nogales , Ariz. , an investigation by The Arizona Republic has found .
Agents know that what they call `` rockings '' are a constant threat on the U.S. side along Short Street , East Street and Escalada Drive , all of which end at the border fence near the top of a large hill , just east of the Dennis DeConcini Port of Entry .
Even though Border Patrol reports show that long-range less-lethal weapons , such as one that fires irritant `` pepper balls , '' are highly effective at dispersing rock throwers , Customs and Border Protection does n't require agents assigned to urban areas such as this one to carry such weapons .
STORY : Numbers do n't back need for lethal force at border
Many agents do . The Republic analyzed nearly 1,600 CBP use-of-force reports nationwide from 2010 to mid-2012 , obtained through Freedom of Information Act requests . These reports , the most recent CBP has disclosed , showed the vast majority of the time agents responded to rockings with less-lethal weapons and easily dispersed rock throwers without injury to the agents , rock throwers or bystanders in the crowded areas on both sides of the border .
Agents have several less-lethal long-range alternatives . The pepper-ball launching system , essentially a modified paintball gun , can fire more than 10 balls per second filled with pepper spray , letting agents saturate an area up to 60 feet away with irritating vapors . The longer-range FN-303 , a rifle-style weapon , uses compressed air to shoot `` kinetic impact '' projectiles , similar to rubber bullets , which are meant to incapacitate people without killing them . The sting-ball grenade is a hand-thrown grenade that sets off a flash and a loud bang , exploding several hundred small rubber balls , quickly clearing an area .
In nearly all of the 50 incident reports in east Nogales in which one of these less-lethal devices was used , agents reported that the rock throwers retreated south into Mexico without further incident . But some agents opt not to carry these weapons . In at least three incidents where agents were n't carrying less-lethal devices , calls were made for someone to bring them the weaponsso they could disperse the rock throwers .
That was the case at about 3 a.m. on Jan. 5 , 2011 . During a rocking on Escalada Drive , an agent radioed in , urgently asking for a pepper-ball launcher to be brought there . But moments later , an agent — the heavily redacted report does n't say whether it was the same one — fired his M4 rifle through the fence into Mexico .
And 17-year-old Ramses Barron Torres fell to the ground , shot through the chest .
Just past 2:30 on a recent sunny winter afternoon in the Buenos Aires neighborhood in Nogales , Sonora , a half-dozen young Mexicans rushed to the international border fence .
Quickly , they set metal ladders against the 20-foot-high rust-colored barrier . With what appeared to be bundles of marijuana strapped to their backs , several clambered swiftly up in two spots . From the top , they dropped ropes into the United States and slid down .
They crossed inwhat appeared to be plain sight of two Border Patrol sport-utility vehicles sitting perched on ridges to either side of the crossing spot , only 200 to 300 yards away . In less than 30 seconds , at least four people crossed into Arizona and disappeared amid the ravines , hillsides and houses across the fence . Neither of the Border Patrol vehicles appeared to move . Contacted later , Border Patrol officials would n't say whether they caught any crossers or seized any drugs in the area that day , Jan. 27 .
As the crossers climbed the fence , a glassy-eyed man in his early 20s pedaled furiously up the road on his BMX-style bike and shouted at two Arizona Republic reporters and a photographer witnessing the crossing .
`` If you take pictures of my friends we will take your cameras , '' he yelled in Spanish . `` Do n't take pictures . ''
For more than a decade , the Buenos Aires colonia , or neighborhood , has been described by Nogales residents as neglected by authorities and ceded to the cartels that control the crossings of migrants and drug runners into Arizona . The neighborhood is among the oldest and poorest in the city . Border Patrol agents say cartel lookouts watch them constantly from the hilltops here overlooking the fence , and that the cartels pay youths to throw rocks to distract or deter agents from catching crossers .
Many residents declined to speak to reporters . One glanced at another youth on a BMX bike and muttered about lookouts . The youth he looked at seemed surprised when a reporter approached .
`` You should be careful , '' said the youth , circling on his bike . `` This is a mafia area , the territory of piratas . '' He said he did n't know anything about anyone ever throwing rocks .
`` I come home from work , I go straight into my house ; I do n't see anything ; I do n't know anything , '' snapped a small older woman , gray hair in a tight bun , whose home faces the border fence .
But not everyone fears talking.Another longtime resident said she 's seen youths throwing rocks at agents manytimes . She glanced down the unpaved street . Rocks are plentiful .
`` They throw sometimes when the agents come , and I 've seen them fire back . The pepper spray is very strong , '' she said . `` I worry about my kids . ''
Her brother interrupted . `` If you provoke the agents , they 'll defend themselves . '' He shrugged . `` If someone was throwing rocks at me , I 'd fire back , too . '' Anyhow , he added , `` better the pepper than bullets . The pepper wo n't kill you . ''
The narratives of the rockings from use-of-force reports by Border Patrol agents on the three Nogales streets are similar . Agents see people crossing the fence , often with bundles on their back . They try to apprehend them . The agents then report being assaulted with rocks thrown by people on top of the fence or on the ground in Mexico . In some cases , the agents report rocks being thrown at them or their vehicles while on patrol .
In most incident reports The Republic reviewed , agents used either a pepper-ball launcher or other less-lethal weapons , such as the FN-303 or sting-ball grenades , to disperse the rock throwers .
Since 2010 , there have been eight incidents nationwide in which agents have killed alleged rock throwers , including six in which they fired across the border into Mexico . That includes twoin Nogales : the Barron Torres case and the October 2012 shooting of Jose Antonio Elena Rodriguez . On Jan. 30 , 2012 , a Border Patrol agent fired at rock throwers in Mexico while breaking up a drug-smuggling incident near where Barron Torres was killed . An alleged rock thrower was wounded and taken to a nearby hospital .
Six people were killed in known cross-border rocking incidents between 2010-13 compared with two in 2006-09 . The rise in deaths occurred even as the number of assaults against agents fell by 1,168 over the same time period .
Because of several high-profile deaths in recent years , the Border Patrol 's use-of force policies — which CBP has refused to make public — have become an issue . In response to a demand by members of Congress , Homeland Security 's Office of Inspector General issued a heavily redacted report last September recommending changes to the agency 's use-of-force training and policies .
The report 's recommendations were censored . But Border Patrol Chief Michael Fisher revealed one of them to The Associated Press , saying that , despite the recommendations , the Border Patrol would continue to consider rocks deadly weapons and to authorize agents to respond to rock-throwing with deadly force .
The Border Patrol requires agents to carry a .40-caliber handgun and one close-range less-lethal weapon , either a collapsible steel baton or a can of pepper spray . But it does n't require agents to be certified in or carry other less-lethal weapons .
A less-lethal weapon was not available in time when an agent called for one as 17-year-old Barron Torres was allegedly throwing rocks at them from Mexico in early 2011 .
At 2:50 a.m. on Jan. 5 , 2011 , Border Patrol agents monitoring cameras along the border fence near Escalada Drive , in Nogales , reported seeing two people climb the border fence and go back into Mexico from the United States , according to a report on the Torres shooting from the U.S. Department of Justice 's Civil Rights Division , obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request .
Agents watching on camera said they saw an SUV in Mexico drive up to the fence . Two people got out . The report said they appeared to confront the two individuals who had just crossed into Mexico .
One person climbed back over the fence into Arizona , picked up a bundle of marijuana on the ground and took it back to Mexico . Then that person climbed back over and picked up another bundle .
An agent arrived in his service vehicle and came under attack from three to five people throwing `` big rocks '' from Mexico , the report said . An agent , the report does n't say which one , called for backup from any agent with a pepper-ball launching system .
Before that could happen , an agent shot through openings in the fence with his .223 caliber M4 rifle , striking Barron Torres in the chest . The teen was loaded into a red Dodge Durango and taken to a Sonora hospital , where he died .
The agent 's account of the shooting was almost completely redacted in the federal report , but the unredacted portion said pepper-ball launchers release `` an extremely effective super irritant called PAVA pepper ( Capsaicin II ) . The systems are contact safe , target accurate within 60 feet and provide area saturation with PAVA within a 200-foot range . ''
Pepper-ball launchers can be particularly effective because they can be shot over the fence and saturate a large area , forcing rock throwers to retreat quickly or face highly irritating vapors that cling to skin and clothing .
The report said the Border Patrol cameras did not capture the agent firing , but did show Barron Torres making a throwing motion with his arm and then crumpling to the ground in mid-throw when he was shot . The agent was standing an estimated 40 feet from the fence . It is not clear exactly where Barron Torres was on the south side .
The federal government declined to pursue criminal charges because officials said the agent had a claim of self-defense and did n't pursue civil charges because Barron Torres was standing in Mexico when he was shot .
The youth 's self-described adoptive mother , Rosa Avechoco , said she does n't believe he was throwing rocks . But even if he was , `` a rock is not a deadly weapon in the same way a bullet is , '' she said . `` They claim that they were defending themselves , but they did n't have to shoot . ''
From 2010 to mid-2012 — the 29 months covered in the data that CBP provided — there were more than 300 use-of-force incidents nationwidein which agents used force against rock throwers . Fifty of those incidents occurred at or near Short Street , East Street and Escalada Drive in eastern Nogales . There may be more , but many incident reports contained too little information to determine the location .
More than one-third of all the rockings nationwide to which agents responded with force occurred in the Nogales Station of the Tucson Sector . There are other hot spots for rocking along the border , including along the border fence in Calexico and San Diego , Calif. , and on the Rio Grande in Eagle Pass , Texas . CBP had not responded by deadline to a 6-month-old Freedom of Information Act request for data since mid-2012 .
Border Patrol spokesman Adame said rockings have been decreasing . They accounted for 63 out of the 152 assaults against Border Patrol agents in Arizona last fiscal year , just over 40 percent . CBP 's numbers do n't include whether the agents responded with force .
Adame said that assaults along the Arizona portion of the border dropped 46 percent from a year earlier . `` It 's dropped a lot the last couple of years because of the new fence , and because we 've made leaps and bounds in terms of our cooperation with Mexican authorities , '' he said . The new fence is taller and longer than prior fencing .
Art del Cueto , president of the Border Patrol agent union local for the Tucson Sector , said he 's been subjected to rockings , but he opts not to carry a pepper-ball launcher .
`` There are a lot of factors that go into carrying these things , '' he said . `` It 's an extra piece of equipment to carry around , and it 's bulky . Not everyone is trained to use it . ''
Cueto said many of those throwing rocks at agents are teenagers hired by the cartels .
`` A lot of them are young kids throwing rocks , '' Cueto said . `` But they 're paid to throw rocks at agents by these organizations that cross drugs and people ... they 're kids , but they 're there for a reason . ''