Congress now appears likely to reach a budget deal to keep the government functioning without treating as bargaining chips hundreds of thousands of young undocumented immigrants brought to the United States when they were children . It also appears , though , that President Trump will consider undoing his threat of deportation for these young “ Dreamers ” only if Congress considers the first deep cuts to legal immigration since the 1920s .
The changes the president is demanding stem from a nativist , zero-sum view that what ’ s good for immigrants is bad for America . That view runs counter not just to the best of American tradition and principles , but to evidence of what ’ s best for the country .
The programs targeted by Mr. Trump are designed to make legal immigration more diverse and humane . One is the lottery system that offers the chance for visas to people from countries that are underrepresented as sources of American immigrants ; the other is family-based immigration , which offers visas to close relatives of citizens and legal residents .
Mr. Trump , who has regularly smeared immigrants as terrorists and criminals , has lately been focusing his fear-mongering on the diversity visa program . Last month , his Department of Homeland Security released a report that dishonestly claimed that those who entered the country via the lottery were more likely to be tied to terrorist attacks . The Cato Institute found that lottery visa holders actually killed only eight of 3,037 Americans murdered by foreign-born terrorists since 1975 . The immigrants chosen in the lottery , moreover , are not chosen “ without any regard for skill , merit or the safety of our people , ” as Mr. Trump said in his State of the Union address . They must have at least a high school education or two years of experience in skilled work , and they must also undergo criminal , national security and medical checks . The 50,000 recipients of the visas are not guaranteed permanent residence , only a chance at getting through the rest of the immigration process .