WASHINGTON—President Donald Trump ordered stepped-up deportations and a rapid start on building a wall on the border with Mexico , as he worked to make good on the promised immigration crackdown that powered his presidential campaign .
Taken together , the executive orders announced Wednesday—along with another set expected Thursday—sharply recast U.S. immigration policy .
“ A nation without borders is not a nation , ” Mr. Trump said during a visit Wednesday to the Department of Homeland Security . “ Beginning today , the United States of America gets back control of its borders . ”
Under former President Barack Obama , administration policy makers generally saw immigration as a net good . Though deportations at the border reached record highs early in his tenure , most illegal immigrants living in the U.S. weren ’ t at risk of deportation unless they broke the law .
Mr. Trump ’ s actions flesh out the “ America First ” agenda he set forth in his inaugural address . In his vision , stricter border controls and immigration enforcement are needed to keep out undocumented workers who unfairly compete with Americans for jobs , as well as drug smugglers , criminals and terrorists who threaten their way of life .
Thursday ’ s expected orders would amplify that message by banning the entry of people from Middle Eastern and North African countries considered terror risks , suspending the country ’ s refugee program , and implementing “ extreme vetting ” for some visa applicants .
Wednesday ’ s first order directs federal officials to immediately begin planning , designing and constructing a “ physical wall ” on the border , though the document includes language suggesting something short of brick and mortar would qualify .
It also calls for quickly processing claims of asylum , which are often asserted by Central Americans fleeing their countries , and building more detention facilities to hold people while their cases are considered . And it says the government will consider local police agencies an extension of federal immigration enforcement .
In a companion order , Mr. Trump restored the controversial Secure Communities program , which directs local law enforcement agencies to detain undocumented immigrants until federal agents can pick them up . He greatly expanded the group of people targeted for deportation , and directed agencies to strip federal grant funding from so-called sanctuary cities that “ willfully refuse ” to assist federal immigration authorities .
“ These jurisdictions have caused immeasurable harm to the American people and to the very fabric of our Republic , ” the order reads .
Mr. Trump also called for hiring 5,000 additional border agents and 10,000 more Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers , though he said this was subject to available appropriations . A White House official said the recently announced federal hiring freeze allowed agencies discretion to hire needed personnel .
The reaction in Mexico to the order for a barrier was angry , particularly since it came on the day top Mexican officials were to meet with White House officials to discuss the troubled bilateral relationship . Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto is due to meet with Mr. Trump at the White House next week .
In an apparent reference to the trip , Mr. Peña Nieto said in a message to Mexicans late Wednesday that he would take a decision on the “ next steps ” to follow after consulting with his cabinet , senate members and Mexican state governors .
“ This is an insult to those Mexican officials , to the president of Mexico and to all Mexicans , ” said Jorge Castañeda , an ex-foreign minister , in a televised interview . “ It ’ s a way of making them negotiate under threat , under insults and it should lead President Peña Nieto to cancel his trip next week . ”
Mr. Trump suggested relations with Mexico would improve , saying stricter border security would be good for both countries .
“ I believe the steps we will take starting right now will improve the safety in both of our countries , going to be very , very good for Mexico , ” he said . “ I have deep admiration for the people of Mexico and I greatly look forward to meeting again with the president of Mexico . ”
Democrats derided the orders as undermining trust in local police . House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D. , Calif. ) called them “ constitutionally suspect . ”
House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy ( R. , Calif. ) said the “ actions are the right start to enforcing our laws and protecting our citizens , ”
Michael Matzke , president of the National Border Patrol Council Local 2554 in El Centro , California , supported the action .
“ Regardless of what people say , walls work , ” he said , adding news of the wall and Mr. Trump ’ s plans to tighten security “ raises morale ” among border patrol agents . “ I think its just the general feeling that we ’ re the good guys again . ”
While Mr. Trump ’ s plans for the border have received most attention , other components of his executive orders are likely to have a bigger impact on the day-in , day-out practice of immigration enforcement .
Many cities and counties stopped cooperating with federal immigration authorities , considering the Obama administration ’ s immigration enforcement overly aggressive . Mr. Obama eventually narrowed his deportation targets to serious criminals and recent border crossers .
Mr. Trump is directing agencies to target criminals for deportation under a much broader definition that includes those charged with any offense or anyone an immigration officer considers “ a risk to public safety . ”
Mr. Trump is likely to face a battle with cities , often run by Democrats who will resist cooperation and possibly challenge the move to cut their grant funding in court .
“ We will not retreat one inch from welcoming diverse , global communities that made us one of the most successful cities in the world , ” Boston Mayor Martin Walsh said Wednesday .
The White House offered no cost estimate for the wall project , but outside experts say an end-to-end fence could easily cost $ 10 billion and possibly much more , depending on details . A wall would be more .
Mr. Trump has repeatedly insisted Mexico would pay for the wall , something Mexican leaders say they won ’ t do . In an interview with ABC News , Mr. Trump said he expected U.S. taxpayer dollars to construct the barrier and that reimbursement from Mexico would follow .
“ I ’ m just telling you there will be a payment . It will be in a form , perhaps a complicated form , ” he said .
Still , Mr. Trump faces significant challenges . There are currently just over 650 miles of fencing on the southwest border , close to the 700 miles called for in legislation passed in 2007 . Unfenced portions of the border are often unsuitable for construction . Much of it is open desert , private land or areas along the Rio Grande where the soil isn ’ t amenable to construction . In many places , roads would first need to be built to reach the border , and then a barrier constructed , adding to the complexity and cost .
Technology , such as aerial surveillance , and targeted increases in manpower are seen by experts as more effective than a physical barrier . Some of them say the only way to truly deter illegal crossings is to change the rules for what happens once people arrive in the U.S .
Rep. Will Hurd ( R. , Texas ) , whose southwestern Texas district stretches along the Mexico border , said it would be “ impossible ” to build a wall in much of its terrain . “ The facts have not changed , ” he said . “ Building a wall is the most expensive and least effective way to secure the border.Each section of the border faces unique geographical , cultural , and technological challenges that would be best addressed with a flexible , sector-by-sector approach . ”
Further , a 1970 treaty requires that the U.S. consult with and possibly get approval from Mexico before it builds any sort of barrier that would affect the Rio Grande , which runs along 1,254 miles of the U.S.-Mexican border .
On the border , some questioned how a wall could be built .
Gary Jacobs , a retired banker in Laredo , Texas , pointed to a local golf course whose clubhouse sits on the banks of the Rio Grande , barely a stone ’ s throw from the Mexican bank .
“ Where exactly would we build a wall ? ” asked Mr. Jacobs , who counts President George H.W . Bush and a host of Republican leaders as friends . “ I don ’ t care how smart you are , how many big buildings you ’ ve built . It can ’ t be done . ”
Dudley Althaus , Damian Paletta and Jon Kamp contributed to this article .