If there were such a thing as a classic American immigrant story , it might sound something like the one Arlene tells of her family .
Her immigrant parents each arrived in New York City poor but eager , searching for a better way of life . They found work – and each other – in the garment district ; they married , had children , and sent their girls to parochial school where nuns taught proper English .
Arlene 's parents told her and her sister that here , in the United States of America , they could do anything . So the girls went to college , became professionals , married , and had children of their own – English-speaking children who would never consider themselves anything but American .
It is a familiar , almost nostalgic , narrative ; one that evokes sepia-toned photos of Ellis Island , Little Italy boccie players , German grandmas , or Eastern European deli proprietors .
Arlene 's last name is Garcia . Her parents came from the Caribbean , not Europe . Today she lives in Lawrence , Mass. , a city north of Boston that is more than 73 percent Hispanic . She is fluent in Spanish and English , switching seamlessly one recent morning at work answering the phone at Esperanza Academy , a tuition-free , private school for low-income girls . She is married to a Dominican man ( albeit one whose name – Johnny Mackenzie – is far more gringo than hers ) and returns regularly to the Dominican Republic ( although these days she far prefers the Punta Cana resort area to the villages of her ancestors ) .
Is she assimilated ? She laughs at the question : `` Well , it depends on what you mean by 'assimilated . ' ``
That , it turns out , is a controversial question . And it is one that has moved in recent months to the forefront of public debate , as lawmakers wrestle with immigration reform , and as the Boston Marathon bombings – allegedly perpetrated by two ethnic Chechen immigrants – ushered in a new wave of speculation about newcomers ' ability , or desire , to integrate into American culture .
On one side are conservative officials and pundits who worry that a flood of Spanish-speaking immigrants and a reverence for `` multiculturalism '' have led to a population of immigrants in the US unappreciative of and unconnected to their new country . On the other are a slew of academics , armed with studies from think tanks and longitudinal research projects , who say that assimilation these days is as strong as it has ever been , that immigrants as a group are still more enthusiastic about the country than the native born , that immigrants ' children tend to do better than their parents by a host of socioeconomic indicators , and that within three generations an immigrant family fully identifies as American .
This happens across the country , they say , even in regions such as the Southeast that are not traditional immigrant destinations .
Although there has been bipartisan support in Congress 's immigration reform efforts for provisions to better integrate new immigrants into US civic and cultural life , as Arlene Garcia and her family show , the notion of assimilation – or `` integration , '' `` incorporation , '' or any word used to describe the process of belonging – is far from straightforward . To evaluate how and whether immigrants – and , arguably more important , their children – are becoming part of this country involves questions of identity , belonging , and the very essence of being American .
In 2006 , Jacob Vigdor , a professor of public policy at Duke University in Durham , N.C. , joined a group of academics in a series of meetings convened by the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research .
The scholars , all with backgrounds in immigration research , were focused on a single question : Is there a way , in the face of an increasingly emotional debate over immigrants in the US , to actually measure assimilation ?
This is no simple question . The 2010 US Census found close to 40 million immigrants in the US , making up 13 percent of the population . In 2012 , the census determined that 36 million more were `` second-generation immigrants , '' or the American-born children of immigrants . And while much of the public discourse focuses on Latinos – particularly the estimated 11.5 million here illegally – the portrait of America 's foreign born is far more diverse .
The country is in the midst of what most scholars refer to as the `` modern wave '' of immigration , which started when Congress passed the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 . This law essentially opened the door to Latin Americans , Africans , and Asians who had previously been barred by an immigration quota system that gave preference to northern Europeans . Since then , 40 million immigrants have come to the US , reports the Pew Research Center .
In sheer numbers there are more immigrants today than in prior generations , but as a percentage of the population , first- and second-generation immigrants peaked in the early part of the 20th century . In 1900 , 34.5 percent of the US population was first or second generation ; last year it was 24.5 percent .
Today , census data show , 12 million immigrants come from Mexico and 10 million hail from South and East Asia . Almost 4 million come from the Caribbean , while 14.5 million come from Central America , South America , the Middle East , and elsewhere . Within those groups , of course , there are huge differences ; that `` elsewhere '' category , for instance , includes hundreds of thousands from countries ranging from the United Kingdom to Nigeria to Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Categorizing the assimilation of all these different people , Professor Vigdor and the others knew , could prove a daunting task . Even the word itself – `` assimilation '' – had become contentious ; in academia it was associated with nativist pressures on newcomers to assume Anglo sensibilities at the expense of their own culture and history .
But as a social scientist , Vigdor was eager to find evidence in an emotion-laden debate . The key , he says , is in census data .
`` When you talk to some people about immigration today , they say , 'Well , my grandmother came here in 1902 , and she learned to speak English , and she did all these things , and the immigrants today are n't doing it , ' `` Vigdor says . `` And as it turns out , we were able to get a good sense of whether all the grandmas were really like that . ''
As early as 1900 , the US Census was asking people about where they were born and when they had arrived in the US . Using these markers , as well as other data points such as homeownership , marital status , and citizenship , Vigdor created an index that calculated a statistical difference between immigrants and native-born Americans . Full assimilation , according to Vigdor 's work , is when these data points are indistinguishable .
`` Assimilation is a process whereby people come to adopt the various mannerisms and behavior of native-born residents of a country ... , '' Vigdor says . `` By being able to track immigrants as they spend more time in the US , we can trace out how that process works . And the process actually works in a remarkably similar manner whether you 're looking over the past 20 years in the US or looking at immigration from Eastern Europe at the turn of the last century . ''
In other words , a first-generation immigrant will usually struggle with more cultural differences than his American-born child , who will grapple with more cultural disconnect than his children .
But there are also significant differences between immigrant groups , he points out , more so than between immigrants overall and the native-born population .
In his work , he developed three categories of assimilation – civic , cultural , and economic – and then combined those categories for an overall assimilation score . By his findings , Latino immigrants tend to be least assimilated , particularly on measures of civic and economic assimilation , which include characteristics such as citizenship , professional status , and homeownership .
Indians and South Koreans score higher on economic assimilation than on cultural assimilation index measures , which include questions about language , marital status , and the number of children in the adult 's household .
He has also found that , as a whole , immigrants to the US assimilate far more than those in European countries , but do so less easily than immigrants in Canada .
`` It turns out that almost every developed country has worries about immigration , '' he says . In Europe , immigrants `` have a harder time working their way to citizenship [ and ] immigrant unemployment problems are more acute .... Even if you look at a basic thing like homeownership – the home-ownership rate for immigrants in most countries is lower than for natives . The disparities in European countries are much more acute than in the US . ''
In his most recent index , this year , Vigdor found that immigrants to the US today were more assimilated than at any time in the past decade . He attributes this primarily to demographic shifts in post-recession America – new Mexican migrants , who typically score lower on his index , are down in numbers ; while Asian migrants , who tend to be from a higher socioeconomic level and score higher on his assimilation index , have increased .
Scholars such as Richard Alba , a sociology professor with the City University of New York who has written extensively on immigration , are more than a little skeptical .
Professor Alba says he is wary of indices of assimilation , which he sees as too simplistic to capture the full complexity and nuance of social integration .
`` They might be useful , but they do n't exhaust the concept of assimilation , '' he says . `` To take a simple example : We want to know whether people feel like they belong in the United States . How much do they identify with the United States ? ''
To get at this more important marker of assimilation , Alba says , you need to find out how immigrants feel . Which is what the Pew Research Center has tried to do in a number of recent studies .
In a survey report released earlier this year on second-generation immigrants , who many scholars say are the true markers of a family 's assimilation or lack thereof , Pew found that the children of immigrants are , in general , doing better economically than their parents , are more likely to marry and have friends outside their ethnic groups , and are twice as likely to say they consider themselves to be a `` typical American . '' ( Six in 10 Hispanic and Asian-American second-generation immigrants respond this way . )
Meanwhile , second-generation Hispanics and Asian-Americans `` place more importance than does the general public on hard work and career success , '' the Pew research found ; they and their parents are more likely than the native-born population – and even more likely than the older adult children of European immigrants from the turn of the last century – to feel optimistic about the direction of the country . More than 80 percent of second-generation Hispanics and Asian-Americans say they can speak English `` very well '' ; 10 percent say they can speak it `` well . ''
`` There is a lot of that very positive data in that second generation report , '' says Paul Taylor , executive vice president of the Pew Research Center . `` When you look at values , sense of belonging , things are unfolding the way that a society that opens its arms to immigrants would want it to unfold . Is everything perfect ? Of course not . But there is a lot of positive news in that data . ''
There are other reports about immigrants ' feelings , however , that come to a different conclusion . A week before the Boston Marathon bombings , the Hudson Institute , which generally researches conservative issues , released a report claiming a `` patriotism gap '' between the foreign- and native-born .
Citing a new quantitative analysis of Harris Interactive survey data , the Hudson Institute 's researchers determined that native-born citizens are , by 21 percentage points ( 65 percent to 44 percent ) , more likely than naturalized immigrants to view America as `` better '' than other countries rather than `` no better , no worse . '' When given a choice , the native born are more likely to describe themselves as `` American '' rather than `` citizen of the world '' ; 67 percent of the native born believe the US Constitution is a higher legal authority for Americans than international law , as compared with 37 percent of naturalized immigrants .
These statistics led the researchers to conclude that `` America 's patriotic assimilation system is broken . ''
A number of conservative columnists jumped on this finding , seeing proof in news reports that at least one of the Tsarnaev brothers , accused of the Marathon bombings , had felt alienated in and angry at the US .
All of which gets at a bigger issue when it comes to analyzing cultural integration : Who gets to describe the values of a `` typical American ? ''
As Alba points out , a `` typical American '' changes region to region , family to family . The meaning also changes based on socioeconomic surroundings .
In the 1990s , Princeton University 's Alejandro Portes , considered one of the leading thinkers on immigrant integration , helped develop a theory of `` segmented assimilation , '' which at a basic level says that because American society is so unequal , there are a number of social places where an immigrant can fit – including the social underclass .
Often referred to as `` downward assimilation , '' this is when people join gangs and adopt a street culture that is quite American , but not the sort of American that the Hudson Institute had in mind .
Indeed , the pressure for the sort of assimilation described by the Hudson Institute can often backfire , Professor Portes says . ( He also takes issue with the word `` assimilation , '' preferring `` integration '' or `` incorporation . '' )
`` Nativists take the position that they do n't want any immigrants at all – they want to build fences , '' Portes says . `` The other position is to turn [ immigrants ] into Americans as quickly as possible – this is forced assimilation .... The problem is that the first generation can not be turned into Americans instantly . And the attempt to do so is often counterproductive . It creates fear and alienation , it denigrates the culture and language of immigrants themselves , and it denigrates it to their kids . ''
Not only does this put the country as a whole at a disadvantage – after all , Portes says , with the global economy , citizens should understand multiple languages and cultures – it also puts children at the risk of downward assimilation because it hurts their relationship with their parents .
`` The idea that the habits and foodways and the religious patterns of immigrants are not worth it and should be eliminated – that is counterproductive , '' he says . `` In the history of this country , groups like Italians and Germans and Poles gradually developed a phased integration into American society . And today , elements of immigrant culture – the Irish , the Italian – are celebrated as positive parts of American culture . ''
In Ms. Garcia 's household , there is a regular debate over sleepovers . Her Dominican-born husband can not , for the life of him , understand why their 14-year-old daughter would want to stay at someone else 's house for the night . This is not atypical , she said . Dominicans , and many other Latinos , just do n't do sleepovers .
`` He 'll say , 'You have a perfectly good bed here ! ' '' Garcia says , laughing . `` I 'll say , 'Johnny , just let her be . ' And then he 'll say , 'You know , if there 's a fire , you know they 're not going to be worried about Marleyna . Oh no . They 're going to get their own child first . ' I 'm like , 'Oh my goodness , can you be any more dramatic ? ' But then I 'm awake all night thinking about fires . ''
She laughs again . It 's a far cry from the assimilation debates in her childhood , when the nuns insisted to her father that they speak English at home .
`` He said , with that accent of his , 'Seester , out of the home , you da boss , ' '' Garcia recalls. `` 'Inside of the home , I dee boss . But I promise you , she will learn to speak good English . But she will also learn to speak our language . ' ``
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Now she worries that her own daughter does n't know enough Spanish to talk with her cousins .
`` But this is what 's so wonderful about this country , '' she says with a smile . `` It 's the texture . The stories . ''