Throughout the history of human civilization , wherever there were established cultures and populations , there were borders – the Great Wall of China to protect against invaders ; stone walls to protect European cities from the time of the Roman Empire to the Middle Ages ; stockades that protected early American settlers from Indian attacks ; and barbed wire fences stretching across the plains of Texas to protect roaming herds of cattle from rustlers . Strong borders make good neighbors ; also , safe homelands .
Yet , preservation of the homeland does not appear to be the true focus of supporters of the so-called “ immigration reform ” bill recently passed by the U.S. Senate . Rather than craft a bill that actually modernized our immigration process to reflect today ’ s economic , fiscal and social conditions , the Senate pieced together a massive slab of legislation , loaded with pork , and aimed more at appeasing special interest groups than fixing serious deficiencies in our immigration system . Worse still , at the core of the legislation ’ s attempt at reform is a pathway to amnesty for millions of illegal aliens .
There is no denying the number of illegal aliens in the United States must be addressed , but “ reform ” does not begin by exacerbating problems supposedly being remedied . Granting amnesty to millions of illegals only adds to the long list of incentives for others to sneak into the U.S . While the Senate bill does allocate more resources to the Border Patrol to better secure the border , physical security measures can only go so far to stem the waves of illegal immigrants constantly penetrating our southern border .
Meaningful immigration reform must include more comprehensive steps to address why so many people immigrate to our country illegally . Only by tackling illegal immigration at the foundation can America ’ s border security be made effective . Once the balance of immigration is shifted back towards legal pathways , Congress can address the question of what to do with the millions of undocumented peoples within our border .
This approach will force Congress to look at two key problems in our current immigration process . The first is the financial incentives to “ cut in line ” through the legal immigration process by sneaking into the country . The second is to address the “ line ” itself .
In liberal bastions across the U.S. , illegal immigrants are rewarded with driver ’ s licenses and taxpayer-subsidized handouts . California , for example , which perennially is on the brink of fiscal disaster , can not even afford to pay its bills ; yet its leaders continue to fork-over precious tax dollars to people who legally should not be in the country to begin with . If foreigners see they can break the law , enter the United States illegally , and still receive public aid , there is no incentive to adhere to the legal process . Every time we add more “ bonuses ” for illegal immigration -- amnesty being the biggest prize -- it reduces incentives to follow the law . If we eliminate such financial incentives , we remove a major cause of our immigration woes , while making things fairer for taxpayers .
Secondly , the immigration process itself must be reformed . If the immigration bill does not make it easier for law-abiding immigrants to come here to work and pursue the American dream , we miss an opportunity to truly fix illegal immigration once and for all . Like an electrical current , immigration follows the path of least resistance . As dangerous and expensive as illegally entering the United States can be , it still may be the easiest route for many people , simply because of the bureaucratic complexities built into our immigration system .
We should be working to streamline the legal immigration process itself ; even as we make sure immigrants do not have a criminal record , do not pose a risk to our national security , and do not suffer from any communicable disease .
We also must ensure we manage the immigration process to our economic benefit . This is why I support the SAFE for America Act ( H.R . 704 ) . This measure would eliminate the controversial Visa Lottery program , which annually awards legal permanent resident status to 50,000 foreign nationals , based on pure chance rather than economic needs . Our system of visas and work permits ( including student visas ) must be reformed so it is more rationally based on our country ’ s workforce needs .
It is reassuring to hear Speaker John Boehner call for deliberative consideration of immigration reform , following passage of the Senate ’ s ill-advised product . Hopefully this is a sign we will at long last move beyond the tired talking points crafted for special interest groups and political parties , and come together for a bipartisan solution to fixing this urgent problem . Ultimately , too , voters must wake members of Congress from their self-induced amnesia , in which they believe that amnesty in 2013 will solve the illegal immigration problem to any greater degree than it did when last it tried in 1986 .