WASHINGTON – The White House has released a framework for immigration reform , which so far is receiving broad support from many evangelical leaders .
`` I strongly urge Congress to not let this historic opportunity slip away , but instead embrace a compromise that history will record as a righteous victory for our nation , '' Rev . Sammy Rodriguez , president of the National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference , said in a statement .
$ 25 billion for a southern border wall A path to citizenship for 1.8 million `` Dreamers , '' illegal immigrants brought to the United States as children A reduction in chain migration The elimination of the visa lottery system
Russell Moore , president of the Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission gave his praise on Twitter .
`` Encouraged to see the White House framework for Dreamers . I 'm especially glad it outlines a path to citizenship . This is a good starting point for Congress to get to work and pass a permanent solution , '' he tweeted .
Encouraged to see the White House framework for Dreamers . I ’ m especially glad it outlines a path to citizenship . This is a good starting point for Congress to get to work and pass a permanent solution . — Russell Moore ( @ drmoore ) January 25 , 2018
In a statement to ███ News , Rev . Johnnie Moore said he was glad to see the framework appeal to both Republicans and Democrats .
“ It includes points of agreement and disagreement for both parties & therefore represents a helpful baseline for a constructive negotiation , '' Moore siad . `` This is the President acting masterfully as negotiator-in-chief , and we are hopeful that there will be enough Democrats and Republicans in congress willing to act in the best interests of our nation . ''
Ralph Reed , chairman of the Faith and Freedom Coalition , praised the framework 's protection for families .
“ There are currently one million children waiting in lines around the world who have waited for years waiting to join their mothers and/or fathers , ” said Reed , adding that he encourages Congress to “ act quickly to enact the President ’ s proposal that will strengthen our economy , protect the nuclear family , and provide a safe and secure border . ”
On Twitter Matt Soerens with World Relief said he hopes the framework is a starting point , `` not a final blue print , '' for bipartisan negotiations to give `` Dreamers '' permanent protection .
`` Personal opinion on limited details of immigration proposal : @ realDonaldTrump should be applauded for supporting an earned path to citizenship for Dreamers , including both DACA recipients & those who meet qualifications for DACA but did n't apply . Thank you , Mr. President , '' Soerens tweeted . `` But… Proposed cuts to legal immigration – especially for reunification of immediate family members – are very troubling . ''
Tony Suarez of the of the National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference also praised Trump 's move on Twitter : `` Thankful for the voice of the @ nhclc reminding our elected officials that this doesn ’ t have to be an “ either or ” but “ both and ” decision . Protect dreamers & secure borders . ''
`` If you have been an advocate of immigration reform you ought to be celebrating @ POTUS & the framework he has laid out . If Congress passes this it will be the largest immigration deal passed in three decades . President Trump is about to do what 4 other administrations couldn ’ t do ! ''
If you have been an advocate of immigration reform you ought to be celebrating @ POTUS & the framework he has laid out . If Congress passes this it will be the largest immigration deal passed in three decades . President Trump is about to do what 4 other administrations couldn ’ t do ! — Tony Suarez-NHCLC VP ( @ revtonysuarez ) January 25 , 2018
Lawmakers have until Feb. 8 to reach a deal on immigration reform and the budget .