This week the Senate is expected to make a big push for illegal immigration reform through the Gang of 8 bill and Democrats everywhere can hardly contain how excited they are . But on his show over the weekend , Bill Maher expressed frustration with Republicans for being against amnesty .
BILL MAHER , HBO 'S `` REAL TIME '' HOST : I think they do n't want the votes because you know what ? They know if they 're going to take 11 million people and make them citizens and allow them to vote , they 're just creating more Democrats . Latinos who are mostly young -- young trumps it all -- they hate Republicans . They did a survey this week --
ANA NAVARRO , REPUBLICAN STRATEGIST : Now you are agreeing with Ann Coulter .
MAHER : Wait . They did a study this week , young people , this is the College Republicans , they wanted to find out . These were people who voted for Obama who they could win back . They wanted to know how they felt about the Republicans . These are the words : close-minded , racist , rigid , old fashioned . That 's what young people think of Republicans . Probably because they are close-minded , racist , rigid and old fashioned .
NAVARRO : Let 's go back to the point about legalizing 11 million [ illegal immigrants ] means 11 million Democrats . As the only Latino on the panel , I like to opine on this . I 'm a Republican Latino . We are not lemmings ; we are people . We do n't follow just blindly , we have opinions .
NAVARRO : Because who were they going to vote for ? Mitt Romney , who wanted to self-deport ?
MAHER : And who are you going to put up next time that they 're going to like better ?
CNN contributor and Republican strategist Ana Navarro pushed back on Maher 's assertions.I hate to say it , but Maher is right . As a reminder , granting amnesty did nothing for Ronald Reagan and the Republicans . Not to mention , Republicans lost the last two elections against President Obama and they ran extremely moderate candidates . John McCain , who is all about amnesty , and Mitt Romney , who has a bit of a tougher illegal immigration stance than McCain but is still anything from far right .