White House senior adviser Stephen Miller listens as President Donald Trump holds a cabinet meeting at the White House in Washington , D.C. , July 18 , 2018 . ( Leah Millis/Reuters )
In an essay for Politico , David S. Glosser launches into a sharp-tongued critique of the immigration views of Stephen Miller , who is both his nephew and a top Trump aide . With a headline calling Miller a “ hypocrite ” on immigration , Glosser ’ s essay tells the rags-to-riches story of Miller ’ s own ancestors , who arrived in the U.S. as poor Jewish immigrants but ended up owning a number of supermarkets and department stores . This inspiring family history is meant to disqualify Miller ’ s skepticism of chain migration and current refugee programs .
We see this accusation of “ hypocrisy ” on immigration a lot . It ’ s been trotted out against Miller , President Trump , and others . So perhaps it ’ s worth spending a few minutes looking at the limits of the “ hypocrisy ” charge .
First of all , the current immigration system would also have excluded the ancestors of many Americans . Family preferences constitute the bulk of new immigrants to the United States ; these preferences would have excluded past immigrants who had no family connections in the United States when they first immigrated . This is one of the major reasons why accusations of “ hypocrisy ” on immigration are not a particularly compelling argument against shifting to a skills-based immigration system . Skills-based migration would exclude many would-be immigrants , but so does our current immigration system .
The “ hypocrisy ” argument falls short on other grounds , too . Saying that you can ’ t support changing a policy that benefited your ancestors ( or even you ) would create a bizarre paralysis in political debates . The robber barons of the Gilded Age benefited from a relative lack of inheritance , income , and capital-gains taxes . Does that mean that Vanderbilt and Rockefeller scions can ’ t support any of those taxes ? What about the people who work at the schools , libraries , and other organizations that industrial magnates donated to — are they allowed to support a taxation system that would have shredded the mega-fortunes upon which their institutions relied ? Similar arguments could be applied to other policies . The ancestors of some Americans enjoyed higher wages due to the protective tariff , so can they support cutting tariffs ? Should someone who benefited from coal technology block the development of other energy sources ?
This paralysis points to one of the deepest methodological problems with closing off policy debate through claims of prior benefit . Part of serious politics is about the common good , the achievement of which can sometimes entail personal sacrifices . A soldier goes off to war knowing he might die , but he takes that great personal risk because he thinks that the common good outweighs that danger . Even if a change in regulations or taxation might hurt a voter , that voter might still support those changes because she believes they are best for the nation as a whole . If politics is to be more than self-dealing , policymaking needs to take into account what is in the national interest . ( It ’ s worth noting that claims on behalf of the common good and the national interest do not necessarily oppose claims on behalf of individual liberty ; one might believe that defending certain liberties is part of the common good . )
Now , one might argue that Miller ’ s preferred policy changes are not in the national interest . But the “ hypocrisy ” charge detracts from this argument .