Two Republicans who helped write the Senate ’ s immigration bill said Tuesday that they are convinced it will finally be able to get a handle on the porous southwestern border — but acknowledged it could mean problems for American workers .
Sens . John McCain and Jeff Flake , both Arizona Republicans , said they fear that foreign workers will be more attractive to hire than Americans for some companies because the foreigners won ’ t be eligible for the same health care benefits .
“ I think it ’ s a problem . I don ’ t know what else to say , ” Mr. McCain told a questioner at a forum on immigration sponsored by the Arizona Republic newspaper and KPNX-TV , both based in Phoenix .
Mr. McCain and Mr. Flake were two of the eight senators who wrote the immigration bill that cleared the Senate on a bipartisan 68-32 vote in June . Since then , they have been defending the legislation from attacks from within their own party .
They said that they are convinced the bill will strengthen security along the border with Mexico , and that a key part is the addition of more border fencing . Their initial bill didn ’ t mandate additional fencing , but that requirement was added on the Senate floor , pushing the Homeland Security Department to construct full pedestrian fencing along another 350 miles of the southwest border .
The forum featured questions from the audience , including one from a tearful Sue Krentz , whose husband was killed on their border-region ranch in 2010 , and who pleaded with the two lawmakers to finally get a handle on the situation .
“ We have paid the ultimate price of their negligence in securing the border , ” she said , urging the two senators to focus on enforcing existing laws rather than pass new ones “ no one follows . ”
“ Her family is a victim of a terrible tragedy of a shooting and a murder , and that is obviously something that is unacceptable in America , ” he said . “ These measures that we have in this legislation , we believe , will prevent another tragedy such as you have experienced . ”
While illegal immigration has become a major political issue for the entire country , it has long been a hot-button issue in Arizona . Five years ago , President Obama even tapped then-Gov . Janet A. Napolitano to come to Washington to head the Homeland Security Department .
On Tuesday , Ms. Napolitano delivered her farewell address as she prepares to leave early next month , and she said one of her disappointments was that Congress has yet to pass a bill to legalize illegal immigrants .
She said she was proud of the steps she was able to take unilaterally to revamp her department ’ s priorities for whom gets deported .
“ We instructed our immigration agents and officers to use their discretion under current law to not pursue low-priority immigration cases , like children brought to the United States illegally by their parents — children brought here through no fault of their own and who know no other country as their home , ” she said .
Mr. McCain and Ms. Napolitano have repeatedly battled over the way she has run her department and whether she is doing enough to combat illegal entries in the Southwest .
Mr. McCain , though , said his distrust of the Obama administration isn ’ t a reason not to try to pass an immigration bill now .
“ If you use that logic , which people are saying , ‘ Well , don ’ t pass legislation because the president won ’ t enforce it ’ — then let ’ s not pass any laws , ” he said .
He said going forward , Congress and the courts will pressure the administration to follow through on new laws .