Republican candidate tells Phoenix audience there will be no amnesty and lays out vision of a Mexico border wall and mass expulsion of criminal ‘ illegal aliens ’
Donald Trump has vowed anew to deport millions of undocumented people and to build a wall on the border with Mexico , defying expectations that he would soften his stance on immigration .
The Republican presidential candidate doubled down on his hardline stance in a speech on Wednesday night which delighted core supporters and dismayed his few remaining Latino allies who had expected a tack towards moderation .
Speaking hours after a lightning visit to Mexico , Trump told a rally in Phoenix , Arizona , he was sticking with his plan for a “ deportation force ” to intercept illegal border crossers and hunt down criminal “ illegal aliens ” already in the US .
In Arizona we saw the real Donald Trump : the one we already knew Read more
“ We are going to take our country back , ” he said , repeating a mantra from the primary campaign .
Speaking largely from a teleprompter , he also reiterated his vow to make Mexico pay for a 2,000-mile wall which , he said , would bristle with sensors , towers and guards . “ We will build a great wall along the southern border . And Mexico will pay for the wall , 100 % . They don ’ t know it yet , but they ’ re going to pay for it . ”
Trailing Hillary Clinton in the polls with just 69 days to the election , Trump and campaign aides had recently fuelled expectations of a “ softening ” of immigration policy , prompting speculation about a flip-flop .
Instead the speech , which his campaign billed as a major policy address , represented an abrupt reversion to an aggressive tone just hours after an unfamiliar conciliatory timbre in Mexico City , where Trump met President Enrique Peña Nieto .
The GOP nominee roused the crowd in Phoenix with grisly details about murders committed by undocumented immigrants . He brought on stage “ angel moms ” whose children were killed .
He spoke of cancelling an Obama administration programme that gives work permits to about 800,000 young immigrants who came to the US as children – a stance likely to slam shut any chance of Latino outreach .
Anybody who entered the US illegally would be subject to deportation and there should be detainers for immigrants who committed any crime , not just felonies , he said . “ There will be no amnesty . ”
Trump also promised ideological tests for would-be visa applicants , a “ sunset ” on visa laws requiring Congress to rewrite them every few years and a ban on taxpayer funding for cities that don ’ t deport undocumented immigrants .
The rhetoric trampled over the hopes of Trump ’ s dwindling band of conservative Latino supporters . “ This is how I feel : disappointed and misled , ” tweeted Alfonso Aguilar , head of Latino Partnership for Conservative Principles . Jacob Monty , a member of Trump ’ s National Hispanic advisory council , resigned , Politico reported .
The rightwing columnist Ann Coulter , in contrast , exulted . “ Wow . This doesn ’ t sound like “ softening. ” GO , TRUMP ! ! ! ” she tweeted .
Trump did however imply most of the estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants would remain untouched while his putative administration focused on deporting 2 million with alleged criminal records . “ We will begin moving them out , day one . My first hour in office , those people are gone . ”
The ambiguity over the fate of non-criminal undocumented immigrants marked a tacit retreat from Trump ’ s earlier vows to swiftly deport all 11 million people . The lack of clarity allowed supporters and critics to fill in the blanks with their own wishes and anxieties .
Trump ’ s policy could in theory yet resemble that of Obama , who has deported millions , and GOP rivals such as Marco Rubio and Jeb Bush , whom Trump accused of supporting de facto amnesty .
The speech capped a whirlwind day of political theatre in which Trump , after a year of denigrating Mexican immigrants as rapists , murderers and drug dealers , met President Peña Nieto in Mexico City , triggering a backlash from Mexicans who denounced the New York businessman as a tyrant , and worse .
'Cállate , imbécil ' : the best Mexican responses to Donald Trump 's visit Read more
Trump emerged from the private meeting at Los Pinos , the presidential residence , heaping praise on Mexican immigrants . “ They are amazing people , amazing people ... Mexicans are just beyond reproach . Spectacular , spectacular and hardworking people . ”
He said the hour-long meeting with Peña Nieto was “ substantive ” and “ excellent ” but did not touch on his pledge to force Mexico to pay for the wall . “ We ’ re saving that discussion for a later date . ”
Mexico ’ s president however said he did broach the topic and told Trump Mexico would not pay . In a late evening television interview , an angry-looking Peña Nieto said : “ His policy stances could represent a huge threat to Mexico , and I am not prepared to keep my arms crossed and do nothing .
“ That risk , that threat , must be confronted . I told him that is not the way to build a mutually beneficial relationship for both nations . ”
Hillary Clinton ’ s campaign , sidelined by another day of Trump drama , seized on the discrepancy : “ It turns out Trump didn ’ t just choke , he got beat in the room and lied about it . ”
The unexpected visit – Trump ’ s first meeting with a head of state since he became a candidate – yielded presidential optics in the form of a podium and marble backdrop in an international setting . Speaking beneath a Mexican flag the casino owner-turned reality TV star sounded restrained and diplomatic .
That evaporated when he bounded onto the podium in Phoenix , 200 miles north of the border , and seemed energised by the crowd , even though the cavernous convention centre was half-empty .
Rory Carroll ( @ rorycarroll72 ) # Trump takes the stage : 'what a crowd .. So many people . ' pic.twitter.com/3YzsUNv9X1
“ There is only one core issue in the immigration debate and that is the wellbeing of the American people . Nothing even comes a close second . Our greatest compassion must be for our American citizens. ” The audience cheered and chanted “ USA ” .
Maricopa county sheriff Joe Arpaio , a controversial hunter of suspected undocumented people , New York ’ s former mayor Rudy Giuliani and Trump ’ s running mate , Indiana governor Mike Pence , warmed up the crowd before Trump arrived .
Supporters hailed his cross-border foray as evidence he could negotiate with foreign leaders and secure US interests . George Buchanan , 71 , a retired flooring installer , said it also showed courage . “ It ’ s dangerous . You ’ ve got those Mexican people over there , drug lords . The drug lords don ’ t want him to build the wall . ”
Some in the crowd sensed that behind the brash reiteration of mass deportations Trump was in fact edging towards a more moderate , viable , policy . “ I think he ’ s loosening up , becoming more realistic , ” said Nancy Lewis , 56 , a retired law enforcer . “ And I ’ m OK with that . I have Hispanic friends . ”
Michelle Des Marais , 78 , appeared willing to forgive Trump if he did end up retreating . “ It ’ s a hard fight but at least he ’ s trying . ”