Donald Trump renewed warnings about Middle Eastern refugees and other immigrants coming to America on the heels of Sunday ’ s terror massacre in Orlando , while claiming thousands already are in the country who – like the shooter – are “ sick with hate . ”
Though the gunman , Omar Mateen , was a U.S. citizen , Trump told ███ on Monday that the U.S. is allowing others into the country who are “ no different than this maniac . ”
“ This could be the all-time great Trojan horse , ” Trump said , of those being admitted from Syria and other nations .
The presumptive Republican presidential nominee has only amplified his warnings about immigration and the terror threat since Sunday ’ s massacre left 49 dead and even more wounded . At the same time , he ’ s aggressively criticized both President Obama and likely general election rival Hillary Clinton for not initially using the term “ radical Islam ” in describing the shooter ’ s religious background .
“ She won ’ t even utter the words , ” Trump said Monday . On Sunday , Trump had said Obama should “ step down ” for not using the term and Clinton should “ get out of this race ” if she won ’ t either .
In remarks that were getting widespread attention Monday , Trump also made a vague statement about Obama interpreted by some as a reference to his sympathies .
“ He does n't get it or , or he gets it better than anybody understands , '' Trump said . `` It 's one or the other . And either one is unacceptable . '' He later said Obama is either not tough and smart or has “ something else in mind . ”
Obama , speaking in the Oval Office after getting briefed on the investigation by top officials , said the U.S. has to go after terror groups and “ hit them hard. ” He also said the U.S. needs to make it harder for those who wish to inflict harm to obtain weapons .
Meanwhile , Obama said while the investigation is at the preliminary stages , “ We see no clear evidence that he was directed externally. ” Rather , Obama said it appears the gunman was inspired by extremist information on the Internet .
Speaking Monday on NBC ’ s “ Today , ” Clinton directly rejected Trump 's criticism on their approach to terror attacks .
“ I think Trump , as usual , is obsessed with name-calling and from my perspective , it matters what we do , not what we say , '' she said . `` It matters that we got bin Laden , not what name we called him . But if he is somehow suggesting I do n't call this for what it is , he has n't been listening . ”
Clinton called the attack an “ act of terror ” on Sunday , as did Obama .
But unlike Obama , who did not use the term `` radical Islam , '' Clinton elaborated on Monday and addressed some of the religious motivations .
“ I have clearly said that we face terrorist enemies who use Islam to justify slaughtering innocent people , ” she said . “ We have to stop them and we will . We have to defeat radical jihadist terrorism , and we will . And to me , radical jihadism , radical Islamism , I think they mean the same thing .
“ I 'm happy to say either , but that 's not the point . … I 'm not going to demonize and demagogue and declare war on an entire religion . ”
Clinton , who spoke as well on CBS ’ “ This Morning , ” also said she would push for laws that prevent people on America 's no-fly list from buying weapons . She also urged tougher restrictions on `` weapons of war , '' like the assault-style rifles used in Orlando and San Bernardino , Calif. – while saying she would set up a federal team dedicated exclusively to addressing `` lone wolf '' attacks .
Trump later claimed credit on Twitter for Clinton referring to radical Islam .
The attack has only fueled tensions in the 2016 race , as both Trump and Clinton launch into a general election battle after having effectively clinched their respective nominations . Trump has tried to cast Clinton as weak on security issues , while the presumptive Democratic nominee has described Trump as unfit to lead .
Clinton will attend a campaign event in Ohio later Monday , while Trump is scrapping plans to make an anti-Clinton speech and instead delivering an address focused on terrorism , security and immigration Monday afternoon in New Hampshire .
Trump told ███ he ’ ll be calling for strength , and calling for intelligence improvements in his speech .
Further , of those in America “ sick with hate , ” Trump said they need to be reported .