US Attorney General Jeff Sessions has defended separating migrant children from their parents at the US border .
In a radio interview , he said that authorities `` prefer to keep the children close '' to their parents , but added that this was often not possible .
The issue has caused a growing storm after US officials confirmed hundreds of child migrants had been removed from their families .
On Tuesday , the UN called on the US to `` immediately halt '' the separations .
When asked whether it was `` absolutely necessary '' to separate children from their parents , Mr Sessions replied in the affirmative .
Speaking to conservative radio host Hugh Hewitt on Tuesday , he argued that many US children are taken away from their families if their parents are serving prison sentences .
Mr Sessions said migrant children were `` being well taken care of '' .
`` It 's certainly not our goal to separate children , but I do think it 's clear , it 's legitimate to warn people who come to the country unlawfully bringing children with them that they ca n't expect that they 'll always be kept together , '' America 's top law officer said .
In early May , Mr Sessions announced that anyone found crossing the border illegally would be prosecuted and face possible separation from their children .
Previously , those crossing the border illegally for the first time were often charged with a misdemeanour offence , before often being released to face a court hearing . Most never turned up for those hearings , say Trump administration officials .
The UN Human Rights Office 's spokeswoman Ravina Shamdasani criticised the policy on Tuesday and said that several hundred children , some as young as one , appeared to have been affected .
`` The use of immigration detention and family separation as a deterrent runs counter to human rights standards and principles , '' she said .
`` The child 's best interest should always come first , including over migration management objectives or other administrative concerns . ''
US Customs and Border Protection has confirmed that more than 650 children were separated from parents at the border over a fortnight in May .
US Ambassador Nikki Haley responded by accusing the UN of `` hypocrisy '' and said that `` neither the United Nations nor anyone else will dictate how the United States upholds its borders '' .
President Donald Trump has tried to shift blame for family separations , claiming they were caused by bad legislation passed by Democrats .
However , a fact check by the Associated Press news agency found there was no law requiring families to be separated at the border and that it was a new policy from the Trump administration .
But the problem of children ending up in border immigration holding centres is not one that started with the current US administration .
Jon Favreau , a speechwriter for President Barack Obama , recently tweeted photos of young people being held in a chain-link fence enclosure at a facility in Texas , using the images to excoriate Mr Trump .
Mr Favreau apparently did not realise the images were taken in 2014 when his former boss , Mr Obama , was president .