Sen. Ted Cruz warned the administration Wednesday that it needs to stop even planning for an eventual amnesty for illegal immigrants , saying a federal judge ’ s broad injunction means it would be illegal for the Homeland Security Department to spend any money on President Obama ’ s immigration plans .
The Texas Republican also said Judge Andrew S. Hanen ’ s ruling late Monday undercuts the basis of Senate Democrats ’ ongoing filibuster to block homeland security spending , which the president ’ s allies have launched to try to defend the White House ’ s immigration policies .
The warning to Mr. Obama to stop spending money on the amnesty opens the door for another potential fight between Mr. Obama and the Republican-controlled Congress and could leave the president open to another legal challenge as well .
“ The district court ’ s order was abundantly clear : The federal court enjoined any and all aspects of the illegal amnesty order , ” Mr. Cruz said . “ If the Department of Homeland Security continues moving forward , that on its face is in violation of a federal court injunction . ”
Mr. Obama said he would comply with the order but his Justice Department will plan an appeal . The president also insisted that the Homeland Security Department continue its preparations in case a higher court lifts Judge Hanen ’ s injunction . That means advancing on plans to hire hundreds of employees and contractors to process the applications , even though no money is coming in to pay for the expansion .
Mr. Obama planned for Wednesday to be the first day for applications under the amnesty , but Judge Hanen ’ s ruling sent the White House scrambling for another legal strategy , leaving illegal immigrants fuming and prompting a rebuke from the Mexican government , which said it “ regrets ” the court order .
SEE ALSO : Judge cites executive overreach , burden on states in halting Obama amnesty
In a statement Tuesday , the Mexican Foreign Ministry said its citizens who are living illegally in the U.S. have earned the right to stay .
“ These programs are a just remedy for millions of families and have the potential to strengthen the important contributions that Mexican immigrants make to the American economy and society , ” the ministry said .
Mexico vowed to continue providing its citizens who are living illegally in the U.S. with documents so they will be ready if Judge Hanen ’ s order is lifted and the amnesty goes into effect .
Immigrant rights activists in the U.S. still held application workshops Wednesday , though the message was far less upbeat than what they anticipated two days earlier .
“ While anti-immigrant forces are trying to throw up roadblocks , here in New York we are moving forward to prepare the 300,000 individuals who would benefit from this relief , ” said Steven Choi , executive director of the New York Immigration Coalition .
Spanish-language network Univision said it would proceed with its plans for blanket coverage of the amnesty , but instead of focusing on the application process , analysts said the stories were politically devastating to Republicans hoping to win over Hispanic voters .
Jorge Ramos , Univision ’ s nightly news co-anchor , posted on Twitter after Judge Hanen ’ s decision calling the federal court ruling a political issue for Hispanic voters : “ The Texas decision clearly defines who is against immigrants in the U.S. Latino voters will remember ; 2016 is not that far away . ”
Activists predicted an eventual court victory , though there was no word from the Obama administration on whether it would ask a federal appeals court to stay Judge Hanen ’ s order or go ahead with a full appeal , which would take more time . White House press secretary Josh Earnest said that decision will be made in the next several days .
Mr. Obama ’ s amnesty would apply to more than 4 million illegal immigrants in two categories . Most of those who qualify are illegal immigrant parents of U.S. citizens or legal permanent residents , and a much smaller number are Dreamers , or illegal immigrants who were brought to the U.S. as children . Mr. Obama created a deportation amnesty for Dreamers in 2012 but expanded it in November .
Judge Hanen ruled , in a lawsuit brought by Texas and 25 other states , that the amnesty for parents and the expanded amnesty for Dreamers was illegal because the president didn ’ t follow a law requiring him to solicit public comment before making a major policy change . Judge Hanen said Mr. Obama was not using its powers of “ discretion , ” as the administration claimed , but rather writing laws himself “ from scratch . ”
The judge said he stopped at the point where Mr. Obama ’ s actions violated the law , and he never had to decide whether the moves also violated the Constitution .
Rep. Steve King , an Iowa Republican fighting the president ’ s actions , said Judge Hanen ’ s ruling strengthens the Republican argument against providing funds for the Homeland Security Department .
“ Now it becomes even more clear that the Senate Democrats who are trying to block this by protecting the president — they ’ re the ones who are saying they ’ re not interested at all in their oath to defend the Constitution , ” Mr. King said .
Congress is on a weeklong recess from Washington with a Feb. 27 deadline looming to fund the Homeland Security Department for the fiscal year . Democrats had said they hoped Republicans would hear from worried constituents and retreat from their demand that the funding be coupled with language halting the president ’ s 2012 and 2014 amnesties .
But Mr. King said what he has heard back home supports the Republicans ’ position , and Judge Hanen ’ s ruling will strengthen their resolve even more . He said Mr. Obama ’ s decision to follow the judge ’ s ruling was “ a milestone ” moment that further undercuts Democrats ’ objections .
Mr. Obama , though , has promised to veto the spending bill if it halts his immigration actions , and the White House remained firm in its stance Wednesday . White House spokesman Josh Earnest also said the Homeland Security Department is pressing ahead with preparations despite the court order .
Those preparations include hiring 1,000 employees and contractors to process the illegal immigrant parents ’ applications at a facility in Crystal City , Virginia . Congress has not appropriated money for the amnesty , but the administration argues that the agency running the program , U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , is funded by fees from applications , which means it has its own money .
The agency had been counting on fees from the amnesty applications to help recoup money already spent , but with those applications on hold it ’ s unclear what the administration will do .
Judicial Watch , a conservative public interest legal group , asked Congress last week to order an investigation into those preparations , arguing that if Congress hasn ’ t approved money for the amnesties the administration could be violating another federal law that specifically prohibits spending when Capitol Hill hasn ’ t given its OK .