WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama announced Thursday that millions of illegal immigrants will gain protections from deportation , bypassing Congress and unleashing unpredictable political and economic forces .
The plan will give more than four million illegal immigrants the chance to apply for work permits and a temporary reprieve from deportation . People who have been in the U.S. for at least five years and are parents of citizens or legal permanent residents would be eligible to apply . The White House said nearly a million more could benefit through other new or expanded programs . The president also is narrowing the group of people who would be subject to deportation , in what the White House said was an effort to focus enforcement resources on gang members , serious criminals and those who crossed the border after Jan. 1 , 2014 .
“ What I ’ m describing is accountability—a common-sense , middle ground approach : If you meet the criteria , you can come out of the shadows and get right with the law . If you ’ re a criminal , you ’ ll be deported , ” Mr. Obama said in describing his executive action .
Republicans criticized the move as presidential overreach . “ The action he ’ s proposed would ignore the law , would reject the voice of the voters , and would impose new unfairness on law-abiding immigrants—all without solving the problem , ” said Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R. , Ky. ) .
Mr. Obama said his move was well-grounded in law and precedent and challenged Republicans to pass a bill if they don ’ t like it . He noted contributions immigrants make to the nation , and said it was neither realistic nor desirable to deport all 11.3 million undocumented immigrants .
He also rejected accusations that his policy amounts to amnesty , and said it would rightly deport those who represent real threats . “ Felons , not families . Criminals , not children . Gang members , not a mom who ’ s working hard to provide for her kids , ” he said . “ We ’ ll prioritize , just like law enforcement does every day . ”
Mr. Obama ’ s plan contained only minor benefits for businesses that crave more visas for foreign workers and which have lobbied unsuccessfully for action in Congress . A new program will expand immigration options for foreign entrepreneurs who meet certain criteria . But White House officials said they opted against a plan , favored by high-tech companies , to make visas available from those unused in prior years , after concluding they couldn ’ t justify it legally .
By giving work papers to millions of illegal workers , Mr. Obama ’ s plan could affect businesses in unexpected ways , enabling workers to seek new jobs and higher wages to the benefit of some business sectors more than others . Some in agriculture , for example , worried that affected workers would leave for other sectors .
A 1986 law , which offered legal status to nearly 3 million undocumented immigrants , had an almost immediate labor-market impact , with many low-wage workers moving to other jobs that pay better .
Senior administration officials said the legal justification for Mr. Obama ’ s plan was based on the principle of prosecutorial discretion—there are insufficient resources to target all 11.3 million illegal immigrants , so the administration can assert priorities .
Advocates for immigrants , who lobbied Mr. Obama to act without waiting for approval from lawmakers , planned celebrations and rallies across the country . A crowd gathered outside the gates of the White House shouting , “ Si se pudo ! ” or “ Yes we could ! ” in Spanish . In an East Los Angeles immigrant enclave , people were tuned in to Spanish-language television at mom and pop shops . Univision offered simultaneous translation of the president ’ s speech into Spanish .
“ I feel like everything I did now is paying off , ” said Martha Sanchez Almaraz , of Shakopee , Minn. , who advocated for the change and stands to benefit from it . Two of her three children are U.S. citizens . “ Sometimes , I felt like this would never happen . ”
As a candidate , Mr. Obama had vowed to make an immigration overhaul a priority in his first year . That didn ’ t happen . He pushed for legislation as his second term opened , but a bipartisan bill that passed the Senate died in the GOP-run House .
Now , with two years left in office , Mr. Obama has turned to unilateral action . But the new protections in the executive action are temporary and the entire policy could be reversed by a future president .
Republicans in Congress have been looking for ways to block implementation of the Obama policy . Many have suggested using legislation that must pass by Dec. 11 , needed to keep the government funded , as a vehicle for enacting limits on Mr. Obama ’ s policies .
That idea hit a roadblock Thursday when the House Appropriations Committee said that Congress can ’ t defund the primary agency involved in Mr. Obama ’ s plan , U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , because it is self-funded by fees . In fact , the agency could continue operating even if the rest of the government shut down .
President Reagan signed a law making sweeping immigration changes . President Obama is taking executive action . What are the differences in their plans ? WSJ ’ s Jason Bellini has # TheShortAnswer .
Some GOP lawmakers favor filing a lawsuit , challenging the constitutionality of Mr. Obama ’ s action . Others suggested potentially withholding funding for other parts of the president ’ s agenda .
Mr. Obama ’ s action raised the question of whether immigration legislation was now dead for the rest of his term—as GOP leaders said his unilateral action would “ poison the well ” in working with Congress—or whether it created new pressures for lawmakers to revisit the issue .
Some lawmakers said Congress may respond to Mr. Obama by renewing efforts to pass legislation , likely in piecemeal fashion , as many Republicans have advocated . “ Congress needs to re-establish its authority in this , ” said Rep. Mike Simpson ( R. , Idaho ) . “ Ultimately , we ’ ve got to solve the problem , so why not just start doing it ? ”
Sen. Chris Murphy ( D. , Conn. ) said the president ’ s actions are “ a forcing mechanism . Republicans can sit down and negotiate with us tomorrow to make this executive action last all of a few weeks . ”
The executive action satisfies few priorities of business groups , which are now regrouping . Mr. Obama ’ s new policy will allow companies to employ certain workers who are waiting for their visas to clear , and it will expand a program that helps foreign students who have graduated and are awaiting work visas . Unions complained about both provisions , but they fall well short of legislative changes that business wants : more legal visas for high-skilled and low-skilled workers .
“ Republicans will have an opportunity in the next Congress to put forward bills to address our dysfunctional immigration system , ” said U.S. Chamber of Commerce spokeswoman Blair Latoff Holmes .
The most controversial part of the plan is a new “ deferred action ” program , which gives a temporary reprieve from deportation and the chance to apply for work permits . Parents of U.S. citizens and permanent residents will be eligible for the program . To qualify , they will have to undergo a background check and pay application fees .
In addition , the administration is expanding criteria for an existing program that gives the same benefits to young people brought to the U.S. illegally as children , sometimes called Dreamers , making about 270,000 people newly eligible .
However , senior administration officials said they couldn ’ t legally justify giving shelter to the parents of these young people . They said that Congress had recognized the importance of the relationship between children and their immigrant parents , in that citizens are able to sponsor their parents for green cards . But there is no such justification for the parents of Dreamers , who have no legal status of their own , they said .
For similar reasons , they said , they considered but didn ’ t create a special program for farm workers .
“ It ’ s a bittersweet moment for us , ” said Felipe Sousa-Rodriguez , a Brazilian immigrant who was raised in Florida and has legal protections under the existing program . “ Many people who got us to this point won ’ t have the relief of knowing their parents are protected from deportation . ”
The plan also makes changes to the enforcement regime . Under newly crafted guidelines , gang members , those with serious criminal convictions and people who crossed the border after Jan. 1 , 2014 , will top the list of priorities for deportation . People with only minor immigration violations or traffic convictions , but no other offenses , will no longer be targeted , officials said .
It wasn ’ t clear whether deportations , which have hit record numbers under Mr. Obama ’ s tenure , would drop under the new policy . Most of the people deported in recent years would have qualified as priorities for deportation under the new rules .
The president was also replacing the Secure Communities program , which mandates that local law enforcement detain illegal immigrants and notify federal authorities . Under the new program , immigration enforcement officials will be notified , but people wo n't be held for any extra time .