After talking it over with John Boehner last night , Joe Biden says he 's pretty confident that House Republicans will be able to pass a consensus immigration reform bill .
According to Nancy Pelosi , she believes Republicans will adopt a reasonable position on immigration reform that most if not all Democrats will ultimately support .
In his State of the Union address , President Obama was much less critical of House Republicans for stalling immigration reform -- `` Republicans and Democrats in the Senate have acted , I know that members of both parties in the House want to do the same '' -- than for allowing emergency unemployment benefits to lapse -- `` this Congress needs to restore the unemployment insurance you just let expire for 1.6 million people '' -- or for attacking healthcare reform -- `` let ’ s not have another 40-something votes to repeal a law that ’ s already helping millions of Americans like Amanda . The first 40 were plenty . ''
Suddenly immigration reform does n't look nearly as comatose as many observers , including myself , believed it was just a few weeks ago . So the question of the hour is , What will the price of resuscitating it be ? And I 'm not sure Democrats have thought through whether they 're ready to accept the price Republicans might settle on .
At the Washington Post , Greg Sargent has been unspooling the verbal contortions pro-reform Republicans must resort to when they discuss their reform principles and particularly the issue of 11 million undocumented immigrants .
It all turns on the term conservatives hate : “ special pathway to citizenship. ” There is a way Republicans could embrace legalization that Dems could ultimately accept . Dems could insist that if Republicans don ’ t want a special pathway to citizenship for the 11 million , then the normal channels to citizenship for everyone must be unclogged . That means removing various currently existing barriers to green cards ( which start the path to citizenship ) for those who would be sponsored by employers or family members . Reformers believe you can get to citizenship for many of the 11 million this way .
Presumably Democrats would never agree to an immigration reform bill that immigrants themselves believe would make their lives more difficult -- so the worst possible outcome here is probably that nothing happens at all . No bill .
But right now , the best possible outcome hinges on this bizarre metaphysics of guaranteed citizenship .
Nebulous wording and wiggle room is where a lot of politics happen , and its totally possible that this all comes down to framing a picayune technical dispute over how and when the 11 million end up becoming citizens as the difference between amnesty and not amnesty .
But it 's also possible that Republicans will make legalization precluding citizenship , or making citizenship effectively unattainable , their final offer . And I 'm not sure Democrats and advocates have adequately grappled with the bind that would place them in . Obviously it would be a major negotiating failure for reformers to entertain an idea like this publicly . And it would be a genuinely unjust outcome in the sense that the 11 million would be treated secondarily to the rest of their fellow taxpayers under the law . And it would be a sub-optimal political outcome for the Democrats ' demographic politics .
For all these reasons , reformers have typically refused to go there .
Until very recently . When CBS News asked Biden about this issue on Wednesday morning , he cracked open the door . `` We still think by far and away the preferable route to go is citizenship , '' he said . `` We don ’ t want two-tier people in America , those who are legal but not citizens and citizens . ''
Which perhaps explains why AFL-CIO president Richard Trumka slammed it shut Wednesday afternoon , warning that unions would walk away if party leaders sanctioned a deal along those lines .
“ Without citizenship , it ’ s a nonstarter because you can ’ t fix a broken immigration system and create a vast class of millions of people living in the community and working in our workplaces without citizenship . You can ’ t do that . They have no rights , ” Trumka said .
That is the principled concern here . But in human terms , would actual immigrants ( and their citizen children ) prefer no bill at all to a bill that at least lets them work and live freely in the U.S. in perpetuity ? Particularly if they could turn right around and begin organizing for a fight over the singular issue of guaranteed citizenship in 2016 and beyond ?
I do n't think you can poll questions like that accurately . If you can , I have n't seen it . But I have seen and known plenty of people living in fear of deportation , and many of them would welcome relief from that fear . Which means the question for Democrats would be whether the principle of equal treatment , and the cynical fruits of guaranteed citizenship , trump the actual wishes of the people they 're tying to help .