Democrats are bracing for a fierce fight over immigration on Capitol Hill if Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonClinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' Krystal Ball : Potential Ocasio-Cortez endorsement of Sanders would be ' a no-brainer ' Trump asked Australian leader to help look into Mueller probe 's origins : report MORE wins the White House on Nov. 8 .
Clinton has promised to send a comprehensive immigration reform bill to Congress within her first 100 days in office if elected , and Hispanic groups plan to make sure she keeps her word .
Sen. Charles Schumer Charles ( Chuck ) Ellis SchumerSchumer : Trump 's reported Russian meddling remarks among 'most disturbing things ' yet Senate Democrats say top NRA officials knew about Kremlin ties Office of Director of National Intelligence not planning to release whistleblower complaint MORE ( D-N.Y. ) , who stands to become the new Senate majority leader if Democrats win control of the upper chamber , has also staked out immigration reform as a top priority , though he won ’ t discuss timing .
But the prospect of a battle on immigration reform is causing jitters among Senate Democrats .
The party must defend 25 seats in the next election cycle , including seats in Republican-leaning states such as Indiana , North Dakota , West Virginia , Missouri and Montana — all of which Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE seems likely to win .
Vulnerable Democrats facing reelection in 2018 know that Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison ( Mitch ) Mitchell McConnellOvernight Defense : Dems subpoena Giuliani for Ukraine docs | DOJ says Trump contacted foreign countries over Russia inquiry | Top Armed Services Republican Thornberry to retire | Milley sworn in as top general ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff US sanctions Russian individuals for interference in 2018 elections MORE ( R-Ky. ) will seek to use an immigration reform bill against them .
“ McConnell will be on the immediate hunt to win back the Republican majority , and the 2018ers will be gun-shy out of the gate , ” said one senior Senate Democratic aide .
“ They ’ re worried about what can get done before 2018 . They ’ re already freaking out . ”
The other big piece of legislation many see as coming down the pike if Clinton is elected is an infrastructure investment package .
While liberal and centrist Democrats broadly support a push for infrastructure spending , some Democrats would rather see Clinton emphasize that issue over immigration . They say they want her to focus on jobs and the economy instead of becoming embroiled in a bitter , partisan fight over immigration reform — which they also argue could make an infrastructure push more difficult .
“ You have only a couple of bites at the apple in your honeymoon , ” the Democratic aide added , referring to the first hundred days of the new administration .
“ Getting something done that can pass the House like an infrastructure bill is a benefit to the 2018ers . That will be at the front of everyone ’ s mind , ” the source said . “ They ’ ll be worried about passing immigration reform . ”
Clinton ’ s campaign staff says she is equally committed to moving an infrastructure investment package and immigration reform in the first few months of the priority and doesn ’ t see it as an either/or proposition .
“ In terms of big legislative items , she has said she wants to prioritize comprehensive immigration reform and an infrastructure jobs package in the first hundred days , ” said Clinton campaign spokesman Brian Fallon .
“ Both of those issues are things that she ’ s discussed all the way through from the primary to the general . They are priorities that are consensus proposals that have strong support in the country , and thirdly they are both things that in a normal environment Republicans in the past have been inclined to support , ” he added .
Fallon noted that Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanDemocrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Three-way clash set to dominate Democratic debate Krystal Ball touts Sanders odds in Texas MORE ( R-Wis. ) in concept supports both infrastructure investment and immigration reform .
“ If she wins , it will be in the best interests of Republicans to want to work on those things since they are consensus proposals , ” he said .
Clinton and other Democrats pushing immigration reform are betting that Republicans will conduct a post-election analysis — similar to the report produced after Mitt Romney lost to President Obama in 2012 — that will find they need to improve the party ’ s standing among Hispanic voters .
That , they think , will give Ryan and other Republican leaders strong incentive to work with Democrats on immigration reform instead of turning it into a partisan fight to knock off vulnerable red-state Democrats in 2018 .
“ I would expect if Hillary Clinton is successful , Republicans will again face a scenario similar to the 2012 aftermath where they penned an entire autopsy saying they needed to get right with key constituencies , including by enacting comprehensive immigration reform , ” Fallon said .
Schumer told NBC ’ s John Harwood in an interview this week that he thinks both immigration reform and an infrastructure package can pass in the new Congress .
He said both policies come to mind because they are backed by Clinton , Ryan and himself .
Schumer predicted that “ mainstream conservatives in the Senate and House ” will tell “ the hard right , ” who are staunchly opposed to immigration reform , to “ go take a hike ” if they try to quash reform .
Schumer , however , is staying away from getting into any details on timing and what the bill might look like until after he knows if Democrats will have a Senate majority — and how big it is .
“ We ’ ll wait and see . These are all the conversations that happen in a transition or early next year . We ’ re not going to speculate one way or the other , ” said a Senate Democratic aide .
The Senate approved comprehensive immigration reform legislation in 2013 with 68 votes . Every Senate Democrat backed it , including vulnerable members , some of whom were defeated in 2014 when the party lost its majority . Thirteen Republicans also voted for the package .
But the bill died in the GOP-controlled House when then-Speaker John Boehner John Andrew BoehnerIs Congress retrievable ? Boehner reveals portrait done by George W. Bush Meadows to be replaced by Biggs as Freedom Caucus leader MORE ( R-Ohio ) refused to bring a companion measure to the floor .
Some Democrats question whether the politics of the issue have changed after the emergence of strong anti-immigrant sentiment in the Republican presidential primary .
Trump won the GOP nomination by pledging to build a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border and taking a much harder stance against illegal immigration . He reiterated in Wednesday ’ s debate that giving illegal residents a path to citizenship would be unfair to millions of people who have waited in line to enter the country legally .
There is also skepticism about whether Ryan , who some think could be a White House contender himself in 2020 , would schedule votes on immigration reform — especially a package that includes a path to citizenship , as Clinton wants .
Ryan ’ s office said Friday that he hopes he won ’ t be working with Clinton next year .
“ Our focus right now is on defeating Democrats including Hillary , ” said AshLee Strong , Ryan ’ s spokeswoman .
Grover Norquist , the anti-tax activist who is close with Republican leaders and has backed immigration reform , predicts that it will be very difficult to pass immigration reform next year because Republicans don ’ t trust Clinton .
“ Just because there just is n't the trust , it 's awfully tough to do this thing , '' he said . `` Comprehensive [ reform ] is when you at least trust the other guy enough that when you walk out the door everything will get done , ” he said .
Brent Wilkes , the national executive director of the League of United Latin American Citizens , which supports comprehensive immigration reform , said that former Sen. Ken Salazar ( D-Colo. ) , who is heading Clinton ’ s transition team , has promised advocacy groups that the issue will be a top priority .
He acknowledged , however , that advocacy groups feel they need to reach out to white working-class voters who back Trump to repair the damage they feel this year ’ s divisive debate has done to their cause .
While Trump is trailing in the polls in several moderate Senate battlegrounds this year , such as New Hampshire and Pennsylvania , he is doing well in red states where Senate Democrats face reelection in 2018 , such as Indiana and Missouri .