In a statement Thursday , Obama conceded the bill wasn ’ t perfect . Obama does n't get all he wanted
The Gang of Eight and the White House clashed repeatedly in the final week of the immigration reform debate , as a fundamental disagreement over running up the Senate vote led the administration to resist key changes .
The White House grudgingly accepted the border security deal with Republicans , and pushed back at efforts this week to make additional concessions that might have secured more GOP support for the overall bill , according to senators and congressional aides involved in the talks .
The conflict underscored the extent to which President Barack Obama didn ’ t get all of what he wanted in the Senate bill , as negotiators agreed to a series of compromises aimed at keeping his top domestic priority advancing through Congress .
The biggest tradeoffs involved border security and the pathway to citizenship for the nation ’ s 11 million undocumented immigrants .
The Gang of Eight agreed to “ militarize ” the Southern border , including spending $ 30 billion on 19,000 additional border control agents — even though the administration said for months that it didn ’ t need more manpower on a border that it already considered secure .
The negotiators also bucked the White House by linking the legalization program to enforcement benchmarks , hiking the fines on undocumented immigrants , lengthening their wait for a green card , tightening their access to government benefits , and shifting to a point system for legal immigration .
In a statement Thursday , Obama conceded the bill wasn ’ t perfect .
“ The bipartisan bill that passed today was a compromise . By definition , nobody got everything they wanted . Not Democrats . Not Republicans . Not me , ” Obama said . “ But the Senate bill is consistent with the key principles for commonsense reform that I — and many others — have repeatedly laid out . ”
The Senate Democrats ’ determination to protect the path to citizenship — and attempt to line up almost 70 votes behind it — forced tradeoffs that resulted in a more conservative take on reform than Obama initially wanted .
The legislation now moves onto the House , where Republicans supporters will attempt to convince their party to accept the proposal by arguing that it ’ s moved far from what the White House first sought . This public relations fight could be central to whether the bill gains House traction and what further compromises may be needed to muscle immigration reform into law .
“ I can promise you that this is not Obama ’ s bill , ” said Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) , a member of the Gang of Eight . “ It has triggers , it has border security I could have never dreamed of . It had triggers tied to the pathway citizenship to border security . It has a more legal immigration than the AFL-CIO , Obama would have wanted . This is anything but Obama ’ s bill . ”
Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) said the bill keeps faith with the president ’ s principles , but “ it is a little more centrist . ”
“ The influence of Republicans is clear , but we needed to pass a bill , ” Schumer said . “ The basic concepts have to stay the same . There will be no bill without a path to citizenship , for instance . None . ”
But conservatives who opposed the bill see it as little more than a Democratic wishlist engineered by Schumer and the White House .
“ It is fundamentally President Obama ’ s bill , ” said Sen. Jeff Sessions ( R-Ala. ) . “ Yes , this is a bill the White House blessed , a process the White House has blessed and a result the White House is very pleased with and they are anxious to see it become law . But it will not . ”