While the authors of the newly released Senate immigration bill touted its multibillion dollar investment in border security , critics are seizing on what they describe as a major loophole -- giving the government `` discretion '' to choose when to enforce immigration laws .
The union representing Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents has long complained that the Obama administration has made their job harder by preventing agents from detaining and deporting select illegal immigrants . They had petitioned members of the so-called `` Gang of Eight '' -- the lawmakers writing the immigration bill -- to address those concerns in the package .
But , in a letter obtained by FoxNews.com , National ICE Council President Chris Crane said `` this legislation again does nothing to resolve that . ''
The letter was sent Tuesday to Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , a key member of the Gang of Eight , shortly before the legislation was formally released . Crane thanked Rubio for meeting with him , a meeting he had long sought , but complained that the bill did not address his concerns .
`` In fact , it appears that the security components it does contain focus mostly on the exterior , and rely on the discretion of DHS , even though DHS is in federal court right now for undermining the constitutional rule of law , '' Crane wrote , referring to a lawsuit brought by ICE agents .
The proposal , as emphasized by its co-authors , does aim to invest billions in border security -- both for a security and fencing plan . In a bid to ease conservative concerns , the bill establishes a set of `` triggers '' that would have to be met before illegal immigrants currently in the country can apply for a green card .
Those triggers include steps for the Department of Homeland Security to launch a new border security and fencing plan , and achieve high levels of apprehension along high-risk areas on the Mexican border .
But Crane said the Senate legislation should be held until several major issues are addressed -- including what he described as `` directives '' that release `` dangerous criminal aliens '' back into the community and the Obama administration 's `` dangerous abuse '' of prosecutorial discretion .
The administration has allowed `` prosecutorial discretion '' to let the government focus on deporting high-risk illegal immigrants . Officials have said criminal aliens are generally not being released , and that only low-priority individuals are given a reprieve . The administration also issued a directive allowing some illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. as children to stay .
Critics , though , warn that legalizing the millions of illegal immigrants already in the country without establishing a strict system of interior enforcement will allow the problem to fester all over again .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Ala. , who has been one of the Senate 's biggest critics of the immigration bill , echoed Crane 's concerns .
`` Our interior enforcement needs are almost totally neglected in the Gang 's proposal , '' he said in a statement . `` Alarmingly , the bill leaves intact the single greatest obstacle to immigration reform : the administration 's abuse of prosecutorial discretion to prevent the enforcement of federal law . ''
Sessions is expected to join with Crane and Sen. David Vitter , R-La. , for a press conference on the bill Thursday afternoon .
The bill is scheduled to come up for its first hearing on Friday . Rubio has sided with fellow Republicans in saying the bill should get a thorough review on Capitol Hill .
`` Our immigration system is broken , and the status quo of having 11 million undocumented people living under de facto amnesty will only continue if we do nothing to solve this problem . This bill marks the beginning of an important debate , '' he said .
While the path to citizenship and other provisions draw the most scrutiny from congressional Republicans , the nearly 900-page bill contains a number of other measures -- including a new system of temporary visas for low-skill workers and expanded visas for high-skill workers .
The bill , unlike the recently stalled gun control legislation , comes out of the gate with prominent bipartisan backing . Rubio was one of four Republicans drafting the bill , and some other Republicans have expressed a willingness to consider an immigration overhaul , with the goal of leveraging the immigrant workforce to help the economy and cutting red tape .