I am for immigration reform because I am against allowing 12 million more illegal immigrants into our country . If we do nothing , 12 million more illegal immigrants will come . We must be in favor of reform–smart reform that starts with border security .
What we have now is a lawless border . Current policy is a beacon for more illegal immigrants . The Obama administration ’ s lawless executive orders legalizing people who came here illegally will only encourage more illegal immigration–unless we act now with real , strong , verifiable border security .
I am for immigration reform because what we have now is untenable . I voted against the Gang of Eight ’ s comprehensive immigration reform bill because it did not secure the border first . I will only support reform that has border security first as verifiable and ascertained by Congress , not the president .
My plan will not give the president the authority to simply declare that the border is secure . It will require yearly votes of Congress to ensure the president doesn ’ t get around the law .
My “ Trust but Verify ” plan will ensure that our border is secure . Under my plan , national security and border security will move as the first element of any reform and would require annual votes of Congress to establish that the border is truly secure . No other reform could go forward until this happened .
In addition to increased border security , our nation needs to modernize our visa system . We need to know who comes and goes on travel , student , and other temporary visas . There must be a workable system to ensure that visitors don ’ t use travel visas as a way to enter the country then disappear . This will address the problem of visa over-stayers .
National security has to be a cornerstone to any border security and visa reform initiative . Our nation needs to look back at the September 11th Commission Report and study the recommendations regarding terrorists ’ use of visas to commit acts of violence against America . The 9/11 hijackers used visas to enter the country and to stay here while planning attacks .
Strong border security includes using cutting edge technology . Satellites , physical barriers , screening to bar criminals and terrorists from entry , increased patrols on the border–and yes , surveillance drones–all should be part of a comprehensive plan to physically protect the border . My plan is to take specific measures at the border and then have the Department of Homeland Security Inspector General ’ s Office produce a report to Congress on the progress of border security .
My plan takes border security a step further than anybody else in Congress . Under my plan , Congress will vote every year on border security . If Congress votes that the border is not secure , elements of immigration reform will cease to go forward and visa programs will be slowed . If Congress does not think the border is secure after five years , every element of immigration reform will be stopped .
Our nation is a nation of immigrants . Throughout history , our nation has been flooded with immigrants who have moved here with a flavor for the home country , yet they have assimilated into what we know today as America . That idea , and the American Dream , must be protected and preserved .
Immigrants are drawn to the magnet of free market capitalism here in the United States . Our nation should have open arms to immigrants who want to come her and work hard to make a new life in a free nation . As a libertarian-minded senator , I am attracted to the idea of somebody coming to this country with a couple dollars in his pocket , and then through hard work , make the American Dream a reality .
I do not support amnesty , which is why I don ’ t support our current system with no border security and a blind eye to the problem .
I support legal , not illegal , immigration . We must embrace immigration and immigrants , and we must recognize that our country has been enriched by those who seek the freedom to make better lives for themselves . However , our current system is broken , and we can not move towards reform until our border is truly and fully secure .