Renee Sun ’ s 21-year-old son always wondered why his girlfriend of three months regularly ended her tearful breakup speeches by pulling him close and whispering into his ear , “ Text me . ”
The brief but tempestuous relationship began when the two were students at University of Colorado-Boulder -- he an admittedly naïve engineering student and she a foreign scholar from Mongolia .
She approached him , asked him on a date , took yoga classes with him , and learned about his religion , according to Sun , who asked that her son not be named . In retrospect , Sun and her family believe he was being played .
“ This was a setup that trapped a simple American young man for the benefit of gaining legal status for this woman 's entire family , her mother , and her brother , ” Sun said . “ By finding a victim like my son , they can stay in this country and immediately enjoy all the social benefits . ”
The reason for the parting double message seemed to become clear when Sun ’ s son was arrested and learned his erstwhile paramour had gone to campus police claiming he was stalking her .
Every time he texted her , he unknowingly provided digital evidence to prove her claim . That made her and her family members eligible for the only prize they were ever really after , according to Sun and immigration experts : A green card known to bureaucrats and applicants as the “ U ” visa , which would allow them to stay in the U.S. legally and ultimately gain citizenship .
Immigrants , whether legal or illegal , may apply for the U visa if they are victims of certain crimes , including stalking and domestic violence , and if they help law enforcement in the investigation or prosecution . The U visa , created as part of the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 , allows the alleged victims to remain in the U.S. while assisting law enforcement , and they can then become eligible to adjust to lawful permanent resident status .
According to the Department of Homeland Security , the U visa is in place largely to protect women and children who may be victims of crimes such as human trafficking , domestic violence , sexual assault and other abuse , but are afraid to report the crimes due to factors including the language barrier , cultural differences , lack of knowledge of U.S. laws and deportation fears .
Former Arapahoe County ( Colo. ) District Attorney Michael Steinberg , who now specializes in such cases , said , `` anyone who enters the country illegally and can produce a restraining order or affidavit , even with no hard evidence of abuse , is likely to be approved for a work permit and permanent residency . ''
Steinberg , in a paper posted on his website , notes that accused individuals such as Sun 's son are not allowed to offer Customs and Immigration Services evidence , even if it shows the petitioner has engaged in criminal behavior . The U visa provision even brings to a halt deportation proceedings that may have already been under way , Steinberg said .
A local prosecutor charged Sun ’ s son with stalking , and while the first trial ended in a hung jury , he was convicted on retrial .
“ It has been devastating for my son , our family and the people who know about this relationship and care about my son , ” Sun said , noting the family is considering an appeal .
If it was a con , it was not the first of its kind , say experts . While foreign nationals unquestionably experience domestic violence in America , savvy scammers know that playing the card opens up loopholes to legal residency and even citizenship .
“ Every week we hear from people who have been taken advantage of by fraudsters , ” said Jessica Vaughan , director of policy studies for the Washington-based Center for Immigration Policy . “ It ’ s hard to hear these stories of citizens who are duped and not only have their hearts broken , but often their bank account drained and lose their good name to false accusations of abuse , but is a predictable consequence of giving out green cards to anyone who claims to have been the victim of a crime . ”
The number of people submitting U visa applications to the U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services claiming to be victims of crime has increased dramatically in recent years , rising to 52,666 last year from 24,768 applicants in 2012 . The number is on track to reach nearly 58,000 by year ’ s end .
“ It can ’ t be that there has suddenly been a wave of domestic violence or victimization of immigrants , ” Vaughan said . “ Instead , the advocates for illegal immigrants have realized that these special green card programs are a way to launder the status of many illegal aliens in the absence of a larger amnesty . ”
John Sampson , a retired Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent , who now operates CSI Consulting and Investigations , which specializes in helping U.S. citizens victimized by foreign national visa scams , was an expert witness in the Suns ’ case .
`` If he was harassing her , why did n't she block his number , get a new phone , tell his parents about him , or get a restraining order before a year 's time ? Why subject herself to a year 's long harassment that turned into stalking ? ''
Sampson said claiming to be a victim of stalking , harassment or domestic violence to obtain a U visa is a common scenario . “ Unfortunately , most of the courts and prosecutors are fully unaware of what is going on . They have no idea , ” Sampson said .
The so-called “ domestic violence ” visas are even easier to obtain if the underlying relationship blooms into a marriage , Sampson warned .
Of the more than 450,000 immigrant visas issued on the basis of a marriage to a U.S. citizen each year , nearly 30 percent are fraudulent , Sampson said , citing US ICE statistics .
“ It is these one-sided immigration marriage fraud schemes that cause the most damage to unsuspecting U.S. citizens and their families , ” Sampson said . “ They are abused emotionally , financially , psychologically and , often times , physically . And no one seems to be interested in stopping this heinous crime . ”
All the foreign nationals have to do , Sampson said , is allege they are the victim of domestic violence or abuse , even on the same day of marriage , and then they become a permanent resident alien “ in an instant . ”
Obstacles that normally prevent a foreign national from obtaining a green card – or being deported – are waived for those claiming domestic violence because the foreign national is now the victim , said Sampson .
“ It 's the mother of all ‘ Get Out of Jail Free Cards , ’ ” Sampson said .
In addition to having their hearts broken , U.S. citizens taken in by the scam can have their lives ruined and even be sent to prison . Some have seen their bank accounts emptied by newly-minted resident aliens , who often go straight onto the government dole , Sampson said .
New Jersey resident Elena Maria Lopez claims she was targeted in an immigration marriage fraud scheme , and now runs an advocacy website to educate the public about such scams .
“ The easiest way to get a quick green card is by claiming domestic violence against your American spouse , ” Lopez said . “ Making such unsubstantiated , uninvestigated allegations can help you bypass background checks and is almost a guaranteed green card for foreign nationals that would 've been flagged on many other levels . ”
While immigrants are often eligible for pro bono legal help , including immigration fraud , no such help is available to U.S. citizens and legal permanent residents scammed by immigrants for legal status , Lopez said .
Dani Bennett , spokesman for ICE ’ s Homeland Security Investigations , said the agency places a high priority on investigating identity and benefit fraud .
“ These types of fraud pose a severe threat to homeland security and public safety because they create a vulnerability that enables criminals and other nefarious actors to gain entry and remain in the United States , ” Bennett said .
In 2015 , Homeland Security Investigations arrested 873 individuals on federal criminal charges related to benefit fraud and another 1,282 individuals on federal document fraud charges , Bennett said .
There ’ s no doubt there are true victims of domestic violence , and the Violence Against Women Act , initially signed into law in 1994 , has been key in getting the abused much-needed protection , said Claude Arnold , a retired U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement special agent in charge of Homeland Security Investigations .
“ This is a tough situation , ” Arnold said . “ You want to have the law protect domestic violence victims , yet the law also creates another vulnerability in our immigration system that is exploited by fraudsters . ”