WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Several Democratic senators are uncomfortable with President Barack Obama ’ s decision to use executive action to make immigration reform , raising the possibility of open , bipartisan resistance to his plan .
U.S. President Barack Obama delivers remarks at a `` ConnectED to the Future '' conference with school district supervisers and educators in the East Room of the White House in Washington , November 19 , 2014 . ███/Larry Downing
The senators , most from conservative states , objected to Obama ’ s unilateral approach , saying on Wednesday that they preferred Congress to take the lead with legislation . Democrats should try again to work with Republicans in Congress to set reforms in law , many said .
No Democrats went so far as to say they were ready to break with the president , but several were critical of his go-it-alone approach .
“ I wish he wouldn ’ t do it , ” Democratic Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia said . “ I think we ought to work through this process , and with the new elections and the results of the elections , we ought to try in January to see if we can find a pathway to get something accomplished . ”
Republicans , who after midterm election gains will take control of the Senate in January , have uniformly condemned Obama ’ s plan to give deportation relief to as many as 5 million undocumented immigrants . They are considering ways to resist .
Any defections in Obama ’ s own party would make that resistance bipartisan , further isolating the president and potentially making it even more difficult to pass other items on his agenda .
If six or seven Democratic votes in the new Senate joined Republicans , they would have the 60 needed to block the executive order and force Obama into a politically embarrassing veto .
Senator Claire McCaskill of Missouri said she supported comprehensive immigration reform but was concerned by Obama ’ s plan . “ I have to be honest , how this is coming about makes me uncomfortable , I think it probably makes most Missourians uncomfortable . ”
The Senate in June 2013 passed a sweeping , bipartisan immigration bill , but the Republican-led House of Representatives did not take it up . Obama said the Republican refusal to move on immigration was forcing his action , to be announced in a televised address on Thursday .
Democratic Senator Jon Tester of Montana said he would like to see Congress try again .
“ I would prefer the Congress acted , yes , ” Tester said . “ I think it would be great to have the House take up the Senate-passed bill … . That would be a solution to the problem . ”
Manchin also said he would like to see the House tackle the issue again , and “ if that ’ s not going to happen , then we ’ ve got to find another way to work this . ”
A spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner said on Wednesday that Obama ’ s executive action would ruin the chances of Congress acting on immigration .
Senator Angus King of Maine , an independent who caucuses with Democrats , has been supportive of immigration reform but critical of unilateral action by Obama . A spokesman for King said the senator had conveyed his position to the White House earlier this week .
Some Republican conservatives have suggested placing funding restrictions on Obama ’ s plan in a must-pass government spending bill , which could lead to a government shutdown that Republican leaders have vowed to avoid . Other approaches include passing targeted bills to defund implementation of the order .
Republican Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina predicted the instinct for “ political survival ” would force some unhappy Democrats to join Republicans in trying to defund Obama ’ s executive action .
“ There will be some Democrats who will join the effort to limit an overreach of executive authority , ” Graham said .
“ Some will be genuinely upset , a lot of it will be political survival , like in purple and red states , ” he said , referring to the colors commonly used to designate conservative-leaning and swing states .
Moderate Republican Senator Susan Collins of Maine said Obama was making “ a huge mistake from both the political and policy perspective . ”
Asked if any Democrats agreed with her , Collins said : “ I know for a fact that they do . ”