President Trump vowed during the campaign to deport millions of illegal immigrants , but his plans could be short-circuited by a massive backlog and looming judge shortage that threaten to slow deportation cases to a crawl .
While the administration is tackling the case backlog that built up during the Obama administration , the problem won ’ t be easy to fix , according to a recent government audit . The report found it takes almost a year to bring a deportation case ; more than a third of immigration judges are eligible to retire ; and the process of hiring a new immigration judge takes nearly two years .
The findings also suggest the recruitment of new judges is not keeping pace with the increase in caseload .
“ Unless more court slots are filled , those individuals will not be removed from the United States , ” said Art Arthur , a former federal immigration judge who oversaw cases in York Immigration Court in York , Pa .
HOUSE PASSES KATE 'S LAW AS PART OF ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT CRACKDOWN
The Government Accountability Office released the report on June 1 and two weeks later , Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced a third round of new immigration judge appointments , bringing the total to 326 immigration judges currently serving . Expediting the appointment process would be key , since 39 percent of current judges are eligible to retire -- and the GAO found it took an average of 742 days to hire new judges from 2011 through 2016 .
Trump ’ s proposed fiscal 2018 budget also would provide $ 80 million , a 19 percent hike from last year , to hire 75 new immigration judges .
But that ’ s still not enough to cover the cost of the judges needed , argued Ira Mehlman , a spokesman for the Federation of Americans for Immigration Reform , a pro-border enforcement advocacy group .
“ The Trump administration still has to deal with a lot of what it inherited from the Obama administration ’ s catch-and-release policy , ” he said . “ Instead of catch and release , it should have been detain or send across the border . To do that , you need more judges and more courtrooms . ”
The Justice Department ’ s Executive Office for Immigration Review ( EOIR ) , which is responsible for conducting immigration court proceedings and appeals , already has begun to address many of the problems outlined by the audit , Justice Department spokeswoman Kathryn Mattingly said .
“ For example , on April 11 , 2017 , the Attorney General implemented a new , streamlined hiring plan for immigration judges that requires just as much vetting as before , but reduces the timeline , ” Mattingly told ███ .
She said the office is also “ working with its federal partners to make the immigration process more efficient , and ensuring that its resources are allocated in the most effective manner , ” while “ reviewing internal practices , procedures , and technology in order to identify ways in which it can enhance immigration judge productivity without compromising due process . ”
The GAO report looked at the challenges facing the immigration review agency between fiscal 2006 and 2015 and found :
The backlog was steady from 2006 through 2009 , then rose each year starting in 2010 , the first fiscal year under then-President Barack Obama . The backlog in 2006 was 212,000 cases , with a median pending time of 198 days . It dropped slightly in 2009 to 208,000 . But from fiscal 2010 to 2015 , the backlog skyrocketed an average of 38,000 cases per year and reached 437,000 cases , with a median pending time of 404 days .
In February of this year , half the immigration courts had a master calendar scheduled into January 2018 or beyond . Another calendar scheduled immigration hearings into May 2021 , while yet another scheduled hearings into February 2022 .
The number of immigration judges actually increased from 212 in 2006 to 247 in 2015 . The 17 percent increase , though , was not enough to match the 44 percent caseload increase .
Median completion times for the cases went from 43 days in 2006 to 286 days in 2015 . The median case completion time for non-detained cases ( the vast majority of cases ) rose from 96 days to 535 days over the decade . For detainee cases , the time rose from seven days to 28 days .
“ There are so many layers of review and a long vetting process , ” said Arthur , who also previously served as a Justice Department attorney .
Arthur , now a resident fellow in law and policy for the Center for Immigration Studies , told ███ the problem with the backlog is that there is generally no downside for judges who grant a continuance of a case , since that ’ s fewer cases to deal with on a given day .