House Republicans resurrected their border bill Friday morning and said they were on track to pass the rewritten measure later in the day — though with the Senate gone for the summer the vote will be more a political statement than a policy-making exercise .
GOP leaders weren ’ t making any predictions after suffering an embarrassing conservative rebellion on Thursday , which forced them back to the drawing board , but rank-and-file lawmakers said they believed they had finally corralled enough votes to pass it .
“ We will finish the job . We will get it passed tonight , ” said Rep. Matt Salmon , an Arizona Republican who said the changes made overnight were critical to earning enough votes .
The crux of the bill sends hundreds of millions of dollars to immigration agencies to house the illegal immigrant children and families surging across the border , and makes changes to a 2008 law that made it difficult to deport children from Central America .
In order to attract enough support , Republicans also added in another bill that would halt President Obama ’ s non-deportation policy for so-called Dreamers , the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program .
Conservatives had supported both of those policies in general but balked at the way the bills were written , arguing they left too many loopholes that they believed Mr. Obama would use in refusing to enforce the laws .
As of late Friday morning GOP lawmakers were rewriting their bills to try to accommodate those concerns .
The procedural hiccups signal just how touchy the immigration issue is . Many Republicans want to vote on the strongest possible statement opposing Mr. Obama ’ s policies , and they fear his claims of unilateral authority to pick and choose how he enforces immigration laws .
Democratic leaders , meanwhile , have called for the GOP to forgo changes to the law , and instead want to see a bill that only spends money to house and care for the tens of thousands of children and families from El Salvador , Guatemala and Honduras that are crossing the Rio Grande in search of a foothold in the U.S .
But Senate Democrats failed to win enough votes for that plan on Thursday , with even some of their own party colleagues joining Republicans in saying it doesn ’ t do anything to stop the flow of children .
After their failure , Senate Democrats closed the chamber down and sent most lawmakers home for a five-week summer vacation , meaning that regardless of what the House does , nothing can be sent to Mr. Obama ’ s desk .
“ They never should have left in the first place , ” said Rep. Michele M. Bachmann , Minnesota Republican . “ We were here actively engaged on the House side , getting the job done on immigration . They couldn ’ t get the job done in the Senate . ”
Rep. Phil Gingrey , Georgia Republican , said that at the very least the House had avoided a PR “ disaster . ”
“ If we had gone home yesterday , I think that would have been a disaster , ” said Rep. Phil Gingrey , Georgia Republican . “ There is a humanitarian issue and you can ’ t explain all the nuances and connect every dot to all of 7,000 constituents . They are going to read the newspaper and they ’ re going to say , ‘ Oh , those Republicans went home , didn ’ t have a vote and now they are going on a five-week vacation . ’ ”