The Department of Homeland Security says it will once again accept renewal requests from recipients of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program in response to a court order .
`` Until further notice , and unless otherwise provided in this guidance , the DACA policy will be operated on the terms in place before it was rescinded on Sept. 5 , 2017 , '' U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , a part of DHS , wrote on its website Saturday .
The Obama administration began the program in 2012 , which enabled certain young immigrants brought to the U.S. illegally as children to apply for work permits and protection from deportation . As of September , about 700,000 people are currently protected under the program .
Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced in September that the Trump administration would wind down the DACA program . The administration said it was executive overreach and called on Congress to come up with a solution to the status of DACA recipients , also called DREAMers .
But a federal judge in San Francisco halted that plan late Tuesday and ordered the administration to resume processing DACA renewals while a lawsuit against the September decision moves forward .
The statement from USCIS says people who have already been granted deportation deferral under DACA can request renewal , but the agency will not accept new requests from people who have never received deferred action before . If someone 's DACA expired on or after Sept. 5 , 2016 , that person may file a renewal request , the agency says ; people who received DACA that expired before then can file a new DACA request .
President Trump held a meeting with lawmakers on Tuesday about passing new legislation to allow the DREAMers to stay in the country , though he has pushed for funding for a wall with Mexico to be part of any immigration policy overhaul . He also received widespread criticism this past week after reports that he referred to immigrants from certain countries using a vulgar slur .