Republicans hate immigration reform , right ? You know… all those racists and such . Who could blame them ? So they must be the ones torpedoing any real , meaningful immigration reform in Congress , obviously . But a recent WSJ editorial seems to put the brakes on this idea , at least in one important area . What shall we do about all of those immigrants yearning not only for freedom , but for a good job ? Surely the Democrats and their largest backers are champing at the bit to put them all to work , right ? Well… maybe not all of them .
The bipartisan Gang of Eight Senate talks on immigration are continuing , with avowals that a deal is done or close to it . But we also keep hearing that it may not include a flexible guest-worker program rooted in the realities of the U.S. labor market , and that some Republicans may nonetheless go along for the ride . Specifically , the AFL-CIO has been insisting on a guest program for low-skilled workers to start at a mere 10,000 visas a year , and the Senators may agree on as few as 20,000 . These would be the total number of visas for workers across the entire U.S. economy outside of high-tech or agriculture—the likes of construction , hotels and restaurants , landscaping , among so many others . To put that in perspective , in 2011 the U.S. admitted more than two million temporary workers in a work force of 154 million .
Ah… it ’ s our old friends in the AFL-CIO again . They ’ re big supporters of the Democrats and the general progressive agenda . ( And by “ supporters ” I mean the people who finance a significant part of the machine . ) And the Democrats and progressives are big supporters of immigration reform and legalization of “ undocumented workers ” in America . So we ’ re all on the same page , right ?
Not if it means more workers competing legally for positions where the unions can ’ t get all their members on the payroll as it is . This would be a delicious bit of irony if it weren ’ t for the fact that legal , American workers are the ones who lose on either front . They face competition from the outside for lower skill , lower wage jobs , and unions who rob their paychecks to pay for elections selecting representatives who do nothing to strengthen American business . ( And jobs . ) It ’ s pretty much the opposite of a classic win-win .