As Bob Corker ambled down from the Senate chamber last week , he wore a knowing smile : Immigration reform wasn ’ t going to squeak through the Senate – it was going to pass big .
On that Monday , an amendment co-authored by Senator Corker , a Tennessee Republican , and Sen. John Hoeven ( R ) of North Dakota passed a procedural hurdle that signaled that more than a dozen Republicans and several previously shaky conservative Democrats would be there in the end , giving the bill the sweeping , bipartisan backing its authors hoped would power the immigration debate forward in the reluctant House of Representatives .
Leaning in to a crush of reporters , the affable Corker was midway through a riff on the amendment when , apropos of nothing , he paused .
“ I ’ ve enjoyed the work I ’ ve done over the last two weeks on this bill more than anything I ’ ve done in the United States Senate , ” he said with a grin . “ I think it ’ s important work , I ’ m glad to have been involved in it , and certainly gratified by the vote . ”
Rare sentiments , says Ross Baker , a political scientist at Rutgers University in New Jersey , for a member of a legislative body wracked by gridlock . `` Elation is not a common emotion in the United States Senate these days , ” he says .
But Corker , a construction entrepreneur and a former mayor of Chattanooga , Tenn. , draws an electric joy from the pursuit of the deal , and if he has anything to say anything about it , the immigration pact won ’ t be the only major accord Congress strikes before this term is out .
While Washington 's dysfunction almost led him to quit the Senate after one term in 2012 , Corker ’ s dogged effort to broker compromises on a handful of major issues bespeaks a senator who is arguably the body ’ s happiest warrior , plunging into issues from Benghazi to the budget with aplomb .
“ He ’ s passionate , he cares , he ’ s trying to figure out how to get to yes , ” says Sen. Max Baucus ( D ) of Montana , a six-term lawmaker famous for infuriating his fellow Democrats in his search for bipartisan solutions . “ He reminds me of some of the greats who have been up here with us . ”
The Volunteer State ’ s junior senator seems intent on generating plenty of positive momentum all by himself , taking on enough issues to stuff an ordinary member ’ s schedule for an entire career .
On the same day the Senate approved the immigration bill , Corker unveiled sweeping legislation with kindred spirit Sen. Mark Warner ( D ) of Virginia to wind down the government-sponsored housing goliaths , Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . That bill , which would fundamentally reshape the American mortgage industry , has a bipartisan posse of six co-sponsors on the Senate Banking Committee .
Just before the final immigration vote , Corker broke away from the Capitol for lunch with a bipartisan , bicameral group of lawmakers led by Senator Baucus and Rep. Dave Camp ( R ) of Michigan to talk about another mega-goal : a comprehensive rewrite of the nation ’ s tax code .
In previous weeks , he ’ s been among Republican senators who met with Obama administration officials to lay the groundwork for negotiations to head off another calamitous showdown over the federal debt ceiling this fall . ( He delivered his own 200-plus-page plan that would have cut the deficit by $ 4.5 trillion over the next decade , including $ 1 trillion in new tax revenue and a revamp of Medicare , to congressional leaders in the aftermath of the 2012 election . )
And as the top Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , Corker and chairman Bob Menendez ( D ) of New Jersey are trying to reassert some congressional power in the foreign policy realm . Corker will soon travel overseas to investigate pressing American foreign policy issues , but the details of that trip are being withheld for security reasons .
“ The executive branch has taken foreign policy totally over ; Congress plays almost no role , ” Corker says . “ And , candidly , people in Congress like it that way because foreign policy issues don ’ t play so well back home sometimes and you ’ re never held accountable for the decisions that are made . ”
Whether judged by his workload over the past fortnight or in previous legislative successes such as playing a key role in shaping the bailout of America ’ s auto companies or crafting a chunk of the Dodd-Frank financial reform bill with Senator Warner , Corker has been able to cram so much onto his plate by , well , cramming .
Leaning on habits of study and research that helped him build two construction companies into a $ 20 million fortune ( Corker donates the entirety of his Senate salary to the Community Foundation of Greater Chattanooga ) , his days are stuffed with briefings “ nonstop , ” he says .
As a junior member , Corker discovered , the only way to break through the Hill ’ s often-stultifying seniority system and get a seat at the table on pressing problems is to bring more intellectual and policy firepower than everybody else and hope for the best .
When a senator does not have a top committee post , “ the only other way to really be involved is to know more than anybody else about a given topic , ” he says . “ You never know when the timing is going to hit in a such a way that you ’ re going to make a difference . ”
Warner , another executive-minded lawmaker ( he was governor of Virginia ) with a business background , sought out Corker after admiring how the Tennessean assiduously worked on the auto bailout , including opening direct lines of communication with auto executives . The two sat together at President Obama ’ s first inauguration and have been fast friends ever since .
Warner attributes Corker ’ s successes to a chief advantage that those with private-sector backgrounds have over colleagues who are steeped in politics .
“ In politics , you can have a whole successful career where you simply point out what ’ s wrong with the other guy , ” Warner says . “ In business , no matter how good you are at criticizing the competition , if you didn ’ t put out a good product , you didn ’ t sell something , ultimately , you ’ d go out of business . ”
It ’ s not only junior lawmakers who have taken a shine to Corker .
It wasn ’ t an accident that Corker ( or Senator Hoeven , for that matter ) were in the mix on immigration , an issue on which neither has any background , says Professor Baker . The two senators are among a handful of conservatives that Democratic Senate leaders see as practical , fair-minded partners who carry enough weight in their own conference to make other Republicans take notice .
The trust of Democratic leaders like Sen. Charles Schumer ( D ) of New York , with whom Corker worked on the immigration compromise , is doubly impressive considering that Corker has served as member of his own party ’ s Senate leadership team since 2011 .
“ He ’ s a conservative , ” Baker says , “ but you don ’ t have to be a moderate to be a dealmaker . In fact , being a moderate may lessen your value .... Bob Corker is not always ‘ gettable ’ [ to vote for a bill ] . So when he gets drawn into something , people are more apt to notice . ”
“ It turns out in the strange , exotic world of the Senate there are people who are identified as dealmakers even though they may have reliably ideological votes , ” says Baker . “ They are people who turn up at the right time . ”
When Corker was the only freshman Republican senator in the Democratic wave of 2006 , the timing hardly seemed auspicious . He quietly took a seat on the Banking Committee , where he thought his private-sector background would be put to good use . When Democrats obtained a Senate supermajority in the 2008 election , it looked as if nearly all Republicans , much less junior first-term members , would be on the outside looking in for the foreseeable future .
Corker flourished working on the panel ’ s response to the banking crisis and on other issues , but the Washington gridlock that momentarily had been broken by crisis and the unitary control of Congress eventually resumed .
Two years away from his 2012 reelection , Corker says he very nearly decided to pack up and go home . Bitter partisanship and gridlock were making the guy with all the briefing books miserable .
“ If your focus in life is on being productive , ” says Corker , “ when things are not happening ... one has to ask oneself , ‘ Is this worth a grown man ’ s time ? ’ ”
In the end , he decided , there was only one way the Senate could go : up .
“ I think we have talent in the Senate that is oriented toward solving problems . I think we have more of that than people acknowledge , ” he says . “ And second , I would say just the fact that it ’ s been so bad for so long , at some point , people hit the floor and there ’ s momentum in another direction . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ I do think the immigration bill we just passed , and the way that has occurred , can help show that complex issues can be dealt with and that people can do it with a high degree of trust , ” says Corker . “ Right now , there ’ s more momentum in a positive direction than I ’ ve seen in several years in the Senate . ”