Reports that President Donald Trump wants to send 5,000 more troops to the Southern border , at first , come as a shock . It ’ s a startlingly high number . To put it in perspective , NATO recently deployed 4,500 troops in the Baltic nations to deter and repel a Russian tank assault . How many troops could possibly be needed to stave off an unarmed caravan of refugees walking up through Mexico—even if , as Trump and Vice President Mike Pence maintain , with no evidence , “ Middle Eastern ” terrorists are hiding in their midst ?
As might be imagined , this is not a Pentagon initiative . Last week , Secretary of Defense James Mattis ordered a mere extra 800 troops to the border , to augment the 2,000 National Guard personnel sent there last spring , and even that seemed a bit of a sop to Trump ’ s clamoring .
News of a 5,000-troop upgrade , reported in Monday ’ s Wall Street Journal , may reflect a White House wishful dream . “ Planning is still underway , ” a Defense Department spokesman said Monday . “ It remains premature to speculate total numbers or specific forces to be selected to accomplish the requested missions . ”
One Pentagon official further told me that those “ requested missions ” came from the Department of Homeland Security as a list of desired capabilities . “ It is the role of DOD planners to determine numbers ” required for those capabilities , he said .
The Pentagon teems with creative bookkeepers , adept at stretching the “ requirements ” to whatever contours the commander desires .
These capabilities are not the stuff of combat brigades . In a Monday morning tweet about the caravan , Trump warned , “ This is an invasion of our Country and our Military is waiting for you ! ” But the troops—however many they amount to—won ’ t be waiting with machine guns and artillery rockets . Rather , according to a Pentagon statement based on the DHS request , they will be providing support to the 16,000-plus Customs and Border Protection forces . “ Support ” is defined as engineers ( for temporary barriers , barricades , and fencing ) , helicopters and planes ( to move CBP personnel around ) , medical teams , command and control , temporary housing , and personal protective equipment .
When it comes to providing this sort of operational support , the Pentagon teems with highly creative bookkeepers , adept at stretching the “ requirements ” to whatever heights and lengths the commander desires . Recall last summer when Trump was pushing the Pentagon for a military parade in downtown Washington ? Neither Mattis nor the officer corps really wanted to waste their time or money on empty showboating , so , all of a sudden , the estimated cost of the parade swelled from $ 12 million to $ 92 million—too expensive even for Trump , who canceled it . Similarly , if Trump wants to send 800 or 5,000 or 10,000 or however many troops to the Southwestern border , the Pentagon planners will devise a plan that fits the number .
Still , as a retired Army commander told me in an email Monday , “ 5,000 is a lot , ” the size of “ a very heavily augmented brigade combat team… Doable , but will require a lot of resources . ”
Then again , Trump probably doesn ’ t care how many troops are sent , just as he doesn ’ t seem to care whether a “ big beautiful wall ” ever gets built . In his world , saying that something is true matters more than whether it really is true . Still , one wonders how much Mattis grinds his teeth at night . Neither he nor the brass could be happy about providing props and scenery for Trump ’ s Halloween election pageant , in which he drums up scary stories about dark-skinned goblins invading our fair land for the sake of boosting the Republican Party ’ s prospects in the midterms .