One big sticking point has become the visa program for low-skilled , year-round , temporary workers . In February , the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the A.F.L.-C.I.O . reached a compromise that acknowledged the need for a system that would allow businesses to meet their demand for lower-skilled labor , while still protecting American workers .
But the two groups remain divided on the number of visas the new program should offer , said Randel K. Johnson , the chamber ’ s lead negotiator on immigration . The chamber , he said , wants 400,000 visas , while the A.F.L.-C.I.O . prefers a number in the “ very , very low five figures. ” Ana Avendaño , the director of immigration for the A.F.L.-C.I.O. , refused to discuss a specific number , but said “ the whole notion is to create a system that responds to the needs of the economy . ”
The bipartisan group of eight senators is also still debating how to improve E-Verify , the system that employers use to check the immigration status of their workers . A high-tech , biometric identification card was deemed too costly ; instead , the group is considering an enhanced E-Verify system that would allow employers to use photographs to identify job applicants and would let workers provide answers to security questions to help prove their legal work status .
But despite the remaining differences , the eight senators who are in negotiations are continuing to make steady progress toward an overall deal , according to people familiar with the talks . Mr. Obama , who has threatened to push forward with his own legislation if Senate efforts stall , is satisfied with the current pace of talks , White House officials said .
Even if the Senate passes an immigration overhaul later this spring or summer , it still faces an uphill battle in the Republican-controlled House . A group of House Republicans told Speaker John A. Boehner last week that they were close to releasing a set of principles to guide their own legislation .
House Republicans would prefer to tackle an immigration overhaul in several smaller bills rather than one big bill . And many House Republicans want to offer illegal immigrants a legal status that stops short of a pathway to citizenship .
But the momentum that appears to be most evident is the progress among senators on the path to citizenship . No immigration debate has been more contentious over the years than the question of whether , and how , illegal immigrants eventually become citizens .