The Trump administration said it wants to effectively end a decades-old legal settlement that bars long-term detention for immigrant children when families are arrested for trying to enter the U.S. illegally .
Department of Homeland Security and Health and Human Services officials said Thursday that they want to circumvent the so-called Flores agreement , a 1997 court settlement that prevents authorities from detaining children for more than 20 days .
The proposal , announced as a rule change in the Federal Register , signals that officials are looking for ways to detain families together until their immigration cases are decided amid the administration ’ s efforts to crack down on illegal border-crossers .
The proposal is almost certain to face legal challenges . The administration earlier this year asked a federal judge in California to let officials detain families together beyond the 20-day limit and was denied .
Immigration authorities have struggled to adhere to the Flores settlement ’ s terms while trying to impose a zero-tolerance policy that aims to prosecute all adults who cross the southern border illegally .
The new proposal would allow families , most of whom are seeking asylum , to be detained together throughout the duration of their lengthy immigration proceedings . And officials said it would offer protections similar to those outlined in the Flores settlement .
“ Today , legal loopholes significantly hinder the Department ’ s ability to appropriately detain and promptly remove family units that have no legal basis to remain in the country , ” Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said in a statement . “ This rule addresses one of the primary pull factors for illegal immigration and allows the federal government to enforce immigration laws as passed by Congress . ”
The rule would satisfy the basic purpose of the agreement “ in ensuring that all juveniles in the government ’ s custody are treated with dignity , respect , and special concern for their particular vulnerability as minors , while doing so in a manner that is workable in light of subsequent changes , ” the proposal says .
The zero-tolerance policy resulted this year in the separations of children from their families who were arrested at the border . President Trump , facing a widespread outcry , then ordered an end to the separations , sending agencies scrambling to reunite families .
The government has reunited nearly 2,000 once-separated children but is still trying to reconnect almost 500 children whose parents have been deported .
Under Flores , immigrant children must be held in licensed child-care facilities . The government has been unable to obtain such licenses for the two largest family detention centers in Texas and has bed space for more than 3,000 people . A smaller facility in Pennsylvania is licensed to care for children but has room for only about 100 people .
The administration wants to now “ create an alternative to the existing licensed program requirement for family residential centers , so that ICE [ Immigration and Customs Enforcement ] may use appropriate facilities to detain family units together during their immigration proceedings , consistent with applicable law . ”
The proposal is scheduled to be published in the Federal Register on Friday and the public will have 60 days to comment .
The administration ’ s practice earlier this summer of separating children from their parents had sparked rare , forceful pushback from Republicans on Capitol Hill .
House Speaker Paul Ryan ( R. , Wis. ) told reporters Thursday : “ My position ’ s been really clear about this : We should not be separating people at the border. ” He added : “ I believe that ’ s what the administration also agrees…we shouldn ’ t be separating families at the border .. ”
Immigration advocates and others were swift to condemn the proposal .
“ It is sickening to see the United States government looking for ways to jail more children for longer , ” said Omar Jadwat , director of the American Civil Liberties Union ’ s Immigrants ’ Rights Project . “ That ’ s the complete opposite of what we should be doing . ”
Tom Perez , chairman of the Democratic National Committee , said the administration should be working to finish reuniting separated families instead of trying to “ circumvent court limits . ”
Also Thursday , the administration said ICE deported more than 191,000 immigrants between October and the end of June , a 9 % increase from the same time last year . During the Trump administration ’ s first year , 226,199 immigrants were deported , a nearly 6 % decrease from the last year of the Obama administration .
The agency has also made nearly 120,000 arrests , a 16 % increase since last year .
About 55 % of those arrested were convicted criminals , said Nathalie Asher , the ICE official running the agency ’ s enforcement and removal operations . She said the majority of noncriminal immigrants arrested “ came to ICE ’ s attention due to criminal charges . ”