President Barack Obama is facing potential rifts with members of his own party in tough re-election contests as he barrels toward a fall fight with Republicans over his ability to change immigration policies .
If Obama takes the broadest action under consideration — removing the threat of deportation for millions of people in this country illegally — the short-term risks appear greatest for Senate Democrats in conservative-leaning states . Weeks before the November vote , they could find themselves on the hot seat for their views not only on immigration but also on Obama 's use of his presidential powers .
Wary of what could be coming , some of those lawmakers have said Obama should act with caution .
`` This is an issue that I believe should be addressed legislatively and not through executive order , '' said Sen. Kay Hagan , D-N.C. , one of the top targets for Republicans trying to retake control of the Senate .
Sen. Mark Pryor , D-Ark. , another vulnerable incumbent , said in a statement that he also is `` frustrated with the partisanship in Washington . But that does n't give the president carte blanche authority to sidestep Congress when he does n't get his way . ''
A coalition of advocacy groups , in a letter to congressional Democrats on Friday , said any attempts by the party to delay or dilute administrative changes `` will be viewed as a betrayal of Latino and immigrant communities with serious and lasting consequences . ''
Still , Obama looks determined to move forward on his own despite the political risks for Democrats .
He is irritated by House Republicans ' inaction on immigration legislation passed last year by the Senate . The crisis over unaccompanied minors arriving in South Texas does not appear to have deterred him , and the slowdown of arrivals at the border may be shifting the issue away from the spotlight anyway .
Advocates and lawmakers who have talked with administration officials anticipate that he could expand a program that granted work permits and deferred deportation to more than 700,000 immigrants brought illegally to the U.S. as kids . It could be extended to include parents of those children , as well as parents of U.S. citizens , or potentially others — groups that could add up to perhaps 5 million people .
During a news conference this month , Obama was not specific on his immigration plans . He did say that in the absence of congressional action and in order to address the crisis involving unaccompanied youths , he had to shift resources on his own and exercise prosecutorial discretion .
`` I promise you the American people do n't want me just standing around twiddling my thumbs and waiting for Congress to get something done , '' Obama said .
Some GOP leaders worry that opposition to a comprehensive overhaul will harm their party in the 2016 presidential race , where Hispanic turnout is higher than in midterm elections . Hispanics are a fast-growing sector of the presidential electorate and backed Obama overwhelmingly in 2012 .
But Republicans also see a nearer-term chance to translate Obama 's potential executive actions into electoral success in November . Republicans need to win a net of six seats in order to take control of the Senate for the remainder of Obama 's term . The GOP already is all but assured of maintaining control of the House .
As Republicans meet with voters in their districts during the summer break , lawmakers have raised alarms about the scope of Obama 's potential plans . In some cases , they are hearing clamors for impeachment in return .
`` It is up to Congress to actually go back and restrain this guy , '' one voter told GOP Rep. Andy Harris of Maryland at a town hall meeting on the Eastern Shore . Harris had warned that Obama could expand an existing deportation relief program to 4 million or 5 million more people , `` competing with Americans for work . ''
Republicans have tagged Obama as an `` imperial president '' who goes around Congress rather than working with lawmakers , and House Republicans have moved to sue him over it . The prospect of the president making a unilateral move on a contentious issue such as immigration has Republican consultants salivating .
`` President Obama 's executive amnesty would inject adrenaline into an electorate already eager to send him a message of disapproval , '' said Brad Dayspring , communications director for the National Republican Senatorial Committee .
Also problematic for Obama : His apparent plans to act on his own authority come after years of saying , when pressed by Latino interviewers and others , that he did not have the legal justification to proceed without Congress .
`` If , in fact , I could solve all these problems without passing them through Congress , I would do so . But we 're also a nation of laws , '' he said in November . A heckler had interrupted a speech he was giving in San Francisco , prodding him to halt deportations , which have reached record highs on Obama 's watch .
Democratic pollsters argue that any executive action by Obama could give a political boost to Democrats , not just from newly energized Latino voters but from an electorate at large that would welcome any action from gridlocked Washington .
`` It will help get turnout of Latino voters up and reinforce the notion that the president gets things done , '' said Democratic pollster Celinda Lake . `` Voters are so sick of the do-nothing Congress they do n't mind if there 's an imperial president . They would just like someone to get something done about something . ''
© Copyright 2019 The Associated Press . All rights reserved . This material may not be published , broadcast , rewritten or redistributed .