WASHINGTON — President Trump has asked state and local officials to publicly praise Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers , calling efforts to abolish the agency “ dangerous . ”
In a letter issued Monday , Trump asked public officials to applaud the “ sacrifice ” of ICE officers as well as Customs and Border Protection agents .
“ Through letters , public statements , op-eds , resolutions , and events , we can give our voice to our Nation ’ s longstanding tradition of honoring the public servants who protect our communities and our way of life , ” Trump wrote .
He said he wrote the letter because ICE has become a political punching bag , with a number of likely Democratic 2020 hopefuls — including Sens . Elizabeth Warren ( D-Mass . ) and Kirsten Gillibrand ( D-N.Y. ) — urging that the agency be abolished .
“ Tragically , the brave men and women of ICE have recently been subjected to a nationwide campaign of smears , insults , and attacks by politicians shamelessly catering to the extreme elements of our society that desire lawlessness and anarchy , ” Trump said in the letter .
“ These horrendous assaults are no-doubt spurred on by the dangerous ‘ Abolish ICE ’ movement – a movement to abolish our borders entirely , ” the president said .
Trump referenced protests against ICE in Portland , Oregon — in which the protesters had the backing of the city ’ s mayor — and in Louisville , Kentucky .
“ Yet , while anarchist protesters hurl vicious insults at ICE officers in Portland and other disturbing episodes nationwide , those same ICE officers continue to dutifully remove some of the most dangerous and violent individuals from the communities they protect – putting their lives on the line in the process , ” Trump said .
The president said that in fiscal year 2017 , ICE arrested more than 125,000 “ aliens ” with criminal records . He also pointed out how immigration enforcement plays a part in keeping the US safe post-9/11 .
“ We also must not forget the important role that ICE and CBP play in preventing terrorism , ” the president said . “ The attacks were carried out by foreign nationals who exploited our lax immigration laws and defrauded our immigration system in order to murder nearly 3,000 innocent people . ”
Trump was hosting an event later in the day , a “ Salute to the Heroes of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement and Customs and Border Protection , ” at the White House .
He ’ s invited ICE officers , CBP agents and politicians , including Arizona Gov . Doug Ducey , Sen. David Perdue ( R-Ga. ) and Alabama Attorney General Steve Marshall , to take part .