Pressure from companies and trade groups could spell trouble for the bill . Immigration details leak , biz gears up
The business community has long supported the idea of immigration reform — particularly the high-tech sector and the construction industry , which badly need the workers .
What they don ’ t support are some of the specifics leaking out on a new immigration reform proposal expected Tuesday from the Gang of Eight .
Now , companies and trade groups — that have been pressuring the key Senate negotiators — are preparing to unleash their lobbying forces broadly on Capitol Hill in hopes of securing changes to the package .
And that could spell trouble for the bill since any significant change to even a single element could scuttle the delicately reached bargain , leaving final passage of a comprehensive immigration reform bill in serious jeopardy .
“ There are a host of different interests who will want to go to the other 92 senators , ” said veteran lobbyist Tony Podesta , who represents several clients on the issue . “ I think the immigration groups , high-tech community , there are lots of interests that are implicated , the agriculture industry , lots of concerns and interests that will matter a lot to people , to companies that rely a lot on Indian technology consulting companies . ”
When the bill is unveiled , the eight key negotiators are expected to have signed off on the plan . Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) already gave the deal a full-throat endorsement on Sunday ’ s talk shows .
The pressure campaigns that have been going on behind the scenes during negotiations will go public with a growing number of companies and industries over specific provisions in the Senate legislation .
For the past several years , tech companies have pushed lawmakers to overhaul the H-1B visa program , arguing that there aren ’ t enough high-skilled American workers to fill positions and that they don ’ t even have enough visas to bring in foreign workers .
Today , H-1B visas are capped at 65,000 annually , with 20,000 more for those with advanced degrees . Earlier this month , the Homeland Security Department announced it received more visa requests than available for the 2014 fiscal year after just a week of accepting applications .
Several tech lobbyists said they think the Senate Gang of Eight ’ s plan won ’ t increase the number of H-1B visas by nearly enough . Final details of the plan haven ’ t been made public , yet .
“ Tech companies have been the primary driver of reinforcing the need for immigration reform , and now , it looks like their concerns are totally being thrown overboard , ” one tech lobbyist said .
The Senate package is expected to contain a provision that will not allow companies to displace an American worker in the same region and occupation unless the entire number of American workers in that occupation has remained the same or increased . That provision could have a big impact on large companies like IBM , Deloitte and Accenture .