As the City Council prepares to vote on amendments strengthening the city ’ s “ sanctuary ” law , a newly unearthed agreement between Chicago police and federal authorities has some immigrant rights activists concerned .
The agreement — signed by former Supt . Eddie Johnson in April — allows Immigration and Customs Enforcement to “ designate certain employees ” of the Chicago Police Department as “ customs officers . ”
Those officers are “ authorized to enforce the full range of federal offenses ” but are not allowed to “ enforce administrative violations of immigration law , ” according to a copy of the agreement shared with the ███ .
CPD spokesperson Anthony Guglielmi said there are no department employees currently deputized as “ customs officers ” but defended the agreement , saying it allows police to investigate drug trafficking , human trafficking , gangs and financial crimes through Homeland Security Investigations , which is a branch of ICE .
“ Chicago , like many other major cities , has the authority to appoint officers to conduct joint state and federal investigations with Homeland Security Investigations , ” Guglielmi said . “ This is not a partnership in immigration enforcement . ”
But Guglielmi ’ s assurances aren ’ t enough for Rey Wences . A member of Organized Communities Against Deportations , Wences helped craft amendments to the Welcoming Cities ordinance that are up for a full City Council vote Wednesday .
The amendments bar CPD from assisting ICE , Customs and Border Protection and Homeland Security Investigations in enforcing civil immigration operations and requires the department to keep track of every request for assistance it receives .
But Wences said she didn ’ t know about the agreement between CPD and ICE . Neither did Ald . Carlos Ramirez-Rosa ( 35th ) nor Ald . Michael Rodriguez ( 22nd ) , who introduced the amendments in December with Mayor Lori Lightfoot .
“ Police-ICE collaboration is police-ICE collaboration no matter how you paint it , ” Wences said . “ The existence of this agreement ... makes you wonder what other kinds of agreements the city has [ with ICE . ] ”
The agreement “ goes against the spirit of the Welcoming Cities ordinance , ” Rodriguez said .
The mayor ’ s office and ICE officials did not respond to requests for comments Tuesday .
The Homeland Security Investigations office was created in 2010 to handle a range of criminal investigations such as weapons smuggling and child sex tourism .
ICE has routinely insisted Homeland Security Investigations is separate from its Enforcement and Removal Operations , which handles all deportations .
But under the Trump administration , the line between both branches of ICE has blurred .
In 2017 , former ICE acting director Tom Homan told Homeland Security Investigations to increase time spent on worksite raids “ by four to five times . ”
Within two years , Homeland Security Investigations had conducted several high-profile raids across the country , including a raid of seven food processing plants in Mississippi that landed nearly 700 undocumented immigrants workers in detention . ( Almost half of them were released the next day . )
“ While HSI has attempted to legitimize its use of worksite raids by claiming they are criminal investigations , the vast majority of the workers detained are administratively arrested on civil immigration violations , ” reads a 2019 report by the Immigrant Legal Resource Center , the National Immigrant Justice Center , and the National Immigration Law Center .
The same report criticized Homeland Security Investigations for engaging in racial profiling as it targets criminal gangs across the country .
“ It is no longer a secret that HSI agents use the ‘ gang ’ label as a cover for engaging in widespread round-ups of immigrant youth of color , ” the report says .
And in Boston — a fellow sanctuary city — a similar agreement between the local police department and ICE led to widespread criticism after it was revealed officials “ regularly offer information back and forth between the agencies , ” as reported by NPR-affiliate WBUR .
Guglielmi says he doesn ’ t believe those kinds of incidents will happen in Chicago and is confident CPD officers will obey the Welcoming Cities ordinance .
“ Our core focus of this department is to protect every resident of the city . We don ’ t care where you were born , ” he said .
Freddy Martinez , a policy analyst at Open the Government who obtained a copy of the CPD-ICE agreement through an open records request , said , however , there is reason to question cooperation between immigration authorities and sanctuary cities .
“ We know ICE uses deceptive practices to get CPD to cooperate with them on immigration enforcement , with or without their knowledge , ” Martinez said . “ Significant questions remain about why [ CPD ] felt the need to enter into these types of agreements when there are no officers deputized to assist ICE . ”
Carlos Ballesteros and Manny Ramos are corps member of Report for America , a not-for-profit journalism program that aims to bolster Sun-Times coverage of Chicago ’ s South Side and West Side .