Sen. Marco Rubio was the glue that held together the immigration deal in the Senate , helping set the stage for adding tens of thousands of Border Patrol agents to the final deal — but failing to win many of the changes the Florida Republican himself said he needed to see .
The 68-32 vote last week in favor of the bill was a milestone for the Senate and for the immigration debate , but it was even more important for the first-term senator whose political future is inextricably linked with the landmark legislation he helped write and pass .
“ I think the debate has been hard for Marco . It ’ s been a physical strain , an emotional strain , a political strain . Without a doubt , this has not been peaches and cream for Marco , ” said Ana Navarro , a Republican Party strategist from Florida and a Rubio ally .
“ But I actually think his political stock has gone way up in the sense that he ’ s achieved something — he ’ s gotten a major legislative accomplishment under his belt and he ’ s made a difference in this debate , ” she said . “ So you now can ’ t say he ’ s the Republican Barack Obama — a first-term senator who made great speeches . This guy now can say he was a crucial part of getting a very controversial piece of bipartisan legislation through . ”
Mr. Rubio was one of the “ Gang of Eight ” senators — four Republicans and four Democrats — who wrote the immigration bill and defended it against major changes .
The crux of the deal offers quick legal status and work permits to illegal immigrants , regardless of any border security improvements . But it withholds full citizenship rights until the government adds more agents to patrol the U.S.-Mexico border , and creates interior infrastructure such as an entry-exit system at airports and a worker verification system for businesses .
SEE ALSO : Jeb Bush to House lawmakers : Improve and pass Senate immigration bill
Along the way , Mr. Rubio repeatedly found himself on the defensive against critics who said the bill put “ amnesty ” first and security second , and others who said the Florida Republican , in his third year in office , was getting snookered by the Democrats with whom he was working to write the bill .
Last week , ahead of the final vote , the chief of the union representing Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents accused the senator of having “ misled ” him and other law enforcement critics by failing to fix the bill ’ s problems — problems Mr. Rubio acknowledged .
Responding to his critics , Mr. Rubio delivered a broad floor speech Wednesday saying he got involved in writing the bill because it otherwise wouldn ’ t have any provisions for border security . He also said the final deal is better than current law , which isn ’ t being enforced at all .
“ Getting to this point has been very difficult . To hear the worry and the anxiety and the growing anger in the voices of so many people who helped me get elected to the Senate , whom I agree with on virtually every other issue , has been a real trial for me , ” Mr. Rubio said .
“ I realize in the end many of my fellow conservatives will not be able to support this reform , ” he said . “ But I hope you will understand that I honestly believe it is the right thing to do for this country — to finally have an immigration system that works , to finally have a fence , to finally have more agents and E-Verify , and to finally put an end to de facto amnesty . ”
Although he helped sell the bill , which garnered support of 14 of the Senate ’ s 46 Republican members , he didn ’ t fare as well in making the changes that he promised he would try to do .
Heading into the debate , Mr. Rubio said he wanted significant changes , including to border security , to the entry-exit system to check visitors ’ visas , and to the requirement that newly legalized immigrants show they have learned English before they earn green cards .
Mr. Rubio called the English-language loophole “ one of the bill ’ s shortcomings ” and vowed to fix it , and even wrote an amendment to require immigrants to prove English skills , rather than merely sign up for classes , which under the bill is considered acceptable .
The Senate never considered that , nor Mr. Rubio ’ s other amendment to modify eligibility for the Dream Act .
The Senate also ignored the list of nearly two-dozen changes Mr. Rubio ’ s office floated ahead of the debate in a three-page document designed to point out potential flaws and solutions to the bill .
Of those proposed changes , the Senate accepted two in full and several others in part .
Mr. Rubio ’ s main public role in the debate wasn ’ t about amendments or specifics ; it was about selling the measure to a skeptical conservative electorate . As a face of the 2010 tea party revolution , Mr. Rubio had the kind of lingering good will that gave him the opening Sen. John McCain , Arizona Republican and another key bill author , had long since squandered with much of their party .
Mr. Rubio ’ s office said he averaged three or four cable television news appearances a week , appeared on every major nationally syndicated talk radio program — often more than once — and visited smaller shows , too .
He set what pundits said was a record by doing seven Sunday political talk shows the same weekend in April — all five English-language shows and two Spanish-language programs . Mr. Rubio also did four or five Spanish-language interviews a week during the immigration debate .
Ford O ’ Connell , a strategist who worked on the McCain-Sarah Palin Republican presidential ticket in 2008 , said Mr. Rubio managed to help dent some of the worst criticisms from conservative critics , which plagued bills in 2006 and 2007 .
“ Look , he got Rush Limbaugh and some other conservative talking voices to listen to him , and for a while they even sided with him until they dug into the mechanics of the bill , ” Mr. O ’ Connell said , pointing particularly to Mr. Rubio ’ s success in framing existing law as a free pass for most illegal immigrants . “ One of the things he learned very quickly is he set the premise of the debate , which is that our current immigration system is de facto amnesty . ”
A Rasmussen Reports poll last month showed Mr. Rubio ’ s favorability rating had dropped among Republicans by 15 points since February — though he still sits at a rosy 58 percent favorability , and just 16 percent view him unfavorably .
Mr. O ’ Connell said Mr. Rubio has suffered in the short run and may have damaged himself with the Republican primary electorate in some key early-voting states in 2016 , such as Iowa and South Carolina .
But Mr. Rubio now polls better among all voters , meaning he may have helped move himself out of the category of Republican star and become more of a viable candidate for the general election .
“ I think people can have deep disagreements and some people can hate what he did , but it is hard not to recognize political courage and leadership , and I think that tips the balance in his favor , ” Ms. Navarro said .
Mr. Rubio already is winning plaudits from Democrats , including Sen. Charles E. Schumer of New York .
“ I think the world of him , ” Mr. Schumer told late-night comic Stephen Colbert last week .
Michael McKenna , a Republican strategist with deep ties to Capitol Hill , predicted there will be more praise like that for Mr. Rubio — but that it won ’ t help him when it comes to winning over primary voters .
“ He ’ s instantly the Democrats ’ favorite Republican to win the nomination in 2016 . The media and the Democratic establishment are going to love him and try to convince us all that he ’ s really the answer to the problems that plague the Republican Party . I suspect the Republicans are going to have a significantly different take on it , ” Mr. McKenna said . “ He ’ s a young man who once had a bright and promising political future . He ’ s instantly the Brazil of American politics . ”
Mr. McKenna said Mr. Rubio also has other problems looming — chiefly the implementation of the bill , if it does become law , whose success will hinge on a Homeland Security Department struggling to follow through on current laws .
“ The bill ’ s bad enough , but the implementation is going to be three times worse , and he ’ s going to get blamed for this . Who else is going to get blamed ? This is Marco Rubio ’ s bill , ” Mr. McKenna said . “ He has stapled his political future to a bureaucracy that ’ s either incapable or unwilling to do its job . ”