Jennifer Rankin in Brussels has more on Tusk ’ s concerns about Trump .
One of the EU ’ s top leaders has criticised Donald Trump for his “ worrying declarations ” and said the new administration in Washington is contributing to the dangers facing Europe .
Donald Tusk , the head of the European council , said the “ worrying declarations by the new American administration ... make our future highly unpredictable ” .
In a letter to EU leaders [ pdf ] , he included the new man in the White House with a threatening geopolitical outlook that also includes an “ assertive China ” , “ aggressive Russia ” , radical Islam and “ wars , terror and anarchy in the Middle East and Africa ” .
The former Polish president said Europe had never faced such threats since six countries embarked on the integration project sixty years ago , by signing a declaration in the Italian capital . “ The challenges currently facing the European Union are more dangerous than ever before in the time since the signature of the Treaty of Rome . ”
As well as a new and unpredictable world order , Tusk listed two other challenges : a rise in anti-EU sentiment and the “ state of mind of the pro-European elites ” . In a striking passage he blamed elites for “ a decline of faith in political integration , submission to populist arguments as well as doubt in the fundamental values of liberal democracy ” .
Tusk was writing to 27 EU leaders - excluding Britain ’ s Theresa May - ahead of a summit in Valletta on Friday to debate the future , as the EU prepares to mark the 60th anniversary of its founding in Rome at the end of March . The British prime minister will be in the Maltese capital to take part in discussions on the migration crisis on Friday , but is not invited to a second session on the future of the EU .
Tusk urged the EU to show it was united at the Rome anniversary summit , which falls just days before the deadline May has imposed on herself for triggering Britain ’ s EU exit process .
The letter from Tusk appeared to be a response to Trump rather than Brexit , but arguably he had a message for both US critics of EU integration and Brexiters dreaming of taking back control . “ It must be made crystal clear that the disintegration of the European Union will not lead to the restoration of some mythical , full sovereignty of its member states , but to their real and factual dependence on the great superpowers : the United States , Russia and China , ” he wrote . “ Only together can we be fully independent ” .