America , we were introduced to our next president on Wednesday night . He ’ s not a politician . He is one of a kind . He is an American . Welcome President Donald J. Trump .
I ’ m a cynical Jewish Ivy Leaguer from New York . Nothing gets me too excited . I don ’ t believe politicians . Nor do I believe in politicians . I don ’ t fall for theatrical political productions . I don ’ t believe rhetoric or propaganda . And I ’ ve never teared up over a political speech in my life .
Wednesday night I found myself fist-pumping . I found myself chanting along with the crowd “ USA , USA , USA. ” And as the procession of mothers and fathers came up to the podium to state the name of their child -- who was murdered by illegal immigrants -- and then say “ I ’ m voting for Trump ” or “ Trump is our last chance to save America ” I found myself tearing up . And the amazing thing is… I could n't stop . The tears rolled down my face .
Not just the speech , but the entire day . Trump accepted the invitation to meet with the President of Mexico . He showed he ’ s a man of action by flying to Mexico on a moment ’ s notice . Trump stood next to Mexico 's president -- looking to all the world like President Donald J. Trump . Trump stated his case and never gave an inch to the president of Mexico . Trump turned a vision -- that was mocked and ripped to shreds for a year now -- into a reality . Who now believes that if Trump is elected a wall won ’ t be built ?
As a conservative , I ’ ve waited a lifetime for this speech . Why ? Because it was a speech that didn ’ t back down by even one inch . It was a speech aimed at Americans , for Americans , delivered by a proud American , who values American exceptionalism .
A speech that always put American citizens , workers and taxpayers first .
A speech that recognized the right to safety and security for American citizens .
A speech that recognizes that a foreigner here illegally does not have the same rights as an American-born citizen .
A speech that pointed out that foreigners here illegally should not be treated better than our veterans .
A speech that recognized that American citizens have every right to choose who comes into our country . And that we should proudly choose immigrants with skills , self-sufficiency and a respect for our common values .
It was a speech that recognized that illegal immigrants do not qualify for welfare , food stamps and other entitlements -- and our government has a right , for the first time ever , to prioritize the deportation of illegal foreigners for abusing the welfare system .
It was a speech that recognized that foreigners in American prisons for violent crimes and felonies should and will be deported immediately -- and that no country can refuse to take them back .
It was a speech that recognized our right to practice “ extreme vetting ” on anyone who wants to come into America -- and that we can choose to exclude those who don ’ t share or respect our values , customs , laws and Constitution . Some people just won ’ t be allowed in . ( At this point , I jumped up from my chair and screamed “ YES ! ” )
It was also a speech that recognized that the federal government must shut off all funding to Sanctuary cities . After all that 's our taxpayer money being given to political leaders who are choosing to break the law . FINALLY , an adult has decided to just say `` NO . ''
And then there ’ s the wall… that great , big , beautiful Trumpian wall . I ’ ve waited a lifetime to hear that we have a right to build a wall , to protect and secure our borders and keep the bad guys out .
Trump covered it all on Wednesday night . He never backed down to pressure from the corrupt mainstream media , billionaire titans , Wall Street moguls , Silicon Valley tech gurus , lawyers , lobbyists , liberals , the GOP establishment , Ivy League know-it-all intellectuals . He gave no quarter to any of them . He changed nothing to appeal to them .
Trump is our last chance to save America . To restore law and order . To protect my four beautiful children . To save our economy . To rescue our middle class . We have only one choice . We have only one chance .
Look at yourself in the mirror . If you ’ re American-born…if you ’ re a taxpayer…if you ’ re a parent…if you love America…if you agree this is the greatest country in world history….if you believe we are blessed by God…if you ’ re horrified at the prospect of bringing hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees into this country at a cost of $ 400 billion…if you ’ re scared to death about our soon-to-be- $ 20 trillion national debt…if you don ’ t want your child to become just another murder statistic…if any of those descriptions fits you and Trump ’ s speech didn ’ t move you…
If everything Trump promised and everything I ’ ve just said doesn ’ t impress you , then just think of Trump as our TREXIT . Trump is a blunt force , all-American , laser-guided middle finger to everything and everyone in Washington , D.C .
And that , my fellow Americans , sounds like the dream of a lifetime to me .