TIJUANA , Mexico ( ███ ) - Dozens of Central American migrants from about 600 traveling in a “ caravan ” through Mexico arrived at the border city of Tijuana late on Tuesday despite warnings it would be futile to try to cross to claim asylum in the United States .
A group of Central American migrants , moving in a caravan through Mexico , get on a microbus to get to the office of Mexico 's National Institute of Migration to start the legal process and get temporary residence status for humanitarian reasons , in Hermosillo , Sonora state , Mexico April 24 , 2018 . ███/Edgard Garrido
By evening , two busloads of men , women and children arrived in Tijuana , a city that grazes southern California .
U.S. President Donald Trump has ordered officials to repel them .
The arrivals spilled into the streets and gazed toward San Diego , visible at spots through a rusty barrier or across a pedestrian bridge , exhausted after their trek that began a month ago near Mexico ’ s southern border with Guatemala .
Another four busloads were making their way north from Hermosillo , a city 432 miles south of the border , where the migrants had been stalled for days .
Many who fled their homes in Guatemala , El Salvador and Honduras because of what they described as lethal threats or political persecution have clung to the hope of receiving asylum in the United States . But their prospects dimmed after U.S. authorities released statements on Monday saying they would driven back .
Rodrigo Abeja , a coordinator from immigrant rights group Pueblo Sin Fronteras that has been organizing similar caravans for several years , said the caravan planned to regroup before making any decisions .
“ They will wait for all those seeking asylum to be together , ” Abeja said .
A third group , resigned to staying in Mexico , awaited processing for year-long visas by immigration authorities in Hermosillo .
Traveling as a group for safety , their numbers were down from a peak of about 1,500 people , dwindling under the twin pressures of waiting for transportation and attacks by Trump , who began lashing out at the caravan on Twitter in early April .
After Trump ’ s comments , Mexican authorities stalled the caravan in a southern town and began handing out temporary visas that gave them legal status to travel to the border .