The Trump administration on Sunday called for a number of changes to the immigration system in exchange for an extension of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program .
Included in its “ immigration principles and policies ” paper , the administration requested a crackdown on sanctuary cities , 10,000 more Customs and Border Patrol agents , a reduction in the number of incoming refugees , and a merit-based system that limits chain migration , among other reforms .
`` These findings outline reforms that must be included as part of any legislation addressing the status of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) recipients , '' Trump said in a statement after the proposal was announced Sunday . `` Without these reforms , illegal immigration and chain migration , which severely and unfairly burden American workers and taxpayers , will continue without end . ''
The plan also takes a hardline stance against unaccompanied minors who enter the country , advocating for the removal of the legal limitations , or what it calls “ loopholes , ” currently in place that prevent “ Unaccompanied Alien Children ” ( UACs ) from being deported from the U.S. `` These loopholes in current law create a dramatic pull factor for additional illegal immigration and in recent years , there has been a significant increase in the apprehensions of UACs at our southern border . Therefore , the Administration proposes amending current law to ensure the expeditious return of UACs and family units , '' a press release stated . ( The Hill )
Attorney General Jeff Sessions argued the reforms will restore the rule of law .
“ Unfortunately , over the last several decades respect for the rule of law has broken down and immigration enforcement has been sacrificed for the sake of political expediency . This has made us less secure and it can not stand , ” he said in a statement . “ Now President Trump has put forth a series of proposals that will restore the rule of law to our immigration system , prioritize America ’ s safety and security , and end the lawlessness . These are reasonable proposals that will build on the early success of President Trump ’ s leadership . This plan will work . If followed it will produce an immigration system with integrity and one in which we can take pride . Perhaps the best result will be that unlawful attempts to enter will continue their dramatic decline . ”
Democrats have already said a number of the proposals will not be considered .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said the list of requests “ goes so far beyond what is reasonable ” and “ fails to represent any attempt at compromise . ”
“ The Administration can ’ t be serious about compromise or helping the Dreamers if they begin with a list that is anathema to the Dreamers , to the immigrant community and to the vast majority of Americans , ” they wrote in a joint statement .