Senators introduced a long-awaited and sweeping immigration overhaul early Wednesday morning , touching off what is likely to be a charged debate over whether the legislation amounts to `` amnesty '' for those who broke the rules and does enough to help those who follow them .
Sen. Charles Schumer , D-N.Y. , appeared on the Senate floor around 2 a.m. Wednesday to file the 844-page bill . It is the product of weeks of negotiations among the Senate 's `` Gang of Eight , '' a bipartisan group that includes Schumer and seven others .
`` This bill marks the beginning of an important debate , '' Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , said . `` And I believe it will fix our broken system by securing our borders , improving interior enforcement , modernizing our legal immigration to help create jobs and protect American workers , and dealing with our undocumented population in a tough but humane way that is fair to those trying to come here the right way and linked to achieving several security triggers . ''
Rubio is arguably the most vital of the eight co-authors , as his support has the potential to attract fellow conservatives . He and others in the `` gang '' are making a hard-charging effort to ease conservative concerns , pointing out that the bill includes language to both boost border security while putting limits on the so-called path to citizenship .
The bill , as expected , includes a carefully calibrated trade-off where millions of illegal immigrants would be put on a pathway to legal status in exchange for paying fines , provided certain border security steps are taken .
Arguably the biggest hurdle to passage will be convincing conservatives that the flow of illegal immigration will be stemmed -- and not increased -- by the legislation .
The bill , as introduced , would require the Homeland Security Department to create and launch plans for border security and fencing before illegal immigrants can enter a provisional status . This could happen as early as six months after enactment of the bill .
They would remain in that provisional status for 10 years , able to work legally but barred from federal benefits like welfare or health care . After 10 years they could seek green cards conferring permanent legal status , provided certain goals for border apprehensions and other security measures are met .
After another three years , those immigrants could petition for citizenship .
In total , the bill creates a minimum 13-year path to citizenship for up to 11 million illegal immigrants , costing them each $ 2,000 in fines plus additional taxes . Applicants would have to meet other criteria as well in order to qualify .
It 's unclear whether the border security `` triggers '' will be enough to satisfy skeptical lawmakers . Conservatives say border security improvements should be verified before illegal immigrants can seek citizenship . Illegal immigrant advocates say their pathway should not be held up by that process .
Regardless , the plan dedicates billions to security efforts , including $ 3 billion to providing more border agents , customs agents and surveillance systems along the border ; and $ 1.5 billion to building up border fencing .
It also includes language meant to assuage concerns that the mass legalization would send millions onto the federal welfare rolls . The bill claims to strengthen a federal law requiring applicants for legal status to prove they wo n't become government dependents -- some Republicans have claimed this law is rarely enforced .
Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz. , one of the authors in the bipartisan `` Gang of Eight , '' said after meeting with President Obama Tuesday afternoon that the security provisions in the bill would assure `` we wo n't have a third wave '' of illegal immigration .
`` It 's not amnesty , '' he added , preemptively responding to criticism of the pathway to legal status .
Obama , after being briefed by McCain and Schumer , said the bill is `` largely consistent with the principles that I have repeatedly laid out for comprehensive reform . ''
The authors , though , were confronting concerns about the bill 's contents , even before its release . Rep. Lamar Smith , R-Texas , put out a statement claiming `` it legalizes almost everyone in the country illegally before the border is secured . ''
`` I do n't think the American people are going to give the Senate another turn at bat , '' he said .
`` To have an honest debate , we need to be clear about the facts -- and unfortunately there 's already some misinformation being spread about what 's in the bill . Our legislation will implement the toughest border security and immigration law enforcement in U.S. history before a single illegal immigrant is able to apply for permanent residence in the U.S. , '' Rubio spokesman Alex Conant said .
The security and legalization efforts , though , are only part of the sweeping plan .
The legislation also would remake the nation 's inefficient legal immigration system , creating new immigration opportunities for tens of thousands of high- and low-skilled workers , as well as a new `` merit visa '' aimed at bringing people with talents to the U.S . Senators had planned to formally introduce the bill Tuesday , but after Monday 's bombing at the Boston Marathon a planned press event was delayed until later in the week .
Employers would face tough new requirements to check the legal status of all workers .
Overall , the changes represent the most dramatic overhaul to U.S. immigration law in more than a quarter-century .
The bill is the result of months of secretive negotiations among eight lawmakers . In addition to Schumer and McCain , they are Democrats Dick Durbin of Illinois , Robert Menendez of New Jersey and Michael Bennet of Colorado , working with Republicans Rubio of Florida , Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Jeff Flake of Arizona .
Even harder work lies ahead now that legislative language will become public for other lawmakers and groups on all sides to examine and react to . The Senate Judiciary Committee will hold hearings on the bill beginning Friday and likely move to amend and vote on it in May , with action on the Senate floor expected later in the summer . The Republican-controlled House also must act , and opposition from some conservatives there is likely to be fierce .
People brought here illegally as youths would have a faster path : They could get green cards in five years and would become eligible for citizenship immediately thereafter .
U.S. citizens no longer would be able to sponsor their siblings for eventual U.S. citizenship , a change activist groups have opposed . That 's among several changes aimed at rebalancing an immigration system that now awards around 15 percent of green cards to people with employment ties , and the majority to people with family ties , to a system that awards 45 percent to 50 percent of green cards based on employment ties .
There would be no limit in the number of green cards awarded to people of extraordinary ability in science , arts , education , business or athletics , or to outstanding professors , doctors and others . A new startup visa would be created for foreign entrepreneurs trying to come here to start their own companies .
Visas for highly skilled workers greatly in demand by technology companies would nearly double . Low-skilled workers would be able to come in for jobs in construction , long-term care and other industries , ultimately up to 200,000 a year . A new agriculture visa program would bring farm workers to the U.S. ; farm workers already here illegally would get a faster path to citizenship than others here illegally , able to seek a green card in five years , an effort to create a stable agricultural workforce .
The bill is titled the `` Border Security , Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013 . ''