Each day , dozens of immigrant families come to the US-Mexico border seeking asylum — and now the parents are being told that they ’ ve broken the law , are separated from their children , and are taken to jail .
The children , meanwhile , are swept into a completely different federal bureaucracy .
My colleague Dara Lind has an excellent explainer that covers the various moving parts of the separation of migrant families at the border . But if you haven ’ t been following closely , this visual story should help you get a better understanding of how this process works — and how the Trump administration is justifying it .
Let ’ s say you and your child are from Honduras , among the world ’ s deadliest nations that aren ’ t at war .
Like thousands of other families , largely from Honduras , Guatemala , and El Salvador , you take the dangerous journey north to the US-Mexico border .
You could go to a US port of entry — like a border checkpoint — and claim asylum , which is legal . But you ’ ve heard that the ports of entry into the US can ’ t process asylum seekers quickly and that border officials sometimes refuse to accept asylum seekers .
So , like many other asylum seekers , you decide to cross between ports of entry .
And upon crossing the border , you are apprehended by Border Patrol .
The Border Patrol agent asks if you fear persecution in your home country . You say yes . An official then interviews you to make sure you have “ credible fear ” if sent back . This is to determine whether you are eligible to go in front of a judge and seek asylum . ( About three in four people are deemed credible . )
At that point , the US has to keep asylum seekers because federal and international law says they can ’ t deport people back to places where they would face danger .
2a ) Before this policy , families would first await asylum proceedings together
Before this Trump policy , those who were deemed to have credible fear would be put on a track to see an immigration judge , who would determine whether to grant asylum .
Some families were released and told to come back for a court date . Others were kept waiting in detention for up to 20 days and , if they hadn ’ t seen a judge by then , were released and told to return for a court date at some point in the future .
This is what immigration hawks derisively refer to as “ catch and release , ” something President Trump has vowed to end . In fiscal year 2017 , the US issued 100,000 formal orders of deportation for all unauthorized immigrants . But just 60 percent of people showed up to court to hear this decision ; the rest never appeared in front of the judge .
2b ) Now some parents are being prosecuted for the illegal crossing — and separated from their kids
Instead of first figuring out whether you should be granted asylum , the administration ’ s first step is now to deal with the other matter at hand : the misdemeanor for illegal entry .
Upon being apprehended by Border Patrol , you are set aside to be detained by US Marshals and sent to a federal jail to await trial .
This is where the separation happens — because a child can ’ t go with you to federal jail , he is taken from you .
Your child is now placed under the supervision of the Department of Health and Human Services , which sends him to temporary housing . This could be foster care , or it could be one of the detention centers where children are kept in what are essentially cages . In the meantime , HHS looks for a relative in the US who can take him in . Sometimes this takes weeks .
3 ) After serving time in jail , parents try to reunite with their kids . But there is no process to make this happen .
And it could take time to see a judge because immigration courts are backlogged — and this would get worse since the Trump administration wants to prosecute all border crossers .
The maximum sentence for a first-time illegal entry conviction is six months . Usually judges just sentence immigrants to “ time served . ”
Once you ’ ve been convicted , you are returned to the custody of immigration officials to go through deportation proceedings . This is when you can theoretically reunite with your child at a civil detention center while you pursue your asylum case , according to the administration .
But that ’ s not what ’ s happening . The US has no procedure to reunite parents with children . In the detention centers , immigrants don ’ t have phone access . It ’ s taken some parents months to track down their kids . In addition , some parents are being deported without their children , and advocates say some small children are being deported without their parents .
The Trump administration can ’ t seem to get its story straight on why it has implemented this “ zero tolerance ” policy .
As my colleague Matthew Yglesias put it , “ President Donald Trump ’ s White House has now offered three conflicting reasons for why it is breaking up families seeking asylum at the border . It ’ s a deterrent . It ’ s Democrats ’ fault . It ’ s not even a real policy at all . ”
Immigration experts say family separation is clearly being used as a deterrent .
It ’ s a strategy to make the process more painful for families in hopes of making sure asylum seekers don ’ t set even one foot in the US , since international laws say they then can ’ t be turned away .
The reality is that this strategy involves taking children away from their parents without a process for reuniting them .