CLOSE President Donald Trump said Wednesday he ’ s open to an immigration plan that would provide a pathway to citizenship for hundreds of thousands of young people who were brought to the country as children and are now here illegally . Time
WASHINGTON — A White House proposal on immigration will contain a path to citizenship for up to 1.8 million young people brought into the United States as children as part of a package that also includes $ 25 billion for a border wall and other security measures .
President Trump 's plan would also include a massive cut in family-based immigration and the end to a diversity visa lottery system that gives preference to immigrants from under-represented countries , according to a White House briefing for congressional staffers and Trump allies hosted by White House senior adviser Stephen Miller .
The proposal is designed to win 60 Senate votes and break a potential filibuster that could trigger another government shutdown next month , Miller said on the call , to which ███ obtained access .
The path to citizenship has been among the most contentious issues in the immigration debate over the last decade , and Trump himself has taken inconsistent positions on it . But in an impromptu group interview with reporters Wednesday , the president said he 's willing to consider citizenship for so-called DREAMers who came to the United States as children .
`` If they do a great job , I think it 's a nice thing to have the incentive of , after a period of years , being able to become a citizen , '' Trump said . That period would be 10 to 12 years , Trump said .
Yet the proposal to cut back family-based immigration is sure to draw fire from Democrats , as it represents a nearly 25 % cut to legal immigration into the country . Under the new plan , Miller said that U.S. citizens and green card holders will only be allowed to sponsor their spouses and minor children to enter the country .
Congress passed a short-term funding bill over the weekend to keep the government open until Feb. 8 ; Democrats have insisted the Senate take up an immigration bill before voting on any additional funding . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said in a statement Thursday that he appreciated Trump laying out his immigration objectives . `` I am hopeful that as discussions continue in the Senate on the subject of immigration , Members on both sides of the aisle will look to this framework for guidance as they work towards an agreement , '' he said .
The plan addresses four issues that the White House has insisted be included in any immigration fix :
► DREAMers . The bill would provide a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants who came to the U.S. as children , known as DREAMers . The number of immigrants who could qualify would be larger than the group protected under the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program . That program covered nearly 800,000 DREAMers , but Miller said the new plan could protect up to 1.8 million people , which is `` substantially larger than the DACA population . ''
The immigrants who would be eligible to apply for citizenship may face a process that could take 10 to 12 years , according to Trump . `` We 're going to morph into it , '' Trump told reporters . `` I think it 's a nice thing to have the incentive of , after a period of years , being able to become a citizen . ''
Eligibility criteria would include requirements for `` work , education and good moral character , '' according to a White House summary of the plan .
That plan mirrors a bipartisan Senate proposal that would allow DREAMers to become citizens after 12 years , or 10 years if they were approved for DACA .
More : After the shutdown , 4 things that make the road ahead to a 'DREAMer ' deal rocky
Related : There are 3.6M 'DREAMers ' — a number far greater than commonly known
CLOSE Thousands of immigrant `` DREAMers '' still await action on a possible pathway to avoid deportation . Democrat lawmakers are hoping assurances from Republicans , made for the stopgap budget deal , to take up the issue soon will bring action . ( Jan. 23 ) AP
► Border security . The White House has proposed a $ 25 billion `` trust fund '' to build at least parts of a wall along the United States-Mexico border . That represents a sharp increase from the $ 18 billion that the Department of Homeland Security requested in recent weeks , but also includes improvements to ports of entry on the Canadian border as well .
While the wall has been a sticking point for congressional Democrats , Trump said Wednesday : `` If you do n't have a wall , you do n't have DACA . ''
The border wall could be a contentious issue among Democrats . In negotiations over a spending bill to keep the government open last week , Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer of New York told Trump he would be willing to appropriate money for a border wall in exchange for protections for DREAMers , but was turned down . The government shut down early Saturday morning and did not reopen until Monday .
After a weekend of blaming each other for the breakdown in negotiations , Schumer rescinded his offer to fund the wall – and it is not clear , at this point , that Democrats would be willing to put it back on the table .
► Family-based migration : The White House plan would restrict the practice of sponsoring relatives for green cards to `` nuclear families , '' namely spouses and minor children . That practice , dubbed `` chain migration '' by Trump and other critics , has long been the main source of immigration into the U.S .
According to an analysis of Department of Homeland Security data , the proposed cut would eliminate nearly a quarter of the roughly 1 million immigrants allowed to enter the U.S. each year .
In 2016 , the U.S. government granted lawful permanent residence known as green cards to 1.2 million foreigners . More than 260,000 green cards – 23 % – were granted to parents , adult children , siblings , grandchildren , nieces and nephews of U.S. citizens and green card holders .
More : What is 'chain migration ' and why does President Trump want to end it ?
► Visa lottery . Created by Congress in 1990 , the diversity visa lottery grants 50,000 visas a year to people from countries under-represented in the U.S . In recent years , most have come from Africa , Asia and Eastern Europe .
The White House plan would devote those slots to fill in the family-based and high-skilled visa backlog . After those slots are filled , the visa lottery would end completely , Miller said .
Like McConnell , many Republicans in Congress applauded Trump for putting forward a proposal without actually endorsing all the elements of the plan . Democratic leaders did not immediately respond , but some lawmakers saw immediate flaws in Trump 's plan . Sen. Brian Schatz , D-Hawaii , said in a tweet `` There is no public policy justification for cutting legal immigration in half . None . ''
And liberal icon Sen. Elizabeth Warren , D-Mass. , called the plan `` insulting '' and an `` anti-immigrant wish list . ''
By ending DACA , @ realdonaldtrump subjected 800k Dreamers to deportation . Now he wants to hold them hostage to Steven Miller ’ s anti-immigrant wish list . It ’ s insulting . We already have a bipartisan solution to the Trump-created crisis : it ’ s called the Dream Act . # DreamActNow — Elizabeth Warren ( @ SenWarren ) January 25 , 2018
Some conservatives were equally skeptical of what they called an expansion of `` amnesty '' for immigrants now in the country illegally . “ Amnesty comes in many forms , but it seems they all eventually grow in size and scope , said Michael Needham , CEO of the conservative political group Heritage Action for America . `` Any proposal that expands the amnesty-eligible population risks opening pandora 's box , and . . . should be a non-starter . ''