PALM BEACH , Fla. ( AP ) — President Donald Trump said Sunday that a program that protects immigrants who were brought to the U.S. illegally as children is “ probably dead , ” casting a cloud over already tenuous negotiations just days before a deadline on a government funding deal that Democrats have tied to immigration .
At issue is the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program created by President Barack Obama to shield hundreds of thousands of these individuals , known as “ Dreamers , ” from deportation . Trump , who has taken a hard stance against illegal immigration , announced last year that he will end the program unless Congress comes up with a solution by March .
“ DACA is probably dead because the Democrats don ’ t really want it , they just want to talk and take desperately needed money away from our Military , ” the Republican president tweeted . “ I , as President , want people coming into our Country who are going to help us become strong and great again , people coming in through a system based on MERIT . No more Lotteries ! # AMERICA FIRST . ”
Republicans and Democrats were already at odds over funding the government , and the negotiations became more complicated after Democrats — whose votes are needed to pass a government funding bill — insisted immigration be included . Government funding expires midnight Friday without a deal in place , and some government functions will begin to go dark .
Further roiling the talks are comments by Trump during an Oval Office meeting in which he questioned the need to admit more Haitians to the U.S. , along with Africans from `` s -- -- hole '' countries , according to people briefed on the conversation but not authorized to describe it publicly . He also said in the Thursday meeting he would prefer immigrants from countries like Norway instead . The White House has not denied that Trump said the word “ shithole , ” though Trump did push back on some depictions of the meeting .
A confidant of Trump ’ s told The Associated Press that the president spent Thursday evening calling friends and outside advisers to judge their reaction on his inflammatory remarks . Trump wasn ’ t apologetic and denied he was racist , instead blaming the media for distorting his meaning , said the confidant , who wasn ’ t authorized to disclose a private conversation and spoke on condition of anonymity .
The president also rejected as insufficient an immigration deal drafted by the bipartisan group of lawmakers who attended that meeting . The deal had included a pathway to citizenship for the “ Dreamers ” that would take up to 12 years , as well as $ 1.6 billion for border security , including Trump ’ s promised wall along the U.S.-Mexico border . Trump ’ s staunchest supporters consider any route to citizenship for the “ Dreamers ” amnesty for lawbreakers .
The president has said any deal must include funding for the wall as well as changes to make the immigration system a more merit-based structure .
The debate over DACA ’ s fate came as lawmakers faced questioning about whether Trump is racist .
Rep. Mia Love , R-Utah , the first black female Republican in Congress and the daughter of Haitian immigrants , denounced Trump ’ s comments as racist and called on him to apologize . “ I think that would show real leadership , ” she said on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union ” on Sunday .
Sen. David Perdue , R-Ga. , who was at Thursday ’ s Oval Office meeting , insisted Sunday that Trump did not say “ shithole ” in referring to African countries .
“ I am telling you that he did not use that word . And I ’ m telling you it ’ s a gross misrepresentation , ” Perdue said on ABC ’ s “ This Week. ” He said Sen. Dick Durbin , D-Ill. , and Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , were mistaken in indicating earlier that that was the case .
Perdue and Sen. Tom Cotton , R-Ark. , had issued a joint statement Friday saying they “ do not recall the President saying those comments specifically. ” Cotton said Sunday on CBS ’ “ Face the Nation ” that he “ didn ’ t hear ” the vulgar word used .
Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen , who also attended Thursday ’ s meeting at the Oval Office , said , “ I don ’ t recall that specific phrase being used . ”
Nielsen did dispute , however , Trump ’ s assertion that DACA was “ probably dead . ”
“ I do not believe DACA is dead , ” Nielsen said on “ Fox News Sunday. ” She said that the bipartisan proposal rejected by Trump did not address core security issues facing her department and that Trump ’ s administration was not interested in “ half measures . ”
Perdue said that “ the potential is there ” for a deal to protect the “ Dreamers ” but that Democrats needed to get serious .
Sen. Michael Bennet , D-Colo. , defended the agreement as a “ principled compromise ” on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” and said , “ I hope people will explore it . ”