Capitol Hill lawmakers acknowledged Sunday the Senate has cleared a major hurdle toward crafting a final immigration-reform proposal but said chamber leaders have yet to reach a final deal and still must negotiate with the Republican-led House .
Senators from the so-called Gang of Eight leading the chamber ’ s bipartisan effort spoke in an apparent attempt to make clear that a deal reached Friday between organized labor and big business on a visa program for low-skilled workers was not a final solution .
“ We 've still got a ways to go in terms of looking at the language and making sure that it 's everything we thought it would be , ” Arizona Republican Sen. Jeff Flake , one of the eight senators in the group , told NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press. ” “ But we 're closer , certainly . ”
Flake also said the next step will be an agreement on securing the U.S. border , followed by one regarding a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants . However , the group has had problems getting consistent information from the Department of Homeland Security .
“ We 're going to have to have that before we move further , ” Flake told NBC .
His remarks followed those of fellow group member and Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio , who earlier in the day also cautioned about reading too much into the agreement between AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka and U.S. Chamber of Commerce leader Tom Donohue .
`` Reports that the bipartisan group of eight senators has agreed on a legislative proposal are premature , '' Rubio said in a statement .
He also said the proposal still needs public input and enough votes to pass from the other 92 senators .
Rubio , a Cuban-American who is weighing a presidential bid in 2016 , is a leading figure inside his party . Lawmakers will be closely watching any deal for his approval , and his skepticism about the process did little to encourage optimism .
Though he has appeared frustrated at times since being elected to the Senate in 2010 over reform efforts , New York Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer seemed optimistic Rubio will remain in the negotiations .
“ I do n't think he 'll walk away , ” Schumer , another group member , told NBC . “ He 's been an active and strong participant . … I 'm not even going to speculate about that . … He is protecting some of the things that he thinks are very important in the bill . But I do n't think that 'll stand in the way in any way of any final agreement . ”
Schumer also acknowledged the group has yet to finish writing a bill to address the 11 million illegal immigrants already in the United States .
Still , even if the Senate approves an immigration reform measure , it faces a tough road in the House .
New York Republican Rep. Peter King , the former chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee , was skeptical Sunday about any prospects for a deal .
`` Eight guys in a room saying the border is going to be secure is not enough , '' King said on ABC ’ s “ This Week . ”
On Saturday , White House spokesman Clark Stevens said President Obama continues to be encouraged by the progress being made by the bipartisan group of senators .
“ We look forward to seeing language once it is introduced and expect legislation to move forward as soon as possible , ” Stevens said .
The deal reached Friday will allow tens of thousands of low-skilled workers into the country to fill jobs in construction , restaurants and hotels .
Under the compromise , the government would create a new `` W '' visa for low-skilled workers who would earn wages paid to Americans or the prevailing wages for the industry they 're working in , whichever is higher .
In a deeply divided Congress , immigration reform has emerged as the issue mostly likely to result in bipartisan , compromise legislation that can be passed by the Democratic-controlled Senate and Republican-led House .
In last year 's Republican presidential primary , candidates took a tough stance on illegal immigration . In the November election , President Obama ended up receiving about 70 percent of the Hispanic vote , pushing him to victory in several swing states . With Latinos making up a rapidly growing segment of the electorate , many Republicans have become more receptive to immigration reform fearing that their party might become uncompetitive in national elections .
The immigration measure under serious discussion also would secure the border , crack down on employers , improve legal immigration and create a 13-year pathway to citizenship for the millions of illegal immigrants already here .