President Trump said Friday that a `` red wave '' is needed to pass an immigration bill in Congress , as he accused Democrats of “ doing nothing but obstructing . ”
“ Republicans should stop wasting their time on Immigration until after we elect more Senators and Congressmen/women in November , ” Trump tweeted . “ Dems are just playing games , have no intention of doing anything to solves this decades old problem . We can pass great legislation after the Red Wave ! ”
Trump 's call comes after GOP leaders pulled a major immigration bill from consideration late Thursday , pushing a vote into next week .
HOUSE GOP ABRUPTLY SCRAPS PLANNED VOTE ON TROUBLED IMMIGRATION BILL , SAYING IT COULD PASS NEXT WEEK
Congressional Republicans had earlier failed to pass a more conservative bill . The more moderate , compromise measure was expected to have a requirement that employers use E-Verify to check the legal status of employees .
Leaders have sought to assuage both conservatives and moderates in their party , while also meeting the president ’ s four pillars : a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants brought to the country as children , border security including a wall , an end to so-called “ chain migration ” and an end to the diversity lottery visa .
A sticking point for conservatives is that while the compromise funds the wall , it also offers a pathway to citizenship for 1.8 million young illegal immigrants . The conservative bill offers only the 700,000 recipients of the Obama-era Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program the ability to apply for indefinite renewals of non-immigrant status .
`` It is not a compromise , '' House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , told reporters . `` It may be a compromise with the devil , but it is not a compromise with the Democrats . ”
Trump on Wednesday extended an invitation to Democrats to the White House to discuss immigration and said “ it takes two to tango , ” although he had scathing words for what he called the “ extremist , open border ” lawmakers .
“ They do n't care about the children ... they do n't care about the problems . They do n't care about anything . All they do is say , 'Obstruct and let 's see how we do ’ because they have no policies that are any good , ” he said ahead of a Cabinet meeting .
TRUMP SLAMS 'OPEN BORDER ' DEMOCRATS , BLASTS MEXICO ON HEELS OF EXEC ORDER
On Thursday , he echoed that rhetoric , but without the invitation for Democrats to come to the table .
“ Dems are doing nothing but Obstructing . Remember their motto , RESIST ! Ours is PRODUCE ! ” he tweeted .
He renewed his criticism of the filibuster in the Senate , which requires 60 votes to break .
“ Even if we get 100 % Republican votes in the Senate , we need 10 Democrat votes to get a much needed Immigration Bill - & the Dems are Obstructionists who won ’ t give votes for political reasons & because they don ’ t care about Crime coming from Border ! So we need to elect more R ’ s ! ”
Trump 's tweets come after a fiery week in which rhetoric on both sides has escalated on the question of the administration ’ s “ zero tolerance ” policy , which prosecutes all illegal border crossers . That in turn led to an increase in the number of children being separated from their parents .
Trump signed an executive order Wednesday ending the practice and allowing families to be detained together , but Democrats have since pushed for ending what they described as “ indefinite detention ” of families at the border .