( CNN ) – A bipartisan proposal to revamp U.S. immigration policies will contain three policy steps that must be accomplished before undocumented workers can apply for legal status , an architect of the measure said on Sunday .
Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Florida , said the `` triggers '' embedded in a legislative proposal to be unveiled this week are necessary to ensure workable reforms that discourage immigrants from coming to the United States illegally .
`` If we do n't do enforcement , if enforcement is not a part of this , and if we do n't modernize legal immigration , if we do n't do all of these things , then we 're going to be right back here in 10 years having the same conversation - and that would be the worst outcome , '' Rubio told chief political correspondent Candy Crowley on CNN 's `` State of the Union . ''
Rubio , who made the rounds of Sunday talk shows , disputed conservative critics who say a pathway to citizenship is tantamount to amnesty .
“ This is not amnesty . Amnesty is the forgiveness of something . Amnesty is anything that says do it illegally , it will be cheaper and easier , ” he said on “ Fox News Sunday . ”
President Barack Obama has named comprehensive immigration reform as a top priority of his second term , fulfilling a promise he made during both of his White House bids .
Republicans have also expressed renewed interest in the issue as the party looks for new ways to expand its appeal among Hispanic voters .
The issue has a tortured history in Congress . Past attempts , including during George W. Bush ’ s presidency , failed and caused some supportive Republicans to lose backing with core conservatives .
But as the number of undocumented immigrants in the United States grows , both Republicans and Democrats say now is the time to revamp a system that neither side regards as adequate .
Rubio is viewed as a possible 2016 Republican presidential candidate , who insiders conclude is potentially risking crucial GOP political capital negotiating with Democrats on such a hot-button issue with uncertain prospects in Congress .
He is a member of the bipartisan “ Gang of Eight ” senators who plan to roll out their comprehensive reform proposal on Tuesday .
The package includes an agreement on a path to citizenship that would affect the nearly 11 million undocumented residents currently in the United States .
It would take 10 years for undocumented workers to get a green card , and then another three years to gain citizenship .
Along the way , undocumented workers would have to pay a fine and back taxes and pass a background check . The size of the fine remains unclear .
But that pathway to citizenship would remain contingent on three `` triggers , '' which Rubio described Sunday .
They include forming an `` e-verify '' system for employers to check the legal status of workers ; tracking immigrants entering and leaving the country , and bolstering border security , which Rubio specified would `` include fencing . ''
`` All of these things are going to happen because they are triggers , triggers for the green card process that we are laying out in our proposal , '' Rubio said . `` That is the incentive to ensure they happen . ”
“ In essence , for those who are undocumented in this country , not only will they have to wait 10 years , more than 10 years , they will have to wait until all three of those things are fully implemented . If they are not implemented , there will be no green cards awarded . We think that will be an incentive , '' he added .
That contrasts with past positions by Obama , who has said tying a pathway to citizenship by strengthening border security could delay the process for undocumented workers .
The White House also has argued the U.S. border is currently the most secure it 's ever been .
Rubio admitted on Sunday the plan was at odds with Obama 's position , but noted the Senate bill had been shaped by both Democrats and Republicans .
`` A bipartisan group of senators agree that should be the trigger , and hopefully we can pass a bill that has that in there , '' he said . `` And if we do , he 'll have a decision to make about whether to sign it or not . But it has to be a part of it , otherwise it wo n't happen . ''
One of the four Democrats in the “ Gang of Eight , ” Sen. Charles Schumer of New York praised Rubio ’ s efforts on Sunday , calling him a “ tremendous asset ” in hammering out the plan .
“ The present situation is untenable , ” Schumer said on ABC ’ s “ This Week. ” “ This is a balanced approach that both prevents future waves of illegal immigration , but has common sense solutions . ”
Rubio will also have some work to do to convince some fellow Republicans concerned the “ Gang of Eight ” prescription amounts to amnesty .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Alabama , worries the proposal would have economic consequences during an already uneven recovery from recession .
“ I think it 's incumbent on Republicans , Democrats , and every one of us to ask what 's going to happen to working Americans , whose wages have been falling since 2000 , who are unemployed at a very high rate . It will impact them adversely , ” Sessions said on ABC .
Rubio , however , said he could justify `` every aspect of the bill '' to conservatives , noting he held many of the same positions in the past .
`` I think part of my job is to explain to people what it is we worked on , to try to justify it and hopefully gain their support . That 's what I look forward to doing , '' he said .
`` We can try to address it in a way that 's responsible and humane , in a way that is n't unfair to the people that are doing it the right way , and does n't encourage people to do it in the wrong way in the future , '' he continued . `` And that 's what we 've arrived at , and I hope to be able to convince people it 's the right approach . ''
Asked whether his position as a point man for comprehensive immigration reform could influence his chances in 2016 , Rubio claimed , “ I have n't even thought about it in that way . ”
Rubio has not said whether he will be a candidate for president .
Explaining himself to an incredulous Crowley – “ Seriously , senator ? ” – Rubio said his work on immigration reform would speak for itself with voters .
“ My belief has always been that if I do my job and I do my job well , I 'll have options and opportunities in the future to do things , whether it 's run for re-election , run for something else or give someone else a chance at public service . And that 's how I view this issue , ” he said .