Even patrons who were already citizens , like María Cano , who came here from Mexico in 1979 , reacted with emotion as they named cousins or neighbors who might now be able to stay in the country legally .
“ Immigrants have helped build this society for many , many years , and I think it ’ s time that we were recognized and given a chance , ” Ms. Cano , 46 , said , tearing up as she spoke . “ I know so many people whose parents brought them here illegally , who went to school and started working here . And now there is finally hope for them . ”
For Ms. Cano , like many others in this solidly Democratic neighborhood , the new policy reaffirms her plans to support Mr. Obama in November .
But even in this area , some other Latinos had grown frustrated with the president , as immigration reform efforts stalled in Congress .
Vilma Berrios , who immigrated from El Salvador in 1975 and is now a citizen , voted for Mr. Obama in 2008 . As she sat in MacArthur Park , another gathering place for immigrants , she spoke of her conflicted feelings .
She said she did not support Mr. Obama anymore , because so many people had been deported under his administration . But she added that if he followed through on the promises he made Friday , she would vote for him again .
“ I have to think about who I ’ m going to vote for , ” Ms. Berrios , 59 , said in Spanish . “ If he completes what he promised today , I will vote for him . It ’ s very important . But I want immigration reform that will benefit everyone . ”
Angelica Salas , executive director of the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles , said Friday ’ s announcement had the potential to reinvigorate enthusiasm for Mr. Obama among many Latinos .
“ It is a game changer for him , ” Ms. Salas said . “ It is very motivating . It kind of keeps the hope people had for this president alive . ”
Still , after years of disappointment in efforts to change immigration laws , some remained skeptical , reserving their excitement until they saw how the new policy would be implemented .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
“ We heard the news , and it ’ s great , but it ’ s just a first step , ” said Maxima Guerrero , 22 , a college student who wore a shirt that read , “ I Am Undocumented ” to a rally in downtown Los Angeles . “ When I see it in action , then I ’ ll say , ‘ This is fantastic. ’ For now , we ’ re just getting the ball rolling . ”
And most important , Ms. Guerrero said , the new policy did not at all diminish the need for comprehensive immigration reform — a sentiment that nearly everyone in East Los Angeles echoed .
José Pérez , 60 , runs the farmers ’ market in Boyle Heights with his wife and daughter . On Friday night at the market , as a singer on stage crooned in Spanish and locals perused stands selling cherries , tamales and handmade jewelry , Mr. Pérez said he hoped that eventually , a new immigration policy would offer legal status to everyone in his community .
“ I know so many people who graduate , and then that ’ s it ; they can ’ t do nothing , ” Mr. Pérez said . “ This is a country of immigrants . Why don ’ t we help these people who need to be helped ? ”