( CNN ) – Senate Majority Whip Dick Durbin , part of the bipartisan Gang of Eight senators pushing immigration reform , said Sunday on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union ” that he agrees with Republican Sen. Marco Rubio that their bill may need some improvement but argued that they need to “ stand by the basic agreement ” of the legislation .
The Democrat from Illinois said , however , that he would support a same-sex provision in immigration reform , a plan that could undermine bipartisan support for the bill introduced last month .
Florida 's Rubio , the leading Republican on immigration reform , said last week that the bill he helped craft would struggle in the Senate and would not pass in the House as it currently stands . The bulk of public outcry has been over the bill ’ s promise for a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million to 12 million undocumented immigrants in the country .
`` Congress will have a chance to make it tougher , yet still realistic , '' he wrote in an opinion piece for the Wall Street Journal , responding to further criticism that the bill is not strong enough in border security .
Durbin said there may be “ elements where we need some improvement ” but did not specify which parts should be tweaked and argued instead that the main foundation of the bill should stand .
“ We 've got to basically stick to the standard of what we 've established , what we 've agreed over the last three months , ” he told CNN 's chief political correspondent Candy Crowley .
In the proposed legislation , it would take 10 years for the majority of undocumented immigrants to get green cards and another three years to gain citizenship .
The legislation mandates strict new controls on the U.S.-Mexico border before any pathway to legality is opened .
The bill goes for markup this week in the Senate Judiciary Committee .
The committee ’ s chairman , Democratic Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont , is proposing legislation that would allow gay Americans to sponsor their partners not born in the U.S. for green cards .
Currently , such rights apply to only to foreign-born men or women in heterosexual marriages with U.S. citizens . If Leahy moves ahead , some fear that it could upend efforts for any significant Republican support for the compromise immigration effort .
Durbin , a co-sponsor of the Leahy legislation , described the measure as a “ hot ” and “ contentious ” issue but added that he nonetheless supports it .
“ If we can find a way through this to protect that basic right of an individual and still pass immigration reform , that 's what I want to achieve , ” he said . “ We have two very important issues before us here . I hope we can get them both done . We may face a choice at some point in the future . ”
President Barack Obama indicated at a news conference in Costa Rica on Friday that the idea was `` the right thing to do '' but acknowledged that such a politically charged issue may ultimately not make it into a final immigration package .
`` I 'm not going to get everything I want in this bill , '' he said in response to a question about his support for gay rights and its relation to immigration reform , a priority for Democrats seeking to maintain strong support from Hispanics and Republicans trying to woo them to their side .
Watch State of the Union with Candy Crowley Sundays at 9am ET . For the latest from State of the Union click here .