House GOP leaders plan to move forward with a compromise immigration bill next week despite a Friday morning tweet from President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE saying he thinks Republicans should hold off on immigration until after the midterm elections .
Trump said Republicans should `` stop wasting their time on Immigration until after we elect more Senators and Congressmen/women in November , '' dealing a setback to lawmakers who were looking to get the president 's support before casting their vote .
House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyOcasio-Cortez blasts McCarthy as a 'bumbling , sloppy , dishonest mess ' over Trump defense ███ 's Morning Report - Dems to hit gas on impeachment GOP senators attack whistleblower 's credibility MORE ( R-Calif. ) on Friday confirmed that the legislation — introduced by Rep. Jeff Denham Jeffrey ( Jeff ) John DenhamBottom line Ex-GOP Rep. Roskam joins lobbying firm Ex-GOP Rep. Denham heads to lobbying firm MORE ( R-Calif. ) , Rep. Carlos Curbelo Carlos Luis CurbeloOvernight Energy : Lawmakers show irritation over withheld Interior documents | Republican offers bipartisan carbon tax bill | Scientists booted from EPA panel form new group GOP congressman introduces bipartisan carbon tax bill Pelosi : GOP retirements indicate they 'll be in the minority , with Democrat in the White House MORE ( R-Fla. ) , Homeland Security Committee Chairman Mike McCaul ( R-Texas ) and Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte Robert ( Bob ) William GoodlatteUSCIS chief Cuccinelli blames Paul Ryan for immigration inaction Immigrant advocacy groups should n't be opposing Trump 's raids Top Republican releases full transcript of Bruce Ohr interview MORE ( R-Va. ) — will come to the floor before lawmakers leave for their July 4 recess .
`` We have been working very closely with the entire conference taking all ideas in , '' McCarthy said Friday on the House floor . `` We had a very productive conference last night , and we 'll work through the weekend and will see that bill on the floor next week . ''
Changes to the legislation are expected to be made over the weekend . The measure was initially supposed to get a vote on Thursday and was then pushed back to Friday . It was delayed further after a conference meeting Thursday evening , when leadership said it would be postponed to the following week .
House Majority Whip Steve Scalise Stephen ( Steve ) Joseph ScaliseScalise defends Trump Ukraine call : ' I 'm glad President Trump continues to look into [ Russian ] interference ' Sunday shows lineup : Trump impeachment dominates the talk circuit Trump lashes out at 'Do Nothing Democrat Savages ' MORE said he remains confident that Trump would sign the bill if it makes it through both chambers . The Louisiana Republican said he believes Trump is committed to fixing the issue , but that the president is frustrated with the lack of Democratic support on Republican-backed measures .
`` We want to solve this problem and President Trump wants to solve this problem , '' Scalise said . `` I think what he 's doing in these tweets is expressing his frustration that Democrats are unwilling to work with anybody to actually vote for a legislative solution . ''
Scalise 's comments come a day after a conservative-backed immigration bill failed in a 193-231 vote .
Democrats say Republican leaders have n't made an effort to bring up bipartisan legislation that could potentially make it to the president 's desk , while McCarthy said Democrats were only open to supporting the discharge petition introduced by moderate Republicans , which would have forced votes on four immigration proposals .
`` Not everybody gets what they want , because in that bill there wo n't be everything that I want , '' McCarthy said Friday on the House floor . `` Not one person in this room will get everything they want . Will America be safer ? Will America be better in the future ? And will we have a system that works ? The answer will be yes . ''