President Trump is considering a sweeping executive order that would block migrants , including asylum seekers , from entering the U.S. at the southern border in a bid to stop the caravan traveling north through Mexico .
The White House , if it goes ahead with the measure , would issue new regulations restricting certain migrants from seeking asylum . The rules would effectively block most if not all the migrants who are taking part in the caravan , Politico first reported .
███ has learned the proposal originated out of the White House and is one of several being considered . No final decision has been made .
“ The Administration is considering a wide range of administrative , legal and legislative options to address the Democrat-created crisis of mass illegal immigration . No decisions have been made at this time . Nor will we forecast to smugglers or caravans what precise strategies will or will not be deployed , ” a White House official said .
The order would be akin to Trump 's previous aggressive immigration-blocking executive orders , such as the travel ban aimed at halting people from some Muslim-majority countries from entering the U.S .
Any attempt to block the entry of Central American migrants is likely to prompt legal challenges , though Trump is likely emboldened following a Supreme Court ruling earlier this summer that affirmed the president ’ s right to bar the entry of migrants who “ would be detrimental to the interests of the United States . ”
The plan for the executive order comes just in the final stretch before the upcoming midterm elections , with Trump trying to make the issue of caravan the defining topic as voters head to the polls .
`` Every time you see a caravan , or people illegally coming , or attempting to come , into our country illegally , think of and blame the Democrats for not giving us the votes to change our pathetic immigration laws ! '' Trump wrote in a tweet Monday . `` Remember the midterms ! ''
Hundreds of U.S. troops are also set to make their way to the southern border to help Homeland Security and the National Guard as the caravan pushes north .
An official told ███ on Thursday roughly 800 soldiers will be sent to the area to offer “ logistical support , '' including providing tents and vehicles .
It ’ s not immediately clear which units are being tasked with the mission as details are still being finalized . There are currently 2,100 National Guard troops on the southern border assisting Homeland Security .
Democrats , while previously outspoken regarding Trump ’ s immigration policies , are staying largely silent on the issue , instead preferring to remain focused on tackling the GOP on issues like health care , saying it ’ s the winning issue this election cycle .
DEMOCRATS AVOID SPARRING WITH TRUMP ON CARAVAN AS MIDTERM NEARS
Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , the top Democrats in the country , slammed Trump in a statement earlier this week regarding the caravan of migrants , saying the president is “ desperate ” to change the conversation because “ health care is the number one issue Americans care about . ”
According to a Kaiser Family Foundation survey published last week , which surveyed people since the beginning of the caravan earlier this month , the issue of immigration isn ’ t the top concern for voters . It ranks below health care , which has consistently been viewed as the most important issue . Other key issues have been the economy , jobs and policies concerning gun rights .