President Donald Trump instructed Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to use the nuclear option to end the filibuster and pass funding for the border wall , in a Friday morning tweet .
Mitch , use the Nuclear Option and get it done ! Our Country is counting on you ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 21 , 2018
Trump ’ s tweet came moments after White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders told Fox News explicitly that the White House wants the Senate to end the filibuster .
“ The Senate has a constitutional duty and a constitutional authority to actually protect our country . We can ’ t be a sovereign country if we don ’ t have borders and we don ’ t have protection of the American citizens , ” Sanders declared .
Trump ’ s tweet is the latest in a series he sent Friday morning urging the Senate to pass a bill which cleared the House of Representatives Thursday night , and fully provides 5 billion dollars for his proposed wall along the U.S. southern border . ( Related : Trump Moves Towards Shutdown Over Wall Funding )
Shutdown today if Democrats do not vote for Border Security ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 21 , 2018
No matter what happens today in the Senate , Republican House Members should be very proud of themselves . They flew back to Washington from all parts of the World in order to vote for Border Security and the Wall . Not one Democrat voted yes , and we won big . I am very proud of you ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 21 , 2018
This option was originally thought to be untenable in the Senate because it could not garner the necessary 60 votes . All legislation that passes the upper chamber of Congress must have 60 votes of support in order to clear a filibuster-proof majority . The Senate , however , reserves the ability to remake its own rules and end the historical filibuster .
Trump ’ s instruction for McConnell may , however , fall on deaf ears with the senate leader promising in 2017 that he would never end the filibuster in order to advance legislation .
“ There ’ s not a single senator in the majority who thinks we ought to change the legislative filibuster , ” McConnell declared in 2017 . “ Not one . ”