The President has been back out on the road again , spinning heartwarming tales and pushing for his second term agenda , as you ’ d expect any recently reelected leader to do . I ’ ll confess that I had a hard time paying attention to a lot of it , what with asteroids crashing to Earth on poop filled cruise ships and all , but there was one theme which caught my attention . He ’ s going all in on the hot new fad of comprehensive immigration reform .
President Barack Obama told a group of Senate Democrats Wednesday that Congress must move forward with comprehensive immigration reform , or else he will propose his own legislation on the hot-button topic… In a description of Wednesday ’ s meeting , the White House said Obama “ reiterated the key principles he believes must be a part of any bipartisan , commonsense effort , including continuing to strengthen border security , creating an earned path to citizenship , holding employers accountable and streamlining legal immigration . ”
Everyone seems to be talking about it these days , and not just Democrats . Republicans from Marco Rubio to John McCain have their own proposals , many of which involve some form of what the President is talking about . You can call it a “ path to citizenship ” or amnesty or Expedited Entry… whatever you like . But for some reason there are still quite a few of us who hear proposals such as these and get an uneasy feeling . For some of us , it may even be hard to quantify exactly what ’ s wrong . But if you harbor any such qualms , of course , you will be immediately labeled… say it with me…
Whatever . But as I considered the question this week , I realized that there might be a better way to describe exactly why this sounds troubling . And to understand it , you really need to talk about the story of Ray Bowman and William Kirkpatrick . Those names might not be familiar unless you lived in the Pacific Northwest in the 90s , but they were something of a legend . In a career spanning more than 16 years they robbed 28 banks around the country for a total of more than $ 7 million . I ’ m not going all anti-hero worship on you here , but you ’ ve got to admit… in terms of raw focus and mission attention , these guys were good . They stole a LOT of money without getting caught .
But the law finally caught up with them , and in 1999 they went to trial and were sent to lengthy stretches in the Crowbar Motel . Now here ’ s the thing about their story… during the trial , not one person – not in the media , the public , the courts or the government – not one single person stood up to say anything remotely like the following :
You know , yeah… okay .. they stole the money . But they ’ ve had it for a really long time now . And their families are depending on it for retirement and the kids ’ college . Some of it is invested in various places and we ’ d have to draw it out . Maybe , after all this time , we should just let them keep it .
Why did nobody say that ? The answer is because they broke the law and they got caught . This applies for virtually any other law you could name… except for illegal immigration . As things stand now , crossing the border without the proper authorization and paperwork is a crime . Beyond that , continuing to stay here without said credentials is also a crime . If you do this , you are committing a crime each and every day that you are here . But for some reason , we seem to be reaching the point where we ’ re fine with treating this as more of a game of Red Rover Red Rover . Yes , it ’ s a crime to come over the border uninvited , but if you make it to home base , maybe we ’ ll just forget about it .
Now , before the inevitable , hollow argument comes flying back at me here , I ’ m not talking about anything resembling the statute of limitations . ( Why we have a statute of limitations is a debate for another day . ) Bowman and Kirkpatrick kept committing crimes all through their run . And people who are here illegally continue to break the law every single day by the simple fact of being in the country . If you want to have a discussion about a statute on illegal immigration where people can leave for seven years and have it dropped from their record… fine . We can have that debate . But it doesn ’ t apply to this situation .
Allow me to also answer the second , inevitable question which crops up every time we have this discussion . No , I have no idea what to do about the five million or twelve million or twenty million illegal immigrants currently breaking the law every single day in this country . I have not even the beginning of a hint as to what should be done about it . I also don ’ t know what to do about the 90 % of robberies that go unsolved each year . But I ’ m pretty sure that the answer isn ’ t to decriminalize theft .
I ’ ve had some conflicting feelings about this immigration question myself , I confess . But America either is or it is not a nation of laws . If we are to change our system so that entering our nation without permission is no longer a crime – or at least not that serious of one – then lawmakers need to make that clear . But don ’ t tell us you ’ re doing it just because you can ’ t figure out how to stop people from breaking the law . And if keeping control of our borders and retaining management of who does or does not enter is still an important priority and a criminal matter , that should be made clear also . What we ’ re getting out of Washington now is static , clarifying nothing and selling a feel-good product which doesn ’ t seem to address any of these questions .