Across the decade that preceded Donald Trump ’ s election , American politicians of both parties consistently tried to pass big , sweeping immigration bills that would legalize most of the country ’ s illegal population and increase immigration overall . These bills failed because of populist opposition , at first bipartisan ( the resistance of a certain socialist senator from Vermont helped doom the 2007 effort ) but increasingly simply conservative , and over time the conservative opposition developed a well-founded suspicion of Republican elites , whose plans on immigration always seemed to require ignoring their own base .
This sense of betrayal was fertile ground for Trump , who used bigotry and bluster to sell himself to immigration hawks as a Republican who wouldn ’ t , indeed couldn ’ t , sell them out . You could trust him more than the Bushes and Rubios because he was willing to be disreputable , willing to give the finger to elite opinion , willing to play not only the tough guy but the bad guy . And you had to trust him , some hawks argued , because the Democrats had been radicalized on the issue and the hour was late ; it was either Trump or a Californian future , in which waves of immigration transformed the entire United States into a one-party , Democratic-governed state .
But the irony was that the populist resistance had already itself been reasonably effective in achieving some of the goals that Trump promised to pursue . Over the years when bipartisan elites were seeking the grail of “ comprehensive ” reform , they tried to appease skeptics with various forms of border-security spending , and this spending really did gradually harden the United States-Mexico border and make it much more difficult to simply slip across . Combine this with economic and demographic change in Latin America , and by the time Trump took office , border crossings had fallen by two-thirds since the presidency of George W. Bush .
In this sense Trump was a lagging , not a leading , indicator . He represented the political triumph of an attitude that had already changed policy , albeit in piecemeal and only half-intentionally , and partially sealed the porous borders of 15 years before . And his chief proposal , the famous wall , would have been a ( literal ) extension of the existing border-security project rather than a radical addition .