'To Be Determined ' : Trump Campaign Signals He May Moderate Immigration Stance
Is Donald Trump considering wavering on a key campaign promise ?
That 's what several news reports published over the weekend suggest . And while the Trump campaign issued a statement denying any shift on immigration policy , top surrogates and campaign operatives hinted that a change just might be on its way .
You 're going to have a deportation force , and you 're going to do it humanely .
The issue : what to do with the estimated 11 million immigrants already living in the United States illegally .
Since he entered the presidential race last year , Trump insisted they would have to be expelled from the country , despite the logistical and humanitarian questions a mass deportation would present .
`` You 're going to have a deportation force , and you 're going to do it humanely , '' he told MSNBC in November 2015 .
But this weekend , Buzzfeed reported that during a meeting with a Hispanic advisory council , Trump hinted he was n't totally attached to that proposal . People who attended the meeting told the website that Trump asked for suggestions on a `` humane and efficient '' way to address people already living in the country illegally . Other news outlets confirmed the conversations .
Univision went one step further , reporting that Trump will roll out a new immigration plan Thursday in Colorado `` that will include finding a way to legalize millions of undocumented immigrants . ''
That 's something the campaign immediately pushed back on . `` Mr. Trump said nothing today that he has n't said many times before , including in his convention speech , '' said Trump campaign staffer Steven Cheung in a statement provided to NPR .
And yet , when asked on CNN the next day whether Trump 's immigration policies would include that promised `` deportation force , '' Trump 's new campaign manager , Kellyanne Conway , responded , `` To be determined . ''
On CBS News ' Face the Nation , Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions said Trump is `` wrestling with how to do that , '' referring to removing people in the country illegally .
`` He did not make a firm commitment yesterday or at the meeting the other day about what he will do with that , '' Sessions said . `` But he did listen , and he 's talking about it . ''
Politics Presidential Campaign Strategies Shaped Early By Immigration Presidential Campaign Strategies Shaped Early By Immigration Listen · 5:16 5:16
A major shift on immigration policy would be the clearest signal yet that , faced with widening deficits in most national and state-level polls , the Trump campaign is now making a concerted effort to appeal to moderate and independent voters .
But a shift would carry major political risks , too . Immigration is a key issue — if not the key issue — for many of Trump 's fiercest supporters . And it 's been a hallmark of Trump 's campaign since day one , when he warned that people entering the country from Mexico were `` bringing drugs ; they 're bringing crime ; they 're rapists . ''
Trump has also framed himself as a no-apologies `` truth '' teller , who will push for what he thinks is best regardless of the political consequences . Walking back from a high-profile promise could undermine that image .
Trump 's campaign never provided details about what that deportation force would look like or how it would track down and expel people in the country illegally . But Trump stuck to the promise .
`` We have no choice if we 're going to run our country properly and if we 're going to be a country , '' he said in a December debate .
Ohio Gov . John Kasich questioned Trump 's proposal during that forum , saying , `` Come on , folks . We all know you ca n't pick them up and ship them across — back across the border . It 's a silly argument . It 's not an adult argument . It makes no sense . ''
Trump responded by citing a controversial Eisenhower administration initiative called `` Operation Wetback , '' which deported up to 1.5 million immigrants who were living in the United States illegally .
Trump 's response to terrorism has centered on immigration as well . After the mass shootings at Orlando 's Pulse nightclub in June , Trump reiterated his call for a temporary ban on all Muslims immigrating to the United States . That 's despite the fact that the shooter was born in New York City .
`` The only reason the killer was in America in the first place is because we allowed his family to come here , '' Trump said in his first speech after the attacks . `` That is a fact — and a fact we need to talk about . ''
At nearly every campaign rally , supporters chant `` Build that wall ! Build that wall ! '' referencing Trump 's promise to erect a wall along the entirety of the United States-Mexico border .
`` We will build a wall , do n't you worry , '' Trump assured the crowd Friday evening at a Michigan rally .