The Trump administration will now deport Mexican nationals — including families — who come to the US southern border seeking asylum to Guatemala , an expansion of a controversial program that will spark outrage among advocates and lawmakers , according to documents obtained by ███ .
The program , which was signed in July , was implemented in late November . Emailed guidance was sent to asylum officials across the country in recent days detailing how Mexicans were now to be included in the process .
The plan was initially only focused in El Paso but was later expanded to the Rio Grande Valley , according to documents seen by ███ .
A Department of Homeland Security spokesperson confirmed the news on Monday .
`` Certain Mexicans seeking humanitarian protections in the United States may now be eligible to be transferred to Guatemala and given the opportunity to seek protection there , under the terms of the Guatemala Asylum Cooperative Agreement , '' the spokesperson said .
As of late December 2019 , 43 asylum-seekers from El Salvador and Honduras have been deported to Guatemala under the agreement , according to government data obtained by ███ . The plan was initially limited to adult asylum-seekers but was expanded to families on Dec. 10 , according to documentation seen by ███ .
The Trump administration says the plan is a key element in its strategy to deter migration at the border and restrict asylum-seekers from entering the US . Advocates and asylum officers previously told ███ that the unprecedented plan lacks legality and organization and will lead to immigrants being placed in dangerous circumstances .
In recent months , the administration has been concerned about an increase of Mexican nationals arrested at the border . In December , Ken Cuccinelli , the second in command at the Department of Homeland Security , said that Mexicans could be sent to Guatemala as part of the agreement .
“ Mexico is dangerous ; Guatemala is even more so . This expansion of the [ agreement ] continues to prevent legitimate asylum-seekers from having their cases heard by the US and foists them upon the Guatemalan system , which has about a dozen staff , ” said one asylum officer , who was not authorized to speak publicly on the matter . “ Asylum in the US is now practically available only for people wealthy and privileged enough to get visas , shutting out many of the most vulnerable groups asking for help at our borders . ”
The interviews with asylum officers determine if a person is eligible to be deported to Guatemala . The immigrants are told they will be deported to Guatemala and can obtain protections there , instead of in the US .
Before this interview with an asylum officer , immigrants have no access to legal counsel — unlike their initial asylum screening , when they first arrive at the US border . The asylum-seeker must explicitly state that they fear persecution or torture in Guatemala in order to have an opportunity to avoid deportation , the email said . They must prove it is “ more likely than not ” that they will be persecuted or tortured there .