The Department of Homeland Security is ramping up a new campaign to try to persuade Central American families not to make the perilous journey to jump the U.S. border , as new statistics suggest that last summer ’ s surge could be happening again .
The effort comes as the administration fights a federal judge who is trying to severely limit detention of illegal immigrant families , once again testing President Obama ’ s standing in the Hispanic- and immigrant rights communities .
In a court filing last week , Border Patrol Deputy Chief Ronald Vitiello said they saw a rise in illegal immigrant families crossing into the U.S. in July , which was surprising as it breaks the usual pattern in which a decrease occurs as the year wears on and the immigrants ’ journey through the late-summer heat becomes more difficult .
The Obama administration said things could get even worse should Judge Dolly M. Gee ’ s decision to curtail detention of illegal immigrants stand , because it will serve as an invitation for more people to try — and to “ incentivize ” them to bring their children along on the dangerous trip , using them as human shields , of sorts , to avoid deportation .
Hoping to head off a surge now , the administration kicked off a public relations campaign last week to send the message to would-be immigrants in Honduras , El Salvador , Guatemala and Mexico — and to their relatives already here in the U.S. who might encourage them — that there is no legal status awaiting them .
“ There are no permisos , ” Customs and Border Protection Commissioner R. Gil Kerlikowske said at a press conference in El Paso , Texas , pushing back against a message that smugglers employed to entice tens of thousands of illegal immigrants to make the journey in the late spring and early summer last year .
What illegal immigrants called “ permisos , ” or free passes , were the court documents issued by immigration authorities . Because the U.S. didn ’ t have the political will , capacity or , in some cases , the legal authority , to hold the illegal immigrants while awaiting deportation , most of them were given a notice to appear for an upcoming court date and were released .
To the U.S. , that constituted enforcement , but to the immigrants that meant a chance to disappear into the shadows with the 11 million other illegal immigrants already here — thus the free pass .
Faced with that reality , the Obama administration sought to stiffen enforcement . And while the law prohibited detaining children traveling without their parents , it did not prohibit the detention of families , so Homeland Security opened new facilities to boost family detention space from fewer than 100 beds to several thousand .
But Judge Gee late last month issued a ruling that found much of family detention violates a 1990s-era court settlement . She has threatened to severely limit the amount of time women and children can be held and the conditions in which they can be held .
If she stands firm , the administration could have to revamp or shut down all of its family facilities .
The Justice Department filed briefs Thursday signaling it will fight that determination , arguing that Judge Gee is stretching the so-called Flores settlement beyond its original boundaries . The lawyers argued that if smugglers or would-be illegal immigrants learn that traveling with children could get them out of detention , it could entice more of them to bring youngsters along on the trip .
“ Specifically , the proposed remedies could heighten the risk of another urge in illegal migration across our Southwest border by Central American families , including by incentivizing adults to bring children with them on their dangerous journey as a means to avoid detention and gain access to the interior of the United States , ” Deputy Assistant Attorney General Benjamin C. Mizer said in the court papers .
“ The writing is on the wall — family detention is unacceptable , un-American , and will end , ” said Reps. Luis V. Gutierrez , Zoe Lofgren and Lucille Roybal-Allard , three leading Democrats on immigration . “ Rather than fight the court ’ s ruling , the right and moral response is to swiftly take the necessary steps to bring our nation ’ s detention policy in line with the Flores settlement agreement . ”
Representatives of Human Rights First , another group , visited one of the detention facilities last week , just days after Judge Gee ’ s ruling , and said they found conditions had worsened , with Immigration and Customs Enforcement officers setting bonds too high for families to be able to meet .
Human Rights Watch also disputed the government ’ s assertion that most mothers and children are being quickly released .
The administration now acknowledges that it can not use detention as a deterrent , and it has taken other steps to more quickly process illegal immigrant families , making initial asylum claim determinations much faster than in previous years , which reduces the time many of them remain in detention .
But officials told Judge Gee that they need to detain families for at least a few days in order to make their determinations and conduct necessary health screenings .
The Justice Department asked for a hearing later this month to present more evidence to the court , hoping to convince the judge that she misread the situation and to change her preliminary ruling .
Meanwhile , border officials are preparing for what could be a new surge , if smugglers use Judge Gee ’ s ruling to entice a new wave of crossers .
The public information campaign Mr. Kerlikowske kicked off last week involves broadcast and print ads promising stiff enforcement of immigration laws .
Similar approaches have been used the past two years — though a new watchdog report from the Government Accountability Office said there is no evidence the past campaigns worked .