WASHINGTON – President Trump is standing by a new rule that would allow the government to detain migrant families indefinitely while their asylum claims are being processed , and critics are pushing back .
The new Department of Homeland Security policy would effectively end the practice of `` catch and release '' at the border , but immigration advocates and Democrats say it would cause more problems than it solves .
`` Right now we have a million , more than a million plus , backlogged in terms of the immigration court , '' Geoffrey Hoffman with the University of Houston Immigration Law Clinic said . `` Most likely it 's going to take several years and then what the government is trying to do is say , all of those people who are in detention , all those families should be detained indefinitely while that process is pending . ''
The policy , announced Wednesday , would end a previous rule that children detained with their families could only be held for 20 days . Now , families would be kept together and held until their day in court .
Acting DHS Secretary Kevin McAleenan defended the move and also unveiled plans for new housing in a news conference . He said the old agreement basically served as an incentive for illegal entry .
`` Human smugglers advertise and intending migrants know that even if they cross the border illegally , arriving at the border with a child has meant that they will be released into the United States to wait for court proceedings that could take five years or more , '' said McAleenan .
Democrats are also blasting the change , accusing Trump of wanting to punish children .
`` This president seems to want maximum cruelty for children who are brown , '' presidential candidate Julian Castro said .
Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi also criticized the new rule in a statement . `` The administration is seeking to codify child abuse , plain and simple , '' she claimed .
The president says congressional inaction is creating the crisis at the border .
`` If the Democrats would meet and we could fix the loopholes and asylum , which is what you are talking about to an extent – but let me just tell you very much I have the children on my mind . It bothers me very greatly , '' Trump told reporters .
He 's also coming under fire for saying he 's considering ending birthright citizenship which is guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution .
`` We 're looking at that very seriously , birthright citizenship where you have a baby , you know , you walk over the border have a baby , congratulations the baby is now a US citizen . We 're looking at it very , very seriously , '' he said .
The new rule would take effect 60 days from Friday but is already facing legal challenges , so it could take much longer .