Democrats blasted President Donald Trump this week over new asylum regulations enacted in response to the growing humanitarian crisis at the southern border .
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) called the regulations — which require migrants to claim asylum in the first safe country to which they arrive , not the country of their preference — `` illegal '' and `` cruel . ''
However , new video of former President Barack Obama from five years ago shows just how far Democrats ' goal posts have moved .
Speaking in 2014 , Obama said that poverty and crime are not sufficient legal reasons for granting asylum .
`` Under U.S. law , we admit a certain number of refugees from all around the world based on some fairly narrow criteria . And , typically , refugees status is not granted just based on economic need or because a family lives in a bad neighborhood , or poverty , '' Obama said .
`` It 's typically defined fairly narrowly , '' he explained . `` You have a state , for example , that was targeting a political activist and they need to get out of the country , for fear of prosecution or even death . ''
`` There may be some narrow circumstances in which there is a humanitarian or refugee status that a family might be eligible for , '' Obama went on to say . `` If that were the case , it would be better for them to be able to apply in country , rather than take a very dangerous journey all the way up to Texas to make those same claims . ''
However , Obama was clear that the American asylum-request pipeline is not suited to handle a large-scale humanitarian asylum crisis .
`` I think it 's important to recognize that would not necessarily accommodate a large number of additional migrants , '' Obama emphasized .
Obama 's comments followed a meeting at the White House with Honduran President Juan Orlando Hernandez , then-Guatemalan President Otto Perez Molina , and then-El Salvadorian President Salvador Sanchez Ceren .
Obama had met with his three counterparts to discuss what was at the time an ongoing migrant crisis impacting Central America , Mexico , and the U.S. That crisis is most notable for the surge of unaccompanied migrant children that overwhelmed U.S. immigration resources .