The Trump administration asked the Supreme Court late Thursday to let the revised travel ban take effect .
The administration filed two emergency applications with the nine Court justices seeking to block two lower court rulings that blocked President Trump ’ s executive order .
In the filing , the Justice Department argued that the appeals court in Richmond , Va. made several mistakes in ruling against Trump ’ s travel order .
Sarah Isgur Flores , a Justice Department spokeswoman , said the ban is lawful .
The Justice Department is `` confident that President Trump 's executive order is well within his lawful authority to keep the nation safe and protect our communities from terrorism , '' Flores said . “ The president is not required to admit people from countries that sponsor or shelter terrorism , until he determines that they can be properly vetted and do not pose a security risk to the United States . ''
The order barred entry for people from six Muslim majority nations , including Iran , Libya , Somalia , Sudan , Syria and Yemen for 90 days while the U.S. implements stricter visa screenings .
The 4th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals called the national security concerns an after-the-fact justification for a policy that was `` intended to bar Muslims from this country . ''
Rights groups that have been fighting the policy in the courts said the justices should not allow the travel and refugee bans to take effect .
`` Again and again , our nation 's courts have found that President Trump 's Muslim ban is unconstitutional . We will continue to defend our plaintiffs ' right to live free from fear of discriminatory treatment by the federal government , '' said Karen Tumlin , legal director of the National Immigration Law Center .
Trump signed his first executive order on travel a week after he took office in January . It applied to travelers from the six countries as well as Iraq and took effect immediately , causing chaos and panic at airports as the Homeland Security Department scrambled to figure out who the order covered and how it was to be implemented .
A federal judge blocked it eight days later , an order that was upheld by a 9th Circuit panel . Rather than pursue an appeal , the administration said it would revise the policy .
In March , Trump issued a narrower order , but federal courts that have examined it so far have blocked it as well .