Key senators are exploring an immigration bill that would force every U.S. worker—citizen or not—to carry a high-tech identity card that could use fingerprints or other personal markers to prove a person 's legal eligibility to work .
The idea , signaled only in vaguely worded language from senators crafting a bipartisan immigration bill , has privacy advocates and others concerned that the law would create a national identity card that , in time , could track Americans at airports , hospitals and through other facets of their lives .
The lawmakers have n't committed to the `` biometric '' ID card , and are wary of any element that might split the fragile coalition of Democrats , Republicans and outside organizations working toward agreement on a broad overhaul of immigration laws .
But at least five of the eight senators writing the bill have backed biometric ID cards in the past . At least three of them—Sens . Lindsey Graham ( R. , S.C. ) , John McCain ( R. , Ariz. ) and Charles Schumer ( D. , N.Y. ) —have said they support requiring the cards under the new law but are open to other options , aides say .
The goal is to ensure that employers can learn the legal status of all new hires quickly , part of the effort to dissuade illegal immigrants from entering the country or seeking jobs . A system now in place , called E-Verify , matches prospective hires to a database of Social Security numbers and other data , but it can be foiled at times when illegal immigrants give stolen names , dates of birth and Social Security numbers .
The Senate group , in a statement guiding their work on a new law , called for workers to prove their legal status and identities through `` non-forgeable electronic means . '' Senate aides said the language was intentionally broad because of the sensitivity of the issue . It leaves open several possibilities for how new hires would be required to prove they can legally work .
Mr. Graham , in an interview , said that in his mind the language refers to a requirement for biometric ID cards . `` This is the public 's way of contributing to solving the problem '' of illegal immigration , Mr. Graham said .
A second senator working on the bill , Jeff Flake ( R. , Ariz. ) , said in an interview he is open to the idea of biometric ID cards but that the issue remained unsettled . `` You 've got to give employers the tools '' to screen new workers , Mr. Flake said , noting he had signed on to legislation in past years that employed biometric data .
Mr. McCain 's spokesman declined to discuss Senate talks on the current bill . Two other senators who have backed the ID card in the past , Mr. Schumer and Democrat Dick Durbin of Illinois , said through spokesmen that the new Senate legislation would n't necessarily call for a biometric card .
In 2010 , Messrs. Graham and Schumer offered an immigration plan that included the requirement for an ID card featuring either fingerprints or a scan of the veins in the top of a person 's hand .
Like the senators , President Barack Obama is calling for an improved worker-verification system , but he does n't specifically call for a biometric card for all workers . In principles for an immigration overhaul released this year , Mr. Obama called for a `` fraud-resistant , tamper-resistant Social Security card . '' Draft legislation prepared by the White House refers to collecting biometric information from those in the country illegally as part of qualifying for legal status . A senior administration official said the White House wants to deal with `` fraud in a way that works and is cost effective . ''
The other senators writing the immigration bill are Marco Rubio ( R. , Fla. ) , Michael Bennet ( D. , Colo. ) and Robert Menendez ( D. , N.J. ) . Spokesmen for Messrs. Rubio and Bennet declined to comment on the ID cards , while a spokeswoman for Mr. Menendez said the lawmaker has supported employee verification with antifraud measures .
As an alternative to a biometric card , senators may move to strengthen the E-Verify system by , for example , requiring new hires to answer questions about previous addresses or other details , a person familiar with the Senate group 's thinking said .
Aides to several senators in the group said that a biometric card would be used only for employment verification and that it would n't become a mechanism for linking other personal data or replacing drivers ' licenses . Still , privacy advocates fear that governments and companies would in time require people to use the biometric card in other spheres of daily life .
`` I subscribe to the 'if you build it , they will come ' school of regulation , '' said Chris Calabrese of the American Civil Liberties Union , who said he worried that the card would be required to board airplanes , to vote or perhaps purchase a firearm . `` It becomes in essence a permission slip to do all of the ordinary things that are your rights as an American , '' he said .
Alex Nowrasteh , an immigration-policy expert at the Cato Institute , a libertarian think tank , said : `` It 's not only a gross violation of individual privacy , it 's an enormously high-cost policy that will have an incredibly low to negligible benefit . ''
`` Every time I 've heard someone say 'non-forgeable , ' it 's code for biometric , '' Mr. Nowrasteh added .
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce supports expanding the E-Verify system , which is now used by a fraction of companies , though some states require all businesses to use it to clear new hires . The chamber has n't taken a position on biometric IDs , a spokeswoman said .
Some businesses support a move to biometric cards . If Congress expanded E-Verify nationally , it could widen identity theft and create new paperwork for small businesses , some businesses said . A 2009 study by Westat Inc. for the Department of Homeland Security found that 54 % of unauthorized workers who submitted E-Verify paperwork were able to trick the system , though unauthorized workers account for only 6.2 % of E-Verify queries .
A high-tech ID card that could be scanned could solve that problem , said Manuel Cunha Jr. , president of the Nisei Farmers League in Fresno , Calif . The scan would check the employee against a federal database to confirm eligibility to work . `` I do n't want on the biometric card when I went to the hospital or whether I am married , '' Mr. Cunha said . `` I just want to know Manuel F. Cunha Jr. can work . ''
Julie Pace , an immigration lawyer from Phoenix , said she previously opposed a biometric card but would now support it as part of a broader immigration overhaul , arguing it would make worker verification more accurate . `` Undocumented workers today would be so happy to come out from the underground , '' she said .
It is n't clear how much such a card would cost businesses and taxpayers . When Mr. Schumer proposed biometric identification in 2010 , he estimated card scanners could cost businesses as much as $ 800 .
A 2012 study by the Chief Justice Earl Warren Institute on Law and Social Policy at the University of California , Berkeley , law school concluded that a national ID system would cost the government $ 22.6 billion to create and $ 2.1 billion each year to operate .
Most European countries require their citizens to carry some form of ID . The U.K. recently attempted to offer voluntary national ID cards . Citing concerns over cost and civil liberties , it scrapped the plan in 2010 .