Almost 15,000 Migrant Children Now Held At Nearly Full Shelters
The number of immigrant children being held in government custody has reached almost 15,000 , putting a network of federally contracted shelters across the country near capacity .
The national network of more than 100 shelters are 92 percent full , according to the Department of Health and Human Services . The situation is forcing the government to consider a range of options , possibly including releasing children more quickly to sponsors in the United States or expanding the already crowded shelter network .
Most of migrant children are teenage boys from Central America who travel to the border alone . Many are escaping poverty or gangs , and they plan to ask for asylum and ultimately find work or go to school in the U.S .
Waves of these so-called unaccompanied children have arrived in recent years , and the numbers are on the rise again . In November , according to Customs and Border Protection , an average of 175 unaccompanied children crossed the southern border every day .
The largest migrant youth shelter in the country is in Tornillo in remote west Texas . About 2,800 children live in heated , sand-colored tents set up on a patch of desert a few hundred yards from the Rio Grande .
The camp is staffed for 3,000 children . It can house up to 3,800 children , but that will require hiring more staff .
A source familiar with Tornillo 's operation , who asked not to be identified because this person had not been authorized to speak to the media , said the shelter is taking in roughly twice as many kids every week as it is able to release . `` This is unsustainable , '' the source said .
The federal government could add more beds at Tornillo or elsewhere . Another option is to release the minors more quickly to sponsors who agree to take the children — usually a family member who 's already living in the U.S . The children stay with this sponsor while their asylum case is pending .
Federal officials screen the sponsors , but that vetting process has slowed to a crawl because of a new policy that says anyone who lives in the sponsor 's house can be fingerprinted for a criminal background check .
The Trump administration , when implementing the policy earlier this year , said officials are taking these extra precautions to ensure children are n't put in danger .
If those vetting rules were relaxed , 1,300 children are ready to be released to sponsors , according to the source familiar with the Tornillo operation . The background checks are taking so long that the average stay for a child in Tornillo has now reached 50 days , the source said .
A senior official with Health and Human Services said it would be `` premature '' to say what action would be taken to address capacity issues at the shelters . The official spoke on the condition of anonymity because a plan had n't been finalized .
When asked whether the government is considering relaxing the screening of sponsor households , the official said that `` everything is on the table . '' The official also said the shelter network could be expanded .
`` We continue to look for options that do n't jeopardize child safety , '' the senior official said . The official also blamed a broken immigration system that acts as a `` perverse incentive '' for undocumented children to cross the border in the first place .
The youth shelters have come under intense scrutiny and criticism from child welfare experts .
`` Detention is never in the best interest of a child , especially when it 's extended , '' said Jennifer Podkul , senior director for policy and advocacy at Kids In Need of Defense . `` It 's bad for the child 's mental and physical health . ''
Podkul said child welfare experts agree it 's best to put kids in smaller facilities , not larger ones , where they can be affected by isolation and illness .
Protesters , including congressional Democrats , have been coming from across the country to the fence line at Tornillo to denounce the facility .
Vince Perez , the El Paso county commissioner whose precinct includes Tornillo , wants the facility to close . `` We 're already battling the perception that [ El Paso County ] is inherently a violent place . Now you have a massive detention facility where you have thousands of children detained there . It 's deplorable , '' Perez said .
Last month , the Office of Inspector General at Health and Human Services identified two `` significant vulnerabilities '' at Tornillo . The contractor , BCFS , did not conduct FBI fingerprint background checks on its 2,000 staffers , though it had performed routine criminal background checks . And the facility lacked enough mental health clinicians for the swelling number of children .
BCSF officials have defended the camp , insisting that it is not a detention facility and that the employees are not guards . They say every child has access to three hot meals , snacks , education classes , medical care , soccer games , movie nights and , soon , Christmas festivities .