IRVINE , Calif.—Senior pastor Kenton Beshore said the first sermons on the plight of illegal immigrants did n't go over well with many members of his evangelical church , which sits on a 50-acre campus in Orange County and has a 3,400-seat sanctuary , sports facilities , restaurant and a man-made lake .
`` We took a hit on it , '' said Mr. Beshore . `` We had people who walked out and whose giving went away . '' It was part of the reason the church ended 2012 with a $ 500,000 budget shortfall , he said .
But much has changed in the two years since—both at Mr. Beshore 's 14,000-member Mariners Church and at conservative evangelical congregations around the U.S .
After decades of sitting on the sidelines of the debate , evangelical Christians are prodding Republican lawmakers to support a path to U.S. citizenship for the nation 's illegal immigrants , based on their reading of Bible teachings . Evangelical pastors from pulpits across the U.S. cite Scriptures about welcoming strangers . Some compare illegal immigrants with modern-day lepers , who should be treated with compassion by Christians .
An estimated 300 evangelical leaders , including Mr. Beshore , plan to convene in Washington next week to lobby lawmakers of both parties for an immigration policy overhaul , an issue that has divided voters , lawmakers and church congregations .
Evangelicals Preach Welcome for Immigrants Congregants worshiped at Mariners Church in Irvine , Calif. , during Easter services . John Francis Peters for The Wall Street Journal More photos and interactive graphics
A bipartisan Senate group working on the issue could introduce legislation as early as this week . Supporters of an immigration overhaul hope the grass-roots movement by evangelical Christians , which has included meetings with local GOP leaders , will help swing the debate .
`` Republican lawmakers take guidance from evangelical America on social policy issues , '' said Ali Noorani , head of the National Immigration Forum , an advocacy organization . `` That evangelicals have taken on immigration bodes well for passage of comprehensive reform . ''
Evangelical leaders have met with Republican Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida and U.S. Rep. Bob Goodlatte ( R. , Virginia ) , who is chairman of the judiciary committee that will shape the House proposal .
`` We have been encouraging of folks like Marco Rubio and provided them with critical cover , '' said Ralph Reed , founder of the Christian Coalition and now head of the Faith and Freedom Coalition . `` What really changed the political calculus was the introduction of a religious , spiritual and compassionate case for immigration reform . ''
Immigration Law in America Review legislative milestones and key shifts in immigration policy .
The emerging evangelical position on immigration is a dramatic shift for a socially conservative movement that places a high premium on law and order . It comes as many evangelical churches , much like the Republican Party , see an opportunity to add members from the swelling Hispanic population .
`` They are making themselves heard , '' said U.S. Rep. James Lankford of Oklahoma , Republican Policy Committee chairman , who also has met with evangelical pastors . `` Their case is built on compassion and justice : 'How can we deal with this and resolve it ? ' ''
U.S. Rep Lamar Smith , a Texas Republican who has opposed legalization , said people should be careful about citing Scriptures in the debate .
`` The Bible contains numerous passages that do not necessarily support amnesty and instead support the rule of law , '' he said . `` The Scriptures clearly indicate that God charges civil authorities with preserving order , protecting citizens and punishing wrongdoers . ''
Mr. Beshore said some members accused the church of taking a political position that flouted U.S. law after preaching about immigration in the fall .
`` I tell my people they need the poor far more than the poor need them . That 's what a follower of Christ should do , '' said Mr. Beshore , 59 years old , whose wife , Laurie , also is a pastor at Mariners Church .
Many of Mr. Beshore 's church members , as well as some Republican leaders , have since warmed to the idea of helping the estimated 11 million people , mostly from Mexico , who live in the U.S. without permission .
The loss in November by Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney was blamed , in part , on his suggestions for `` self-deportation '' that alienated many Latino voters .
High-profile evangelical leaders stayed out of the debate over the landmark 1986 immigration law signed by President Ronald Reagan that allowed legal status to some three million immigrants . They also steered clear of the Bush administration 's unsuccessful push for an overhaul in 2006 and 2007 .
This time , the National Association of Evangelicals is taking a lead role , drawing on a membership of 45,000 congregations from 40 denominations .
The new focus began around 2009 , with the book `` Welcoming the Stranger , '' by Matthew Soerens and Jenny Hwang of the group 's humanitarian arm . It offered a Christian argument for changes to immigration law and was distributed to thousands of pastors .
Not all church members agree that an immigration overhaul is part of their Christian duties , and many pastors avoid the issue . But polls show views are shifting quickly .
A Pew survey last month found that 55 % of white evangelical Christians believed immigrants were a burden on the U.S. , compared with 66 % who held that view in 2010 . Overall , 41 % of Americans believe the newcomers are a burden , polls said , down from 50 % three years ago .
Some Mariner church members said their attitudes changed after performing hands-on Christian service . The church has long offered free after-school tutoring and English classes in Orange County neighborhoods of Southeast Asian refugees and recent Latino immigrants .
John Hornburg , a wealthy real-estate developer and self-described conservative , is one of the volunteers who teaches English to immigrants at a Mariners center . `` As I learned their stories , '' he said , `` I started to look at these folks through a prism of humanity and my heart just opened up . ''
Many Mariner congregants live in Newport Beach , where per capita income is $ 81,000 . The church runs volunteer programs in nearby Santa Ana , where per capita income is $ 16,600 . Stephen Hueber , 30 years old , said tutoring in Santa Ana `` put a whole new face on the immigration issue . ''
Since taking the helm at Mariners in 1983 , Mr. Beshore has urged members to serve the needy but stayed away from illegal immigration . `` This is stepping into quick sand , '' he recalled thinking .
That began to change in October 2011 , when he and his wife joined 100 evangelical leaders in Chicago to coordinate a `` Christian response '' to illegal immigration . On the flight there , Mr. Beshore read `` Welcoming the Stranger . ''
In Chicago , Mr. Soerens , of the National Association of Evangelicals , interviewed Bill Hybels , senior pastor of Willow Creek Community Church , about the emergence of immigration as a spiritual theme at his Illinois megachurch .
The pastor described the growing Spanish-language Sunday service at the church attended by immigrants , many living in the U.S. illegally . He said he decided Willow Creek could n't ignore their plight .
Some members left . But Mr. Hybels recounted that he took solace in Matthew 25:35 : `` For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat , I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink . I was a stranger and you invited me in . ''
Mr. Beshore said the exchange between Messrs. Hybels and Soerens left him convinced of `` a biblical obligation '' to address immigration at Mariners . He invited Mr. Soerens to lead two sessions—one to pastors , staff and elders of the church , and another for members .
When the pastor announced a `` Conversation on Immigration '' at a Sunday service in March last year , the church campus erupted in chatter , recalled Fred Gladney , an associate elder : `` People were asking each other , 'Why are we doing this ? Why do we need this ? Is there a position the church is going to drive ? ' ''
The event drew several hundred members and a dozen or so activists who oppose illegal immigration . `` If immigrants are our neighbors , then we are called biblically to love them in interpersonal interaction and the public policy side we support , '' Mr. Soerens said at the meeting . `` We have a very duplicitous system , a help-wanted sign next to a no-trespassing sign . ''
During a question-and-answer session , one person said illegal immigrants were stealing work from Americans . Mr. Beshore later got emails from members who said the discussion was insulting , one-sided and anti-patriotic . `` I lost enthusiasm '' for the church , said Mark McCracken , a member of 20 years .
Others left the meeting with a new view . `` It opened our eyes to see the issue more broadly and biblically , '' said Mr. Gladney , the associate church elder who works as an executive coach in Newport Beach .
In June 2012 , evangelical leaders announced the creation of the Evangelical Immigration Table , a coalition to advance an immigration reform message and build support from congregations . In November , the umbrella group of conservative and liberal evangelical organizations told lawmakers that an immigration overhaul needed to account for family unity , human dignity , border security and fairness to taxpayers .
Early this year , the evangelical coalition launched a national campaign to encourage pastors to study 40 biblical passages related to immigration with their congregants and begin lobbying their elected officials . Last month , the evangelical coalition announced it backed giving immigrants a path to citizenship and launched an ad campaign on Christian radio stations .
`` The good news is everyone in Washington seems to be getting on the same page , '' said Mr. Beshore . `` No political party owns this issue anymore . ''