WASHINGTON—As a group of U.S. senators released full details of a bill to overhaul immigration , outside groups quickly launched efforts to tweak it in their favor—or to derail it entirely .
The eight lawmakers made their proposals public Wednesday morning , officially kicking off the broadest push to overhaul immigration laws since a failed effort in 2007 . Negotiations stretched into Tuesday evening , as lawmakers hashed out details of visa programs for farm workers and other low-wage workers , along with other issues .
The bill lays out plans to spend at least $ 4.5 billion more on border security and to legalize some 11 million unauthorized immigrants living in the U.S. , but the authors made it clear some provisions may be altered .
`` I guarantee you that today , 20 people will call up as they look at the language and say , 'What about this , what about that , I 'd rather have this , I 'd rather have that , ' `` said New York Sen. Charles Schumer , a Democratic member of the group . `` We 're open to some changes . ''
Many groups—high-tech organizations , farmworker groups , large companies and immigration advocates—applauded the bill before offering their wish lists of ways to change it .
Meanwhile , groups hoping to limit immigration vowed to intensify their efforts . The Federation for American Immigration Reform , a national group that plans a campaign to fight the bill , set up a talk-show blitz in Washington , with roughly 40 radio hosts interviewing politicians , law-enforcement officials and others opposed to the plans .
Roy Beck , executive director of Numbers USA , another organization favoring tough immigration curbs , said he could tap 1.8 million activists to help thwart the plan . `` The way this bill 's written is perfect for our plan to defeat it , '' he said . `` It is adding more foreign workers at every turn , as if we have a labor shortage . ''
Immigration advocates raised alarms about a provision that requires beefed-up border security and employment verification before steps to legalize undocumented immigrants can kick in .
`` We are very concerned that this proposal has security triggers that create an obstacle to citizenship for our families , '' said Cristina Jimenez , managing director of United We Dream , the largest organization representing undocumented youth . `` We have to make sure the pathway is clear , '' she said .
The legislation sets goals for the Department of Homeland Security to be able to monitor comings and goings across the entire southern border and to apprehend or turn back 90 % of people trying to cross illegally . Before undocumented immigrants are allowed to obtain green cards , a plan to reach those goals has to be `` substantially deployed and substantially operational , '' the bill says . It does n't require the plan to be fully implemented , meaning there is no process to ensure the security goals are ever met .
`` The triggers are based on developing plans and spending money , not on reaching that effectiveness , which is really quite clever , '' said Frank Sharry , executive director of advocacy group America 's Voice . `` On the other hand , when you 've got that kind of money and that kind of political pressure , they 're going to really try to reach those . ''
Few groups have been more critical than the construction sector . Geoff Burr , vice president of federal affairs for the Associated Builders and Contractors cheered the Senate progress , but said a plan for low-wage workers allocated too few construction visas . `` We like this program so much that we are deeply disappointed we wo n't be able to use much of it at all , '' he said .
Amid supporters ' complaints about the legislation 's finer points and opponents ' promises to block the bill , there was also celebration Wednesday as immigration advocates hailed what they see as the start of an historic push to rewrite immigration laws .
On Wednesday , hundreds of evangelical pastors converged on Washington to lobby Republicans whose votes will be crucial to the passage of any bill .
At a church service held near the Capitol , evangelical leaders invoked Bible passages to make the case for an immigration plan , and stressed that the rollout of a bipartisan Senate bill was just the beginning .
`` We have to keep pulling it across the finish line , '' said Richard Land , an influential leader of the Southern Baptist Convention .