Emails between former Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach and the then-acting director of the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency reveal that Kobach sent a list of 289 people to the agency in 2017 to ask it to check if any of them were undocumented , according to the Kansas City Star .
Kobach had pulled the list from occupancy licenses in Fremont , Nebraska , which had hired him to craft a city ordinance banning undocumented immigrants from renting houses and apartments . ( Kobach , representing the city in court , won Fremont ’ s right to enact that ordinance in 2014 . ) “ The Fremont ordinance permits the city to share any information on the alien ’ s application with ICE for ICE ’ s own purposes , ” Kobach wrote in the emails . “ So if your agents want to use that information for ICE enforcement operations , the ordinance contemplates that . ”
Kobach ’ s emails were specific . Under the ordinance , the occupancy licenses renters had to submit to landlords mandated that renters mark if they were citizens or noncitizens . Kobach apparently wanted to use these answers to help Fremont rid itself of undocumented immigrants . “ If you could assign someone to determine the immigration status of each alien and add that to the attached word file , that would be great , ” he wrote . But his request didn ’ t lead to any actions from ICE , as the agency ’ s acting director , Thomas Homan , replied in the emails that he would need proof Kobach was acting on behalf of the Fremont police . Homan also warned against using occupancy licenses to learn anything about someone ’ s immigration status .
According to the government watchdog American Oversight , which obtained the emails through a records request , Kobach ’ s straightforward suggestion that ICE identify undocumented immigrants from his list and arrest them appears to undermine the legal justification for the ordinance . According to the Star , when the American Civil Liberties Union sued over the ordinance , alleging that it was discriminatory and intended to frighten off Latino residents of Fremont , Kobach—who was paid more than $ 100,000 for his immigration work for the city—said that its intention was not to intimidate immigrants . If Kobach gave the names on applications directly to ICE to ask for information on immigrants , critics contend , any fears that the ordinance would be used to feed information to ICE would have been justified .
Kobach has been a zealous anti-immigrant figure in recent years . He built much of his political career on unsubstantiated claims that undocumented immigrants were illegally voting , and in 2017 , he was placed in charge of Trump ’ s failed voter fraud commission . As Kansas ’ secretary of state , Kobach focused on claims of voter fraud , but when he ran for governor of the state in 2018 , he lost to Democrat Laura Kelly . Kobach is now running for the U.S. Senate .