MATIAS ROMERO , Mexico ( ███ ) - Central American migrants stranded on a journey through Mexico because of U.S. President Donald Trump ’ s pressure on the Mexican government say they will struggle on toward the United States , even as their “ caravan ” said it would disband in Mexico City .
Central American migrants , part of a caravan moving through Mexico toward the U.S. border , stand in line to register at a makeshift centre of Mexico 's National Institute of Migration , in Matias Romero , Mexico April 4 , 2018 . ███/Henry Romero
Fearful of the risks to children among the bedraggled and tired knot of travelers , the organizers of the annual caravan , U.S.-based advocacy group Pueblo Sin Fronteras , said it would end in the capital , not at the border as had been planned .
“ It ’ s not because of Donald Trump , ” said Irineo Mujica , director of Pueblo Sin Fronteras , which has staged the caravan since 2010 to draw attention to migrants ’ rights and help them .
Mujica said the group did not want to put children on freight trains , which are traditionally used to cover part of the journey to the border . Nicknamed “ la bestia ” ( the beast ) , the train is infamous for causing injury to migrants .
Trump has lashed out at the caravan , accusing Mexico of failing to stop illegal immigrants heading to the border .
The president took a hard line on illegal immigration during the 2016 election campaign and is frustrated by the failure of Congress to fund his long-promised border wall .
Trump would sign a proclamation on Wednesday ordering the deployment of the National Guard to the border with Mexico , Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen said .
Mexican officials , meanwhile , have screened people in the caravan , stalling it and dispersing migrants . The foreign ministry denied putting pressure on the migrants , saying that the caravan was breaking up of its own volition .
By mid-afternoon on Wednesday in the southern town of Matias Romero , migrants were sprawled in the fields singing songs or tying to sleep off the searing sun .
Sitting in the dust was a seven-year-old boy who removed his dirty flip-flops and splayed his feet , revealing flaking and blackened cracks between his toes from days of walking with his mother and sister from El Salvador .
A number of the children in the caravan were suffering from diarrhea , vomiting , respiratory problems and dehydration , said a local doctor , Julio Cesar Iglesias .
Some migrants may get permits to stay , while others will be sent back to their home countries , the Mexican government says .
Hundreds of the migrants , many from Honduras , marched in Matias Romero on Tuesday evening to draw attention to their plight near the field where they have been bivouacked since the weekend .
There were shouts to oust Honduran President Juan Orlando Hernandez , whose disputed re-election victory in a November vote split the country .
International observers criticized the result due to serious concerns over vote-rigging , though Mexico and the Trump administration recognized it a few weeks later . Some migrants in the caravan saw no future for themselves in Honduras .
One of them , Maria Elena Colindres Ortega , an opponent of Hernandez and former member of the Honduran congress who is seeking U.S. political asylum , said the march on Tuesday aimed to show the migrants were not giving up .
“ We ’ re marching and moving to prove to ( Trump ) that we are not afraid , ” said Colindres Ortega , a mother of seven .
Migration officials on Wednesday continued to register names and issue permits to some migrants that give them 20 days to leave Mexico - a far shorter period than the caravan has taken to reach the U.S. border in previous years , organizers said .
The organizers said that on Sunday about 300 migrants , most of them men , left the group , and headed to the eastern state of Veracruz . There , according to three witnesses , four truckloads of immigration officials gave them 48 hours to disperse .