U.S. Border Patrol personnel take illegal immigrants from Honduras into custody in Falfurrias , Texas , June 19 , 2018 . ( Adrees Latif/Reuters )
So long as there are very poor countries , very poor people will understandably want to move here .
Nearly everyone can agree : The scene at the southern border is a horror .
Even those who somehow think that it isn ’ t a moral horror to see little kids pulled from their parents and put in cages — or , to use the preferred term among White House defenders , “ chain-link partitioned holding areas ” — recognize that it is a political horror . If the politics weren ’ t so bad , supporters wouldn ’ t be so desperate to come up with more palatable euphemisms .
As ugly as things are , it ’ s worth remembering that the Obama administration had similar struggles and similar responses . The point here isn ’ t “ whataboutism. ” It ’ s simply to note that the U.S. , not any particular administration , faces a very difficult challenge , shared by other economically advanced nations : Untold millions of poor people want to be richer , and they believe they can make that happen simply by moving here or to Western Europe . And they ’ re right .
It may be 2018 on everyone ’ s calendar , but that doesn ’ t mean we all live in the same moment . Very poor people become richer by moving here because , in a sense , they are moving to the future .
Imagine you live in a poor village in Asia or Africa ( or in Appalachia 150 years ago ) where you still need to fetch water from a well or even a river a mile away . In terms of time used and energy exerted , you ’ d be richer if you moved to the U.S. even if you spent the rest of your life poor by our standards . Mere access to clean tap water , electricity , and indoor plumbing is considered a luxury in some parts of the world . Not to mention the rule of law , human rights , freedom of conscience , etc .
By crossing the U.S. border , low-skilled Mexican laborers automatically become ten to 20 times more productive . It ’ s not because their work ethic magically improves . It ’ s because our economy has countless productivity multipliers built into it , from better machinery to better laws and more efficient institutions and practices .
William Lewis , the former director of the McKinsey Global Institute , found that illiterate , non-English-speaking Mexican agricultural laborers in the U.S. were four times more productive than the same sort of laborers in Brazil . Take a Yemeni bus driver and put him behind the wheel of a bus in the U.S . According to economists Michael Clemens , Claudio Montenegro , and Lant Pritchett , the Yemeni bus driver will become 15 times more productive doing the same job , mostly because the people he ’ s driving around are more productive too .
This is not an argument for open borders . I simply want to point out that so long as there are very poor countries , very poor people will understandably want to move here . This would be true even if those poor countries had solved all of the other problems — violence , anarchy , persecution — that cause decent people to want to flee home .
In other words , supply will exceed demand for a very long time to come . Even if we tripled our intake of legal immigrants , more would still want to come .
The best long-term solution to this problem is to make poor countries rich as quickly as possible . In the meantime , the immediate challenge presented by this level of desire to immigrate to the U.S. is going to be less economic and more political and cultural . Immigrants bring new customs , values , and ideas of how society should work . As the Swiss writer Max Frisch famously said of the guest workers his country imported , “ We wanted workers , but we got people instead . ”
The best long-term solution to this problem is to make poor countries rich as quickly as possible .
Waves of immigrants invite reactions . Many people like to call these backlashes racist , and in some cases they are . But they are also entirely natural , human responses to sudden cultural changes . German chancellor Angela Merkel ’ s government may fall because of one such reaction . ( The 86 percent of Germans who want to see a more forceful approach to repatriation can ’ t all be bigots . ) Votes in favor of Brexit didn ’ t strongly correlate with unemployment very much , but they did with attitudes on immigration .
President Trump ’ s election was in part a reaction to high levels of immigration , legal and illegal . If people don ’ t want unreasonable politicians to exploit immigration-fueled anxiety , then reasonable politicians on both sides need to take immigration far more seriously than they have so far . If they don ’ t , things will get much worse than the spectacle on the border today .