Illegal immigration across the southwest border surged last month as President Trump ’ s zero-tolerance effort crumbled , and smugglers and migrant families rushed to take advantage of renewed “ catch-and-release ” loopholes .
Border officials acknowledged a “ crisis ” as the number of families reached record levels , topping even the worst days of the Obama administration .
It ’ s so bad that caravans of families like the one that drew headlines this spring have become commonplace . Authorities reported groups of 65 , 65 , 66 , 96 and 163 illegal immigrants caught in just the last two weeks — with children as young as four months being carried through the scorching deserts of northern Mexico and southern Arizona .
The caravans are a sign of how brazen migrants have become , said Kevin McAleenan , commissioner of U.S. Customs and Border Protection . He said they know there ’ s little the administration can do , given court decisions hindering deportations , and lack of resources from Congress .
“ These are a very direct response to the vulnerabilities in our legal framework , ” he said .
He said the numbers were “ expected , ” given the administration ’ s widely publicized retreat from its zero-tolerance policy at the border , which came after immigrant-rights activists and members of Congress from both parties complained . Mr. McAleenan said that fight may even have perversely encouraged more people to come , after they became aware of the “ loophole ” of more lax treatment for illegal immigrant families .
With a month still to go in this fiscal year the Border Patrol has already caught more than 90,000 “ family units ” of parents and children traveling together — including 12,744 in August alone . That was up 38 percent compared to July .
Agents also nabbed another 4,396 Unaccompanied Alien Children , or children traveling without parents , which was an 11.6 percent increase . At the ports of entry , meanwhile , CBP officers encountered 9,016 unauthorized migrants , including 3,181 family units and 376 UAC .
Officials believe the number of people caught trying to sneak in is a rough yardstick for the overall flow , so a rise in apprehensions signals a rise in overall illegal immigration .
While adults who arrive at the border without children are usually detained until they can be deported , migrants who show up with children in tow get quickly released from custody . They rarely return for their deportations , instead taking the chance to disappear into the shadows .
Mr. McAleenan said the incentives are so skewed that families and children actually want to get caught when they show up at the border .
“ Now with families and kids , there are no consequences to being apprehended , ” he said .
Indeed , of nearly 95,000 Central American family members nabbed by Border Patrol agents or CBP officers in 2017 , 98.6 percent of them are still in the U.S. today , the government says .
And of more than 30,000 UAC nabbed , 98.2 percent were still in the U.S. as of June .
Migrants and the smuggling cartels , which control the flow of people into the U.S. , are well aware of the disparate treatment . There ’ s even been a surge in illegal immigrants abducting children so they can portray themselves as families .
Among agents , the lax treatment of families is known as “ catch-and-release , ” and it continues to be the biggest issue fueling the illegal immigration surge , said Brandon Judd , president of the National Border Patrol Council .
He said the government had a window to change the trajectory last year , when Mr. Trump took office and illegal immigrants , scared of tougher enforcement , stopped coming . But they quickly realized the president ’ s tough talk was belied by lack of backup from Congress and the enforcement agencies , Mr. Judd said .
“ Congress obviously didn ’ t pass laws to close loopholes and the agency failed to implement policies or operations supporting the president ’ s vision . Instead , the agency ’ s inaction made the president ’ s tough talk seem like nothing more than words that can be ignored , ” Mr. Judd said .
The Trump administration did try to solve the situation earlier this year with its zero-tolerance policy , which called for jailing illegal immigrant adults — even those who came with children . Because federal jails can ’ t accommodate children , that meant the families were separated , and the children were put in Health Department-run dorms .
The separations produced a massive outcry from immigrant-rights activists and both Republicans and Democrats on Capitol Hill , and a federal judge ordered an end to the practice and demanding the families be reunited .
Mr. Trump also signed an executive order ending the separations — but that restored the family “ loophole ” that has enticed the new wave of migration .
The 90,563 family units apprehended at the border so far easily tops the record set in 2016 , when the total for the full fiscal year was 77,695 . Last year ’ s total was 90,576 . Approximately 43,800 more unauthorized family members were encountered at ports of entry .