Unpacking the Ninth Circuit ’ s travel-ban ruling — and a rejoinder to Rich Lowry in our ongoing discussion of nationalism .
Dear Reader ( including the manufacturers of the Bernie Sanders action figure , now with the seize-the-means-of-production Marxist grip ) ,
Now , I don ’ t like the term “ retard ” — and I really don ’ t like it in political debates . We aim for something loftier here .
Still , the scene came to mind because there should be a similar rule in legal circles : “ Never Go Full Ninth Circuit. ” Personally , I think it sounds better in Latin : Nolite umquam ire plenus nona circuit ( and if any of you Latin pedants send me an e-mail correcting my translation , I will come to your house and scatter your Dungeons and Dragons figurines off the kitchen table ) .
The other day I noted on Special Report that Antonin Scalia had a rubber stamp on his desk with one of his favorite phrases : “ Stupid but Constitutional. ” I hope that one day , a Supreme Court justice will have a stamp on his desk that says , Numquam Plenus Nona Circuit .
Anyway , I understand that the case against the Ninth Circuit can be exaggerated . Yes , the West Coast ’ s federal appellate court has the highest rate of cases that have been oveturned by the Supreme Court , but the vast majority of its cases don ’ t get appealed to the Supreme Court . Hence the qualifier “ Full Ninth Circuit. ” Going Full Ninth Circuit is when you claim that that the Pledge of Allegiance is unconstitutional . That ’ s a Simple Jack move , not a Rain Man or even a Forrest Gump move .
It ’ s not that any single one of their findings in the travel-ban case violates the principle of Nolite umquam ire plenus nona circuit , it ’ s the totality of the thing . For starters , here is what the relevant statute says :
Whenever the President finds that the entry of any aliens or of any class of aliens into the United States would be detrimental to the interests of the United States , he may by proclamation , and for such period as he shall deem necessary , suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens as immigrants or nonimmigrants , or impose on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deem to be appropriate .
Remarkably , in the entire opinion , the panel did not bother even to cite this statute , which forms the principal statutory basis for the executive order ( see Sections 3 ( c ) , 5 ( c ) , and 5 ( d ) of the order ) . That ’ s a pretty big omission over 29 pages , including several pages devoted to determining the government ’ s likelihood of success on the merits of the case .
This is like the pope changing a major part of Church doctrine without referencing the Bible or a film critic writing a book about mob movies without mentioning The Godfather .
Then there ’ s the claim that states have standing to challenge this executive order because they have state schools where students or faculty may be affected , thus depriving them of the ability to provide an enriching educational experience . How does this new standard work ? Universities would be affected by a draft or a war , can they challenge those policies because it would affect their students ? The president , I gather , can order a naval blockade around the United States . That might interrupt some U-Dub student ’ s planned semester at sea . Shall the commander-in-chief call to make sure he ’ s not interfering with anyone ’ s plan to take a few easy courses by day and smoke a lot of hash by night ?
The fancy lawyer guys I ’ ve talked to think the most egregious thing in the ruling is that the judges are concerned about the “ potential due process rights ” of illegal aliens . This calls to mind Socrates ’ famous query : “ Huh ? ”
The executive order is only aimed at people trying to enter the country . If you are an illegal immigrant already here , it has no bearing on you . If you are an illegal immigrant trying to enter or re-enter the United States — illegally ! — what are these due-process rights you ’ re talking about ?
But I think the craziest part of the ruling is the idea that a president ’ s campaign statements have legal weight and could violate the Establishment Clause of the Constitution . This is battier than Bruce Wayne ’ s home office . Every cliché-spewing poli-sci major and pundit for the last 17,000 years ( give or take ) has noted that politicians say one thing when campaigning and another thing when in office . Even Mario Cuomo — that savant at casting banal observations as seemingly brilliant insights — said that we campaign in poetry and govern in prose ( Donald Trump changed that to we campaign in limericks and govern in tweets ) .
Whatever you think of Trump ’ s original call for a Muslim ban ( I think it was ludicrous ) the whole point is that Trump did the right thing . He talked to his advisors and they said , “ You can ’ t do that. ” So he said , “ Okay , what can we do ? ” And they came up with this executive order . It was shoddily done and on the merits isn ’ t nearly as vital to American national security as he claims . But that ’ s my point . He did something vastly less ambitious because the demands of governing required it . The judges responded , in effect , “ We don ’ t care . We ’ re still going to punish you for it . ”
David French is exactly right when he says this ruling is a Pandora ’ s Box . Where does this retromingent line of legal reasoning end ? Barack Obama insisted he would fundamentally transform America and suggested he ’ d make the oceans recede . Could some judge reviewing an EPA regulation have said , “ But the president said . . . ” about that ? This is taking the rigorous rules of Twitter logic and putting them into law .
David French is exactly right when he says this ruling is a Pandora ’ s Box . Where does this retromingent line of legal reasoning end ?
I firmly believe the Trump White House screwed the pooch on this thing from the get-go . By doing so , the president set in motion events that have made things even worse . The Ninth Circuit loves to preen under normal circumstances . The judges took a sloppily rolled out — but ultimately legal — executive order and used it to set potential precedents that , if left standing , will have calamitous repercussions .
If one thinks of the courts as a political institution with collective interests , the smartest thing the Ninth Circuit could have done is say something along the lines of “ this is stupid but constitutional. ” If they really think Trump is the monster the “ resistance ” Left thinks he is , they ’ ll need more , not less , credibility in the days to come . But , much like the mainstream media , they ’ ve decided that crying wolf from Day One is the preferable way to go . And that ’ s why they went Plenus nona circuit .
For those who haven ’ t been reading NR this week , what the Hell is wrong with you ?
But if you have a good excuse — e.g. , the hooker handcuffed you to a towel rack in a motel , you had heart-transplant surgery , a bear ate your face , etc . — you missed a lengthy and civil badinage about the question of nationalism and its role in American life . ( See , here , here , here , here , and here ) . I ’ m already running long so a lengthy recap is not in the cards . But , in brief : Rich Lowry and Ramesh Ponnuru penned an eloquent defense of nationalism qua nationalism in a cover story for the magazine . I modestly dissented , arguing that in America , nationalism is different from patriotism . I ’ m going to pick up where we left off below on the assumption you ’ re pretty much up to speed . If it ’ s not your cup of tea , that ’ s fine . I ’ ll see you next week ( when I pretend to be the cable guy ) .
As Rich Lowry is my boss — or at least one of them ( the perils of wearing many hats ) — let me start off by saying that not only is he a powerful man , but a handsome one , too .
I should also say that I love these debates at NR , and it speaks well of him and the magazine that Rich encourages them .
And now that I ’ ve blown enough sunshine up his nethers to earn a solar tax credit from the Obama administration , let ’ s get on with it .
Indeed , the vast majority of expressions of American patriotism — the flag , the national anthem , statues , shrines and coinage honoring national heroes , military parades , ceremonies for those fallen in the nation ’ s wars — are replicated in every other country of the world . This is all the stuff of nationalism , both abroad and here at home .
This is at the same time both entirely right and fundamentally misleading . It leaves out what the flag represents . It glides over the fact that the national anthem sanctifies the “ land of the free. ” Our shrines are to patriots who upheld very specific American ideals . Our statues of soldiers commemorate heroes who died for something very different from what other warriors have fought and died for millennia . Every one of them — immigrants included — took an oath to defend not just some soil but our Constitution and by extension the ideals of the Founding . Walk around any European hamlet or capital and you will find statues of men who fell in battle to protect their tribe from another tribe . That doesn ’ t necessarily diminish the nobility of their deaths or the glory of their valor , but it is quite simply a very different thing they were fighting for .
Rich responds to this by writing like an angel on a cloud ( okay , now I ’ m really done with the up-sucking ) :
It is a charming characteristic of American nationalism to believe it isn ’ t and can ’ t possibly be nationalism — that is for other countries , not us . So Jonah seems to imply that other countries can ’ t have true patriotism because they don ’ t have the Declaration and our founding ideals . Their heroes honored with statues — I guess that means you , William of Orange , and you , Admiral Nelson , and you , Tadeusz Kosciuszko — were combatants in grubby wars of tribe versus tribe , as Jonah puts it . This is the equivalent of the New Yorker “ View of the World from 9th Avenue ” for world history , with the ideals and struggles for independence and self-government of others reduced to utter inconsequence .
Like a mail-order Ikea entertainment center , this is going to require some unpacking before we can even get started .
When Rich says , “ Jonah seems to imply that other countries can ’ t have true patriotism because they don ’ t have the Declaration and our founding ideals . . . ” you should translate that as , “ Rich seems to be inferring. ” I have no problem conceding that patriotism exists in other countries . Americans didn ’ t invent the word , after all .
Let ’ s stipulate that patriotism means “ love of country. ” People all over the world love their countries . Even people who live under oppressive dictators and hate their governments will say that they love their country . Indeed , many of the greatest patriots swim against the nationalist tides in their homelands .
Love is a quadrupedal , five-toed mammal with a prehensile trunk formed of the nose and upper lip . Oh wait , sorry that ’ s an elephant . Love is like a movie about randy underwear models locked up in a prison run by a buxom bisexual warden . No wait that ’ s not it either .
I guess the point is that love , much like pornography and elephants , is hard to define , but most of us know it when we see it . But I think we can all agree that love is contextual . Love requires an object , and the nature of that object defines the nature of our love . I love my wife , my daughter , my dogs , and eating cold fried chicken over the kitchen sink — but I love all of these things in very distinct ways .
I guess the point is that love , much like pornography and elephants , is hard to define , but most of us know it when we see it .
Let me try it a different way . I have always believed that American conservatism is inseparable from American patriotism . I said “ inseparable from ” not “ identical to . ”
Since everyone ’ s quoting Samuel Huntington these days , I ’ ll do it too . Huntington observed that conservatism is a “ positional ideology. ” By that he meant that there are many conservatisms because conservatives in different societies seek to conserve different things . A conservative in France in , say , 1788 seeks to conserve that rich bouillabaisse of altar and throne . A conservative in England seeks to conserve the monarchy , among other things .
“ Men are driven to conservatism by the shock of events , ” Huntington wrote , “ by the horrible feeling that a society or institution which they have approved or taken for granted and with which they have been intimately connected may suddenly cease to exist. ” This is why I share Yuval Levin ’ s contention that , at its core , conservatism is gratitude .
To my mind , conservatism is gratitude . Conservatives tend to begin from gratitude for what is good and what works in our society and then strive to build on it , while liberals tend to begin from outrage at what is bad and broken and seek to uproot it .
This is why I had no problem saying that Barack Obama ’ s talk of “ fundamentally transforming ” America was literally unpatriotic . If patriotism is love , then wanting to fundamentally transform what you love isn ’ t really love . In speeches I used to tell married men , “ Go home tonight and tell your wives , ‘ Honey , you know I love you . I just want to fundamentally transform you. ’ See how that works out for ya. ” Love requires loving something as it is , not for what it might be at your hands .
Patriotism is also a positional orientation ( I ’ m a little reluctant to call it an ideology ) . A patriot in England , never mind Russia or Botswana , loves different things than a patriot in the United States . It ’ s something of a paradox : All patriotisms are equal in that they are all subjective , but not all patriotisms are equal when measured against certain ideals .
And that makes all the difference in the world . Lowry asserts that I think other countries can ’ t have patriotism because they don ’ t love the Founding and our principles of liberty . Not at all ; rather , I think American patriotism is different because America — the object of our love — is different . As Hayek noted , America is the one place where you can be a lover of liberty and a conservative because in America conservatives seek to defend the liberal principles of the Founding .
This creates another paradox . The American colonists considered themselves English subjects and inheritors of an English tradition . But they were , quite obviously , not English nationalists . Indeed , they rebelled against the crown precisely because the inherent logic of nationalism — obey the crown , do as you ’ re told , abide by tradition — was in their eyes a violation of more important English principles that stretched back to the Magna Carta and beyond . The Founders took the arguments of Locke , Burke et al and followed them to their logical and glorious conclusion that ended up leaving the monarchy in the dustbin of ( American ) history .
In the nations of the Old World , nationalism is a tribal passion or sentiment that relies ( in theory ) on mystic and ancient myths of a shared ancestral past . Most of the foundational writers on nationalism , like Johann Herder , argued that nation and volk were literally like an ancient family . There ’ s no room to go into it here in any detail ( though I do at great length in my forthcoming book ) , but the idea that the nation is a family is a very pernicious one , conceptually ceding all manner of authorities to the state that it does not and must not have .
In America there is nationalist sentiment , to be sure , but the ‘ doctrines ’ of nationalism find no easy purchase here .
In America there is nationalist sentiment , to be sure , but the “ doctrines ” of nationalism find no easy purchase here . Werner Sombart ’ s famous question , “ Why is there no socialism in America ? ” has elicited many answers , but the most agreed-upon one is that America has no feudal past . America represented a sharp break with the ancient notion that polities — nations , empires , city-states , tribes , etc . — were no different than families with an unimpeachable pater familias at the helm . We celebrated and enshrined very different notions in our national DNA , which is why Alexis de Tocqueville could observe that the American was the Englishman left alone . What makes America exceptional , what makes American patriotism and conservatism different , is that the object of our love and gratitude is different . If Rich wants to define nationalism as love of country and nothing more , that ’ s his right . But he would be wrong .
So when Rich tries to insinuate that I don ’ t think William of Orange was a patriot , he ’ s wrong . But his patriotism was fundamentally , philosophically , and morally different than American patriotism . And , by the way , it most certainly was tribal , if one is allowed some leeway when using the term . As he knows , England — and Europe — was cleaved in a vicious “ Cold War ” ( historian J. P. Kenyon ’ s phrase ) between protestants and Catholics . The Earl of Essex told the Privy Council in 1679 : “ The apprehension of popery makes me imagine that I see my children frying in Smithfield. ” To this day you can still find Irishmen who ’ ll say , “ I don ’ t care if I swing by a rope , down with King Billy and Up with the Pope ! ”
If you don ’ t want to call that tribalism , fine . But I think my point stands just fine . In America , we said goodbye to all that , and that ’ s made all the difference in the world .
Rich is a greater student of Abraham Lincoln than I ’ ll ever be ( “ Lowry , you magnificent bastard , I read your book ! ” ) . But I ’ ll risk his wrath by reminding him that Lincoln understood the exceptional nature of America as much as anyone . He was dismayed by the nationalist passions that trampled upon the patriot ’ s commitment to law and liberty . As he said in his Lyceum address :
‐ “ I mean the increasing disregard for law which pervades the country ; the growing disposition to substitute the wild and furious passions , in lieu of the sober judgment of Courts ; and the worse than savage mobs , for the executive ministers of justice . ”
‐ “ Thus , then , by the operation of this mobocractic spirit , which all must admit , is now abroad in the land , the strongest bulwark of any Government , and particularly of those constituted like ours , may effectually be broken down and destroyed — I mean the attachment of the People . Whenever this effect shall be produced among us ; whenever the vicious portion of population shall be permitted to gather in bands of hundreds and thousands , and burn churches , ravage and rob provision-stores , throw printing presses into rivers , shoot editors , and hang and burn obnoxious persons at pleasure , and with impunity ; depend on it , this Government can not last . ”
Lincoln recognized that the lust of nationalism was unhealthy and destructive unless it be channeled into the proper orientation of American patriotism .
‐ “ As the patriots of seventy-six did to the support of the Declaration of Independence , so to the support of the Constitution and Laws , let every American pledge his life , his property , and his sacred honor ; — let every man remember that to violate the law , is to trample on the blood of his father , and to tear the character of his own , and his children ’ s liberty . ”
Lincoln recognized that the lust of nationalism was unhealthy and destructive unless it be channeled into the proper orientation of American patriotism .
I should say that I agree entirely with Rich when he writes , echoing Huntington , “ When you lose our nation and common culture , you ’ re going to lose our creed , as well. ” Which is why I said that in a normal time our differences would be largely academic . My purely academic disagreement here is that talking about the burning need for more “ nationalism ” is not the best way to spark a recommitment to our nation and culture .
And that brings me to our final disagreement . Rich is understandably perturbed by my closing paragraph :
In a normal time , I would still have the above disagreements ( and a few others I left out ) with Rich and Ramesh , but they would be entirely academic . But this is not a normal time , and the decision to slap a coat of paint over the term nationalism becomes difficult not to interpret as a whitewash . If the intent is to educate the president about what nationalism , rightly understood is , I wish them luck , but I won ’ t get my hopes up .
Rich fairly notes that his nationalism-rightly-understood project predates the current moment and his own tenure in the captain ’ s chair at NR . That is all fair . And if I had the chance to do it over I would rephrase that penultimate sentence to read : “ But this is not a normal time , and the decision to slap a coat of paint over the term nationalism makes it somewhat more difficult to defend it against the accusation that it is a whitewash . ”
Politics is about moments . We put “ under God ” in the Pledge in order to kick dirt on the shoes of Communists . Trent Lott said many times that America would have been better off if Strom Thurmond had been president and no one noticed or cared . And then they did . Choosing to rush to the defense of nationalism — no matter how rationally or defensibly — at a moment when mobocratic nationalism-improperly-understood is on the rise opens you up to the charge of being on the other side of the question . As I suggested in my initial response , I think that ’ s unfair and misguided . But it should also be expected .
First off , if you haven ’ t signed up for the ███ Institute Ideas Summit ( March 16–17 ) , I really think you should . It looks like it will be the best one in a very long time even though — or perhaps because ! — I won ’ t be there . I have a family commitment I can ’ t get out of . I am quite dismayed about it . But if you ’ re interested in the prospects or plight of the conservative movement and you can make it , I don ’ t know why you wouldn ’ t go .
Canine Update : The beasts are the beasts doing their strange beastlike and beastly things . I ’ d fill you in on all the details , but I ’ m very late for an important date . We ’ re taking the kid to Chicago to see the road show of Hamilton for her birthday ( we couldn ’ t afford or get tickets in NYC ) . So instead I will leave you with some important video of their strange goings-ons .
How to go on a quest for the Holy Grail
“ The Devil Went Down to Georgia , ” feat . Janky Washing Machine
Why is the passenger seat of a car called “ shotgun ” ?