President Trump has endorsed legislation that would slash legal immigration by half , mainly by cutting the number of visas granted to relatives of citizens , while favoring people who speak English and have advanced degrees . The bill , which would do nothing to solve the country ’ s immigration and economic challenges , is unlikely to become law . The only way to understand Mr. Trump ’ s vocal support of an obvious turkey is as yet another attempt to energize his dwindling base of right-wing and nativist supporters .
The bill was introduced by two Republican senators , Tom Cotton of Arkansas and David Perdue of Georgia , who say it will protect American workers from competition from low-skilled foreign workers . Right now , the government issues more than a million green cards every year , most of them to relatives of citizens . A smaller number , 140,000 , are provided on the basis of job skills .
The proposal would slash the total number of green cards issued by 41 percent in the first year and by 50 percent in the 10th year , with most of the cuts coming from family-based immigration . It would cap the number of refugees admitted every year and eliminate a program that provides green cards via lottery to people from countries that send few immigrants to the United States . The bill would not reduce employment-based green cards , but it would change how the recipients are selected by putting in place a points-based system that rewards people who speak English and have advanced degrees and work experience .
The issue of immigration in America is volatile and complex and thus vulnerable to seductive promises . This bill falls into that category . Its central premise — that it would help American workers — is false . It ’ s true that an influx of workers can cause short-term disruptions to the labor market , but the impact on the wages of native workers over a period of 10 years or more is “ very small , ” according to a comprehensive National Academies of Sciences , Engineering and Medicine report published last year .