Eleven of the 15 districts held by Republicans are a quarter or more Hispanic . | REUTERS Calif. GOP focused on immigration
MODESTO , Calif. — Republicans in Washington are taking a piecemeal approach to immigration reform — a strategy that could give the party ’ s most polarizing figures a months-long platform to pop off about illegal immigrants .
California Republicans have a much different line : Shut up and get it done .
The divide boils down to simple math for California Republicans , who know they can ’ t win elections here for long without the support of Hispanic voters .
Eleven of the 15 districts held by Republicans are a quarter or more Hispanic — and some of them are prime targets for Democrats who need 17 seats to take back the House in 2014 .
But Republican leaders in Washington also face a much different picture nationwide : More than 100 House GOP districts have close to no Hispanic voters .
So , while some Republicans in Washington might argue there ’ s no need to tackle immigration reform with a pathway to citizenship , California Republicans believe they must — or face extinction .
Already the California Republican Party is on the rocks : Democrats hold every statewide office and an unbreakable supermajority in both chambers of the state Legislature . It ’ s a situation top players in the state party say is the direct result of missing the demographic tidal wave before it hit — a lesson the national party should remember as they debate immigration reform .
“ Republicans in California ignored demographic changes , ” state Republican Party Chairman Jim Brulte said in an interview . “ As a result , we ’ re a significant minority . ”
Republicans on a national level should take notice , because players in the California GOP argue that they ’ re merely experiencing what states like Colorado , Nevada and Texas will experience in a few years : a drastically weakened party that ’ s routinely rejected by booming minority populations .
“ Ultimately , it could doom the party 15 , 20 years out , ” said Rob Stutzman , a former top hand to former Gov . Arnold Schwarzenegger who is now one of the top Republican political advisers in the state , speaking of the perils of not completing immigration reform . “ As decimated as the Republican Party has been in California , the opportunity here is to figure this out . ”
The pressures are everywhere but are most acute in the arid and hot Central Valley , where agribusiness is the dominant economic driver , and Hispanic voters are prominent . The need for immigration reform is not only cultural , it ’ s economic : The year-round , labor intensive farming of things like lettuce , almonds and stone fruit has led to the need for more workers .
Fifteen months away from the next congressional election , Democrats have already stuck a tracker on GOP Rep. Jeff Denham , who represents a 35 percent Hispanic district and heavy agricultural communities like Ripon and the City of Modesto . As Denham held a town hall on a commuter train from San Jose to Stockton on Thursday , a young man who said he was there on behalf of his grandfather asked Denham if he supports the Senate ’ s immigration bill . His answer was no , but later he said he thinks it ’ s a major step in the right direction .
In Rep. Kevin McCarthy ’ s Bakersfield , 1,000 protestors — mostly union workers — held a rally to try to pressure him to support a pathway to citizenship .
Many Republicans believe their only route to survival to find a way to connect with Latinos and Asians , who have doubled their turnout in general elections in the past dozen years . In 2012 , 72 percent of Latinos voted for President Barack Obama , while 77 percent of Asians helped reelect the president .
Making matters worse is internal GOP polling showing 65 percent of California voters have a negative view of the party .
That ’ s left the shared short-term view out here among most Republicans pretty bleak : We ’ re screwed .
“ Republicans in California have now become experts at getting 25 percent of the Hispanic vote , ” Brulte deadpanned .
The immigration reform debate isn ’ t over , of course , and a perceived legislative victory could help ingratiate Republicans with these minority groups . And few voters make a decision on a single issue . But in order to claw back to becoming a major party here , Republicans agree they need to get the debate behind them .
“ All our polling shows immigration is the fourth- or fifth-most-important issue to Hispanic voters , ” said Teresa Hernandez , who heads an immigration task force for the active Orange County Lincoln Club . “ It ’ s one of those gateway issues : we want to speak to the Hispanic community on things that we agree on : education reform and jobs . But we need to get immigration off the table . ”
All of this stands in stark contrast to the overwhelming Republican narrative in D.C . The skepticism about comprehensive reform that ’ s so pervasive across the Republican Conference is not prevalent here . At least two House Republicans — Rep. David Valadao and Denham — say they like the Senate bill and are open to a new pathway to citizenship .