Timing is everything in politics . And House Democrats know time is running out .
House Majority Leader Eric Cantor ’ s ( R-VA ) shocking loss last night has changed the calculus in Washington . For starters , vulnerable congressional Republicans once considering backing some form of immigration reform might want to pump the brakes on that idea – at least for now . Cantor lost a crimson district to a virtually unknown candidate , not least because he broadly supported certain elements of immigration reform ( although he did not support blanket amnesty ) .
Cantor was hammered repeatedly on this issue , of course , but there were also a number of external factors that led to his defeat . In short , he was clearly out-of-touch with his constituents , had too many ties to Big Business , and took his primary opponent for granted – spending at least part of primary day ... at a DC fundraiser . Unquestionably , though , the dream of a working , comprehensive immigration reform bill making its way through the federal legislature this congressional session seems wholly unlikely . Nevertheless , this is n't stopping some House Democrats from trying :
Rep. Xavier Becerra , California Democrat and chairman of the Democratic caucus , said Wednesday that Majority Leader Eric Cantor ’ s primary loss should spur members to act on legislation that constituents support , including immigration reform . When asked if the Virginia Republican ’ s loss would stall any hope of passing immigration reform legislation reform in the House , Mr. Becerra said it should spur Congress to act on what the American people want before more members lose their seats for inaction . “ The question on immigration reform is not if we get it done but when we get it done , ” he said on MSNBC . He also said it is a message to Congress to start to work together and get things done in a more general sense .
No doubt House Democrats have lost a useful ally in Cantor . But while he is a lame-duck , he ’ s not actually resigning his seat ( although he is stepping down from his leadership position ) . Might he and other retiring House Republicans , then , try to force something through before the next congressional session ? After all , that 's exactly what Rep. Becerra seems to be calling for here .