President Trump is predicting that Democrats will be “ beaten so badly ” if they campaign on the policy of abolishing Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) -- just as the once-fringe call to scrap the agency is going mainstream among the left .
In an interview to be aired Sunday with ███ ’ Maria Bartiromo on “ Sunday Morning Futures , ” Trump was asked what he thinks about more Democrats lining up to call for the agency ’ s abolition .
“ Well I hope they keep thinking about it . Because they ’ re going to get beaten so badly , ” he said . “ You know ICE , these are the guys that go in and take MS-13 , and they take them out . Because they ’ re much tougher than MS-13 , like by a factor of 10 . And these are the ones – you get rid of ICE you ’ re going to have a country that you ’ re going to be afraid to walk out of your house . ”
“ I love that issue if they 're going to actually do that , ” he added .
Calls to “ abolish ICE , ” once limited to the far-left parts of the Democratic Party base , have shifted into the mainstream mostly in response to the Trump administration ’ s tough policies on illegal immigration -- particularly the “ zero tolerance ” policy on detaining all illegal border crossers .
In New York , far-left primary challenger and ICE opponent Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez 's shocked the party ’ s establishment by beating Rep. Joseph Crowley , D-N.Y . In the days after , Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand and Mayor Bill de Blasio have added their support to the cause .
'ABOLISH ICE ' GOES MAINSTREAM AS GILLIBRAND , DE BLASIO BACK CALLS
`` I believe that [ Immigration and Customs Enforcement ] has become a deportation force … and that 's why I believe you should get rid of it , start over , reimagine it and build something that actually works , '' Gillibrand said in a CNN interview Thursday night .
“ We should abolish ICE , ” de Blasio said Friday morning on WNYC radio . His Democratic colleague in Albany , Gov . Andrew Cuomo , is also facing pressure to back such calls after primary challenger Cynthia Nixon has called ICE a `` terrorist organization . ''
Sen. Kamala Harris , D-Calif has said that the U.S. should consider “ starting from scratch ” while Rep. Mark Pocan , D-Wis. , announced on Monday that he would be introducing a bill to abolish the agency .
But , while it was unlikely to gain much traction on the right , Trump also tweeted on Saturday that he was backing ICE agents and that there was “ zero chance ” of ICE being abolished .
“ To the great and brave men and women of ICE , do not worry or lose your spirit . You are doing a fantastic job of keeping us safe by eradicating the worst criminal elements , ” he said . “ So brave ! The radical left Dems want you out . Next it will be all police . Zero chance , It will never happen ! ”
Trump is joining a number of Republicans and immigration hardliners who are welcoming the Democratic shift on the issue , believing that it spells electoral victory for the GOP outside of Democratic enclaves like New York and California .
`` Based on the last week , Democrats apparently want to campaign on open borders , mass migration , & abolishing ICE , '' Sen. Tom Cotton , R-Ark. , tweeted this week . `` Give them points for honesty . Let 's vote . ''