[ Want to join the debate ? Follow us on Instagram at @ nytopinion . ]
We want the Donald Trump who yowls about wildly overestimated crowd sizes and nonexistent achievements . For instance , on Monday in Houston he bragged about Brett Kavanaugh and gave the audience a primer on Supreme Court appointments that went like this :
“ Who — who appointed the highest percentage of judges ? No , no , no , it wasn ’ t Hillary Clinton . No , she didn ’ t make it , remember ? She didn ’ t make it . No , you know who it is ? You ’ ll never guess . It ’ s called George Washington . And we ’ re after George Washington . So , a very big thing , no , George Washington , why ? Because he just started . He did 100 percent . Nobody ’ s ever going to break that record . Nobody ’ s ever going to break the record of George Washington . ”
And — wait ! In actual reality , Trump is not after George Washington . Franklin Delano Roosevelt placed eight justices on the Supreme Court and Ronald Reagan got four . Trump has gotten two , the same number as George H.W . Bush , Bill Clinton , George W. Bush and Barack Obama .
I am telling you all this to cheer you up .
During the rally tour , the preferable making-stuff-up Trump also announced “ a very major tax cut ” just for middle-income people , which would be passed before Nov. 1 , or after the election , or “ next week , ” depending on when you were listening .
“ We ’ ve been working on it for a few months , ” he said in Houston .
This appeared to be total news to everybody in his administration . But maybe the “ we ” Trump referred to was Ivanka and Jared . Jared is great with numbers . Just because his company is teetering on bankruptcy due to one of the most disastrous deals in real estate history doesn ’ t mean there isn ’ t some talent . That sort of thing runs in the family .
Asked about details of his plan — like who would count as a middle-income person — Trump said they ’ d be coming “ sometime just prior , I would say , to November . ”