At certain moments during the past year ’ s long and often tedious march to November , the political class , already bored with discussing a GOP Senate takeover most considered nearly certain , started debating a few post-election hypotheticals . With Republicans in control in both the House and the Senate , would the president try again to strike the elusive grand bargain ? ( No . ) Would Senate Republicans retaliate against Democrats for choosing the so-called nuclear option ? ( Maybe . ) Would Democrats filibuster relentlessly , like Republicans did when they were the minority party in the Senate ? ( Probably not . )
Of all the questions about a Republican Senate that hovered over the midterms , though , none cast a shadow as large as this : Would the swelling of the GOP ’ s ranks lead to the Tea Party finally escaping its quarantine in the House of Representatives ? Would a wave of Republican victories leave Ted Cruz , the Tea Party hero who helped author last year ’ s government shutdown , as the de facto leader of the U.S. Senate ? Less militant Republicans , like Sen. Mitch McConnell and Sen. John McCain , promised the answer was no . But because I ’ d observed the way the establishment of the party had repeatedly bowed to Tea Party threats , I was a skeptic .
Well , it ’ s still more than a month until the new Congress is sworn in , but it ’ s already looking like we can put that debate to rest . The Republican Party will make no clean break from its recent ideological and procedural radicalism , despite whatever some of the more grizzled members of the party leadership may hope . The era of government by crisis — from debt ceiling to government shutdown and all the good stuff in-between — is not over . This will be Ted Cruz ’ s Senate .
Here ’ s what has me feeling so certain : On Wednesday night , Fox News reported that President Obama was readying his long-promised , and repeatedly deferred , executive orders to “ reform ” America ’ s immigration system ( which in concrete terms means reduce deportations ) . Soon thereafter , the Wall Street Journal reported that a bloc of no less than 50 Republicans in Congress was already maneuvering to thwart the orders by attaching language preemptively barring presidential action to “ must-pass ” legislation . And what makes the passage of this legislation so non-negotiable ? It ’ s needed to fund the government .
Yes , not even two weeks removed from a midterm election that Republican leadership promised would bring an end to gridlock and partisan warfare , GOPers in the House are already brandishing the government shutdown threat . “ Everybody has said they want to do something to stop his recklessness , ” Arizona Rep. Matt Salmon , the chief organizer of the push , told the Journal . “ If we have an opportunity to actually do something rather than complain … why shouldn ’ t we ? ” And to be fair to Salmon and his teammates , if one truly believed the melodramatic charges of lawlessness Republicans toss at the president , then the most logical move would be to follow Rep. Joe Barton ’ s lead and bring up impeachment . In that sense , then , the Tea Party ’ s settling for a government shutdown can be seen as a conciliatory gesture toward GOP leadership .
Of course , Tea Partyers in the House were far from the only conservatives to respond to news of Obama ’ s executive orders with the kind of revolutionary fervor Tuesday supposedly ended . Red State ’ s Erick Erickson , who is perhaps second only to Rush Limbaugh when it comes to speaking the id of the conservative movement , also flipped out . “ The Republican response , ” Erickson wrote , “ should be to make Camp David a refugee holding facility and close down every golf course controlled by public funds at which the president might wish to play. ” Not content to merely close the greens , Erickson went on to urge Republicans to “ basically defund the White House , save for security for the president and his family. ” Perfunctory golf jokes aside , the snark was directed primarily toward GOP leadership . By refusing to threaten another shutdown , Erickson wrote , the Republican Party had “ already negotiated the terms of its surrender . ”
Yet as loud as the right wing ’ s expressions of outrage have been , there ’ s one distinctive voice that so far has been most conspicuous in its absence — that of Ted Cruz . To be sure , the junior senator from Texas hasn ’ t been completely mum about his vision of life in the new Senate . But beyond a pre-election Washington Post interview , in which Cruz spoke vaguely about avoiding the “ mushy middle ” and aggressively trying to repeal Obamacare , the likely future presidential candidate has played it close to the chest . Perhaps he ’ s holding back in order to glean how much influence his enormous popularity with the Tea Party can buy him in a Republican Senate . I 'm guessing he likes what he sees : A GOP so at war with itself that , after less than two weeks , the post-victory honeymoon period has already ended .