We all intuitively understand that if your friend loses his house in a hurricane , the right thing to do is to invite him to stay with you . But what if 10 of your friends lose their houses ? You might call on your other friends to help out with the cost of hotel rooms . And if you do n't actually know the unfortunate souls who lost it all ? You might still lend a hand through the many private charities that assist those in distress .
The same philosophy should apply today , as the American people decide whether to accept a portion of the estimated 4.2 million Syrian refugees currently trying to escape their civil war-torn nation . And yet popular resistance to the idea is strong .
In 2015 , the United States admitted 70,000 refugees combined from countries such as Iraq , Iran , China , and Indonesia . For 2016 , President Barack Obama proposed increasing the ceiling to 85,000—higher than at any time since he took office , but much lower than the 207,116 refugees—mostly from Asia—that we welcomed into the country in 1980 .
Obama also requested that 10,000 refugees from Syria be accepted—a number that barely begins to address the humanitarian needs of the millions displaced by war . It also pales in comparison to the 1.1 million Syrian refugees who have found a home in Lebanon and the 815,000 allowed to resettle in Turkey . Unfortunately , with the rise of radical Islamism and recent terrorist attacks in countries such as France and the United States , many Americans ( and American presidential candidates ) are concerned about the national security implications of allowing in any refugees from that region .
Protecting U.S. citizens is obviously a priority , and the government has a responsibility to vet refugees before letting them settle here . But this is n't as easy as it sounds , since reliable background checks may be hard to obtain and people who have fled their homes may have a difficult time providing verifiable proof of their identities .
Those difficulties should n't be deal breakers , however . Arguably , no act of terrorism has been committed in the last 40 years by refugees in the United States ( though a tiny number of refugees have been arrested on terrorism-related charges , and depending on the precise definition of refugees used , the Boston marathon bombing or other incidents may count ) . And the long wait time and high costs of entering the country as a refugee make that an extremely inefficient way for terrorists to get in .
Meanwhile , countries that refuse entrance to refugees—forcing them to reside in terrible living conditions in camps near the theater of conflict—may inadvertently be facilitating recruitment by extremist groups . A 2013 study in International Interactions shows that when large numbers of refugees are placed in countries that have historically had tensions with their country of origin , it increases the risk of terrorism . Georgetown University 's Ann Speckhard , who studies terrorist psychology , says : `` Experience from many conflict zones teaches us that the longer these refugees are left to languish in despair in camps , the more prone they become to radicalization . '' In other words , there are serious security downsides to not accepting refugees .
Resettlement in the United States is only the first step in the process , of course ; assimilation is also important . Thankfully , past efforts on this front have met with positive results . `` Refugees adapt quickly to the U.S. economy , complement existing workers , and settle rapidly into their new homes , '' argues Alex Nowrasteh , an immigration specialist at the Cato Institute .
Because refugees can not return to their homeland as many economic migrants do , Nowrasteh explains , they tend to make serious long-term commitments to learning English and other relevant skills . The data confirm this point : A paper by Kalena E. Cortes , published in The Review of Economics and Statistics in May 2004 , looked at how implicit differences in the time horizons of refugees and economic immigrants affected subsequent human capital investments . She found that a decade after their arrival , refugees who settled here between 1975 and 1980 earned 20 percent more in wages , worked 4 percent more hours , and had improved their English skills 11 percent more .
`` Unlike other immigrants , refugees do have immediate access to some welfare programs , '' Nowrasteh adds , `` but they generally leave them rapidly and are more likely to enter the workforce than natives or other immigrants . '' This is a good thing , since the availability of welfare does n't do much to help assimilation and may even hinder refugees ' well-being .
A 2000 paper by Andrey Vinokurov , Dina Birman , and Edison Trickett in International Migration Review looked at the psychological impact of working on 206 ( mostly Jewish ) Soviet refugees in the United States . It compared Russians who settled in Brighton Beach in Brooklyn to those who settled in the Washington , D.C. , area .
The New York refugees had more access to welfare . However , the data show that those in the D.C. area were more satisfied with their lives and more upwardly mobile . The more the job matched the refugee 's original skills , the more positive the impact . There was no real difference on the level of acculturation .
But what about the impact of these new entrants on Americans ? Economists have shown that immigrants generally increase the host country 's overall gross domestic product ( GDP ) . The result on GDP per capita is a source of debate , but the literature suggests that the effect depends on the relative skill set of refugees compared to the native population . Highly skilled refugees would add much more to the average per-person income than low-skilled ones . But does that mean that low-skilled refugees have a negative impact ?
That does n't seem to be the case . In a well-known 1990 paper , economist David Card looked at the impact on the Miami economy of 125,000 Cuban refugees who arrived during the Mariel boatlift crisis . Though the immigrants increased Miami 's labor force by 7 percent—and were concentrated in less-skilled occupations—contrary to people 's fears , the influx had virtually no effect on the wages or unemployment rates of the city 's less-skilled workers , even among previous Cuban immigrants .
Low-skilled refugees , like other immigrants , tend to boost the employment opportunities of native workers , either by providing cheap child care services that allow women to increase their labor force participation or by pushing native workers to pursue more complex occupations and higher wages . A 2013 National Bureau of Economic Research working paper by Mette Foged and Giovanni Peri , for instance , looked at the effect on Danish workers of a large inflow of non-European refugees between 1991 and 2008 . It found real positive wage effects set in after five to six years , as the rest of the economy adjusted to the increase in workers and the native laborers moved into more complex jobs . The flexibility of the Danish labor market played to everyone 's favor , much as the strong economy in the U.S. in the 1980s did .
Assuming these results hold true today , accepting more refugees is not just the moral thing to do . It 's in everyone 's best interest .