The Senate on Thursday rejected President Trump ’ s immigration compromise to grant temporary legal status to 1 million migrants and allocate money for his border wall , then rejected Democrats ’ alternative to reopen the government without any new border money .
The dueling votes left the month-old shutdown stalemate no closer to a conclusion , though they did give a sense for which side has the upper hand .
Neither proposal achieved the 60 votes needed to overcome a filibuster , but the Democratic plan did better , getting 52 to the Trump plan ’ s 50 votes .
At least a half-dozen senators , mostly on the Republican side , voted for both plans , desperate for any solution to the shutdown . Meanwhile a couple of Republicans voted against both options .
Senate Majority Whip John Thune said the GOP defections weren ’ t all that surprising , and that everyone just wants to see the shutdown end in some way .
“ I actually think these votes put the pressure on both sides to meet , ” said Mr. Thune , South Dakota Republican . “ I think you ’ re going to see our leaders sit down in an earnest way . ”
Democrats framed the votes as a test of support for Mr. Trump , and on that count , it ’ s clear he has more work to do .
“ We all know it was the president who threw us into this turmoil , ” said Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer .
Republican leaders had said Mr. Trump ’ s plan was a reasonable offer and even if Democrats didn ’ t agree with all the details , overcoming the filibuster would have been a sign they were willing to negotiate .
They said another punt on spending for two weeks made no sense .
“ My view is we should fix the problem now through the end of the fiscal year and not go through this exercise again , ” said Sen. John Cornyn , Texas Republican . “ It would take about 30 minutes for fair-minded people of goodwill to work this out . ”
“ I don ’ t know what ’ s going to happen next - nobody knows , ” said Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Richard Shelby , Alabama Republican .
Republicans also said Mr. Trump ’ s plan was the only one he ’ s willing to sign , since the White House has threatened to veto bills that don ’ t include border wall money .
Democrats , though , said the Senate should test the president ’ s resolve and send him legislation to reopen the government .
They have said border security negotiations can come later — though they ’ ve sent mixed signals about whether they would be willing to negotiate over his $ 5.7 billion wall-building plan .
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi has called walls immoral and ruled out any discussions , but other top Democrats have at least seemed open to talks . Still , Democrats are mostly united in saying they want the government to reopen before they ’ ll engage in talks .
“ We ’ re more than willing to have a conversation and develop a compromise as it relates to border security and negotiations , ” said Sen. Brian Schatz , Hawaii Democrat . “ But our bright line is that all of those discussions have to happen after the government is open . ”
The GOP plan , in addition to border wall construction , would have created a three-year protection for 700,000 illegal immigrant “ Dreamers ” covered under the Obama-era DACA program , and another 300,000 immigrants in the country on humanitarian Temporary Protected Status .
It also includes $ 12.7 billion in supplemental disaster relief funding for states that have been affected by recent hurricane and wildfires .
But Democrats said the protections for Dreamers and TPS holders wasn ’ t generous enough — they want full citizenship rights — and said another part of the plan would prevent some illegal immigrants from claiming asylum at the U.S.-Mexico border .
Mr. Schumer called the Trump plan “ laughable ” as a compromise offer .
“ Throughout this debacle , I have not heard one good reason why 800,000 federal employees must be held hostage for us to discuss border security , ” said Mr. Schumer , New York Democrat .