President Donald Trump has acknowledged planning to free immigration detainees in Democratic urban strongholds as a political retaliation ploy .
The Republican president tweeted that his antagonists should be `` very happy '' about the idea given their `` open borders , open arms policy '' .
He said he was targeting so-called sanctuary cities , which have policies to aid undocumented immigrants .
But there was scepticism on the left and right about Mr Trump 's idea .
Mr Trump tweeted on Friday : `` Due to the fact that Democrats are unwilling to change our very dangerous immigration laws , we are indeed , as reported , giving strong considerations to placing Illegal Immigrants in Sanctuary Cities only . ''
The president 's declaration undercut his own White House , which had denied in a statement that the plan was still being considered .
Mr Trump 's comments followed reports in US media that he had wanted the Department of Homeland Security to release detained migrants in sanctuary cities .
The White House had asked agencies last November and again in February this year whether Central American immigrants detained in the US could be sent to `` small- and mid-sized sanctuary cities '' , the Washington Post first reported .
Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) had reportedly rebuffed the idea , citing budget and liability issues .
The agency also expressed concern over how the public might view the move , according to emails viewed by the Post .
On Thursday , the White House said in a statement to the Post that the idea was `` just a suggestion that was floated and rejected '' .
The most powerful elected Democrat , House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi , railed against the plan as un-presidential .
She told reporters on Friday : `` It 's just another notion that is unworthy of the presidency of the United States and disrespectful of the challenges that we face as a country , as a people , to address who we are : a nation of immigrants . ''
Sanctuary cities are jurisdictions - such as New York , Los Angeles , San Francisco and Chicago - that have municipal policies to limit their co-operation with federal immigration enforcement .
Chicago 's outgoing Democratic Mayor Rahm Emanuel said in a statement : `` What President Trump fails to understand is that America is a sanctuary country . ''
San Francisco Mayor London Breed poured scorn on the idea .
`` Like so many issues we are forced to talk about during this presidency , '' she said , `` this is n't a real idea or a real proposal , it 's just another scare tactic . ''
A vocal hardline conservative on immigration was also doubtful the plan would ever become a reality .
Ann Coulter tweeted : `` What is the one thing we know will NOT happen at any time in the future ?
`` Answer : The Trump administration will place Illegal Immigrants in Sanctuary Cities Only . ''
Mr Trump has previously ordered federal funding to be withheld from sanctuary cities , but that plan was torpedoed by a federal judge in California in August last year .
He has amplified his criticism of illegal immigration since Congress denied funding for his long-promised border wall earlier this year .
The president - who often depicts those crossing the US-Mexico border without papers as criminals - recently retreated from a threat to close the international boundary .
Meanwhile , his plan to make asylum applications more difficult was thwarted by a federal judge only this week .