President Trump launched into a fiery defense of his controversial refugee and immigration restrictions Monday , blaming protesters and Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer ’ s ‘ fake tears ’ for difficulties at U.S. airports , and urging his opponents to “ study the world ! ”
Trump signed an executive order Friday that imposed a 120-day suspension of the refugee program and a 90-day ban on travel to the U.S. from citizens of seven terror hot spots , including Iraq , Syria , Somalia and Sudan .
The order sparked chaos at the nation ’ s airports as customs agents struggled to interpret the order , and outraged civil rights groups and Democratic lawmakers -- some of whom attended protests at the nation ’ s airports where some travelers had been detained .
Schumer , D-N.Y. , who has pledged to fight the order “ with every fiber of my being ” tweeted Saturday , that “ there are tears running down the cheeks of the Statue of Liberty tonight . ”
There are tears running down the cheeks of the Statue of Liberty tonight . pic.twitter.com/X6q40dMCsN — Chuck Schumer ( @ SenSchumer ) January 27 , 2017
On Sunday , Schumer struggled to hold back tears at a press conference as he called the order `` mean-spirited and un-American . ''
Trump responded Monday morning , by saying that only 109 people out of 325,000 were detained . He blamed the chaos at airports on a Delta computer outage , protesters and “ the tears of Senator Schumer . ”
Only 109 people out of 325,000 were detained and held for questioning . Big problems at airports were caused by Delta computer outage , ..... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 30 , 2017 protesters and the tears of Senator Schumer . Secretary Kelly said that all is going well with very few problems . MAKE AMERICA SAFE AGAIN ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 30 , 2017
Trump was referring to a Delta systems outage Sunday night that led to a number of delays . However the chaos began Saturday , and so most of the chaos was not related to the outage .
After promising again to “ Make America Safe Again ” he reminded his Twitter followers that “ there is nothing nice about searching for terrorists before they can enter out country ” and urging them to “ study the world ! ''
He later doubled down on his criticism of Schumer , telling reporters after a White House meeting with small business owners that he thought `` there 's about a 5 percent chance [ the tears were ] real . ''
`` I noticed Chuck Schumer yesterday with fake tears , '' Trump said . `` I ’ m going to ask him who is his acting coach . ''
Trump aide Stephen Miller also defended the move Monday morning , saying on Fox & Friends that the list of countries was from a list drawn up by the Obama administration , and that the move was a preventive measure to stop terror attacks like those seen in Europe .
`` Our task in this new administration is to prevent what happened in parts of France and Belgium and Germany from happening in the United States , '' Miller said . `` Where you have large pockets of radicalization that extend through generations and that become a long-term security problem . ''
Responding to criticism that the order had been dropped on agencies with little-to-no warning , both Miller and Trump said that a window would have allowed potential terrorists to come in before it closed .
The Trump administration was forced to make a number of clarifications on the status of permanent legal residents or “ green card ” holders , while a federal judge issued a stay on deportations late Saturday .