One of the biggest misconceptions about undocumented immigrants is that they don ’ t pay any taxes . In his first address to Congress in 2017 , President Donald Trump set the tone for his immigration agenda when he said immigration costs US taxpayers “ billions of dollars a year . ”
Two years later , he is still repeating that lie . In his State of the Union speech on Tuesday , he once again suggested that unauthorized immigrants are a burden to US taxpayers .
“ Working-class Americans are left to pay the price for mass illegal immigration , ” Trump said , suggesting that undocumented immigrants are using government services and programs they don ’ t pay for .
That ’ s not true . Contrary to this persistent myth , undocumented immigrants do in fact pay taxes . Millions of undocumented immigrants file tax returns each year , and they are paying taxes for many benefits they can ’ t even use .
The best estimates come from research by the Institute of Taxation and Economic Policy , a left-leaning Washington , DC , think tank , which suggests that about half of undocumented workers in the United States file income tax returns .
The most recent IRS data , from 2015 , shows that the agency received 4.4 million income tax returns from workers who don ’ t have Social Security numbers , which includes a large number of undocumented immigrants . That year , they paid $ 23.6 billion in income taxes . That doesn ’ t even include workers who paid taxes with fake Social Security numbers on their W-2 forms , which is also common .
These undocumented workers pay taxes for benefits they can ’ t even use , like Social Security and Medicare . They also aren ’ t eligible for benefits like the earned income tax credit . But the IRS still expects unauthorized immigrants to file their taxes , and many of them do so .
Filing taxes helps immigrants create a paper trail to show when they entered the country and how long they ’ ve been contributing tax dollars . Many are hoping it will help them get legal status one day . That has happened in past reform efforts , and one of the first requirements is usually to prove that a person has been paying taxes . That was the case for the undocumented youth granted temporary work permits under President Barack Obama ’ s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals deportation relief program .
So despite all the political rhetoric , undocumented immigrants are not a drain or burden on the government .
In April 2017 , I visited Casa de Maryland in Rockville , Maryland , which hosts two federally subsidized centers where low-income workers can file their taxes for free . That year , they had helped about 200 undocumented immigrants file their taxes , and many were waiting in line with their paperwork when I stopped by .
I watched tax preparer Earvin Gonzalez go through the process of helping undocumented immigrants file their taxes . Maria , whose last name is being withheld because of her immigration status , handed him a folder with tax documents from two jobs . Her W-2 showed that a housecleaning company paid her $ 17,288 in 2015 .
As Gonzalez filled out her information in a computer software program , a green box popped up on the computer screen : “ Taxpayer ’ s Social Security number is not valid . ”
That wasn ’ t a surprise . The 36-year-old from El Salvador is undocumented , and she told me she made up the Social Security number on the W-2 form because she doesn ’ t have one . Her employer never asked for identification to verify it , she says .
Instead , she has an Individual Taxpayer Identification Number ( ITIN ) , created by the IRS in 1996 so people who aren ’ t allowed to work in the United States could still file taxes on any income they earned . ( The IRS does not share ITIN information with immigration authorities . )
Maria said she applied for an ITIN number shortly after arriving illegally in the United States from El Salvador in 2009 . People told her that having a record of paying taxes would help her with her case to gain legal status if immigration reform happened .
Comprehensive immigration reform failed in Congress , but Maria is still paying her taxes every year . “ I think it ’ s important , and all my relatives pay their taxes too , ” she told me .
Last year , her tax documents also included two 1099 forms , for her second job as a contractor .
“ What kind of jobs were these ? ” Gonzalez asked her in Spanish .
“ After cleaning houses , I would go lay concrete in parking lots , ” she said .
Those two jobs brought in a total of $ 24,845 last year , and Maria still needed to pay taxes on that income . Gonzalez entered some deductions , such as the $ 1,500 she spent on equipment to pour and level concrete and the 12,000 miles she drove between job sites .
Maria , who is a single mom , claimed two dependents : her 16-year-old son and 13-year-old daughter . With her ITIN number , she was able to claim child tax credits , but not the earned income tax credit , the major federal tax credit for low-income working families .
In the end , Maria owed $ 1,131 in income taxes to the state of Maryland and $ 775 to the federal government . She said she had some money saved up because she knew she would have a tax bill at the end of the year from the contracting jobs . But she said she will probably get on a payment plan with the IRS .
If Maria had qualified for the earned income tax credit , her tax bill would probably have been about $ 500 lower .
It ’ s true that not all undocumented immigrants pay federal income taxes , because the government has no way to keep track of their under-the-table earnings . The IRS can withhold taxes from those hired with fake Social Security numbers , but workers who get paid in cash could simply choose not to report it , unless they voluntarily file a return with an ITIN number .
Still , all undocumented workers fund public schools and local government services by paying sales and property taxes like everyone else . The Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy estimates that they pay about $ 11.7 billion a year in state and local taxes .
And workers who get a paycheck , like Maria , still have payroll taxes for Medicare and Social Security withheld from their paycheck , even if they put a fake Social Security number on their W-2 form . The IRS estimates that unauthorized workers pay about $ 9 billion in payroll taxes annually .
In Maria ’ s case , the W-2 form showed that she paid $ 1,072 into Social Security and $ 251 into Medicare , two social safety net programs she may never benefit from .
A portion of the payroll tax withheld from undocumented immigrants — like all workers — goes to the retirement trust fund at the Social Security Administration . In 2013 , the agency reviewed how much money undocumented workers contributed to the retirement trust fund . The number was astonishing : $ 13 billion in one year .
The chief actuary of the Social Security Administration , Stephen Goss , estimates that about 1.8 million immigrants were working with fake or stolen Social Security cards in 2010 , and he expects that number to reach 3.4 million by 2040 .
“ We estimate that earnings by unauthorized immigrants result in a net positive effect on Social Security financial status generally , ” Goss concluded in the 2013 review .
These numbers are a stark contrast to the often repeated rhetoric that undocumented immigrants are a drain on the US economy . Even most Americans seem to think so — in a 2014 Reuters poll , 63 percent of people surveyed said they believe undocumented immigrants burdened the economy .
Emiliano , a 57-year-old undocumented day laborer from Honduras , told me that he knows many people assume he doesn ’ t pay his taxes . He doesn ’ t care . He just hopes one day it will help him get legal status .
When I told him the chances don ’ t look good under the Trump administration , he shrugged .