President Obama ’ s new deportation amnesty will impose “ billions of dollars in costs ” on states , they told a federal court this week — including more than $ 130 for each Texas driver ’ s license issued to illegal immigrants under the policy .
More than 1,100 pages of documents submitted by Texas and two dozen other states suing to stop the amnesty detail the costs in depth , and include sworn affidavits from state officials , federal immigration officers and others arguing that the amnesty will increase illegal immigration , leaving the states with even bigger burdens .
Wisconsin said the illegal immigrants granted amnesty would be eligible to apply for concealed weapons permits at a cost to state taxpayers . Indiana said it will end up paying unemployment benefits to the illegal immigrants . And in Texas , officials said they ’ ll have to hire more than 100 new employees to process hundreds of thousands of driver ’ s license applications , with state taxpayers shelling out more than $ 130 per applicant .
“ The states will lose money , ” Texas , which is leading the lawsuit , told Judge Andrew Hanen in legal papers .
Judge Hanen , who sits in Brownsville , Texas , will hear oral arguments in the case Thursday , with the fate of Mr. Obama ’ s most ambitious executive action to date riding on the outcome .
The case turns on two key factors : first , whether Texas and the 24 other states that have joined the lawsuit can show they or their residents stand to suffer from the president ’ s policies ; and second , whether Mr. Obama ’ s actions go beyond case-by-case discretion and tread on Congress ‘ power to write laws and set policy .
Texas and its fellow states argue the licenses and other benefits prove they will suffer , which means they have “ standing ” to sue in court .
They also painted a compelling picture of the program as a rubber-stamp rather than the careful case-by-case decisions the Obama administration claims .
Texas says a 95 percent approval rate for applicants for the existing amnesty for so-called Dreamers shows the program is a rubber stamp . The state even filed an affidavit to that effect from Kenneth Palinkas , head of the labor union of officers who process the applications .
“ Leadership has intentionally stopped proper screening and enforcement and , in so doing , it has guaranteed that applications will be rubber-stamped for approval , a practice that virtually guarantees widespread fraud and places public safety at risk , ” Mr. Palinkas said .
Texas also says the administration has repeatedly hurt its own case with the way it ’ s gone about attacking states that have cracked down on illegal immigration , while trying to make its own amnesty programs as generous as possible .
In one instance , the administration argues that states don ’ t have to issue driver ’ s licenses to illegal immigrants — thus saying there ’ s no financial burden to states from the amnesty . But the administration is currently arguing in another case out of Arizona that states must issue driver ’ s licenses to those granted the amnesty and work permits .
The 9th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals has sided with the administration , meaning that all of the states under its jurisdiction , including three of the plaintiff states in the Texas case , do not have a choice .
In another example , Texas submitted the declaration of a labor economist who said that because the illegal immigrants would become legal workers but still aren ’ t eligible for Obamacare , they are cheaper to hire for some businesses . Texas said that ’ s exactly the kind of “ economic harm ” that courts are allowed to step in and fight .
The Obama administration told the court that judges don ’ t have the power to stop the president ’ s use of discretion .
Administration lawyers and their defenders also point to previous uses by other presidents of “ deferred action ” — the power Obama lawyers cite in their defense — as evidence what they are doing isn ’ t out of the ordinary .
“ The state lawsuit is about politics , not policy or the constitutionality of the executive actions , ” said Marielena Hincapie , executive director of the National Immigration Law Center , which has filed briefs in the case defending the policy . “ Ultimately , we — along with scores of legal experts — believe the courts will prove that President Obama ’ s immigration policy is legally sound . ”
Meanwhile , the Cato Institute has filed briefs challenging the program .
Ilya Shapiro , senior fellow for constitutional studies at Cato , said the case should test just how broadly states are able to challenge federal laws on behalf of their residents . Mr. Shapiro said given gridlock and the penchant for presidents to act on their own , the case could have a huge impact .
“ All of this is pretty new in the sense that the administration is coming up with creative ways of governing without Congress , ” he said .
Cato ’ s involvement is intriguing because , as a libertarian-leaning think tank , it generally agrees with legalizing illegal immigrants . But Mr. Shapiro said sometimes “ something can be good policy yet bad law . ”
Advocates are already preparing for the government to accept applications . A first round , for those brought to the U.S. as children , will begin by Feb. 20 . A second round , for illegal immigrant parents of children who are U.S. citizens or legal permanent residents , will follow 90 days later .
Republicans in Congress , however , are rushing their own end-of-February deadline to try to halt the program . The House this week will debate legislation that would strip funding for the amnesty , halting it in its tracks .
But with Mr. Obama holding veto power , it ’ s more likely his policy gets decided in the courts , and the Texas case is one of several where the president ’ s amnesty is under scrutiny .
Maricopa County , Arizona , Sheriff Joe Arpaio sued in federal court in Washington , D.C. A judge there has already tossed his case , arguing he didn ’ t prove any specific harm . He has appealed that ruling .
Meanwhile , a federal judge in Pennsylvania found the amnesty unconstitutional , saying it intruded on Congress ‘ lawmaker powers . But that ruling came in a specific case of an illegal immigrant whom the government charged with illegally reentering the U.S. after having been deported . That judge has not invalidated the amnesty , but is trying to decide what to do with the illegal immigrant .
The Pennsylvania case is slated for oral arguments next week .