You already knew that both parties are trading hypocritical barbs over the current 'Schumer Shutdown , ' but this clip from the archives is really quite special and simply too delicious not to share immediately . Back when Republicans pushed a flawed shutdown strategy over Obamacare in 2013 , a certain Senator from New York pronounced himself aghast . The GOP 's disgraceful 'hostage taking ' was nothing short of `` governmental chaos , '' he said during an ABC News appearance . His own party would never go to such radical extremes , even over an issue in which they were deeply emotionally invested , he assured viewers . Guess which issue he picked to illustrate his holier-than-thou 'for instance ' ? It 's okay to laugh :
Well this is awkward . Chuck Schumer in 2013 . # Chuckdown pic.twitter.com/3todBxmgj0 — Sweetened Beverage Recovery Fee ( @ jasonelevation ) January 20 , 2018
This made me chuckle even harder than Steny Hoyer 's amusing House floor fail on Friday . The simple fact is that Shutdown Chuck 's caucus has launched a 44-vote filibuster against a spending bill that would have kept the federal government open . The measure did not include a single provision that Democrats actually oppose . They 've chosen to shut down the government because the spending bill did not include unrelated elements regarding immigration policy . It 's not a popular gambit :
CNN poll : DACA not worth a shutdown , except to Democrats
56 % overall say approving a budget agreement to avoid a shutdown is more important than continuing the DACA program , while just 34 % choose DACA over a shutdown . @ CNNPolitics https : //t.co/PGOrBqjdt5 — David P Gelles ( @ gelles ) January 19 , 2018
And even when the issue of immigration is isolated in the survey , people do n't believe that obstructing the construction of a border wall is worth leaving the DREAMers ' fate unresolved :
CNN poll : Strong opposition to # SchumerShutdown , w/ barely a plurality of * Democrats * in favor . Also : “ Only 1 in 6 said opposing the border wall is more important than continuing DACA . ”
Decouple immigration from govt funding , then pass fair DREAM Act + meaningful enforcement . — Guy Benson ( @ guypbenson ) January 20 , 2018
Five Senate Democrats crossed the aisle to vote for the GOP government funding bill , but 60 votes are required to end the Democratic filibuster . Reports are starting to leak out that rank-and-file elected Democrats and aides are growing more and more concerned about their party 's shutdown adventure , wondering if leadership has an `` exit strategy '' and recognizing that shutting down the government on behalf of illegal immigrants may not be an ingenious maneuver :
One House Dem tells me they ’ re not nearly as worried about Schumer in gov ’ t shutdown negotiations as much as they are with Durbin & his making the shutdown all about DACA/immigration : pic.twitter.com/eKtj48OiHC — ? ? Al Weaver ? ? ( @ alweaver22 ) January 21 , 2018
Among Democrats only 49 % back the # Senate Dem shutdown position , while 42 % say avoiding a shutdown is the priority
Majorities of independents ( 57 % ) say avoiding a shutdown is more important.https : //t.co/fyDQB7W3UM — STEW ? ? ? ? ? ? ( @ StewSays ) January 19 , 2018
But Democrats ' ill-conceived , unpopular shutdown is all about DACA and immigration . I 'll leave you with Mitch McConnell vowing to force vote after vote to end the Schumer Shutdown and reopen the government . It 's up to the Senate minority :