Attorney General Jeff Sessions compared California ’ s new sanctuary city laws to attempts by slave-holding southern states to nullify federal laws , and blasted California officials Wednesday for attempting to force a “ radical open borders agenda ” on the rest of the country .
Speaking to California police and sheriffs , Mr . Sessions defended his decision to file a lawsuit against California this week seeking to block three state laws he says are thwarting federal agents ’ ability to stop illegal immigration .
And he took specific aim at Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf , saying she actively aided illegal immigrants in escaping arrest last month by warning them of an impending sweep by federal deportation officers .
“ Here ’ s my message to Mayor Schaaf : How dare you , ” the attorney general said . “ How dare you needlessly endanger the lives of law enforcement to promote a radical open borders agenda . ”
Ms. Schaaf has defended her actions , saying she was trying to give illegal immigrants the tools to defend their rights , and saying she wanted to keep families together .
She won praise from state officials , who said California is proud to be a sanctuary .
The state government approved three laws last year that severely limit cooperation police can provide to federal immigration authorities , and also prohibit private businesses from cooperating as well .
Mr . Sessions said those laws interfere with the federal government , which under the Constitution and laws passed by Congress has supreme power over immigration .
“ There is no nullification . There is no secession , ” he said . “ Federal law is ‘ the supreme law of the land. ’ I would invite any doubters to go to Gettysburg , to the tombstones of John C. Calhoun and Abraham Lincoln . This matter has been settled . ”
Mr . Sessions called the laws “ an embarrassment ” to the state .
He wondered what would happen if a state passed a law to thwart the Environmental Protection Agency ’ s ability to target polluters .
California officials have defended their policies , saying federal agents are allowed to conduct enforcement — but state and local police shouldn ’ t be forced to assist .
They argue that immigrants , including those in the country legally , are less willing to cooperate on reporting other crimes if they fear immigration agents could become involved .