“ They ’ re doing high-fives in the Clinton campaign right now when they hear this , ” Mr. Bush said .
But policy details and disagreements , for the most part , replaced nasty potshots in the early going on Tuesday night , laying bare real fissures within the Republican Party on immigration , national security , trade and the meaning of being a conservative . The candidates used the 90 seconds they were allotted for each answer to promote their tax proposals , to lament what they said were intrusive business regulations and to delve into the country ’ s monetary policy . Even when Mr. Kasich sought to speak at one point when he was not called on , it was because he wanted to discuss a value-added tax .
Mr. Rubio was not only able to avoid being drawn into the contentious immigration debate , but also repeatedly received questions that allowed him to answer with versions of his stump speech . Even he seemed unable to believe his good fortune when he was asked to make his case against Mrs. Clinton . He chuckled for a moment before unspooling a well-rehearsed argument : why he can prosecute a “ generational ” case against her .
“ If I am the nominee , they will be the party of the past , and we will be the party of the 21st century , ” said Mr. Rubio , 44 .
Less than three months before Iowa begins the Republican nominating contest , the jostling in Milwaukee reflected the growing urgency the candidates feel to stand out in a sprawling 14-person field . With a pair of political novices , Mr. Trump and Mr. Carson , atop the polls , the other candidates appeared determined to remain in the campaign until there is more clarity on who is likely to be the nominee . But the muddled picture is clearly starting to unnerve many in the party .
Some of the candidates expressed this frustration and sought to distinguish themselves by speaking more aggressively about their plans to cut taxes or create jobs — even if they did not deliver many specifics .
They barely explored recent controversies roiling the Republican race , particularly accusations that Mr. Carson had embellished or even fabricated part of his inspiring life story . Asked if he was worried about those questions , Mr. Carson drew strong applause from the audience by criticizing the news media as biased against him .