One question left unanswered by President Obama 's announcement last week that he would stop deportations of some young illegal immigrants was what the policy change will mean for students .
Professors and students are wondering whether the changes Obama announced will really help them . The president 's executive action defers deportations for illegal immigrants who are 30 or under and meet certain conditions , giving them the ability to apply for a work permit .
While some in the Latino community are celebrating the president 's announcement , others say its effect on education is murky .
`` It 's talking about deferral of the process of deportation , '' says University of Georgia professor Betina Kaplan . `` It 's talking about working permits . But it 's not saying anything about education . ''
Georgia bans illegal immigrants from attending the state 's five most prestigious public colleges , including the University of Georgia . Kaplan says it 's unclear whether schools will begin accepting these students again .
`` I do n't see any element that would put pressure on the schools in Georgia to lift the ban , but I think we have to wait and see , '' says Kaplan .
Another concern is that state and local officials will have discretion as to whether illegal immigrants who meet the criteria will get deferred status . University of Georgia professor Lorgia Garcia-Pena says she worries students could identify themselves and end up at risk .
`` A student could apply for this and still get deported . There 's no process of appeal . There 's no guarantee that the person that applies for this ... will receive it . It 's really very vague , '' Garcia-Pena says .
A University of Georgia spokesman says the school will look to the state Board of Regents for guidance on Obama 's directive . The board says officials are examining the implications .
State Sen. Barry Loudermilk , a Republican , supports banning illegal immigrants from attending all public colleges in Georgia . He says even if students get deferred status as the president has suggested , that does n't mean they are legal residents .
`` I think that 's something that ... we 're going to have to take a close look at , '' Loudermilk says . `` And will the state stand up and say , 'We 're still not going to do this ' ? So does it really become law ? In my opinion , it does not . ''
Taxpayers are subsidizing public colleges , Loudermilk says , so that benefit should not go to students who are illegal immigrants .
South of Atlanta in Griffin , Ga. , Gustavo Madrigal is cleaning up dishes in the home his family rents . He came to the U.S. from Mexico when he was 9 and is undocumented .
`` I never really knew what it would mean for me in college , '' Madrigal says .
Madrigal was a good student in high school , with a 3.9 average his junior year . He found out in 12th grade , he says , that he was n't eligible for most scholarships .
`` I do n't think education should be about immigration status . It should be about merit . And I mean , the University of Georgia — I could have made a huge contribution to it by going there and studying there , '' he says .
Now 20 , Madrigal is with the Georgia Undocumented Youth Alliance , a group lobbying for passage of a bill that would allow a pathway to citizenship . He says this latest White House announcement is not enough .
`` We do n't want people to end [ up ] working at McDonald 's the rest of their lives , you know . Not that that 's not respectable but , you know , there 's just so much potential with our community that it would be a shame to see it go ... to waste and nothing happen with it , '' Madrigal says .
Another undocumented immigrant , Keish Kim , 20 , came to the U.S. from South Korea when she was 8 . She graduated from high school but is also unable to attend college here despite good grades .
`` We 've been delaying and putting thousands of people on a limbo state for over a decade , '' she says .
`` I definitely do n't want to belittle President Obama 's step , [ his ] courage to stand up and announce that memo , but I think we have to be cautious . I am cautious about it and very hesitant , '' Kim says .
Kim says students want to see concrete action that would allow them to pursue their education legally . She worries the directive could be overturned if Obama is not re-elected .