Flanked by Republican Sens . Tom Cotton and David Perdue , President Trump unveiled the RAISE Act on Wednesday , an immigration bill that aims to drastically limit legal immigration . Soon after the press conference , the Anne Frank Center slammed Trump 's RAISE Act in a fierce statement likening it to an `` ethnic purity test that harkens [ sic ] to the darkest chapters of world history . ''
The RAISE Act would bring about sweeping change to American immigration policy . It would slash in half the number of green cards — some one million — issued today , throw out the diversity lottery aimed at attracting immigrants underrepresented in the U.S. , and cut down on the number of refugees the U.S. admits . But the most contentious part of the bill , at least in the immediate backlash to the announcement , is that it green card applicants who speak English would be favored over those who do n't .
It was a detail in the legislation that many pointed out on Twitter , and it was one that the Anne Frank Center singled out , too . Its statement on Wednesday quoted executive director Steven Goldstein , who called the bill `` evil . '' Goldstein said :
This heinous action would , in effect , establish an ethnic purity test that harkens [ sic ] to the darkest chapters of world history . The Statue of Liberty weeps as she watches President Trump all but flush America 's moral leadership down the toilet .
The Anne Frank Center has been a vociferous opponent of many of Trump 's actions in office . After he issued his travel ban executive order , the organization tweeted in January that banning refugees and immigrants will `` never keep America great . '' In February , after Trump addressed a delayed response to rising anti-Semitic incidents , the center again issued a scorching statement criticizing him .
`` Make no mistake , '' that February statement read . `` The Antisemitism coming out of this Administration is the worst we have ever seen from any Administration . ''
Trump 's backing of the RAISE Act is in line with his anti-immigration campaign stance . As a candidate , however , his wrath was more focused on undocumented immigrants .
The RAISE Act is an updated version of an old bill ( the skill-based system that considers English speaking fluency and financial ability is new ) . Cotton and Perdue co-sponsored this legislation in February , but it did n't even make it to the Senate Judiciary Committee .
This time around , it comes on the heels of an embarrassing failure to pass a health care repeal bill , and as Republican lawmakers are determined to move on to other issues like tax reform . It 's unlikely that it will garner 51 votes , much less the 60 it needs to pass the Senate .