( CNN ) President Donald Trump is following through with one of the first pledges he made a year and a half ago when he announced his long-shot bid for the White House -- directing federal resources toward building a wall along the southern border .
But the reality of building the wall could be more difficult than the rallying cries would suggest . The length of the wall , when construction will begin , how much it will cost and who will pay for it remain fundamental questions .
There is also ongoing debate about the feasibility of the structure and the need for it in the first place .
Trump 's push for a wall dates back to the day in June 2015 when he announced his campaign and promised to `` build a great , great wall on our southern border '' and said Mexico would pay .
His effort to turn those words into reality is expected to be formally announced Wednesday and is among several immigration-related actions anticipated in a multi-day rollout from the new administration .
JUST WATCHED Trump pledges to build a wall Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump pledges to build a wall 00:50
Since he first made the pledge , walling off our neighbors to the south became an oft-repeated promise and rallying cry , both for the candidate and his supporters . Chants of `` build that wall '' thundered through arenas and convention halls . In at least one instance , Trump himself led the cheer . Building `` an impenetrable physical wall on the southern border , on day one '' is listed as item No . 1 on his `` 10 Point Plan to Put America First . ''
At the first press briefing of the new administration Monday , one of the first questions to White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer was about the wall . Spicer said the administration was working with agency heads and Congress to move forward on the project . He offered no further details .
Not everyone is as enthusiastic as the President about building a wall , including the man whose job it was to secure the U.S. border for the past three years .
`` I do n't see any efficacy in building a wall across the border , '' said Gil Kerlikowske , who until last week served as Commissioner of Customs and Border Protection under former President Barack Obama .
`` The border and migration issues are just unbelievably complex , '' Kerlikowske said in an interview with CNN . `` And a simple answer to a complex problem is most assuredly the wrong answer . ''
Kerlikowske said the rugged terrain in the Arizona desert and the shifting Rio Grande River in Texas , which routinely changes depth and even direction , both represent natural obstacles to building a border wall . Some of the land along the border in the Rio Grande Valley is privately owned , representing another challenge , he said .
Kerlikowske also noted that the vast majority of people trying to enter the US are actually showing up at border entry points and seeking asylum or turning themselves in . Most are not trying to scale the fence in the dark of night , he said . Even if a wall was built , he said , it would require a significant hiring increase to have enough agents to monitor the wall . That would be no easy feat for an agency that is currently 1,200 employees below full strength .
Kerlikowske said that , in addition to some 700 miles of fencing , the border is currently patrolled by agents on foot , bikes , motorcycles , ATVs and horseback . There 's also an air wing , unmanned predator drones , ground sensors , infrared video and tower-mounted video with a range of 25 miles .
`` It 's all preferable to a wall , '' Kerlikowske said . `` Unless you monitor that wall . ''
On the campaign trail , Trump told a crowd of supporters in Anaheim , California , in May that he 'd reached out to leaders in the union representing Border Patrol agents and asked whether a wall was truly needed .
`` Mr. Trump , It 's absolutely vital , '' came the reply , he told the crowd . `` It 's an absolutely important tool . Maybe our most important tool to stop what 's going on . ''
`` We 're going to build the wall . We have no choice . ''
At the point , the crowd began chanting , `` build that wall . '' Trump joined in from the podium .
The National Border Patrol Council , the union representing Border Patrol agents , endorsed Trump for President -- marking the first time the group had taken such an action .
Brandon Judd , president of the council , said in a recent interview with CNN , that Trump was `` by far the best on border security '' when compared with other candidates .
Judd said he did n't reach that decision based on his pledge to build a wall . He said his group favored `` barriers in strategic locations . ''
But , importantly , he did n't say those barriers had to come in the form of a wall as Trump is suggesting .
He called the double fencing along the border in the San Diego area `` insanely effective . ''
Judd , who said he met with Trump and his transition team , argued such fencing allows agents to confront people on the US side of the border while they still have a fence in front of them to slow their progress .
`` He was very much willing to listen to our perspective , '' Judd said . `` It was , you know : ' I did n't realize that ' . And 'that 's good to know ' . ''
Trump would then turn to an aide , Judd recounted , and say : `` Hey , get on this . Get back with me . I need to know more about this . ''
Judd said he was confident his group 's views were being taken into consideration .
`` If you look at the areas they 're currently surveying -- if you look at what the talk is , a lot of that is coming from us , '' he said . `` They absolutely 100 % are in the process of implementing things we suggested . ''
Judd said he signed a non-disclosure agreement that prohibited him from going into detail about planned construction .
Shawn Moran , vice president of the Border Patrol union , said he thinks most people would be surprised to learn that it 's possible to drive for 30 minutes in some Border Patrol sectors and not encounter agents on patrol .
`` I think a lot of Americans think you 're going to see agents in towers every hundred yards , '' Moran said . `` That does n't exist . ''
He said one instance in which a wall may have made a difference was in the 2009 slaying of Border Patrol Agent Robert Rosas . Rosas was shot to death by assailants who crawled under fencing near the eastern San Diego County town of Campo .
The US-Mexico border is approximately 2,000 miles long , running from San Diego to Brownsville , Texas . Trump initially said he wanted to wall off the entire border , but has since said that 1,000 miles may do .
He has offered few details on the wall since being elected president . But speaking at a news conference earlier this month , he reiterated his pledge , referring to the border as `` an open sieve . '' He made construction sound imminent .
`` Mike Pence is leading an effort to get final approvals through various agencies and through Congress for the wall to begin , '' he told reporters on Jan. 11 .
CNN reported earlier this month that Trump transition team officials had been in discussions with the US Army Corps of Engineers and the Interior Department to begin planning a wall , including how certain environmental laws could come into play .
`` It seems clear they were trying to size up the environmental laws that may be obstacles to building the wall , '' said one U.S. official familiar with the inquiry .
A review of Trump 's statements on the campaign trail offers a glimpse of what he envisions -- or did at the time .
Trump said his wall would be solid , strong and `` probably 35 to 40 feet up in the air . ''
`` It will actually look good , '' he added . `` You know , as good as a wall is going to look . ''
The dimensions of the border barricade grew when former Mexican President Vicente Fox insisted his country would never pay for it .
`` It just got 10 feet taller , '' Trump told CNN 's Wolf Blitzer last year .
When then-Republican presidential contender Jeb Bush referred to the proposed wall as a fence in August of 2015 , Trump took to Twitter to correct him :
`` It 's not a fence , Jeb , it 's a WALL , '' Trump tweeted , `` and there 's a BIG difference ! ''
In an interview with MSNBC in February , then-candidate Trump said he 'd priced out the project at about $ 8 billion . Later that month , he told Fox News ' Sean Hannity the cost would be $ 10 billion .
`` It 's going to be a very terrific wall , '' Trump said . `` $ 10 billion is not bad . ''
Hannity asked Trump , whose name is synonymous with his brand as a builder and hotelier whether the name Trump will be on the wall .