The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com .
On Tuesday , my wife and I went and voted early , mostly to get it out of the way while my dad and sister are visiting and they could watch our newborn . The experience was pretty much what you ’ d expect – paid temporary workers trying to remember their training , to varying degrees of success , in a community center ’ s gym with a bunch of other people looking to check the “ civic duty ” box . But something struck me this year that made me wonder what the point of citizenship is anymore .
My ballot in Maryland was in both English and Spanish . Maybe it ’ s been that way for years , I honestly don ’ t remember . On the way out the door , as always happens , someone tried to give me and my older daughter , a whole 17 months , an “ I voted ” sticker . I passed because I think they ’ re stupid and obnoxious – you shouldn ’ t celebrate doing what you ’ re supposed to do – but my wife , who took longer to vote because she skipped every race where there was only one person on the ballot , took one . It read , “ I voted , yo vote. ” It was then it occurred to me that the benefits of citizenship are either going away or pretty much gone .
Don ’ t get me wrong , I still have pride in the country , but the country is changing significantly , or more correctly it ’ s being changed , in a dramatic way I ’ m not sure people are aware of .
Why would a ballot need to be written in English and Spanish when , by law , you ’ re expected to be proficient in English in order to become a citizen and , therefore , be eligible to vote ?
What makes people “ Americans ” is being diluted and destroyed by Democrats willing to do anything to obtain power , except listen to the people they seek to represent .
There was a time , believe it or not , when immigrants came to this country with the desire to become an American , not a hyphenated American . There were always ethnic enclaves in major cities – a Little Italy , a Chinatown etc . – and immigrants moved there upon their arrivals . It made sense , they had limited to no English skills , so being able to communicate in their native tongue was understandable . But these enclaves were not their landing strips , it was their launching pads .
Immigrants stayed in those enclaves only as long as they had to in order to learn the language , learn what it took to assimilate . Then they moved on .
Now the opposite happens – immigrants are encouraged by Democrats to maintain their allegiance to their native land , to reject assimilation and maintain the cultures they , in many cases , fled . That leads to a nation of people with nothing in common and limited ability to communicate with each other . We never looked alike , but we could talk . It ’ s getting so we can ’ t anymore , and liberals love that .
If you never speak to anyone different from you , you get a perverted impression of the world . Just look at CNN and MSNBC . There is no debate there , only slight disagreements . They truly believe Donald Trump is lowering the discourse in this country and spreading hate while calling him Hitler , his supporters Nazis , and fantasizing about horrible things happening to the president , up to and including his assassination .
These same people insist encouraging assimilation into America by people seeking to become Americans is racist . “ Celebrate diversity , ” they scream , leaving off the implied “ or else . ”
Diversity based on pigment is the least relevant and interesting thing human beings can be , let alone “ celebrate. ” Skin color has always been an obsession of racists , and it still is . It ’ s what we have in common that makes us a nation . But having things in common leads to getting along , and getting along isn ’ t in the Democrats ’ playbook . So they seek to divide so they can manipulate . As I explain in my book , if you can convince people “ the system is rigged against them , ” and they suffer the setbacks , disappointments , and jerks everyone encounters in life , those setbacks become discouragements from trying in the future . Why try when you believe you literally can ’ t win ?
This creates a mass of people convinced a political party acting on their behalf is the only way to get ahead , to make life “ fair. ” But life isn ’ t fair , life is what you make of it . And you don ’ t make anything of your life waiting for someone else , some political party , to run blocker for you or do your heavy lifting .
Democrats are removing what it means to be an American from actually being an American for their own political gain .
Now the left is actively favoring illegal aliens over Americans and legal immigrants . Liberal jurisdictions across the country are spending untold millions of our tax dollars to defend people here illegally , granting in-state tuition , various forms of welfare benefits ( free meals as schools , picking up the tab for their health care , etc . ) , and voting rights in some areas for local elections ( for now ) .
They tell us illegal aliens are a boon to the economy , which is laughable . Some areas have gone so far as to plea down crimes by illegal aliens to avoid them getting on the radar of Immigration and Customs Enforcement . Would an American get that deal ? Of course not .
For an illegal alien to work in this country and “ pay taxes , ” as we ’ re told they do , they ’ d have to steal someone ’ s identity , someone ’ s Social Security number . That ’ s a serious crime with real victims , American victims of all backgrounds , and something for which American citizens would do real time for committing , but illegal aliens committing it is ignored .
So what ’ s the point of citizenship ? We aren ’ t granted special protections by government officials , we ’ re subject to our laws . People who break our laws to come here have a political party willing to bend over backwards to make sure they aren ’ t . Immigrants who come here legally aren ’ t encouraged to assimilate , they get ballots in their native tongue . How can you fully invest in a country if you can ’ t communicate in the common language ?
I want everyone with something to offer to come here , legally , and become an American . Democrats want anyone to come here , as long as they ’ re likely to vote for Democrats .
If Democrats regain power next week , what it means to be an American will be diluted even further . We just have to decide if we want to be a nation where it 's more advantageous to be here illegally than to be a citizen . Because that ’ s what ’ s really on the ballot Tuesday .
To defeat the liberal mob you first have to understand how it was created and how it is manipulated and controlled . Order a copy of Derek ’ s book , “ Outrage , INC. : How the Liberal Mob Ruined Science , Journalism , and Hollywood , ” to understand how the political left manipulates unsuspecting Americans to the point that they ’ d believe their lies and act on them . And subscribe to Derek ’ s daily podcast , it ’ s free ! Together they ’ ll help you stay sane and just might help you deprogram friends and family who ’ ve fallen prey to the mob mentality .