U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services ( USCIS ) approved 100,000 applications under President Obama ’ s executive amnesty expansion before the official kick off date of February 18 , the Obama administration reveals .
In a court filing to the federal court in Texas that recently placed a temporarily halt on President Obama ’ s November 20 , 2014 , executive amnesty — specifically the expansion of Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) and Deferred Action for Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent Residents ( DAPA ) — the Justice Department reveals that the administration actually jumped the gun on an an aspect of the DACA expansion .
The Texas judge issued the temporary halt on DAPA and the DACA expansion on February 16 . According to the Justice Department ’ s filing , between November 24 and February 16 , USCIS granted 100,000 illegal immigrants three-year employment authorizations ( EADs ) , instead of two year EADs . An aspect of Obama ’ s November 20 announcement was that time expansion on work permits .
The Obama administration stresses in its filing that this was done prior to the court ’ s injunction .
“ Specifically , between November 24 , 2014 and the issuance of the Court ’ s Order , USCIS granted three-year periods of deferred action to approximately 100,000 individuals who had requested deferred action under the original 2012 DACA guidelines ( and were otherwise determined to warrant such relief ) , including the issuance of three-year EADs for those 2012 DACA recipients who were eligible for renewal , ” the administration explains . “ These pre-injunction grants of three-year periods of deferred action to those already eligible for 2012 DACA were consistent with the terms of the November Guidance . ”
Despite taking action on the executive orders well before the beginning of the expanded programs , the Obama administration explains in its filing that it will not be revoking the three-year EADs . The administration simply wants the court to be aware of them .
“ In light of these circumstances , Defendants file this Advisory to ensure that the Court is aware of these pre-injunction actions taken by USCIS . It is Defendants ’ understanding that the preliminary injunction does not require them to take affirmative steps to alter the status quo as it existed before the Court ’ s Order , ” the filing reads .
The administration added that they do not see the court ’ s move to halt the executive actions as cause to take steps to right the apparent misstep .
“ Defendants do not understand the Order to require Defendants to take affirmative steps to revoke three-year periods of deferred action and work authorization ( and accompanying documents , including EADs ) that were issued for recipients of deferred action under the original 2012 DACA eligibility guidelines prior to the Court ’ s February 16 , 2015 Order , ” the administration ’ s filing reads .