With her speech on immigration in Las Vegas on Tuesday , Hillary Rodham Clinton took a large step forward , up front and to the left of President Obama . That is a good place to be for a presidential candidate who proposes to get the stalled debate moving again , and to bring hope to the millions living here outside the law .
Mrs. Clinton defended a path to citizenship for those 11 million , and promised as president to take executive action — more broadly than Mr. Obama has — to defer the deportations of those who have strong bonds to the community through family and work . She also promised to make conditions “ more humane ” for immigrant detainees .
Mrs. Clinton noted that her call for a citizenship path sets her apart from any and all Republicans who are in , or likely to enter , the 2016 race . The same is true of her support for executive action . Senator Marco Rubio of Florida , a former advocate of sensible reform , had the sense beaten out of him by the Tea Party , and now seems to be seeking a vague provisional status for the undocumented — a long , difficult path to a temporary work permit . Jeb Bush , the former Florida governor , has been moderate in the past but is wobbly on citizenship , a nonstarter for many in his party . Whether he supports it for some immigrants , and which ones , under what conditions , is hard to pin down on any given day ; like other Republicans hoping to survive the primaries , he is on his own tortuous path to a coherent position .
Like Mr. Bush , Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky speaks compassionately of immigrants at times , but his agenda seems limited to sealing the border and ending the 14th Amendment guarantee of citizenship by birth . Gov . Scott Walker of Wisconsin just wants every unauthorized immigrant to leave the country — and he wants to limit legal immigration , too . It ’ s early in the campaign , and the ground could always shift . Mrs. Clinton ’ s full-throated public commitment to expansive immigration action , while surprising and welcome , is only a few hours old . She may yet prove herself a staunch defender of immigrants ’ rights , but only last fall she was dodging questions from the young advocates known as Dreamers with a discouraging non-answer : “ Elect more Democrats . ”