After spending weeks dealing with the fallout from the IRS targeting scandal , Tea Party groups are starting to focus their energy on the immigration bill -- a development that could imperil President Obama 's hopes for a speedy approval .
Before adjourning for the Fourth of July holiday break , the Senate easily approved its version of the legislation . The bill now rests with the House , where Republicans say they will take up their own version .
Obama , during his Africa trip , called on the House to `` get this done '' before the August recess .
But House lawmakers already are hearing conservative calls to slow things down . And if the debate leaks into August -- when Congress takes a nearly month-long recess -- the prospects could get even more wobbly . The Tea Party , during the 2009 August recess , famously helped stall ObamaCare by storming town hall meetings and other events .
Tea Party groups may be preparing to again mount demonstrations during the summer break . And even if the House passes a bill this month , it 's unlikely the two chambers would be able to agree on a unified piece of legislation by August -- leaving the work unfinished going into recess .
While Tea Partiers await that opening , they 're already beginning to stir the pot .
Earlier this week , dozens of conservative groups including the Cincinnati Tea Party sent a letter to House Speaker John Boehner urging him to declare the Senate package `` dead on arrival . '' They complained that the Senate bill , by virtue of giving up to 11 million illegal immigrants a shot at legal status , would make life harder for U.S. workers `` struggling to reach the bottom rung of the economic ladder . ''
Whether the Tea Party will be able to reprise the kind of grassroots battle it waged on the health care law remains to be seen . On health care , the movement benefited from a Republican Party and base that largely was on the same page -- that is , against ObamaCare .
On immigration , the party is split . Fourteen Republican senators voted for the bill that passed the Senate last week . Several influential conservative economists have come forward to argue that immigration legislation would be a boon for the economy , with newly legalized workers and an enhanced legal immigration system giving the economy the jump-start it needs .
Tea Party supporters say those conservatives are falling for the ruse that the so-called `` amnesty '' would coincide with enhanced border security . They warn that the mass legalization will trump any security improvements .
And while political strategists see immigration as an important issue that the Republican Party should not ignore , Tea Partiers have a powerful piece of leverage at their disposal -- the ability to threaten wavering lawmakers with a primary challenge .
In South Carolina , Tea Party activists on Monday staged protests at the offices of Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , a key Republican who helped draft the bill .
Ron Hughes , with the South Carolina Tea Party Coalition , told ███ that activists would `` love '' to see Graham face a primary challenge .
`` We wanted a full-time conservative senator , and he has not done that for us , '' he said .
Graham has faced Tea Party angst before , but House lawmakers who owe their seats to Tea Party support might be hesitant to spurn the activists .
House Republicans say they will proceed at their own pace , on their own bills , when it comes to immigration . Last Sunday , they shrugged off a prediction by Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , that the House would simply pass the Senate bill .
`` The House will not simply take up and pass the Senate bill , '' a Boehner spokesman said . `` Our legislation will reflect our principles , particularly on border security . ''