The Trump administration has expanded the government ’ s deportation powers , issuing guidelines urging officers at U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services — the legal immigration agency — to begin the removal process for people who use fraudulent documents or who illegally took government benefits .
USCIS officers have always had powers to begin deportation proceedings , but in the past had usually referred cases to other parts of Homeland Security for decisions on deportation .
Now , though , the agency is flexing those powers , with guidance memos telling officers to look for instances where they can begin the deportation process for people they deem illegal immigrants .
The memos , dated June 28 , tell agency employees to be on the lookout for people who apply for naturalization or other legal immigration benefit but who have criminal records , used bogus documents , lied about their applications or had abused public benefit programs .
In the past those might have been enough to reject the application , but USCIS would either drop the issue at that point or refer the case to U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement for possible deportation . Under the new guidelines USCIS employees are now urged to begin the deportation process themselves .
That involves issuing a Notice to Appear , or NTA , which signals the beginning of the deportation process . Someone who receives an NTA then must go before an immigration judge , has the chance to appeal , and only then is deported .
“ For too long , USCIS officers uncovering instances of fraudulent or criminal activity have been limited in their ability to help ensure U.S. immigration laws are faithfully executed , ” USCIS Director L. Francis Cissna said in announcing the changes .
“ This updated policy equips USCIS officers with clear guidance they need and deserve to support the enforcement priorities established by the president , keep our communities safe , and protect the integrity of our immigration system from those seeking to exploit it . ”
The new guidance reclaims USCIS ’ s role as a gatekeeper and expands the number of government employees on the lookout for deportable migrants .
“ When fraud , misrepresentation , or evidence of abuse of public benefit programs is part of the record and the alien is removable , USCIS will issue an NTA upon denial of the petition or application , or other appropriate negative eligibility determination , ” the guidance says .
USCIS says the move is about efficiency . In the past , it had to wait on ICE to make decisions and ICE would have to track someone down to issue them an NTA . Now , USCIS will be able to do that immediately .
One effect could be to discourage people with bogus claims from coming forward to apply , since they now run a greater risk of ending up in deportation proceedings .
People applying under the Obama-era DACA program are exempted from the new guidance , meaning illegal immigrant “ Dreamers ” won ’ t generally have to worry about being put in deportation if their claim is rejected .
The prohibition on sharing their information with ICE is also still in place , according to a second memo released Thursday .