NEW YORK ( ███ ) - Honduras signed a deal with the U.S. government on Wednesday that could push migrants who cross the country on the way to the United States back to seek asylum , in the latest bilateral deal with Central American countries aimed at curbing migration .
Wednesday ’ s “ safe third country ” -type deal is similar to agreements signed by El Salvador on Sept. 20 and Guatemala on July 26 . The countries have released few details about how the agreements would be implemented .
( For a link to the El Salvador deal , please click on : tmsnrt.rs/2ldjzJI . For a link to Guatemala deal , click on : tmsnrt.rs/2niarEz )
The Honduras deal “ will allow migrants to seek protection as close to home as possible , ” said a senior U.S. Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) official who told reporters about the deal in a conference call on condition of anonymity.The official did not say why he did not want to be named .
The Trump administration is moving forward with a July 16 rule that would bar most migrants from gaining U.S. asylum if they did not seek safe haven in a country they transited through first .
The rule , which accomplishes virtually the same thing being sought by the agreements , has faced legal challenges , however . A federal court initially blocked it from taking effect but the U.S. Supreme Court on Sept. 11 allowed it to be implemented while the court challenges are ongoing .
The bulk of migrants - mostly families - arriving at the U.S.-Mexico border are from the three northern triangle countries and many turn themselves in to border officials to ask for asylum in the United States .
President Donald Trump has made reducing the ballooning number of asylum claims , which have led to long backlogs in U.S. immigration courts , a top priority of his administration and has implemented a series of measures to try to discourage migrants from applying .
But immigrant advocates say sending people seeking refuge back to the region where they fled , even if not to their home country , violates international commitments meant to prevent vulnerable migrants from being returned to danger . The three countries have tiny asylum offices that could have trouble adequately processing a large number of claims , they say .
Honduras President Juan Orlando Hernandez has faced scrutiny over a court filing document related to the upcoming drug trafficking trial in New York of his brother , Juan Antonio “ Tony ” Hernandez . The president has denied any wrongdoing .
In a speech on Wednesday before the UN General Assembly , Hernandez again defended his political reputation against what he called “ smears ” from “ criminals ” and others , without outright referring to the allegations against him .