The Ebola outbreak in West Africa is fueling concerns that the porous U.S.-Mexico border poses a growing health risk , with statistics showing dozens of people from the epicenter of the Ebola scare illegally entered the U.S. -- or tried to -- this year alone .
Breitbart.com on Monday published a Customs and Border Protection document breaking down where illegal immigrants who turn themselves in or are caught by immigration authorities are coming from . The statistics reportedly showed they are traveling from more than 75 different countries .
Among them , between January and July of this year , at least 71 reportedly arrived from the three West African nations hit with the current Ebola outbreak .
The numbers come after Rep. Phil Gingrey , R-Ga. , wrote to the head of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention last month raising concerns about illegal immigrants carrying `` swine flu , dengue fever , Ebola virus and tuberculosis . ''
`` As the unaccompanied children continue to be transported to shelters around the country on commercial airlines and other forms of transportation , I have serious concerns that the diseases carried by these children may begin to spread too rapidly to control , '' he wrote .
Gingrey was ridiculed in the media for his letter and accused of unnecessarily spreading fears about the disease and about the children crossing the border .
The nonpartisan PolitiFact.com panned his Ebola warning , noting that the CDC at the time had no reports of Ebola infection `` anywhere in the Western Hemisphere , much less the U.S.-Mexico border , '' and that anyone with Ebola and traveling by foot would likely die before reaching the U.S. border . ( Since that report , two Americans with Ebola have been brought to the U.S. for treatment , though extreme medical precautions are being taken . )
But Indiana Republican Rep. Todd Rokita once again raised the Ebola issue while discussing the border crisis Monday on WIBC 's The Garrison Show .
Noting that he , Rep. Larry Bucshon , R-Ind. , and other members of the Indiana delegation sent a letter to President Obama inquiring about the hundreds of illegal immigrant minors released to sponsors in their state , he said : `` We sent a letter to the president saying look , first of all , we have got to know . ... [ Bucshon ] said , look , we need to know just from a public health standpoint , with Ebola circulating and everything else -- no , that 's my addition to it , not necessarily his -- but he said we need to know the condition of these kids as well . ''
CDC Director Thomas Frieden tried to assuage concerns about the spread of the disease during an interview earlier with `` ███ Sunday . ''
`` There are 50 million travelers from around the world that come to the U.S. each year that are essential to our economy , to our families , to our communities . We 're not going to hermetically seal this country , '' Frieden said . `` What we can do is put in place sensible screening procedures . ''
Frieden was speaking in reference to a major U.S.-Africa summit being held in Washington , D.C. , this week . In response to the Ebola scare , delegations from certain countries are being screened at their point of departure , and upon arrival in the U.S .
On Ebola , Frieden said that with the proper steps , `` we can turn it around . ''
No case of an illegal immigrant carrying Ebola has been reported .
But several reports have surfaced , including in a recent inspector general review , of other health issues connected to the surge along the U.S.-Mexico border .
The Department of Homeland Security IG report last week said that in two cases , the children of a border agent got chicken pox after their exposure to a child who had the illness .
Other Border Patrol personnel reported they were `` potentially exposed to tuberculosis . ''
There also were reports of U.S. personnel contracting scabies and lice , according to the IG findings .
Despite these concerns , according to the Department of Health and Human Services , any unaccompanied minor caught crossing the border is given what 's called a `` well-child '' exam as well as any needed childhood vaccinations . They are also screened for tuberculosis and get a mental health exam .
According to the department , if they have or have been exposed to a communicable disease , they are put in a facility `` that has the capacity to quarantine . ''