Hundreds of students at the University of California , Berkeley are discussing a plan to create an in-person course solely to circumvent new U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE ) regulations that could result in the deportations of international students on F-1 visas -- and they say at least one faculty member is on board , Fox News has learned .
The plan , which could run afoul of immigration law if enacted in its current form , was hatched hours after ICE announced Monday that foreign students in the country are required to take some in-person instruction or they will not be allowed to legally remain in the country .
`` berkeley students are creating a 1-unit , in-person , student-run class to help international students avoid deportation due to the new ICE regulations , '' a Berkeley Urban Studies student wrote in a now-deleted tweet , which has been archived by Google . `` love my school sometimes . ''
The tweet was shared more than 25,000 times before it was taken down . It linked to a longer Facebook post stating that a member of the Berkeley community had `` found a faculty member who will sponser [ sic ] this . ''
The Facebook post clearly declared that the proposed course was not intended to serve a broader educational purpose for the student body , and `` is ONLY for students who are international and need a physical component to remain in the United States . '' A syllabus was being drafted , according to the post .
`` The duplicity of Berkeley in this case is staggering . '' — Dale L. Wilcox , IRLI executive director
The post also stated that the course would `` likely '' be run `` through the anthropology department , '' although the specifics of the course 's substance and subject matter did n't appear to concern most Berkeley students discussing the matter online .
`` The duplicity of Berkeley in this case is staggering , '' Dale L. Wilcox , executive director and general counsel of the Immigration Reform Law Institute ( IRLI ) , told Fox News . `` They are all too eager to aid foreign nationals in avoiding compliance with our federal immigration laws . They also rely on and expect millions of federal government dollars to underwrite their operations , including bloated administration and faculty salaries . The Trump administration should explore all options to hold colleges accountable for this conduct . ''
The Facebook post has been shared thousands of times on various Berkeley-related social media groups , including several that are publicly available . Academics with ties to Berkeley , including Deborah Miranda , have spread news of the course on their own Facebook accounts -- saying it 's a `` work-around '' to beat the ICE rules .
Miranda went on to falsely state that the ICE regulations would affect `` Dreamers '' ; they would in fact affect students with F-1 visas . Miranda deleted her Facebook messages on the topic , as well as the Facebook thread , after this article was published .
However , Fox News retained the contents of the thread . In the conversation , some students noted that the plan might not work .
`` F-1 students are only allowed to take one course in an online modality each semester , unfortunately , '' observed Tiffany Earley Spadoni , an Assistant Professor at University of Central Florida . `` I do n't think offering a one-credit hour course will meet the administrative requirements . But it is great to see creative solutions being discussed . ''
`` Looks like one other possible solution will be to see if the univ can make them all sign up for an outdoor PE class , '' suggested another user , Florinda Ruiz .
Seyda Ipek , a University of California President 's Postdoctoral Fellow at UC Irvine , sounded a cautionary note on Twitter .
`` I 'm super worried that these kind of actions would be used against international students by ICE/State Dept agents in future visa applications . As an international scholar myself , I 'd highly recommend US citizens talk to an immigration lawyer before considering these 'solutions , ' '' she wrote .
Another user responded : `` That 's cute but international students can only take 3 credits online maximum per semester and must maintain at least 12 credits to maintain visa . So that 's 9 credits , atleast 3 classes , that they 'll have to take in person . ''
RICE STUDENTS DEMAND 'BLACK HOUSE , ' VOLUNTARY HOUSING SEGREGATION , BETTER ID PHOTOS
Berkeley is well-known as among the most left-leaning institutions of higher learning in the United States . Last month , Berkeley 's chancellor mourned the murder of a white student by noting that most of the campus was upset about the death of George Floyd -- a statement that drew widespread criticism , even as top Berkeley officials doubled down . And last year , a Berkeley instructor called rural Americans `` bad people '' who deserve `` uncomfortable '' lives .
Berkeley did not immediately respond to Fox News ' requests for comment about the apparent plan to circumvent immigration regulations . Berkeley is a public institution that receives taxpayer funds for research and education . The plan being discussed by students would have a substantially different purpose , as it would create an in-person course for a narrow subset of the university 's population while most classmates attend class remotely .
The ICE ’ s Student and Exchange Visitor Program released a statement on Monday that said students in the U.S. who are enrolled in schools that plan to operate solely online this fall “ must depart the country or take other measures , such as transferring to a school with in-person instruction to remain lawful status . If not , they may face immigration consequences including , but not limited to , the initiation of removal proceedings . ”
Fiona McEntee , an immigration lawyer , told NPR that ICE 's move “ makes no sense . ”
“ If students can study online successfully from an academic point of view , why are we forcing them to come into a situation where they could put their health at risk and also the health of their classmates at risk ? ”
ICE did not immediately respond to an after-hours email from Fox News . The Wall Street Journal reported that these students can not take all of their courses online if their college offers a mix of on-campus options .
The U.S. is working to contain recent coronavirus outbreaks in states like California and Texas and schools are working to determine how best to approach the upcoming school year . Schools like the University of Southern California announced earlier this month that it would not resume in-person instruction for the fall semester .
UC BERKELEY GRAD FEATURED IN 'NO SAFE SPACE ' DOC DETAILS BEING SHUNNED BY CLASSMATES FOR BEING CHRISTIAN
“ Given the continuing safety restrictions and limited densities permissible on campus , our undergraduate students primarily or exclusively will be taking their courses online in the fall term , ” the school said in a statement . “ On-campus housing and activities will be limited . ”
Foreign students taking online courses who are seeking visas will not be issued them , reports said .
Lawrence S. Bacow , the president of Harvard , said in a statement that he is “ concerned ” about the new guidelines , according to the Harvard Crimson . He said the guidelines seem to be a “ blunt , one-size-fits-all approach to a complex problem . ”
The Crimson reported that the school announced Monday that it would hold all courses online . The Washington Post reported that schools are working to determine the impact of the new guidelines . Schools have reportedly been told to respond by July 15 about how they are going to approach the fall semester .
“ What is just , to me , absolutely staggering is we have been asking for this guidance since April , ” Lizbet Boroughs , associate vice president of federal affairs at the Association of American Universities , told the paper .