WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Republicans in the U.S. House of Representatives on Thursday added $ 5 billion to a government spending bill to help President Donald Trump make good on a pledge to build a border wall , a move that made a partial federal government shutdown more likely this weekend .
The Senate is highly unlikely to pass the legislation , which funds agencies responsible for federal law enforcement activities , airport security screenings , space exploration and farm programs , by a midnight deadline on Friday .
Trump had said he would not sign a Senate-passed bill to keep the government running through Feb. 8 because it lacked funds for the wall , a signature promise of his 2016 run for office , so Republicans in the House of Representatives scrambled to add money to appease the president .
Trump demanded $ 5 billion to put toward a wall on the U.S. border with Mexico that he argues is needed to keep out illegal immigrants and drugs , a down payment on a massive project which Democrats have rejected as ineffective and wasteful .
“ The bill that ’ s on the floor of the House , everyone knows will not pass the Senate , ” Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer told reporters ahead of the vote .
The funding uncertainty weighed on markets on Thursday but it was later dwarfed by another bombshell from the Trump administration : the resignation of Defense Secretary Jim Mattis .
Trump , who accused Democrats of playing politics with the border wall , has said he sees it as a winning issue for his 2020 re-election campaign . Last week in a White House meeting with Democratic congressional leaders , he said he would be “ proud to shut down the government for border security . ”
“ I ’ ve made my position very clear . Any measure that funds the government must include border security , ” Trump said at a White House event .
A view of the U.S. Capitol ahead of a possible partial government shut down in Washington , U.S. , December 20 , 2018 . ███/Joshua Roberts
The House-passed bill also includes $ 7.8 billion in aid for states hit by recent natural disasters .
The Senate had approved a bill late Wednesday that extended existing funds for agencies for seven weeks , punting the funding issue into the next Congress .
But hard-right conservative pundits and lawmakers urged Trump to push for border wall funding now , even if it leads to a shutdown , arguing that it would be impossible to get once Democrats take control of the House on Jan. 3 .
“ It ’ s really about a president that is not willing to fold without a fight , ” Republican Representative Mark Meadows said in an interview on Fox News .
The Senate will look at the House-passed bill on Friday afternoon but would need support from Democrats to vote quickly on it . Most senators had already left Washington for the Christmas break .
Trump also had planned to leave for a vacation at his private resort in Florida , but the White House said he would not go in the event of a shutdown .
During his 2016 campaign , Trump repeatedly said Mexico would pay for the border wall but never specified how . Last week he said that a new trade deal his administration had negotiated with Mexico and Canada would generate enough savings to be equivalent to Mexico financing the wall .
The issue of money for the wall also led to a partial government shutdown during a weekend in January , and a second funding gap in February lasted only a few hours . Impact on government services was negligible in both cases .
In a 2013 shutdown , conservative Republicans made an unsuccessful effort to use funding bills to repeal President Barack Obama ’ s healthcare law .