( CNN ) – A CNN/ORC International poll released Tuesday showed a majority of Americans feel the focus of the country 's immigration policies should be on developing a path to legal residency for undocumented immigrants , a shift from years past , when majorities Americans said the focus should be on deportation and closing the country 's borders .
The survey comes the same day Mitt Romney , the GOP presidential nominee , was quoted saying he would allow young immigrants offered a two year deferral by President Barack Obama to remain in the country if he becomes president , a clarification of his previous stance .
Tune to CNN for Wednesday 's presidential debate coverage starting at 7 p.m . ET on CNN TV , CNN.com and via CNN 's apps for iPhone , iPad and Android . Web users can become video editors with a new clip-and-share feature that allows them to share favorite debate moments on Facebook and Twitter .
- Check out the CNN Electoral Map and Calculator and game out your own strategy for November .
The poll indicated 56 % of registered voters said the main focus of U.S. policy on undocumented immigrants should be developing a plan that would allow them to become legal residents . Thirty-nine percent said the focus should be on deporting undocumented immigrants and stopping more from coming to the U.S .
That 's a change from one year ago , when 55 % said the focus should be deportation , and 42 % said the focus should be developing a path to legal residency . In 2010 , 61 % named deportation as more important , while 37 % identified a plan for legal residency as a priority .
In June , Obama announced a change to immigration rules that allows people younger than 30 who came to the United States before the age of 16 , pose no criminal or security threat , and were successful students or served in the military to apply for a two-year deferral from deportation . The rule change went into effect in August .
In Tuesday 's CNN/ORC poll , 64 % of registered voters said the new Obama policy was `` about right , '' compared to 18 % who said it goes too far and 15 % who said it does not go far enough .
In an interview with the Denver Post published Tuesday , Romney said he would allow those who take advantage of the new rules to remain the country , say they `` should expect that the visa would continue to be valid . ''
`` I 'm not going to take something that they 've purchased , '' he said . `` Before those visas have expired , we will have the full immigration-reform plan that I 've proposed . ''
Previously , Romney had not specified how he would handle the estimated 1.7 million people who could qualify for the new rules .
Romney took a hard line stance on immigration during the Republican primary , but in Tuesday 's interview and in his forum with Univision , the candidate has adopted a softer tone .
In December , Romney said he would veto the DREAM Act if he were president , saying instead he would support a path to residency – not citizenship – for those who served in the military , but not other DREAM Act proposals .
At a Republican presidential debate in January , Romney said he favored a system of `` self-deportation , '' a policy that involves making economic conditions so difficult for undocumented workers that they choose to leave the country to find better opportunities . That stance was derided both by Democrats and his Republican rivals .
Lately , however , Romney has adopted a softer tone , advocating for permanent immigration changes rather than the temporary plans he says have been offered by Obama .
`` We 're not going to round up people around the country and deport them , '' Romney said at the Univision forum in September . `` I said time and time again during our primary campaign , we 're not going to round up 12 million people , that includes the kids and their parents , and have everyone deported . Our system is n't to deport people . We need to provide a long-term solution . ''
The CNN poll was conducted by ORC International by telephone September 28-30 among 883 registered voters . The sampling error was plus or minus 4.5 percentage points .