WASHINGTON — President Obama is considering an executive order that would prevent as many as 5 million people from being deported , administration officials said Thursday .
But the officials — speaking on condition of anonymity , citing internal deliberations — said the details of the immigration plan are still being developed and called reports of specific action `` pre-decisional . ''
The New York Times , citing anonymous administration officials , reported Thursday that a key part of the plan would allow immigrant parents of American citizen children to apply for work authorizations that would allow them to stay in the country . The newspaper said the order could come as soon as next week , when President Obama returns from a week-long trip to Asia .
And Fox News reported that a draft of the administration plan includes 10 proposals , including increased border security , improved pay for immigration officers and expanded `` deferred action '' on immigrant children and their parents . Fox News cited a source `` close to the White House '' who had seen the draft .
White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest confirmed Thursday that Obama recently met with Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson , who has been charged with drafting a plan for Obama 's approval . But Earnest said no decision had been made about the timing or the substance of the executive orders .
`` And I would anticipate that the president will receive some final recommendations from the secretary relatively soon , but certainly not before the conclusion of his trip to Asia , '' Earnest said in Burma , where Obama is attending the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Summit .
The plan is less ambitious than the proposal that passed the Senate last year , which would have given legal status to as many as 8 million undocumented immigrants . That plan stalled in the House , where Republicans say it amounts to amnesty for people who entered or stayed in the country illegally .
The president has pledged to take action by the end of the year , but other priorities in the lame duck session of Congress could complicate the timing . Congress must pass a new spending bill by Dec. 11 to avoid a shutdown , and Obama has also asked for additional funding to fight Ebola and the Islamic State .
Republicans in Congress , who will control both the House and Senate next year , have warned Obama that unilateral executive action on immigration could poison the well for bipartisan cooperation in the last two years of his presidency .
Incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , clamped down on speculation that Republicans could use an upcoming government funding bill to confront Obama on immigration by defunding agencies charged with carrying out an executive order . Such a move could threaten another government shutdown in December .
`` We will not be shutting the government down , '' McConnell told reporters . He said the president 's decision to move forward oversteps his authority and rejects the message of the midterm elections which saw considerable GOP gains in both chambers .
`` We 'd like for the president to recognize the reality that he has to govern with the Congress that he has , not the one that he wishes he had , and work with us to try to find a way to improve our immigration system , '' McConnell said .
But immigrant rights advocates have also been upset with Obama for delaying action -- originally expected by the end of the summer — until after the congressional elections .
Pablo Alvarado of the National Day Laborer Organizing Network , said he was unimpressed with the latest `` trial balloon . ''
`` We need less leaks and more action from within the White House , '' he said . `` As far as we 're concerned , the rumors reported in the Times and by Fox change nothing . They are rumors . ''
The plan also leaves out a huge chunk of undocumented immigrants that could be protected from deportation — those who have lived in the United States for extended periods of time . Democrats , and even some Republicans like Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz. , have argued that those undocumented immigrants have established themselves in the country , maintained jobs and contributed the most to their communities .
`` They 're leaving opportunity on the table , '' said Clarissa Martínez De Castro of the National Council of La Raza , a Hispanic advocacy group that has advised the White House on its executive action plan throughout the year .
`` I know there 's concern that this executive action was going to be attacked , '' she said . `` But even if they do 100 people , they 're going to be attacked the same . So why not go bolder ? ''