President Trump 's travel ban is going into effect Thursday at 8 p.m. , according to multiple reports .
The Supreme Court granted the Trump administration 's request earlier this week to reinstate part of the travel ban meant to temporarily block people from six predominately Muslim countries from entering the U.S .
Foreign nationals can enter the country if they have a `` credible claim of bona fide relationship '' in the U.S .
Otherwise , they are temporarily banned for 90 days , or 120 days if they 're a refugee coming from any country in the world .
According to The Associated Press , the U.S. will not revoke visas that have already been approved .
People applying to come to the U.S. from the six countries — Syria , Sudan , Somalia , Libya , Iran and Yemen — need to show they have a relationship with a parent , spouse , child , adult son or daughter , son-in-law , daughter-in-law , or sibling in the U.S. , the AP reported , citing State Department instructions .
Those trying to come to the U.S. for business or professional reasons need to show a relationship that is `` formal , documented and formed in the ordinary course rather than for the purpose of evading '' the order , the State Department said .
President Trump earlier this week hailed the Supreme Court 's decision , calling it a `` clear victory for our national security . ''
Trump said in a statement his `` number one responsibility '' is to keep the American people safe , adding that the court 's ruling allows him to do just that .
“ Today 's unanimous Supreme Court decision is a clear victory for our national security , ” the president said .
“ Today 's ruling allows me to use an important tool for protecting our nation 's homeland , ” he added . “ I am also particularly gratified that the Supreme Court ’ s decision was 9-0 . ”
The court on Monday also agreed to hear the government 's appeal of lower courts that had prevented the ban from going into place .
The court will hear the case when it returns for the fall term , which begins the first Monday in October . Arguments have not yet been scheduled .