Hundreds of Central American migrants travelling through Mexico to seek asylum in the US have reached the Mexican border city of Tijuana .
The group of 400 , which includes LGBTQ migrants , broke away from the larger caravan of 5,000 people in Mexico City .
US Defence Secretary James Mattis said he would go to the US-Mexico border on Wednesday , his first visit since thousands of troops were deployed .
Larger groups are expected to arrive at the border in the coming days .
The 5,000 migrants , who say they are fleeing persecution , poverty and violence in their home countries of Honduras , Guatemala and El Salvador , have largely been making their journey on foot .
The splinter group , which reached Tijuana on Tuesday , did so aboard a fleet of buses .
They joined a smaller group of about 80 migrants who reached the border city on Sunday .
Many of the smaller group are LGBTQ , media reported , who say they parted ways with the main caravan after weeks of what they call discriminatory treatment by local residents and fellow travellers .
Undeterred by a harder US stance against them , the migrants have said they will continue the journey so that they can claim asylum .
The journey began from the city of San Pedro Sula in Honduras on 13 October - about 4,350km ( 2,700 miles ) away from Tijuana .
Because the route poses a host of dangers , such as attack by criminal gangs , many of the migrants say they feel safer travelling in numbers .
Most previous migrant caravans have numbered a few hundred people , but after a former politician shared news of the planned caravan on Facebook , news of it quickly spread .
More than 1,000 Hondurans were the first to leave , and thousands more people have joined them from neighbouring Guatemala and then Mexico .
President Donald Trump , who has taken a firm stance against the caravan he calls an `` invasion '' , has order the deployment of up to 9,000 troops to the border .
US authorities closed down several lanes of traffic at two border crossings from Tijuana to California on Tuesday so that soldiers can install barbed wire fencing and barricades to reinforce security .
There is a legal obligation to hear asylum claims from migrants who have arrived in the US if they say they fear violence in their home countries .
Last week however , Mr Trump signed a proclamation temporarily barring migrants who enter illegally from claiming asylum .
The caravans became a campaign issue in the US mid-term elections that took place in last week , with Mr Trump warning without evidence they were full of `` gang members '' , `` hardened criminals '' and even Middle Eastern `` terrorists '' .