With a single policy directive last week , President Obama took control of an issue of special importance to Hispanics this election year . Obama announced illegal immigrants younger than 30 who are brought to the U.S. as children and who meet other standards will not be subject to deportation .
That 's an important goal of those who support the DREAM Act , a bill long stalled in Congress . The president 's action has implications for as many as 800,000 young immigrants — as well as a rising star in the Republican Party .
Before Obama 's move , Sen. Marco Rubio , a Florida Republican , was planning to present Congress with his own version of the DREAM Act .
Like many so-called Dream Acters — young immigrants brought to the U.S. as children — Frida Ulloa says she was taken by surprise by the president 's announcement Friday . She says she realized something was up when she was deluged by text messages .
`` I turned on the news and I heard the news and I was like , 'Oh my God , ' `` Ulloa says . `` I was so shocked , I was crying . ''
Ulloa , 23 , is a senior at Florida International University in Miami and an illegal immigrant . She came to the U.S. with her parents from Peru when she was 15 .
Days after the president 's announcement , Ulloa is still excited that after years of meetings and demonstrations , Obama listened to the Dream Acters and removed the threat of deportation .
There are some Hispanics , however , who are critical of the president 's decision — none more so than Rubio , a Cuban-American from West Miami .
`` I do n't think that there 's anyone watching this that doubts that it was for political reasons , '' Rubio said in an appearance on Fox News this week as part of a publicity blitz to promote his new autobiography , An American Son .
For months , Rubio said , he was working to craft a compromise bill that would allow Dream Act kids to stay in America without granting them a path to citizenship .
In doing so , Rubio says , he believes Obama overstepped his constitutional authority . At the same time , Rubio says , the president lessened the chances that Rubio and others in Congress can craft a bipartisan consensus on the DREAM Act and immigration reform .
`` He 's basically taking a very significant issue that needs to be solved in a long-term way that 's measured , reasonable and balanced and deciding by edict , by fiat , basically , to solve it in the short term , which happens to coincide with the November election , '' Rubio says .
DREAM Act advocate Ulloa says Rubio 's response has left her puzzled . Before he was a senator , she says , he told her he would support the DREAM Act . Since then , he has changed his position on the bill . And Ulloa says Rubio 's talk about a compromise has gone nowhere .
`` He says that he 's going to do something , but he has n't really shown us what he 's planning on doing . And to criticize this move , I do n't understand it , you know ? '' Ulloa says .
With Obama 's executive action , Rubio 's effort at building a compromise appears dead for now . In some ways , that may let him off the hook . The chances that he 'd be able to convince conservative Republicans in an election year to support a bill to help young illegal immigrants was always somewhere between unlikely and impossible .
But there are many in the Republican Party with a lot riding on Rubio and the possibility that he can appeal to Hispanic voters — either as a future leader or on the bottom half of a presidential ticket with Mitt Romney .
Miami political consultant Ana Navarro says Republicans have work to do if they hope to win the Hispanic vote away from Obama .
`` What Republicans are going to have to do is focus on immigration and the fact that [ Obama ] did n't deliver on his entire promise , '' Navarro says . `` He made a promise to give us a diamond ring , and after three-and-a-half years of waiting , and seeing that we were falling out of love with him , he showed up with a cubic zirconium . ''
Until Friday 's announcement , there was lots of evidence that Hispanic voters — who were an important part of Obama 's margin of victory four years ago — had lost much of their enthusiasm for the president . A chief concern was the administration 's tough deportation policy , as well as its failure to turn around the lagging economy .
A new survey released by the polling group Latino Decisions shows the power of the presidency . With his move to halt certain deportations , the survey shows enthusiasm among Hispanics for Obama has jumped dramatically — more than a 50-point turnaround from earlier in the year .