Even as Congress prepares to debate whether to legalize 11 million illegal immigrants and give them a path to citizenship , analysts are cautioning lawmakers to focus on the other part of immigration : assimilating them fully into America .
All sides in the debate agree that assimilation is critical , but in a report being released Monday , the Hudson Institute , a conservative-leaning think tank , says the country has failed on that account in recent years .
They found that immigrants — even those who earn U.S. citizenship — have far less attachment to their new home than native-born Americans . Among the findings are that native-born citizens are more likely to view the U.S. as “ better ” than other countries , more likely to see English as central to the American experience , and more likely to see the U.S. Constitution as a higher legal authority than international law .
John Fonte , director of the Center for American Common Culture at the Hudson Institute , said those findings show a glaring hole in the immigration system that should be fixed if Congress is going to add millions more immigrant citizens to the country .
“ We see this as an important part of any immigration project . Whether it ’ s comprehensive or in pieces , this is one of the pieces , ” Mr. Fonte said . “ If it ’ s comprehensive , what could be more important than the end of the whole immigration process , assimilation . It is at the core . ”
At root is a long-running debate over what it means to be American and whether the country is instilling those values in new arrivals .
Mr. Fonte and his colleagues looked at Harris Interactive polling from a 2008 study commissioned by the Bradley Foundation Project on American National Identity . Researchers polled nearly 2,500 citizens , both native-born and naturalized , and found large gaps in how they viewed the Constitution , America ’ s role in the world and other issues .
The study showed that 65 percent of native-born citizens said the U.S. was better than other nations and 3 percent said it was worse . Among immigrants , 44 percent said the U.S. was better , 7 percent said it was worse and 27 percent said it was about the same . A stunning 22 percent weren ’ t sure which was correct .
Naturalized citizens were understandably more likely to see themselves as “ citizens of the world ” than the native-born , and were more likely to have positive views of multinational corporations .
Mr. Fonte said the blame doesn ’ t lie with the immigrants themselves but rather with the multicultural movement in the U.S. , which he said has spent decades sending ambiguous messages about American exceptionalism , and with the federal government that has funded some of those efforts .
“ The fault is not the immigrants ’ — the fault is the elites who are running down patriotic assimilation for the last 40 years , ” he said . “ They receive the wrong message from us . The fault is ours , not theirs . ”
But Frank Sharry , executive director of America ’ s Voice , said worries over assimilation are unfounded . He pointed to the experiences of Hispanic immigrants over the past few decades and said he sees evidence of deep patriotic attachment to the U.S .
“ When you have people putting their lives on the line — you have a lot of legal permanent residents who join the military , put their lives on the line for a country they want to join — that ’ s powerful evidence , ” he said .
“ When you look at the disproportionate number of Latino immigrants who win Medals of Honor , when you look at intermarriage rates , homeownership rates , learning English , the consensus is in — new immigrants become new Americans and embrace this country fully . ”
The debate over assimilation is not new , but it is getting less public attention than it did during the last major immigration debate in 2007 , said Alfonso Aguilar , who ran U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services ’ Office of Citizenship under President George W. Bush .
Mr. Aguilar said Mr. Bush made assimilation of immigrants a focus of his administration . That included rewriting the citizenship test to help make sure applicants were learning fundamental principles of American democracy , not just memorizing facts .
Mr. Aguilar said Mr. Obama has not made the same effort and that part of the reason is that he treats assimilation “ like another entitlement program ” rather than a set of values to be taught .
“ Assimilation has to be championed by someone . Normally it ’ s the president , and President Bush did . But this president really hasn ’ t at all , ” said Mr. Aguilar , who now runs the Latino Partnership for Conservative Principles .
In the current immigration debate , many conservatives argue against offering illegal immigrants a pathway to citizenship , saying that it would reward lawbreaking , which would undermine American values .
But Mr. Aguilar said conservatives who also value assimilation should promote citizenship because it is the single biggest step toward assimilation .
The 2007 bill that Mr. Bush oversaw contained a pathway to citizenship and several specific provisions to boost assimilation , including designating English as the “ national language ” of the U.S. and trying to promote what the bill called “ patriotic integration ” through federally backed citizenship , civics and English classes .
Congressional aides and others who have been tracking the negotiations this year say they expect lawmakers to include similar provisions in the bills they are writing .
Mr. Fonte said the government can help in assimilation by stopping funding for multicultural and bilingual education programs .