WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - President Donald Trump on Tuesday invited Republican and Democratic congressional leaders to a border security briefing at the White House as the federal government remained partially shut down over his demand to fund a wall along the U.S.-Mexico border .
The president ’ s invitation , which was described by congressional sources as a briefing and not a negotiating session , was sent to the top two Democrats and Republicans in both the Senate and the House of Representatives .
Republican Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ’ s office said he would attend the briefing , which is set for Wednesday . It was unclear whether the other leaders would participate , one source said .
The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the specifics of the briefing .
The House and Senate will reconvene briefly on Wednesday to mark the last day of the Republican-controlled 2017-2018 Congress , with no signs of a workable plan to end the shutdown , which is now in its second week .
About a quarter of the federal government is shut down , with roughly 800,000 workers affected .
Democrats , who won control of the House in the November elections , plan to approve on Thursday a two-part spending package meant to end the shutdown . But its prospects are grim in the Republican-led Senate , which previously approved similar measures on the floor or in committee but has since fallen in line with Trump ’ s demands for funding for the border wall .
The legislation will set the stage for the first major battle of the new Congress between House Democrats led by Nancy Pelosi and Senate Republicans led by McConnell .
“ We are giving the Republicans the opportunity to take yes for an answer , ” Pelosi , who is expected to be the House speaker , said in a letter to colleagues released by her office on Tuesday .
“ Senate Republicans have already supported this legislation , and if they reject it now , they will be fully complicit in chaos and destruction of the president ’ s third shutdown of his term . ”
Trump triggered the shutdown , which began on Dec. 22 , by insisting that $ 5 billion in funding for the border wall be part of any spending measure .
“ Border Security and the Wall ‘ thing ’ and Shutdown is not where Nancy Pelosi wanted to start her tenure as Speaker ! Let ’ s make a deal ? ” Trump tweeted on Tuesday .
Trump calls the wall crucial to curbing illegal immigration , echoing his 2016 presidential campaign pledge . During his run for the White House , Trump insisted Mexico would pay for the wall .
The Democrats ’ two-part spending package includes a bill to fund the Department of Homeland Security at current levels through Feb. 8 and provide $ 1.3 billion for border fencing and $ 300 million for other border security items including technology and cameras .
The second part of the package would fund federal agencies that are now unfunded , such as the Justice , Commerce and Transportation departments , through Sept. 30 , the end of the federal fiscal year .
The House Democrats ’ measure does not contain the $ 5 billion Trump wants in wall funding . McConnell has said Senate Republicans will not approve a spending measure not supported by Trump .