A group of top congressional Republicans introduced a bill Tuesday that would require the Homeland Security Department to come up with a way to measure how secure the borders are — at a time when the Obama administration has been resisting those efforts .
The bill would require the administration to develop a strategy to secure the border within the first six months , give the federal government another two years to gain control of the border , and require it to submit to validation by an independent think tank .
It is being sponsored by House Homeland Security Committee Chairman Michael T. McCaul , border security subcommittee Chairman Candice S. Miller and Sen. John Cornyn , a Texas Republican who is a senior member of the upper chamber .
“ Until Congress mandates the creation of a national strategy , the administration will continue to say the border is secure while America ’ s back door remains wide open , ” Mr. McCaul said .
Though none of the sponsors is part of the informal House or Senate talks to strike an immigration deal , the bill appears to be written as if it could become the border security “ trigger ” in any deal . Under a trigger , the border security conditions would have to be met in order for illegal immigrants to be put on a pathway to citizenship — though they would still gain legal status and work permits even before the borders were secure .
Part of the problem with the trigger idea is that nobody agrees on what a secure border is .
Homeland Security Secretary Janet A. Napolitano argues the border is more secure now than it ’ s ever been , and she says the only way to make it safer is to legalize illegal immigrants and rewrite the system so future workers can come legally .
But many border-state lawmakers — particularly those in Texas — insist that the border is not yet secure . They point to the simmering drug cartel war in northern Mexico as a sign of trouble .
The Homeland Security Department scrapped the old definition of border security , known as “ operational control , ” in 2010 , at a time when it was only meeting that standard along a fraction of the 2,000-mile-long border .
The department had promised a new definition by 2012 , but none has been released yet and top officials said there isn ’ t one coming in the near future .
Last week , The Los Angeles Times reported that a new drone program tracked would-be illegal crossers and found that the Border Patrol was apprehending far fewer crossers than it had thought .
In January , Congress ’ chief auditors released a report finding that the Border Patrol believed it was apprehending a little more than 60 percent of those illegally crossing the border . But last week ’ s news report said agents apprehended less than half of those believed to be crossing .