President Trump says he made his point — the U.S. needs a border wall , and he will build it with or without Congress .
Rather than force another unpopular and economically harmful government shutdown , Mr. Trump sounds increasingly willing to accept the agreement in Congress that provides about $ 1.3 billion for border barriers . That ’ s less than one-fourth of the $ 5.7 billion that he demanded initially for a wall .
“ I think a point was made with the last shutdown , ” the president said Wednesday . “ People realized how bad the border is , how unsafe the border is . ”
Lawmakers sorted out the details of the agreement and released details of the bill early Thursday morning . The House and Senate will be voting on the bill later in the day .
The nearly 1,800-page spending bill has money for 55 miles of new border “ fencing ” in Texas , and money to maintain a daily average of 45,274 detention beds under Immigrations and Customs Enforcement , the agency that now holds more than 49,000 immigrants who live in the U.S. illegally in custody . The bill also provides the authority to move cash around to go above that level , if the Homeland Secretary determines it ’ s needed .
When that question and others were still unresolved late Wednesday , the conservative House Freedom Caucus called for a one-week extension of stopgap funding to keep the government open and give lawmakers more time to review the fine print of the border deal . Congress is facing a Friday deadline to approve spending bills to keep nine government agencies open .
The agreement would pay for 55 miles of border fencing or barriers , but not concrete walls , in the Rio Grande Valley of Texas . The president and his advisers are exploring other ways to shift money within departments to pay for more barriers , an option that is riling up congressional Democrats .
“ He needs congressional permission to do it , ” said Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , who noted that Democrats now hold the House majority . “ He doesn ’ t have the authority to do it without House permission . ”
But Republicans say the law gives presidents some flexibility with so-called “ transfer authority ” to shift already-appropriated funds toward border security . Sen. Roy Blunt of Missouri has cited as an example about $ 900 million for fighting drug trafficking that was appropriated to the Pentagon .
Mr. Trump is increasingly delivering the message that he ’ s already building the wall , regardless of Congress , saying he has “ options . ”
“ When people see what we ’ re doing , I think they ’ ll be very surprised , ” he said . “ We ’ re doing a lot of work . We ’ re giving out contracts right now . We have options that most people don ’ t really understand . ”
Speaking later Wednesday to law enforcement groups , Mr. Trump vowed to “ finish the border wall . ”
“ As we review the new proposal from Congress , I can promise you this — I will never waver from my sacred duty to defend this nation and its people , ” he said . “ We will get the job done . It ’ s happening . ”
He told police chiefs and county sheriffs that the barrier will be “ a big wall . ”
“ It ’ s a wall that people aren ’ t going through very easy , ” the president said . “ You ’ d have to be in extremely good shape to get over this one . They would be able to climb Mount Everest a lot easier , I think . ”
The president , who vowed last December that he would be “ proud ” to shut down the government over the principle of border security , made clear that he doesn ’ t want to repeat the episode that forced 800,000 federal workers to go without pay for 35 days .
“ A shutdown would be a terrible thing , ” Mr. Trump said . “ I think a lot of good points were made , but I don ’ t want to see another one — there ’ s no reason for it . ”
While much of Mr. Trump ’ s Republican base supported the shutdown that started Dec. 22 , voters overall disapproved . Gallup said Wednesday that Mr. Trump ’ s job-approval rating fell to 35 percent in mid-January during the shutdown , but had climbed back to 44 percent in early February after he agreed to reopen the government .
The increase was largely attributable to more-positive comments from independents , pollsters said .
A Morning Consult/Politico survey released Wednesday found that only 33 percent of respondents support a second shutdown over Mr. Trump ’ s demand for a border wall .
Some influential conservatives aren ’ t heaping as much public pressure on Mr. Trump this time to force a shutdown .
Fox News host Sean Hannity called the new agreement a “ garbage compromise ” when it came out Monday night , but he has since toned down his criticism , referring to the $ 1.3 billion as a “ down payment ” on the wall and suggesting the administration can find more money elsewhere in the federal budget .
“ In that case , he wins big time , ” Mr. Hannity said on his daily radio show .
Critics of the president are saying that he got nothing from the shutdown , because he got less for border barriers than Democrats had offered last year . But beginning with a campaign rally he held Monday night on the border in El Paso , Texas , Mr. Trump has been telling supporters that the pain of the shutdown was necessary to make his point about the urgency of the border security crisis .
He said the shutdown was worth a temporary increase in the nation ’ s unemployment rate .
“ We had a little blip [ in the unemployment rate ] because of a thing called the shutdown , ” Mr. Trump said . “ But remember this … if we didn ’ t do that shutdown , we would not have been able to show this country , these politicians , the world , what the hell is happening with the border . ”
He added , “ That was a very important thing we did . ”
White House aides also noted that the agreement provides some money for border barriers , while House Speaker Nancy Pelosi had dismissively offered the president $ 1 for wall funding in testy talks during the shutdown .
Mrs. Pelosi was urging House Democrats to support the tentative agreement Wednesday .
“ As with all compromises , I say to people , support the bill for what is in it , ” Mrs. Pelosi told reporters . “ Don ’ t judge it for what is not in it . We have other days to pass other legislation . ”
With lawmakers rushing to avoid another shutdown , however , some of the president ’ s conservative allies were urging him to pack a short-term funding extension to provide more time to study the details of the deal .
“ In politics trust is everything , ” said Rick Manning , president of Americans for Limited Government . “ This president has no reason to trust that Speaker Pelosi did not insert trap language into the bill , and he would be wise to verify that the proposed legislation is free from language that would prevent meaningful action to address the crisis at the border . While everyone would like to see this drama finally come to an end , it is better to get it right than to regret signing the bill later . ”