'The work of the committee should be open to the public , ' Leahy wrote . Leahy vows fast work on immigration
Senate Judiciary Chairman Patrick Leahy vowed to move swiftly on immigration legislation despite calls from conservatives , including Sen. Marco Rubio , to slow the process .
Reacting to a Rubio ( R-Fla. ) letter over the weekend calling for extensive hearings on the soon-to-be-unveiled immigration bill by a group of eight senators , the Vermont Democrat said his panel would “ consider ” holding a hearing on the measure once it was introduced . But Leahy raised concerns that waiting too long could undermine the larger effort to pass the comprehensive bill , calling the matter “ urgent . ”
“ While you have conducted the process of the ‘ gang of eight ’ behind closed doors , I can assure you that it has always been my position … that the work of the Committee should be open to the public , ” Leahy said in a Tuesday letter , “ so I have every intention of ensuring that debate and consideration of any future comprehensive immigration reform legislation will be thorough and will be conducted in open session and streamed live on the Judiciary Committee website . ”
Leahy added : “ I will , however , remain mindful of the urgent need for us to actually get to the work of debating and considering amendments without unnecessary delay because this is an issue to which our attention is long overdue . … Those who have been committed to this effort for decades are counting on us and expect the Senate to act thoughtfully and without further delay . ”
“ I have little doubt we are capable of doing both [ . ] ”
A Rubio aide said the senator was pleased that Leahy promised to consider scheduling a hearing on the forthcoming proposal as it had been unclear he would do so .
“ It ’ s a good sign that Chairman Leahy has recognized the need for a public hearing on the bipartisan proposal , ” Rubio spokesman Alex Conant said . “ Sen . Rubio has always said that public hearings and debate are critical to the process . ”
How the bill advances became a sticking point over the weekend when Rubio sent a letter Saturday to Leahy calling for hearings on the bill . Rubio — a member of the Senate group that is set to unveil a bill next week — was seeking to allay concerns from conservatives that the controversial bill will be rushed .
“ While you and your colleagues on the Judiciary Committee will agree on the details , I respectfully suggest that such a process must begin with a careful examination in the committee including : hearings that explore multiple perspectives on the scope of the problems we face and the efficacy of the solutions we propose , markups in which a broad range of amendments can be considered and a robust floor debate , ” Rubio said .
Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions and other Republicans on the Judiciary Committee raised similar concerns .
In response , Leahy noted his panel has held several “ widely attended hearings ” on the issue of immigration reform . And he said , in consultation with senior Judiciary Committee members , Sens . Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) and Chuck Grassley ( R-Iowa ) , he would “ consider scheduling ” a hearing on the Gang of Eight measure once it is unveiled .
“ I am hopeful you recognize , as I do , that if we do not act quickly and decisively , we will lose the opportunity we now have to fix our immigration system , ” Leahy said , adding that he envisioned a plan to be considered by the full Senate this summer .