As President Obama and lawmakers on Capitol Hill continue to hint at some form of amnesty in the next few months , tens-of-thousands of illegal immigrants are pouring over our open Southern Border with Mexico in hopes of getting in on the deal . The same thing happened last year when the Gang of 8 was working on its legislation but this time , we 're seeing a crisis in the making .
The Washington Times reported yesterday that 60,000 children have been dropped off in Texas or traveled on their own across the border to get there .
Children traveling without their families , including an “ overwhelming ” number younger than 12 , are flooding across the southwestern border in the latest test of the Obama administration ’ s immigration policy .
Homeland Security Officials predict that 60,000 minors will cross the border this year and that the number will double next year , accounting for an astonishing percentage of people trying to jump the border — braving the tremendous perils of crossing Mexico and trying to evade border authorities , hoping to eventually connect with family in the U.S .
Today , local reports out of Tucson show Immigrations and Customs Enforcement has been moving hundreds of illegal immigrants from Texas to Arizona , not back to Mexico , and is dropping them off on street corners downtown .
Hundreds of undocumented immigrants detained as far away as Texas are being released under supervision in Tucson . But getting to their next destination leaves them on their own .
Immigration and Customs Enforcement , or ICE , has said that it does not want to put children in detention centers and it does not want to split up families . ICE releases those families with the condition that they contact ICE for their next court date once they reach their destination in this country .
But last weekend ICE dropped more people at the downtown Greyhound station than there were seats on the buses .
Wednesday afternoon a government van dropped a group of people at the bus station . ICE said that last weekend as many as 400 were left there over the past few days , and that many of them had been stopped in south Texas .
The families , which are from Mexico and Central America , after they are released , contact those who were waiting for them in this country . But sometimes the time is too late to get help from those contacts for a bus ticket . Casa Mariposa has been flooded with people needing a place to stay .
`` Releasing people without tickets is endangerment to them and its a public health and safety crisis that Tucson needs to deal with , '' Wilson said .
ICE said that it is adjusting the rate at which it drops people at the station , and Greyhound is bringing more buses and staying open later . CBP did not have a formal explanation as to why south Texas detainees are being transferred to Tucson . One could be available later this week .
As previously reported here , ICE is also helping to deliver children to illegals already living in the U.S. and has been complicit in cartel human trafficking of minors according to court documents .
According to a court order obtained by ███ , the Department of Homeland Security is enabling cartel trafficking of minors , delivering those minors to illegals living inside the United States and completing criminal transactions for illegal immigrants .
Essentially , illegal immigrants living in the United States are paying human traffickers connected to Mexican cartels to smuggle their children into the U.S . Although Nava-Martinez [ the smuggler ] was arrested and charged , the minor was delivered to her mother living illegally in Virginia by DHS , automatically making the minor eligible for the President Obama 's DREAMers program . Further Salmeron-Santos , who illegally hired a human trafficker to smuggle her daughter across an international border , isn ’ t facing charges .
Current ICE policies not only embolden law breakers , but destroy the argument that children brought here illegally can stay without guaranteeing amnesty for their parents . It 's a well thought out strategy : get the kids over the border , the U.S. wo n't deport them because they fall under current DREAMer policies and then eventually , parents of those kids will also be able to live in the U.S. illegally because ICE does n't want to `` break up families . ''
We already have an illegal immigration crisis , it just became much worse .