President Donald Trump has big , phenomenal plans to make America great again . One pillar of that plan , Trump claimed on the campaign trail , is to bring back jobs . Another is to punish U.S. companies that move their manufacturing outside the country ( especially to that wretched place just south of us ) , and reward those that do their work stateside . And finally , there ’ s Trump ’ s promised immigration crackdown , which became a brutal reality earlier this week , when the Department of Homeland Security issued two memos outlining its plans to hire thousands of new Border Patrol and ICE agents , broaden the definition of the term “ removable alien , ” and generally laying the groundwork for what President Trump recently called a “ military operation. ” ( D.H.S . emphatically denies this is the case . ) What will be some of the great , “ America first ” consequences of these measures ? Let us count the ways !
According to a study cited by Bloomberg , as much as 70 percent of the U.S. farm workforce doesn ’ t have valid immigration papers . Once they ’ re gone , it ’ ll be pretty tough to find documented Americans willing to do their jobs . ( As Bank of America ’ s Ethan Harris wisely intuits , “ There ’ s no way to get people out of the city and into the country to pick crops on short notice without a very dramatic increase in wages. ” ) Wages would likely increase by 40 percent , which the embattled farm industry , whose profits are expected to fall for the fourth year in a row , will struggle to afford without passing on huge price increases to consumers .
If deportations aren ’ t “ accompanied by increases in workers available through legal guest-worker programs ” —and there ’ s no suggestion from the administration that they will be—you ’ ll see “ operations just shut down , ” Norwich Meadows Farm ’ s Zaid Kurdieh told Bloomberg .
And then there ’ s the best consequence , which Team Trump clearly thought through :
An immigration policy focused on closing the border would shift as much as 61 percent of U.S. fruit production to other countries and send jobs to nearby nations such as Mexico , in part because wage costs would make U.S. foods less competitive , according to a 2014 study commissioned by the American Farm Bureau Federation , the largest U.S. farmer group .