The administration asked a federal appeals court Thursday to let President Obama ’ s amnesty go into effect immediately , calling a lower judge ’ s ruling halting the amnesty “ unprecedented and wrong , ” and saying illegal immigrants will suffer until the policy begins .
Justice Department attorneys said Texas and 25 other states , in suing to halt the amnesty , should never have been granted standing in the first place . At the very least , they said , lower court Judge Andrew S. Hanen should have allowed the administration to approve applications from illegal immigrants in states that haven ’ t objected .
“ In short , the preliminary injunction is a sweeping order that extends beyond the parties before the court and irreparably harms the government and the public interest , ” the lawyers said .
But even as the attorneys were asking the 5th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals to allow the amnesty to take place , they were apologizing to Judge Hanen for potentially misleading him in the case , saying they never meant to imply they weren ’ t already approving some applications under the expansion that Mr. Obama announced in November .
Filing the appeal and asking for a stay are considered bold moves for the administration . Some immigrant rights advocates fear a second court loss so soon after Judge Hanen ’ s thorough ruling could sap momentum from their movement at a time they believed they were on the offensive .
Mr. Obama , however , has seemed eager to begin processing applications , telling audiences that once his program is up and running , he doubts it can be stopped .
As many as 4 million illegal immigrants could qualify for the policy , announced in November , that would grant tentative legal status , work permits and Social Security numbers to illegal immigrant parents whose children are either U.S. citizens or lawful permanent residents .
Hundreds of thousands of so-called Dreamers could qualify under a separate policy Mr. Obama announced in 2012 but expanded in November , which applies to illegal immigrants brought to the U.S. as children .
The policy allows immigrants a three-year stay of deportation rather than the two-year stay included in his 2012 policy .
The administration has already processed about 100,000 Dreamer applications under the three-year policy , the Justice Department told Judge Hanen earlier this month — news that stunned Texas and the court .
Texas has asked Judge Hanen to approve limited discovery in the case , and Judge Hanen has scheduled a hearing for March 19 to give the Justice Department a chance to explain itself .
In a filing Thursday , Kyle R. Freeny , a lawyer in the federal programs branch of the Justice Department , said the three year versus two year questions don ’ t affect the fundamentals of the case , which have to do with whether Texas has standing to sue and whether Mr. Obama broke the law or violated the Constitution by trying to write laws himself .
“ Defendants regret any confusion , ” Mr. Freeny said , although he told the judge they are going around him to ask the appeals court to get involved .
Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton , who is leading the challenge , said he is focused on clearing up the confusion the administration sowed in the district court .
“ The most pressing issue at hand is the extent to which the Obama Administration has already issued expanded work permits to illegal immigrants , in direct contradiction to what they told the district court , ” Mr. Paxton said in a statement .
The administration ’ s appeal for the court to allow the amnesty to go into effect for some states also raises tricky questions — and marks a major turnaround for an administration that just a few years ago sued to halt Arizona ’ s immigration laws , arguing there couldn ’ t be a patchwork of policies for different states .
Still to be seen is how the administration would determine who would be deemed to be a resident of one state or another .
Judge Hanen halted the amnesty on Feb. 16 , just two days before the first applications were supposed to roll in . Immigrant rights advocates had to change plans for application clinics , and the administration canceled support contracts and put on hold hundreds of job offers it had extended to employees who were supposed to approve the amnesty applications .
The judge ruled that Texas had standing to sue because it was harmed by the amnesty — stemming from the driver ’ s licenses it would have to issue to tens of thousands of illegal immigrants . The judge then ruled that Texas was probably correct in saying the administration didn ’ t jump through the procedural hoops required to announce a major new policy .
The Obama administration , though , says Texas should never have been granted standing to sue in the first place , and said the policies Mr. Obama announced were only guidelines that don ’ t need to be shared for public comment .
Mr. Obama has insisted his actions are based on his powers of prosecutorial discretion , saying he has the complete right to determine whom to deport .
Judge Hanen agreed with that , but said the president went too far when he then created a program to go beyond nondeportation and to grant tentative three-year legal status and work permits to illegal immigrants .
Judge Hanen ruled that the safest course was to halt the amnesty while he hears the full case , but the administration told the appeals court Thursday that it will be more difficult to ramp the amnesty back up now .
Immigration activists , while happy with Mr. Obama ’ s moves last year to expand his amnesty , said they still believe he ’ s deporting too many illegal immigrants . They called on him to stop agents from trolling prisons and jails looking for criminal aliens to oust .
As part of his new policies last year , Mr. Obama canceled the Secure Communities program that had targeted state and local jails and prisons , and announced a new Priority Enforcement Program designed to only troll for the most serious criminals .
But the National Day Laborer Organizing Network said Thursday it fears the new program “ will become a dangerous dragnet ” that will still lead to too many illegal immigrants being deported .