Over the weekend during an interview with CBS News ' Face The Nation , Democrat presidential candidate and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton suggested the United States should take in 65,000 refugees fleeing the Middle East . At this point the Obama administration has increased the number of refugees from Syria from 1500 to 10,000 .
`` I would like to see us move from what is a good start with 10,000 to 65,000 and begin immediately to put into place the mechanisms for vetting the people that we would take in , '' Clinton said .
But despite Clinton 's best intentions , she fails to mention or acknowledge a major obstacle . The Department of Homeland Security and the FBI have said there is no system in place to vet refugees for terrorism . ISIS has declared it will use the refugee crisis to traffic training fighters onto U.S. soil . Immediately opening the country to 65,000 refugees without a system to vet them would be irresponsible and dangerous to the national security and safety of Americans .
Late last week , Homeland Security Chairman Michael McCaul introduced legislation that would give Congress more control over the decisions made to bring more Syrian refugees to the United States .
Congressman Michael McCaul , Chairman of the House Committee on Homeland Security , introduced the Refugee Resettlement Oversight and Security Act . If enacted into law , this legislation would give the American people ’ s representatives the chance to vote up or down on the President ’ s plan to resettle 10,000 Syrian refugees into the United States and improve the security vetting process . Specifically , this bill will :
Require affirmative approval by both the House and Senate before any refugees are admitted to the U.S .
Allow Congress to block any inadequate refugee resettlement plan put forward by the President .
Require the Administration , when considering the admission of refugees from Iraq and Syria , to prioritize the resettlement of oppressed religious minorities .
Ensure DHS , in coordination with DNI and FBI , provides new security assurances before admitting refugees into the country and for the Governmental Accountability Office to conduct a sweeping review of security gaps in the current refugee screening process .
`` Many Americans are understandably concerned about the threat posed by inadequate security screening procedures for refugee seeking entry into the United States . ISIS themselves have stated their intention to take advantage of the crisis to infiltrate the west . We have to take this threat seriously , '' McCaul said about the legislation . “ This bill will rein in the Administration ’ s refugee resettlement plans and give Congress more control over the process by requiring the Administration to get affirmative approval from Congress through the enactment of a joint resolution before any refugees may be admitted into the United States . These important security updates to the refugee process are necessary for not only the security of the United States , but for the safety of the refugees . ”