President Trump and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer talk in the Oval Office , December 11 , 2018 . ( Kevin Lamarque/Reuters )
The promise of this kind of spectacle is about one half of why Donald Trump was elected .
New York City ’ s annual Shakespeare in the Park is the worst kind of theater . Washington ’ s annual government-shutdown drama is the second-worst kind .
I wrote off the alfresco performances in Central Park after the Public Theater decided that what Shakespeare ’ s A Winter ’ s Tale really needed was a political speech by Senator Schumer , who wandered onto the stage at one point — after Bill de Blasio ’ s campaign-rally speech but before the Muppets , if I recall that slightly surreal evening correctly — to make a few of his habitually banal political observations before shouting “ Vote Democratic ! ” and wandering off .
Improvisation is not the senator ’ s forte . When President Donald Trump surprised Senator Schumer and Representative Nancy Pelosi — the other half of the Democrats ’ noisome slapstick-comedy duo — by broadcasting their acrimonious Oval Office meeting , the anguine gentleman from New York was caught off-guard .
Senator Schumer and Representative Pelosi invoked the word “ shutdown ” as though it were a magical incantation . President Trump said that he ’ d be “ proud ” to shut down the government if he doesn ’ t get funding for a border wall . As Trump bellowed and berated the Democrats , “ Schumer sat staring forward and not meeting the president ’ s eyes , ” as CNBC put it . The promise of that kind of spectacle is about one half of why Donald Trump was elected .
Those of us who take a more miserly view of the enumerated powers of the federal government believe that it does not have very many legitimate jobs to do . Instead of doing a few things well , it does many , many , many things — badly . But if the federal apparatus serves any purpose at all , providing for national security — beginning with securing the borders — is it .
Washington should do its damned job . Which it will , once it has exhausted every other option . Republicans have the chance to take some of those options away .
Disorder is always undesirable in government . And this year ’ s installment of shutdown theater finds many different currents of chaos adjoined : an increasingly dysfunctional constitutional order in which the legislative branch has effectively abdicated and ceded much of its power to the executive ; a border that in practice is defended by very little more than strong language ; a broken congressional budgeting process in which the regular order of appropriations have been supplanted by a series of “ continuing resolutions , ” stopgap measures that have now been passed more than 100 times in this still-young century .
That last one is worth thinking on some . From the Congressional Research Service :
Between FY1977 and FY2016 ( excluding the four fiscal years in which all appropriations were enacted on time ) , over half of the regular appropriations bills for a fiscal year were enacted on time in only one instance ( FY1978 ) . In all other fiscal years , fewer than six regular appropriations acts were enacted on or before October 1 . In addition , in 14 out of the 40 years during this period , none of these regular appropriations bills were enacted prior to the start of the fiscal year . Nine of these fiscal years have occurred in the interval since FY2001 .
The abandonment of what budget geeks refer to as “ regular order ” — the consideration , revision , and passage of a dozen or so separate appropriations bills moving through the ordinary congressional committee process — keeps Washington effectively in a state of constant fiscal emergency . That leads to a great deal of drama and much gnashing of teeth , but the stakes are almost trivial : Federal “ shutdowns ” are really nothing of the sort , with most of the essential functions of the government continuing uninterrupted . We don ’ t dock the aircraft carriers or put the nuclear arsenal in standby mode . The Obama administration made a great show of closing national parks , going so far as to surround the National Mall with barricades .
Republicans used to fear being blamed for these things , a part of the more general Republican tendency to fear being blamed for things . But they have discovered that the political price for these acts of theater is pretty low . They are slow learners , but they learn — or at least they can , where there is a question of self-preservation . Mainly , shutdowns inconvenience the federal workers who get furloughed , which upsets their household finances . One feels for them . What ’ s rarely said aloud but surely appreciated by Republicans is that practically all of them are Democrats , as are the great majority of non-military government employees . If you have to hurt somebody , very few Republican voters are going to weep for the bureaucracy .
Republicans ought to be the party of order . ( Ought ; they are not . ) But border security is an issue worth taking a stand on , even at the cost of a little ceremonial disorder . The politics are broadly on the side of those who wish to see the borders more adequately secured , and the issue will put Democrats in the position of defending illegal immigration — legal immigrants would not be much inconvenienced by a wall .
The problem is that the Republicans have the right politics but the wrong policy . ( Often , the opposite is the case . ) Building a wall would bring some benefits and would present the Trump administration with an important symbolic victory , but it is at best an incomplete policy , and in some ways a bad one . For much of the U.S.-Mexico border , a wall is neither practical nor desirable , something that would be clear to the denizens of Washington if they spent much time on the parts of the border that are not within micturition distance of a Starbucks in San Diego .
Part of the problem with a wall is that it does things that we don ’ t want to do , such as necessitating the appropriation of private property along the border , interrupting access to water , etc . Those problems are mostly solvable . The bigger problem with a wall is that it does not do what we want it to do : cut off the flow of illegal immigrants . Most new illegal immigrants do not enter the United States by wading across the Rio Grande . They come legally on visas and fail to leave when required . You can build the wall ten feet higher or twenty feet higher , but unless you are going to build it high enough to cut off international air traffic , it will not solve the problem .
If the Republicans are going to shut down the government over border security , they should do it on behalf of a better border-security agenda . The most important reform would be putting an electronic wall between would-be illegal workers and their employers through a robust , mandatory program of employment-eligibility verification . And then there ’ s the mundane , tedious work of everyday law enforcement : Raiding a few construction sites will net a few illegal drywall installers , but if you really want to change behavior , then that begins with frog-marching the employers off to the federal pokey . The federal government does not have a very good record on that , and winning convictions in such cases is difficult . But it is the employers who provide the main lure for illegal immigration in the first place . And , unlike the millions of illegal immigrants , we know where they live .
Republicans should be the responsible party on immigration . The Democrats are too much in thrall to identity politics to do be that . And Republicans should not fear a shutdown .
What they should fear is getting too little in exchange .