Congressional Republicans are looking to revive legislation that could give a deportation reprieve to thousands of illegal immigrants who came to the U.S. as children , in turn easing the pressure on President Trump as he faces a deadline to decide the fate of a related Obama-era program .
Sen. Thom Tillis , R-N.C. , is leading the charge on a conservative version of the so-called Dream Act . The talks come as Trump prepares to announce whether he ’ ll keep the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program – which was former President Barack Obama ’ s unilateral , executive-action version of Dream Act legislation .
The timing for a Trump announcement has been fluid . In the most recent guidance , White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders said the decision will be made next Tuesday .
Trump initially had said the call could come as early as Friday or this weekend , without going into detail . Asked if ‘ Dreamers , ’ or those affected by the policy , should be worried , Trump told reporters : `` We love Dreamers . We love everybody . ''
One official told ███ earlier that Trump ultimately is expected to end DACA , while allowing those in the country who qualified under the program to stay until their work permits expire .
Such a move would infuriate Democrats – as well as some moderate Republicans . However , if lawmakers can draft legislation that accomplishes similar goals , it could give Trump some leeway to end DACA without significant impact .
A senior administration official suggested Friday that the onus was back on Congress to pursue a legislative solution .
`` Congress has to do this , ” the official told ███ .
Some Republicans support the goals of Obama ’ s DACA but think the former president committed an overreach by doing it through executive action . Tillis ’ office pointed to this distinction in describing his legislative effort .
“ Regardless of the policy itself , DACA is an executive overreach that sets immigration policy through executive order instead of the proper channel—legislation , ” Tillis spokesman Daniel Keylin told ███ . “ It ’ s the responsibility of Congress , not the President to offer a long-term legislative fix . ”
Congress has been considering legislation to shield young illegal immigrants from deportation for years , dating back to the George W. Bush administration . Lawmakers tried again to pass a bill during the Obama administration , but couldn ’ t muster the votes amid flagging Republican support . The Obama administration announced the DACA policy in 2012 .
According to Keylin , Tillis will be working with Republicans on “ conservative legislation ” to address the “ long-term uncertainty ” undocumented minors face . Kelyin told ███ that they needed to create a “ fair but rigorous process ” for legal status , requiring individuals 18 or older to either be “ employed , pursue post-secondary education , or serve in the Armed Forces . ”
While the legislation is still being drafted , McClatchy reported that Tillis ' bill is expected to be similar to one introduced by Rep. Carlos Curbelo , R-Fla. Curbelo ’ s bill , the “ Recognizing America ’ s Children Act , ” would offer an eventual path to U.S. citizenship to immigrants who entered illegally before Jan. 1 , 2012 and were 16 years old or younger , according to the Miami Herald .
“ The White House has sent a very strong message by preserving the executive order that protects these young people , ” Curbelo said in an interview with the Miami Herald in March . “ We know that they ’ ve been very aggressive when it comes to immigration policy , so it certainly stands out that they have left the DACA executive order untouched . ”
On Friday , House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , said he supported a legislative solution to protect undocumented minors , but also urged the president to reconsider scrapping DACA .
`` I actually do n't think he should do that and I believe that this is something that Congress has to fix , '' Ryan said on radio station WCLO in Janesville , Wis. , Friday . `` President Obama did not have a legislative authority to do what he did . ''
Ryan added : `` There are people who are in limbo . These are kids who know no other country , who were brought here by their parents and do n't know another home . And so I really do believe that there needs to be a legislative solution . ''
Sen. Orrin Hatch , R-Utah , also weighed in on the issue , calling on the president to halt rescinding DACA , saying it would “ further complicate a system in serious need of permanent , legislative solution . ”
Hatch added that the “ solution must come from Congress , ” and that he will be working with colleagues and the administration to pass “ meaningful immigration reform ” and provide a “ workable path forward for the Dreamer population . ”
Then-candidate Trump promised to terminate DACA during the 2016 presidential campaign , but since taking office has weighed whether to preserve components of it .
Looming in the background is the threat of potential legal action by state attorneys general led by Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton and nine other AGs who oppose DACA . Paxton said Thursday that his office would stick to a previously determined Sept. 5 deadline set by officials from Texas for a decision .