President Trump launched another battle for border security on Monday , calling for $ 8.6 billion in funding for the Wall in his proposed federal budget for next year . Predictably , top Democrats came out swinging , bashing a border wall as “ expensive and ineffective . ”
Truth is , the Democrats aren ’ t leveling with the public about the billions we are already forced to spend on shelters , food , diapers , medical care and child care for migrants sneaking across the border and claiming asylum . Not to mention the costs of public schooling and health care provided free to migrants once they are released into communities .
By deterring illegal crossings , the Wall will pay for itself in less than two years . It ’ s a bargain .
Look what it costs us when a Central American teenager crosses the border illegally without an adult . Uncle Sam spends a staggering $ 775 per day for each teen housed at a shelter at Florida ’ s Homestead Air Reserve Base .
There they get medical care , schooling and recreation . They stay , on average , 67 days before being released to a sponsor . Now do the math . That ’ s almost $ 52,000 per teen . American parents would appreciate the government spending that money on their kids . Imagine the government handing you a check for $ 52,000 to defray the costs of raising your teenager .
There are bigger costs ahead . The number of illegal border-crossers just hit an 11-year high . More than 76,000 people in February alone . US and Mexican officials predict hundreds of thousands more in the coming months .
The migrants use the word “ asylum ” as their get-in-free card . When they say it to a border agent , they gain entry to the US 80 percent of the time , according to Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen . The government temporarily houses them before eventually releasing them with an immigration court date . But half never go on to file an asylum claim , instead disappearing into all parts of the US , former Attorney General Jeff Sessions noted .
They are turning asylum into a scam , in other words . The system is meant to protect victims of persecution . Such as Cubans fleeing Castro ’ s prisons . Now it ’ s overwhelmed by Central Americans escaping poverty for a lifestyle upgrade .
Legal immigrants also want to better their circumstances , but they play by the rules . What a slap in the face to see migrants jump the line .
Unfortunately , a federal appeals court just made the asylum hoax even easier . Last week , the left-leaning Ninth Circuit ruled that migrants who fail to convince border authorities they face danger in their home country still have a “ right ” to a day in court in the US . That bizarre ruling won ’ t stand . Another circuit court ruled the opposite way in 2016 , clarifying that a border agent ’ s decision is final . Entering the US , the court held , is a privilege , not a right . The Supreme Court let that earlier decision stand , so count on the Supremes to reverse the Ninth Circuit .
In the meantime , though , taxpayers are getting fleeced by caravans of fake asylum seekers .
Even before the latest surge , the Department of Homeland Security was spending more than $ 3 billion a year sheltering and feeding illegals at the border , double the cost in 2011 .
Add to that the hundreds of millions being spent caring for unaccompanied teenagers in 130 shelters overseen by the Department of Health and Human Services .
Trump has tried several strategies to protect taxpayers from these rip-offs . First , he barred illegal migrants from asking for asylum , requiring that asylum seekers enter the country through official ports of entry . That would have reduced their numbers considerably . But in November , a federal district judge , also from the Ninth Circuit , nixed the president ’ s regulation .
Then Trump devised a “ Remain-in-Mexico ” arrangement to make Mexico the waiting room for asylum seekers . As long as they are south of the border , the US doesn ’ t have to house them , and they have no “ right ” to public schooling and emergency medical care on our tab . The program , if successful , will save American taxpayers a bundle . It ’ s one way Mexico is already helping to pay for the Wall .
Democrats claim it ’ s a waste to spend billions on a wall . But the facts show that we can ’ t afford not to build it . As the cover of the president ’ s new budget says , “ taxpayers first . ”
Betsy McCaughey is a former lieutenant governor of New York .