A short time later , he wrote on Twitter , “ The Democrats are forcing the breakup of families at the Border with their horrible and cruel legislative agenda . ”
But Mr. Trump was misrepresenting his own policy . There is no law that says children must be taken from their parents if they cross the border unlawfully , and previous administrations have made exceptions for those traveling with minor children when prosecuting immigrants for illegal entry . A “ zero tolerance ” policy created by the president in April and put into effect last month by the attorney general , Jeff Sessions , allows no such exceptions , Mr. Trump ’ s advisers say .
The president ’ s efforts to deflect blame for the practice reflected the degree to which it has become politically unpopular , with Democrats , civil rights and immigrant advocacy groups and religious leaders condemning it as inhumane . Republicans have also begun to express unease about the practice . Speaker Paul D. Ryan , Republican of Wisconsin , said on Thursday that he was not comfortable with it , and Gov . John Kasich of Ohio tweeted on Friday : “ Quit separating families . It ’ s that simple . ”
The number released on Friday suggests that thousands of children have been taken from their parents at the border since late last year . The New York Times reported in April that about 700 children had been separated from their parents as they were processed at stations on the southwest border , including more than 100 under the age of 4 . As the number of children in its custody grows beyond the capacity of existing detention centers , the Trump administration reportedly plans to erect a tent city in Tornillo , Tex. , to house them .
The homeland security official said that the administration had drawn a “ bright line ” against taking babies from their parents because the government was unable to appropriately care for children that young , but could not immediately provide information about the age cutoff below which they would decline to take a child .