Hillary Rodham Clinton ’ s campaign pledge to give pro-immigration activists almost everything they want — including expanding President Obama ’ s deportation amnesty to more illegal immigrants — wowed activists but also left them wondering whether she was merely pandering to Hispanic voters .
Her bold immigration agenda also gave pause to the White House , which has argued that Mr. Obama has gone as far as legally possible to unilaterally change immigration laws .
Cesar Vargas , co-director of the anti-deportation Dream Action Coalition , said activists wanted more than words from the Democratic front-runner after Mr. Obama failed to keep promises to illegal immigrants .
“ It ’ s not just hearing what we want to hear . It ’ s seeing some type of action , ” he said .
The White House left in doubt whether Mrs. Clinton could legally carry out her plans , such as her promise to grant deportation amnesty to the illegal immigrant parents of the so-called Dreamers , adults who were brought illegally into the U.S. as children and who have been shielded from deportation by Mr. Obama .
When Mr. Obama used executive action in November to try to grant deportation amnesty to as many as 5 million more illegal immigrants , the Department of Justice ’ s office of legal counsel issued an opinion that supported the action but specifically stated that it could not include the parents of Dreamers .
A federal judge blocked the action from taking effect while the issue is fought in court .
White House press secretary Josh Earnest insisted that Mr. Obama has done everything within his legal authority to ease deportations .
Mr . Earnest was at a loss , however , when asked at the daily White House press briefing whether Mrs. Clinton could go further .
“ I ’ m not a judge . I didn ’ t go to law school , so I ’ m not going to be in a position to render a legal opinion about that , ” he said , adding that it was up to the Clinton campaign to provide a legal argument .
The Clinton campaign did not respond to questions about the legal justification for blocking deportation of Dreamers ’ parents or other measures she endorsed .
Her plan , which she outlined at a Cinco de Mayo campaign event in Las Vegas , included granting attorneys to illegal immigrants facing immigration proceedings and moves to release more illegal immigrants from detention facilities while they await deportation .
The former first lady , senator and top diplomat also called for Congress to pass immigration reform legislation that included “ a path to full and equal citizenship ” for most of the roughly 12 million illegal immigrants in the U.S. , which is the pro-immigrant movement ’ s Holy Grail .
For some in the movement , it was almost too good to be true .
“ It ’ s the talk of the town how bold and how visionary she was on immigration . But now it ’ s like , OK , what ’ s next , ” said Mr. Vargas of the Dream Action Coalition .
He said Mrs. Clinton must convince Hispanic and other pro-immigration voters that she is serious .
“ My 70-year-old mother could be deported at any time , ” he said . “ I ’ m not going to be a cheerleader . I ’ m going to push Hillary Clinton and all the other candidates to the right direction because this is personal for me and not a political career like Hillary Clinton has had . This is personal . This is about my mother . ”
Monica Reyes , a leader of Dream Iowa , said Mrs. Clinton championship of illegal immigrants could be more about the election than about the cause .
“ That ’ s what we ’ re kind of fearful of , ” said the student activist at the University of Northern Iowa .
She recalled an interaction with Mrs. Clinton last year that made her suspicious about the candidate ’ s latest motives .
In September , Ms. Reyes confronted Mrs. Clinton in Iowa about her stance on helping Dreamers such as herself and was dissatisfied with her answer : “ Elect more Democrats . ”
“ It ’ s kind of like a slap in the face . We can ’ t vote , ” Ms. Reyes said .
“ In the past , she hasn ’ t been one of those clear immigration reform supporters . So we want to make sure that she isn ’ t just saying it to get the Latino vote but then in the end not do anything about it , ” she said .
Indeed , Mrs. Clinton has a spotty record on immigration issues .
Her husband , former President Bill Clinton , signed tough immigration laws in 1996 that cracked down on illegal and legal immigrants .
Under those laws , illegal immigrants who stay in the U.S. more than a year must return to their home countries for 10 years before applying for legal status . The 10-year rule continues to frustrate many illegal residents who want fix their status .
Mrs. Clinton opposed driver ’ s licenses for illegal immigrants during her 2008 run for president . She later reversed her position .
As senator , she voted for legalization bills in 2006 and 2007 . But she also voted for constructing a border fence that outraged Hispanic activists .
Clarissa Martinez-De-Castro , a deputy vice president for the National Council of La Raza , said Mrs. Clinton ’ s positions in the past do not take away from her embrace of immigrant rights in her current campaign .
“ From the perspective of Latino voters , we want to hear from any and all candidates what is their formula to achieve relief , resolution and reform on the issue of immigration , and she certainly leaned into it not only expressing support for what is a popular position , comprehensive immigration reform with a path to citizenship , but also going a step further , ” Mrs. Martinez-De-Castro said .
“ She ’ s frankly taken the lead on an issue that the vast majority of Americans agree on and set a mark for others to match , ” she said .