Federal immigration authorities have begun granting tentative legal status to illegal immigrants under President Obama ’ s deportation halt — and in some cases are even ignoring the administration ’ s eligibility rules to stop deportations for those who shouldn ’ t qualify , according to the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee .
Rep. Lamar Smith , Texas Republican , said he ’ s learned some illegal immigrants who have been in the U.S. less than five years have had their deportations canceled , even though Mr. Obama and Homeland Security Secretary Janet A. Napolitano had listed the five-year mark as one of their criteria .
Mr. Smith also obtained documents laying out how U.S. Customs and Immigration Enforcement ( ICE ) officers should actively search for illegal immigrants who are “ apparently eligible ” to have their cases dropped . Those illegal immigrants then would be granted tentative status .
“ President Obama is granting amnesty to illegal immigrants behind Americans ’ backs , ” Mr. Smith said . “ Although administration officials told congressional offices that it would take 60 days to implement the president ’ s amnesty plan , internal ICE documents show that illegal immigrants have already benefited from it , even though there are no standards in place . ”
The ███ reviewed the documents , which also included an ICE memo telling illegal immigrants to contact U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services , the agency that will judge most of these cases , and which is not taking requests until Aug. 15 .
The agency didn ’ t return a call seeking comment , but ICE spokeswoman Gillian Christensen said the policy was always intended to apply immediately to illegal immigrants already in the deportation system — which are the ones ICE deals with .
U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services will eventually put in place a more formal process for illegal immigrants to come forward and proactively head off deportation .
Ms. Christensen said ICE will end up with a relatively small share of the eventual cases , and their review is easier because the agency already had begun using broad prosecutorial discretion last year .
“ ICE is only reviewing cases for deferred action of individuals that are currently in removal proceedings or who were/are part of the agency ’ s larger prosecutorial discretion review , ” she wrote in an email .
Last month , Mr. Obama and Ms. Napolitano said they would unilaterally halt deportations for illegal immigrants who would have qualified for the Dream Act — legislation that never passed Congress but would have granted a path to citizenship to many illegal immigrants age 30 and younger .
To avoid deportation under the new rules , illegal immigrants would had to have been brought to the U.S. by age 16 ; graduated high school or earned an equivalency degree ; not been convicted of major crimes ; and been in the U.S. for at least five years .
Those granted a stay of deportation are given permission to work in the U.S. — which could lead to hundreds of thousands of new , legal workers entering the economy .
The program has come under fire from both sides . Some immigrant-rights activists have said they ’ d be reluctant to recommend illegal immigrants come forward , saying the program doesn ’ t yet have the kinds of assurances they need .
Critics on the other side , meanwhile , say it ’ s drawn too broadly . They also wonder what proof ICE and U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services officers will ask for . The ICE guidance Mr. Smith obtained doesn ’ t lay out any standards for those documents , and he said that ’ s an invitation to fraud .
He also said he has learned ICE has halted deportations for illegal immigrants the agency knows have been in the U.S. for less than five years .
“ Amnesty has been granted to those who have been here for a shorter or even unknown period of time , ” Mr. Smith said .
Ms. Christensen , the ICE spokeswoman , said the agency has broad authority to halt deportations on a case-by-case basis , even when illegal immigrants fall short of the new standards , especially in “ humanitarian ” cases in which the people in question were brought to the U.S. as children .
“ As part of ICE ’ s overall effort to focus the immigration system on public safety threats , border security and public safety , and in keeping with the spirit of the secretary ’ s memorandum , deferred action has been granted on a case-by-case basis to some individuals whose cases may differ from the specific criteria set forth in the memorandum , ” Ms. Christensen said .
As for documents , she said ICE officers are already trained in what documents to ask for and how to evaluate them as part of their jobs . Acceptable documents they can request include passports , visas , school or medical records , and leases , she said .
Part of Mr. Obama ’ s dilemma on immigration is that Ms. Napolitano has said the U.S. has the resources to deport about 400,000 illegal immigrants a year , which means it has to live up to that level .
The president has tried to focus deportation efforts on Illegal immigrants with criminal records and had made progress in his first two years in office . But the latest statistics showed backsliding this year .
In fiscal year 2012 , which began Oct. 1 , about 49 percent of all illegal immigrants deported didn ’ t have criminal records . That ’ s up from about 44 percent last year — and the change had immigrant-rights advocates furious .
ICE said it ’ s trying to focus its priorities , and said even though criminal deportations are down slightly , most of the noncriminals are still important targets for deportation .
Of the more than 143,000 noncriminal illegal immigrants removed from Oct. 1 to June 23 , nearly half had repeatedly violated immigration rules , and more than 49,000 others were recent entrants who were removed at the border .
A little fewer than 5,000 illegal immigrants , or less than 2 percent of the total , were rank-and-file illegal immigrants who didn ’ t fall into any of the administration ’ s target categories .