For liberals alarmed by Donald Trump ’ s election , there is something heartening about the revelation that the new president has no idea what he 's doing . His rollout of new travel restrictions aimed at offering a constitutionally , economically , and diplomatically viable alternative to his campaign pledge of a total ban on Muslim entry to the country has been shambolic . It has spurred judicial and political mobilization against a sloppy and ill-conceived policy , which will likely end up with Trump accomplishing much less harm than he could have with a more measured approach .
All in all , Trump ’ s stumbles raise the prospect of what Dylan Matthews calls the “ Carter Scenario , ” in which a president who is simply bad at presidenting manages to not get very much done and blow the opportunity for a newly empowered legislative majority to enact historic change .
What you make of that will , of course , depend on your prior ideological commitments . What should be viewed differently is the reality that all presidents end up needing to deal with crises of one type or another . So far , Trump has exclusively faced crises of his own creation , and he ’ s handled them disastrously .
Americans of all stripes ought to worry about what ’ s going to happen when he faces a real one .
Even a criminal president can be counted on to deliver a certain measure of economic prosperity and global stability , for the simple reason that incentives are properly aligned . A president prone to making mistakes , however , can easily doom us all .
Trump ’ s order itself is a moral disaster , from top to bottom . It cruelly targets the weakest people in the world — refugees — for nonexistent security gains . It dollops on top of that arbitrary penalties on citizens of seven countries , including Iranian-born people who are Iranian citizens against their own will , that were selected for what were clearly reasons of cynical politics rather than real risk assessment . The good news , such as it is , is that as Brookings Institution national security law analyst Ben Wittes put it on Saturday , the order reads , “ frankly , as though it was not reviewed by competent counsel at all . ”
In that sense , it adds up to “ malevolence tempered by incompetence ” — with a new policy crafted in a sufficiently sloppy manner that key aspects of it don ’ t hold up in court .
What we ’ ve learned since , however , is the scary reality that the order really wasn ’ t reviewed by competent counsel at all . It was written , apparently , by Steve Bannon and Stephen Miller , a couple of hacks without expertise in immigration law . It was then handed over to the Department of Homeland Security without the opportunity for DHS to offer feedback . But when DHS counsel assessed that the order did not apply to green card holders , they were swiftly overridden by Bannon .
Over the weekend , chaos reigned on this front , with members of the Trump administration contradicting each other until Sunday night DHS ’ s initial interpretation was allowed to stand . The order was signed with Defense Secretary James Mattis standing by Trump ’ s side , but Mattis himself apparently never read the order — he was simply used as a prop .
Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly was on the phone receiving a briefing about the proposed policy shift when , according to Michael Shear and Ron Nixon , “ someone on the call looked up at a television in his office . ‘ The president is signing the executive order that we ’ re discussing , ’ the official said , stunned . ”
Mike Allen in his daily email reports that Trump ’ s “ inner circle , resentful of leaks , seeks little input from the Cabinet , outside allies , or Hill leaders . ”
This in some ways understates the level of chaos . Trump didn ’ t seek input from the secretary of state on the possible diplomatic blowback ( UK Prime Minister Theresa May , for example , woke up to the unwelcome news that one of her own party ’ s MPs is now banned from the United States for the crime of having been born in Somalia ) not because he is ignoring the Cabinet but because he has no secretary of state . Similarly , there are no secretaries of Treasury , commerce , or labor in place to offer feedback on the economic ramifications .
Every day , the White House press office sends around an estimate of the president ’ s schedule in the day to come . The Trump White House ’ s daily schedule for the day of the new president ’ s first meeting with a foreign leader misspelled the British prime minister ’ s name three times .
It was an inconsequential thing , but a telling sign that White House statements are heading out the door with relatively little vetting . That is almost certainly the reason that Trump ’ s routine statement on International Holocaust Remembrance Day forgot to mention Jews . But Chief of Staff Reince Priebus , sent out to the Sunday shows to explain why Trump had thrown America ’ s airports into chaos , decided to defend the omission on the grounds that “ everyone ’ s suffering in the Holocaust ” is “ something that we consider to be extraordinarily sad. ” This exacerbated the problem , leading to condemnations from Jewish Republican groups that hadn ’ t originally planned to speak up .
But turning small mistakes into big ones is the kind of thing that happens when your small mistake gets overshadowed by an unrelated additional mistake .
Meanwhile , Trump has simply shot himself in the foot in terms of getting additional members of his team confirmed . The immigration orders led to unprecedented grassroots anti-Trump mobilization that has greatly increased the pressure on Democratic senators to do everything they can to show that they are fighting Trump .
The joint statement of former presidential candidates John McCain & Lindsey Graham is wrong - they are sadly weak on immigration . The two ... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) January 29 , 2017
Meanwhile , Trump is lashing out at Republican senators who criticized his order . The net impact will be to greatly delay the moment until we have a full complement of undersecretaries and assistant secretaries in place , especially with Trump struggling to get full secretaries confirmed speedily and treating Mattis and Kelly in a way that will make it difficult to recruit high-quality people for other jobs .
Many liberals I know are happy to see that the Trump administration is not a well-oiled machine . And to an extent this makes sense . A more disciplined , more organized administration would be a lot more likely to succeed in repealing the Affordable Care Act or shepherding Paul Ryan ’ s war on the poor into law .
In many ways , it ’ s reassuring to know that a malevolent administration ’ s actions will be tempered by incompetence .
But in other ways , it is quite the opposite . Even a president whose ideas you disagree has incentives aligned to get the basics right . A recession , a bloody war , a natural disaster , or a mishandled environmental catastrophe would be bad for Trump ’ s popularity and political standing and also objectively bad for the world . Sound crisis management is a win-win .
What we have seen so far from Trump is that he is not much of a crisis manager . He takes a small problem like having a smaller Inauguration Day audience that Barack Obama and turns it into a days-long , credibility-shattering drama about voter fraud . He takes a desire to crack down on refugees for the sake of a little political gain and turns it into a fiasco .
Yet all presidents eventually face a crisis that is not of their own creation . Maybe a spy plane gets into an accidental crash . Maybe North Korea does an ICBM test . Maybe Greece ’ s budget woes produce a renewed financial crisis in Europe . Maybe there will be a scary infectious disease outbreak . The government will need to respond . And it will be in the interests of America and the world for the government to respond in a calm , well-informed , and effective manner . And it will be in the interest of Donald Trump to respond in a calm , well-informed , and effective manner .
Under the circumstances , it would be nice to think that Trump is capable — at least in principle — of responding in a calm , well-informed , and effective manner . But based on the evidence available in front of us , it ’ s extremely difficult to be confident that he is . In a bitterly divided country , it ’ s inevitable that any newly elected president will roll out some big new initiatives that his opponent regards as malign . Trump ’ s big headline undertakings have been mistakes . As long as he is driving the news cycle , that incompetence is reassuring to his skeptics . As soon as he ’ s forced to respond to external crisis , it ’ s going to be anything but .