Outside a Senate Republican lunch on Tuesday , Ted Cruz lashed GOP leaders for their plan on immigration , telling reporters that it ’ s a “ strategy designed to lose . ”
Inside the GOP lunch , Cruz was mum and didn ’ t raise the issue at all , according to three senators at the gathering .
As he prepares for a likely presidential run , the Texas Republican senator is proceeding cautiously on the latest controversy engulfing the Senate . He is trying to showcase his role as a leading agitator , pulling a recalcitrant Republican establishment to the right . But with his party now struggling to find a way out of an immigration jam , pushing conservatives to take a hard line could result in a standoff with the White House and a politically damaging shutdown of the Department of Homeland Security — just as Cruz prepares to roll out his presidential campaign .
Unlike the battle over Obamacare that prompted the government shutdown in 2013 , Cruz is keeping his distance from this latest fight , blaming GOP elders and Democrats for the mess — while taking an unusually low-profile role despite his own outspoken opposition to the president ’ s immigration policies last year .
Through Tuesday evening , Cruz had not delivered a single speech on the floor over the past week when the issue has dominated the Senate . ( His like-minded conservative colleague , Alabama Sen. Jeff Sessions , has spoken for 147 minutes about the topic since Feb . 2 . ) At several lunches where the issue was discussed , Cruz was either silent on the immigration matter or spoke sparingly , senators said . And even at a private Republican retreat last month in Pennsylvania , Cruz skipped a Senate strategy session where the party ’ s leadership and committee chairmen laid out a game plan for the first several weeks of the new Congress and discussed the immigration fight , attendees said .
It was a sign of how Cruz has to balance his message as a conservative firebrand who says he ’ s not afraid to “ stand and lead ” while dealing with the legislative realities in Washington — and the fact that he dines daily with Republican senators when Congress is in session . He ’ s willing to bash his party publicly but rarely singles out GOP senators by name . And after coming under tremendous heat from his own party during the government shutdown , including being berated behind closed doors , Cruz has avoided private confrontations with GOP senators over the tactics they are pursuing .
“ No , ” Sen. Jeff Flake ( R-Ariz. ) said when asked if Cruz had raised concerns about the immigration matter in private lunch meetings .
“ Not when I ’ ve been there , ” said South Dakota Sen. John Thune , No . 3 in Senate GOP leadership , when asked if he ’ d heard Cruz raise private objections to the latest immigration strategy .
The back and forth over immigration highlights the larger problems facing Republicans as they deal with their first messy legislative fight since taking control of the Senate last month . In the aftermath of President Barack Obama ’ s post-election move to defer deportations for roughly 5 million undocumented immigrants and pave the way for them to obtain work permits , Republicans have been struggling to find a strategy to push back effectively .
Cruz , one of the most furious critics of what he refers to as Obama ’ s “ executive amnesty , ” pushed his party ’ s leaders to include in a mega-funding bill late last year a provision to block the actions . But GOP leaders , nervous about another government shutdown immediately after they won big in November ’ s elections , cut a deal with Senate Democrats , who were still in control of the chamber at the time , as well as the White House . They pushed through a compromise omnibus spending package that funded virtually the entire government through the end of September but temporarily extended money for DHS until Feb. 27 .
The idea , Republicans said , was to fight the president ’ s immigration strategy when it was time to consider the budget for DHS , the agency that enforces immigration laws , when the party assumed control of both chambers in 2015 . So last month , House Republicans included in the $ 39.7 billion DHS funding bill a provision to block Obama ’ s 2014 immigration policies and a 2012 move deferring deportations to undocumented immigrants brought to the country illegally at a young age .
But the GOP quickly ran into a problem : the Senate . Despite controlling 54 seats , Republicans faced a wall of opposition from Democratic senators who are demanding a “ clean bill ” stripped of any immigration riders . On three separate occasions last week , Democrats filibustered the bill , with Republicans falling seven votes shy of the 60 needed to bring the measure to the floor for a debate . ( GOP Sen. Dean Heller of Nevada joined a united Democratic Caucus in blocking the bill . )
On Tuesday , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) finally acknowledged the obvious : The chamber was “ stuck . ”
“ I think it ’ s clearly stuck in the Senate , we can ’ t get on it , we can ’ t offer amendments to it , ” McConnell told reporters . “ And the next step is obviously up to the House . ”
But House Republicans pointed back at the Senate , saying the chamber needed to pass its own bill .
The blame , Cruz said , lies squarely at the feet of party leaders .
“ What I said this weekend was clear , which is this current ‘ Crominbus ’ bill was designed by leadership , ” Cruz said Tuesday , referring to comments he made during two political shows on Sunday . “ I objected strenuously at the time and made the point that it was a strategy designed to lose . My objections were overruled . ”
Cruz added : “ Leadership proceeded nonetheless down this path , and it ’ s now incumbent on leadership to explain what their path is to what they stated the end goal would be . ”
Still , GOP leaders said they designed their strategy to placate immigration hard-liners like Cruz as well as to avoid a government shutdown . While Cruz voted against the December spending bill , Republicans say they could use the Texas senator ’ s help to pressure Democrats now .
Michael Steel , a spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) , said the leadership plan was developed after extensive consultations with House Republicans .
“ And while it may not be perfect , ” Steel said , “ it is certainly preferable to the alternative . ”
Pushing on the issue in the lame-duck session , said Flake , would have been more challenging given that Republicans were still in the minority last year .
“ Anything that ’ s tough now would have been tougher before we had a majority , ” he said .
It ’ s not unusual for Cruz to differ with his caucus over tactics . Since joining the Senate after winning the seat vacated by then-Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison ( R-Texas ) in the 2012 elections , Cruz in 2013 blocked efforts by the House and Senate to negotiate a budget resolution , arguing it would be a back-door way to raise the debt ceiling . In September 2013 , he pushed House Republicans to include in a government funding bill provisions that would have defunded Obamacare , even taking to the floor for a marathon 21-hour speech . A week later , the standoff prompted a government shutdown and ample GOP recriminations over his strategy .
In February 2014 , Cruz filibustered a bill to raise the debt ceiling , prompting McConnell and his fellow Texas Sen. John Cornyn , along with other Republicans , to advance the measure because they feared its failure would prompt a government default on its obligations . And in December , Cruz — along with his ally , Utah Sen. Mike Lee — effectively forced the Senate to return to Washington for a rare Saturday session in order to lodge a protest over Obama ’ s immigration policies . The tactic , GOP senators publicly complained , strengthened the Democrats ’ hands . Cruz later apologized to his colleagues for abruptly interrupting their weekend plans , though he showed little remorse for mounting the immigration fight .
Such fights are expected to be central to Cruz ’ s likely presidential campaign , giving him an argument to advance that he ’ s battled with his party leadership over the direction of the GOP .
With the House DHS bill stalled in the Senate , Boehner has publicly called on Cruz — and Sessions — to lead the charge in their chamber .
“ It ’ s time for Sen. Cruz and Sen . Sessions and Senate Republicans and Senate Democrats to stand with the American people and to block the president ’ s actions , ” Boehner said last week .
But Cruz told reporters Tuesday that Boehner and McConnell had “ given away virtually all our leverage by funding almost the entirety of the federal government ” in last December ’ s funding package . Cruz also called on McConnell to prevent the confirmation of all presidential nominations who are not vital to national security interests — until Obama relents on immigration . ( McConnell has ignored his call . )
Asked whether he agreed with Cruz ’ s criticism of the strategy so far , Sessions was cautious .
“ I don ’ t know about that , ” the Alabama conservative said . “ We should fund Homeland Security , which this bill does , but we shouldn ’ t fund the unlawful actions the president took on immigration . ”