President Obama has apparently had enough of leading from behind .
During the health-care push , Obama left Congress to its own devices . On immigration , he 's doing just the opposite , attempting to prod Republican legislators to the middle by demanding a vote on his own plan .
The president insisted Tuesday that Congress vote on his plan as soon as possible , barring agreement on something else .
`` It 's important for us to recognize that the foundation for bipartisan action is already in place , '' Obama said , referring to a bipartisan Senate bill offered up by the so-called Gang of Eight senators , which looks much more palatable to Republicans than Obama 's own plan . `` And if Congress is unable to move forward in a timely fashion , I will send up a bill based on my proposal and insist that they vote on it right away . ''
In doing so , Obama dared Congress to say `` no '' to something specific .
It 's the same strategy Obama used in the `` fiscal-cliff '' talks . With a year-end deadline approaching , he pushed Congress to vote on his own plan : to let higher income tax hikes go into effect if lawmakers could n't cut a deal themselves . Obama asked Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada to call `` an up-or-down vote '' on that plan , the president announced in a Dec. 28 appearance before cameras at the White House .
`` If members of the House or the Senate want to vote 'no , ' they can , but we should let everybody vote , '' Obama said then .
Republicans hate such a negotiation tactic . Throughout Obama 's White House tenure , GOP aides have griped that the president and congressional Democrats have sought political gain while refusing to negotiate in good faith . On immigration , it 's the same .
The Obama plan includes a faster path to citizenship and nothing to trigger border-security enforcement . It would also clear an easier path for same-sex couples .
Before Obama rolled out his immigration plan in Nevada Tuesday , Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida raised concerns that the president would launch a `` bidding war . ''
In a radio interview with Rush Limbaugh , Rubio dismissed the notion of an up-or-down vote : `` It 's going to have to go through committees and people are going to have their input . There 's going to be public hearings . I do n't want to be part of a process that comes up with some bill in secret and brings it to the floor and gives people a take it or leave it .
`` I want this place to work the way it 's supposed to work , with every senator having input and the public having input , '' Rubio said .
A Senate Republican aide jabbed , `` The president 's been gone from the Senate a long time and perhaps he has forgotten that it 's a lot easier to pass legislation if he works with Congress . ''
Obama has presented Republicans with a plan they will like much less than what 's been crafted by the bipartisan Senate group . The group plan includes triggers to enforce border-security measures , more unmanned drones and no provisions making it easier for same-sex couples seeking to immigrate or naturalize .
Unless other Republicans come up with a plan of their own , the president has given Republicans a choice between the left and the middle . It 's not hard to tell which they 'd prefer .