Immigrant-rights protesters confronted President Obama on Monday , interrupting his speech in San Francisco and demanding he use executive authority to halt all deportations , but he rebuked them and told them he doesn ’ t have that kind of power .
The confrontation is the latest sign of growing tension between Mr. Obama and some on his political left who say he can do more to push the issue of immigration , even as he argues that the roadblock is actually Republicans on Capitol Hill .
Hours before Mr. Obama ’ s immigration speech , protesters chained themselves to the gates of a detention center for illegal immigrants in Adelanto , Calif. , to call attention to deportations and what the activists said is inhumane treatment of those awaiting removal from the country .
“ You have a power to stop deportation for all undocumented immigrants in this country , ” a man , identified by news reports as Ju Hong , shouted from the stage directly behind Mr. Obama , then helped lead a chant of “ Stop deportation ! ” that was taken up by others in the crowd .
“ Actually , I don ’ t , and that ’ s why we are here , ” Mr. Obama replied .
As action on immigration has stalled in Congress , Mr. Obama and activists are increasingly at odds over the question of how much authority he does have .
Mr. Obama raised expectations with his broad policy last year of granting tentative legal status to young illegal immigrants who were brought to the country as children and call themselves “ dreamers. ” Under Mr. Obama ’ s policy they have been granted work permits and authorization to remain in the U.S. without fear of deportation .
Earlier this month , the administration also announced a policy allowing illegal immigrant relatives of U.S. troops and veterans to apply for “ parole in place , ” which would also exempt them from being removed from the country .
The activists say those moves show Mr. Obama has authority to stop deportations for most of the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants in the U.S .
“ If , in fact , I could solve all these problems without passing the laws in Congress then I would do so . But we ’ re also a nation of laws , that ’ s part of our tradition , ” he said . “ The easy way out is to try to yell and pretend like I can do something by violating our laws . What I ’ m proposing is the harder path , which is to use our democratic processes to achieve the same goal that you want to achieve . ”
Security personnel were about to remove the protesters from the event , but Mr. Obama stopped them .
“ These guys don ’ t need to go . Let me finish . No , no , he can stay there , ” the president said , drawing cheers from the audience for his act .
Mr. Obama has said his decision to stop deporting young illegal immigrants was an exercise of “ prosecutorial discretion. ” It ’ s a power Mr. Obama has flexed repeatedly — including earlier this month when the White House said it wouldn ’ t enforce part of the new health care law ’ s requirements that make many existing health plans illegal .
But in the case of immigration , Mr. Obama has told interviewers that stopping all deportations would go beyond discretion and cross the line into ignoring the law .
It ’ s unclear how many people the president has already placed out of reach of deportation .
The youth exemption alone has been granted to more than 450,000 people as of Aug. 31 , which is the most recent data available . U.S . Citizenship and Immigration Services had been updating those numbers monthly , but it has been more than two months since the last figures were released .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , Alabama Republican , said the GOP shouldn ’ t accept any immigration bill until Mr. Obama rescinds his nondeportation policies and lets immigration agents do their jobs .
“ During his time in office , the president has systematically dismantled interior enforcement , handcuffing immigration officers and bypassing Congress , ” Mr . Sessions said . “ No agreement should be entered into while such lawlessness continues . ”
Both Mr. Obama and congressional Republicans are facing increasing heat from activists . Monday ’ s detention center blockade was the latest in a string that has included several locations in Arizona , as well as New Orleans , Atlanta and Chicago .
Meanwhile , protesters have staked out House Speaker John A. Boehner ’ s house and , last week , some were arrested outside the office of House Majority Leader Eric Cantor .
Not every protest is as confrontational . Activists are maintaining an ongoing prayer fast at a tent on the Mall in the District — an event that drew a nod of approval from Mr. Obama in his speech Monday .
The president also repeated his new stance that he is willing to accept an immigration deal from Congress that comes in pieces , rather than the broad single bill that passed in the Senate .
“ It ’ s Thanksgiving — we can carve that bird into multiple pieces , ” Mr. Obama said . “ But as long as all the pieces get done , soon , and we actually deliver on the core values we ’ ve been talking about for so long , I think everybody is fine with it . They ’ re not worried about the procedures , they just want the result . ”
Mr. Obama says any final deal must include a pathway to citizenship for illegal immigrants , along with whatever new border security and interior enforcement measures Congress wants .
Many Republicans , though , argue that border security should come first , and legalization later . Many of those Republicans also object to a full special pathway to citizenship , saying that amounts to amnesty .
Instead of a single bill , House Republicans are working on a series of bills , and Mr. Boehner has said he will not enter into negotiations with the Senate on its massive legislation .
Mr. Boehner , though , also said last week that he remains committed to getting something done on immigration , and doesn ’ t consider it a dead issue in this Congress .
The activists conducting the prayer fast on the Mall urged Mr. Boehner to put that vow into action .
“ It ’ s time Speaker Boehner and the House of Representatives address America ’ s moral crisis — a dysfunctional immigration system that has continuously undermined the integrity of our national values and the unity of our families , ” the activists said in a statement .