For Refugees And Advocates , An Anxious Wait For Clarity On Trump 's Policy
Donald Trump 's election has sent tremors through America 's refugee advocate community , and caused fear and uncertainty among the most recently resettled refugees , the Syrians . They listened with alarm as candidate Trump called them `` terrorists '' and blamed them , incorrectly , for violent attacks in America .
`` That rhetoric has had an impact , '' says Becca Heller , director of the International Refugee Assistance Project , a legal aid program . `` Trump has been successful in politicizing refugee admissions in a way that they have not been politicized before . ''
The United States is the world 's leading resettlement country for refugees ; historically , the program has had bipartisan support and has been a mainstay of U.S. foreign policy .
Syrian resettlement was extremely limited during the first years of a war that began as a peaceful protest against a repressive regime in 2011 . The number of Syrians resettled in the U.S. was 105 in 2014 and rose to 1,682 in 2015 .
In his last year in office , Obama has boosted that number substantially , and set a goal of admitting 10,000 Syrian refugees in fiscal year 2016 . In September , his administration led a global summit to address an unprecedented migrant crisis . The president increased the U.S. resettlement target for 2017 by more than 30 percent , to 110,000 refugees from the world 's most vulnerable populations .
NPR 's Deborah Amos explains how the U.S. vets refugees . YouTube
`` When it comes to resettlement , the president has all the authority , '' explains Jennifer Quigley , a refugee advocate with Human Rights First . `` Our big concern is that it could be none at all or it could be that there is a discrimination against Arabs or Muslims or Somalis , '' she says , pointing out targets in Trump 's anti-refugee campaign speeches .
During the campaign , Trump said he planned to suspend the Syrian refugee program , and threatened to deport those already here . At a rally in New Hampshire last year , he told a cheering crowd , `` I 'm putting the people on notice that are coming here from Syria as part of a mass migration , that if I win , they are going back . ''
`` Everyone is terrified , they are scared , they are shocked , `` says a refugee named Mohammed , describing the Syrian refugee community 's reaction to the U.S. election . He asked to withhold his last name because of fears for family back home . He also fears that Trump will carry out the hard line threat ; rounding up Syrian refugees and kicking them out .
`` You brought them here because they are refugees , they do n't have homes anymore , '' he says . `` Send them back where ? To hell ? ''
Mohammed and his 17-year-old daughter , Lulu , are resettled in central New Jersey , in a small apartment where cable news channels are the constant background ambience . They arrived in the U.S. in 2014 and were granted asylum in 2015 .
A successful Damascus businessman , Mohammed fled his homeland , fearing arrest and torture for his support of an uprising that began as a peaceful protest against an oppressive Syrian regime .
`` Half of my family are back in Syria , '' he says . His wife and a younger daughter are still living in Damascus . `` This is going to destroy my hope . ''
Mohammed hoped his appeal for family reunion would be granted after he obtained asylum status for himself and Lulu . Now , the election throws official approval and a family reunion in doubt .
After a campaign of furious soundbites and often contradictory policy directions , Trump has yet to fill in the details of his comprehensive refugee resettlement program .
`` Admission of refuges from war-torn areas of the world has been a key component of our foreign policy for decades and decades , '' says IRAP 's Heller . `` To give that up now will seriously damage our credibility with our allies abroad . ''
Advocates argue that backtracking on American commitments could encourage other countries to follow the U.S. example , deepening a humanitarian crisis for allies and giving talking points to Muslim militants who claim that the West is hostile to Islam .
But bipartisan support for refugee resettlement unraveled after last November 's Paris terrorist attacks , when early reporting erroneously identified one of the attackers as a Syrian refugee . Support further declined following last December 's terrorist attack in San Bernardino , Calif. , and a mass shooting in June at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando .
Refugees had no role in these attacks , but GOP lawmakers began to call for a pause in resettlement and so did a majority of U.S. governors . Trump 's hard-line campaign rhetoric , specifically against Syrians , resonated with a fearful GOP 's voting base .
Now that Republicans control both chambers of Congress and the White House , refugee advocates fear there will be severe funding cuts for their work .
The first outlines of President-elect Trump 's policy have come in a document from his transition team called `` The First Day Project '' with a to-do list for January 2017 . Refugees come near the top of the list , `` a top-five priority of the transition team , '' says Quigley . The policy includes the intention to `` suspend immigration from terror-prone regions where vetting can not safely occur . ''
`` Terror-prone '' would certainly describe Syria , Afghanistan and Somalia , the three countries that produce half of the world 's refugees .
After Trump 's win , refugee communities across the country have turned to teachers , immigration lawyers and other advocates for guidance on managing deep anxieties . Many have been in the country a short time , a few months to a few years , and have never been through a U.S. election , much less one that 's unparalleled even for Americans .
`` President-elect Trump said in his acceptance speech that he wants to treat everyone fairly . And I hope that for the sake of everyone , he will hew to that promise — as it pertains to both U.S. citizens and to immigrants , '' says Stephen Yale-Loehr , an immigration law professor at Cornell University .
His advice for refugees : Do n't panic . `` Nothing is going to happen immediately , '' he says about deportation fears .
Refugees are legal residents , he explains , with constitutional rights . Even a U.S. president does not have the power and authority to `` round them up and deport them , '' says Yale-Loehr . `` If he thinks they are a terrorist threat , he would have to say a specific refugee poses a threat and have some evidence to back it up . ''
Yale-Loehr also scoffs at Trump 's often repeated campaign charge that when refugees are admitted to the United States , `` We do n't know who these people are . ''
He says the vetting process for refugees is designed to identify security threats . There is an enhanced layer of security vetting for Syrians .
`` Syrian refuges have to go through a 21-step vetting process before they are allowed to come to the U.S . It goes to three different agencies , '' says Yale-Loehr . `` I am not sure what any president could do to make it even more stringent than it already is . ''
The U.S. takes in about a million immigrants each year , admitted legally to work and study . This is separate from refugee arrivals , who are fleeing war , persecution or political chaos . The annual number of refugee admissions is set by the president .
Refugee advocate Chris George says the campaign rhetoric could undermine a program that has resettled 750,00 refugees since Sept. 11 , 2001 — with not one arrest for a domestic terrorism charge .
`` This all goes back to a fundamental lack of information about the refugee program and lack of contact , '' he says .
George is the executive director of Integrated Refugee and Immigrant Services , a nonprofit agency in New Haven , Conn. His organization has resettled more than 250 refugees this year in a distinctive program that partners with private groups to place refugee families in communities , `` so people can meet them and have them live down the street and walk to school with their children . ''
Most Americans have never met a refugee , says George , and that is part of the problem . He places some of the blame on the State Department , which encourages resettlement programs to operate at a low profile .
`` If people throw up their arms , politicians included , and say , 'We do n't know anything about this refugee program , we do n't know who these people are , we do n't know if they 've been vetted , ' well , the information is out there . It 's out of ignorance that people say those things . ''