( CNN ) - With the GOP actively working to reshape its image , it did n't take long for top Republicans to blast one of their own , Rep. Don Young , for using the derogatory term `` wetbacks '' in describing migrant workers from Mexico .
The longtime congressman from Alaska attempted to explain why he used the ethnic slur , but he 's nevertheless seeing little mercy from some of the biggest voices in the GOP .
In perhaps one of the most forceful reactions , House Speaker John Boehner called for the congressman , who 's now serving his 21st term , to apologize .
`` Congressman Young 's remarks were offensive and beneath the dignity of the office he holds . I do n't care why he said it – there 's no excuse and it warrants an immediate apology , '' he said .
Young , Alaska 's sole congressman , originally made the comment during a sit-down interview with Ketchikan Public Radio earlier this week . Talking about how technology is affecting the economy , he referenced an anecdote from his family 's farm in California .
`` My father had a ranch ; we used to have 50-60 wetbacks to pick tomatoes , '' Young said . `` It takes two people to pick the same tomatoes now . It 's all done by machine . ''
Young issued a statement Thursday to a local television station in Anchorage , which did n't come as a full apology but sought to clarify his reasoning behind using the word .
`` I used a term that was commonly used during my days growing up on a farm in Central California , '' he said . `` I know that this term is not used in the same way nowadays and I meant no disrespect . ''
The word is widely considered an ethnic slur and generally refers to those from Mexico who come to the United States illegally by crossing the Rio Grande River . It was used by the government in the 1950s for `` Operation Wetback , '' a massive crackdown on illegal immigration along the U.S.-Mexico border .
But on the heels of a new Republican push to expand its outreach to minorities , especially Latinos , Democrats were quick to point out the comment as damaging–and similar reactions from Republicans started rolling in , as well .
Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus said Young 's words `` emphatically '' do n't represent the party .
`` Our party represents freedom and opportunity for every American and a beacon of hope to those seeking liberty throughout the world , '' he said in a statement . `` Offensive language and ethnic slurs have no place in our public discourse . ''
Sen. John Cornyn of Texas , the number two Republican in the upper chamber , was also quick to seek distance from the comment . He blasted Young in a statement , saying migrant workers come to the country for work and opportunities , not to `` hear ethnic slurs and derogatory language from elected officials . ''
`` The comments used by Rep. Young do nothing to elevate our party , political discourse or the millions who come here looking for economic opportunity , '' he continued .
Sen. John McCain , one of the leading GOP voices on immigration reform , said on Twitter that Young 's comments `` were offensive and have no place in our Party or in our nation 's discourse . ''
The party 's tone on immigration became a focal point in the GOP 's self-review following November 's presidential election . One of the most talked-about issues was Mitt Romney 's position in favor of `` self-deportation , '' where undocumented immigrants would voluntarily leave , go home and get in the back of the line to re-apply for entry into the country .
In a report released earlier in March by the RNC , which showed the results of its months-long review after Election Day , the party described such language as harmful to the party 's image and ability to connect with voters that generally fall outside of the GOP column .
`` If Hispanic Americans perceive that a GOP nominee or candidate does not want them in the United States ( i.e . self-deportation ) , they will not pay attention to our next sentence , '' the report stated . In one of its few policy recommendations , the report advised Republicans to `` embrace and champion '' comprehensive immigration reform .
And GOP Gov . Bobby Jindal of Louisiana focused on the impact of ill-fated comments earlier this year , when he said at the Republican National Committee winter meeting that the GOP has `` to stop being the stupid party '' and should start talking `` like adults . ''
`` It 's no secret we 've had a number of Republicans this year damage our brands with bizarre and offensive comments , '' he said . `` I 'm here to say we 've had enough of that . ''