From President Clinton ’ s stern 1995 call to stop “ the large numbers of illegal aliens ” taking American jobs to President Obama ’ s plea last year for legalizing “ responsible young people ” to work in the U.S. economy , the politics of immigration can be traced through State of the Union addresses .
In the 1990s , illegal immigration was an economic issue — viewed by many in the U.S. from through the lens of competition for jobs . It was a matter of security in President George W. Bush ’ s tenure after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11 , 2001 .
But by Mr. Obama ’ s ascendance , immigration had become a moral issue and even the terminology had changed . Gone were phrases such as “ illegal aliens ” that Mr. Clinton used , and in their place were the “ undocumented workers ” Mr. Obama cited in his 2011 State of the Union .
“ A lot ’ s definitely changed . It ’ s the politics aligning with the demographic changes , ” said Angela Maria Kelley , vice president of immigration policy at the Center for American Progress .
All sides expect Mr. Obama to use his State of the Union address Tuesday to make a plea for a broad bill legalizing most illegal immigrants , repeating his call from last year to work “ on comprehensive immigration reform . ”
Bob Dane , communications director at the Federation for American Immigration Reform , said at a time when the economy is still struggling , he expects Mr. Obama to argue that legalizing illegal immigrants is good for the economy — a 180-degree turn from Mr. Clinton ’ s argument in the 1990s , when he made a starkly Americans-first argument .
“ The jobs they hold might otherwise be held by citizens or legal immigrants . The public services they use impose burdens on our taxpayers , ” Mr. Clinton said in 1995 . “ It is wrong and ultimately self-defeating for a nation of immigrants to permit the kind of abuse of our immigration laws we have seen in recent years , and we must do more to stop it . ”
Rep. Lamar Smith , Texas Republican , who spearheaded Republican efforts on immigration over the past two decades , said Mr. Obama is wrong if he does argue that legalization will be good for Americans .
“ American taxpayers will be forced to foot the bill for the overwhelming costs of amnesty . Under current law , once 11 million illegal immigrants receive probationary status , they will immediately have access to federal benefits like Social Security and Obamacare coverage . If we thought we had a problem with government spending before , just wait , ” he said .
Mr. Obama has said he would try to carve out newly legalized immigrants so they aren ’ t eligible for benefits under his health care law .
The president wasn ’ t always so enthusiastic about pressing ahead with immigration . He didn ’ t mention the issue in his first address to Congress in 2009 , and in 2010 he focused on border security and enforcing laws on the books .
But by 2011 , when he was preparing to run for re-election , he called for a broad immigration bill to “ address the millions of undocumented workers who are now living in the shadows. ” Last year , in the heat of his re-election campaign , he called specifically for passage of the Dream Act , which would legalize illegal immigrants 30 and younger who were brought to the U.S. by their parents .
Ms. Kelley said she doesn ’ t expect Mr. Obama to go too deep into immigration in Tuesday ’ s address — particularly after giving a major speech in Las Vegas last month calling for action .
Mr. Bush did the same thing in 2004 , delivering a speech calling specifically for immigration reform but dropping in only a line or two in his address to Congress .
Ms. Kelley said Mr. Bush had other domestic matters , such as reforming Social Security , that took precedence over immigration , in 2004 and 2005 . That sapped his political capital , and by the time he pushed legislation in 2006 and 2007 , Congress had turned against him .
This year , Mr. Obama is in a different position , Ms. Kelly said .
“ On this , the timing is soon , the tone is urgent and the tactic is legislation , ” she said . “ The issue is more mature than it ’ s ever been . ”
Immigrant rights advocates said the real news Tuesday might be made by Sen. Marco Rubio , the Florida Republican who is delivering the GOP ’ s official response — in English and Spanish — and who has joined a bipartisan group of senators working on writing a bill to legalize illegal immigrants .
They have proposed granting immediate legal status to illegal immigrants , with green cards to follow once the borders are deemed secure — likely 10 years or so later .
With pressure increasing on Capitol Hill , activists are looking past Tuesday ’ s speech to a hearing scheduled for Wednesday in the Senate Judiciary Committee , which will kick off the Senate ’ s push for action and feature testimony from an illegal immigrant .
“ Sure , President Obama and Sen. Rubio both speaking up for immigration reform on Tuesday night is a big deal and adds to the momentum that has accelerated dramatically over the past two weeks . But the most important immigration event of this week is Wednesday ’ s hearing , ” said Frank Sharry , executive director of America ’ s Voice Education Fund .
Mr. Dane , though , said lawmakers shouldn ’ t get too far ahead of voters .
“ The American public hasn ’ t weighed in on this yet . This is still inside-the-Beltway planning . I think the president is in for a rude awakening when the public realizes there ’ s absolutely nothing in the amnesty plan for them , ” he said .