WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - President Donald Trump declared as “ dead ” on Monday a program that protects immigrants brought to the United States illegally as children and pressed Congress to pass legislation to secure the U.S. border with Mexico .
Trump ’ s latest comments on immigration , made via Twitter , came as the U.S. Department of Justice moved to establish first-ever quotas for immigration judges aimed at speeding up cases and clearing a backlog .
Trump said in September he would terminate the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals ( DACA ) program introduced by his Democratic predecessor , Barack Obama , but gave the Republican-controlled Congress until March 6 to replace it .
Congress failed to meet that deadline , but courts have ruled the program can stay in place for now .
“ DACA is dead because the Democrats didn ’ t care or act , and now everyone wants to get onto the DACA bandwagon , ” the Republican president said in a Twitter post .
Trump also urged Congress to “ pass tough laws and build the WALL , ” referring to a U.S.-Mexico border wall he has championed as a way to curb illegal immigration and the flow of drugs .
In a move aimed at speeding deportations , the Department of Justice sent an email on Friday to federal immigration judges telling them their job performance would be evaluated based on how quickly they close cases .
Judges will be required to complete at least 700 cases a year and have fewer than 15 percent of their decisions appealed and remanded back , according to Dana Marks , spokeswoman for the National Association of Immigration Judges .
Another metric demands that 85 percent of removal cases for detained immigrants be completed within three days of a hearing on the merits of the case . The new policy is expected to take effect on Oct. 1 .
A growing backlog of immigration cases reached 687,000 in March , according to a ███ analysis of court records , and caused asylum seekers to wait years to present their cases .
Amiena Khan , executive vice president of the immigration judges ’ union , said the new rules threatened to interfere with judicial independence . “ It ’ s going to create havoc within the courts , ” said Khan , who also serves as an immigration judge in New York . “ The integrity of the entire process is at risk . ”
On Monday , senior administration officials told reporters that legislation was being prepared aimed at helping speed deportations of some illegal immigrants . They did not provide a timetable for submitting it to Congress and did not say whether provisions to help DACA recipients would be included .
No immigration deal has materialized in the Republican-controlled Congress despite months of efforts . The Senate considered several immigration proposals in February but rejected all of them , including bipartisan bills and legislation tailored to Trump ’ s requirements .
Democrats have blamed Trump for the tenuous status of the DACA program that shielded hundreds of thousands of young immigrants , often called “ Dreamers , ” from deportation and gave them work permits .
Dick Durbin , the No . 2 Senate Democrat , said in a telephone interview : “ After the experience of giving this president six different bipartisan options and having him reject them all ... I don ’ t believe we have a reliable partner ” in negotiations that are now dormant .
In the past , Trump had said he was open to a deal with congressional Democrats in which they would support funding for the border wall in exchange for protection for the Dreamers .
But on Sunday , he indicated that the time had passed , writing on Twitter : “ ‘ Caravans ’ coming . Republicans must go to Nuclear Option to pass tough laws NOW . NO MORE DACA DEAL ! ”
U.S. President Donald Trump waves to the media as he arrives with first lady Melania Trump at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland , U.S. , after the Easter weekend in Palm Beach , Florida , April 1 , 2018 . ███/Yuri Gripas
The mention of a caravan apparently referred to a group of 1,500 men , women and children from Honduras , Guatemala and El Salvador who are traveling in a “ refugee caravan ” organized by the U.S.-based immigration advocacy group Pueblo sin Fronteras , whose Spanish name means People Without Borders .
By traveling together , the immigrants hope to protect themselves from the crime and extortion that makes the route through Mexico toward the U.S. border dangerous . They say some but not all of them will seek asylum if they reach the United States .
“ The only person gaming DACA is not in the caravan . He ’ s in the Oval Office ” of the White House , Durbin said , referring to Trump .