The Obama administration is being accused of giving labor groups `` special treatment under the law '' after formally proposing a change that could exempt union health plans from a pesky ObamaCare fee .
Sen. John Thune , R-S.D. , who flagged the obscure rule change after it was filed in the Federal Register ( see page 70 ) , blasted the exemption as `` crony capitalism at its worst . ''
`` Unions are now experiencing the ugly reality of this law , and they want out , '' he said in a statement .
Indeed , the AFL-CIO has fought against what is known as the `` reinsurance fee '' in the Affordable Care Act . The temporary fee would kick in next year and is meant to raise $ 25 billion over three years , to help pay for the cost of people with pre-existing conditions signing up for coverage through the ObamaCare exchanges .
The proposal filed Monday would exempt certain self-insured plans -- those that do not use a third-party administrator for core functions -- for 2015 and 2016 .
Republicans charge this is aimed at unions ' so-called Taft-Hartley plans , though union officials had downplayed the change and suggested some of their plans would n't be eligible anyway .
AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka said earlier this month -- when the administration first telegraphed that it might craft the exemption -- that the change does not single out the union insurance policies , according to The Associated Press .
A Health and Human Services official also disputed the claim that this is directed at unions .
`` This definition would exempt any self-insured group health plan that does not use a third party administrator for claims processing or enrollment , not only union plans , '' the official told FoxNews.com , adding they are proposing the change to better `` align '' the definition with the law . `` The phrase 'self-insured , self-administered plans ' is not synonymous with multiemployer plans , or Taft-Hartley plans . ''
But Republicans say the change is clearly aimed at unions , particularly after labor leaders made a high-profile push to extract some relief from the health care law .
Trumka and other labor leaders met with President Obama and Vice President Biden at the White House in September , as part of a bid to win additional health care subsidies for their workers . The administration determined it could not give them any more subsidies , but later made clear it would look at providing relief from the so-called reinsurance fee .
The fee would start at $ 63 per person next year , but then drop to a bit more than $ 40 per person in 2015 . It would drop again the following year .
The proposed change would not provide any exemption in 2014 .
Thune and a dozen other senators are pushing a bill to bar the administration from exempting unions . Thune 's office said that the senator is concerned the exemptions in 2015 and 2016 will end up forcing other self-insured plans to pay more .
The proposal in the Federal Register appeared to signal this possibility . The proposal said that the Department of Health and Human Services decided not to make any changes for 2014 because it would mean rates `` would have to be raised for other contributing entities . ''
Asked for clarification on how the change would affect other plans ' rates and fees for 2015 and 2016 , the HHS official said `` it is true that the fee will be higher for plans that do have to pay the fee in 2015 because some plans are exempt . ''