A Bay Area Assemblyman got an earful last week as he pushed a largely symbolic bill that would have made it legal for California public employees to be members of the Communist Party . Rob Bonta of Oakland contritely withdrew the measure , which had passed out of committee , after leaders from the state ’ s large Vietnamese community gave him an earful .
I know of no public employee who had been fired for such membership , or for virtually any reason for that matter . Nevertheless , conservatives took the bait and one mentioned the threat from North Korean and Chinese communists . But it ’ s not like they are flooding the Department of General Services with job applications . It was typical Sacramento , as Democrats introduce meaningless legislation designed to burnish their progressive credentials .
As I argued in my Orange County Register column , California has many problems — none of which are the doing of avowed communists in state government . Instead of worrying about this nonsense , Republicans should be gearing up to fight a frightening Bonta-coauthored bill that makes no direct reference to communism , but apparently was inspired by the same kind of thinking despite its benign name , “ The Healthy California Act . ”
The legislation would toss out our existing , quasi-private health care marketplace and replace it with a mandatory , universal single-payer system . Everyone would get “ free ” health care — even people residing in the state illegally . It would create a new state bureaucracy run by a nine-member panel appointed by legislators and which includes union members . Legislators proudly declared that the bill would make health care in California a “ right . ”
This is crazy stuff , but it easily passed out of the Senate health committee . And support for Senate Bill 562 or something like it is becoming a line in the sand for Democrats . At the Democratic Party convention last weekend , the big news was the hundreds of activists who lobbied the party to embrace a single-payer plan . Even the foul-mouthed outgoing chairman of the party John Burton told the demonstrators to shut the f * * * up or go outside . Burton is a San Francisco lefty , showing just how far to the Left the state party keeps going .
OK , it ’ s not going to become law anytime soon . Elements of the hastily drafted bill would need to go before voters , and it ’ s unlikely that even Californians would toss aside their health care and dive into the deep unknown . Coloradans rejected a similar single-payer ballot measure at the polls last November by 79 percent to 21 percent . Gov . Jerry Brown has expressed skepticism about the idea . But this is indeed the next “ big ” thing here .
The most telling part of the debate came early in the week when the Senate Appropriations Committee released a staff report analyzing the costs of the bill in anticipation of a committee vote . Even in this land of free money , the report ’ s conclusions were stunning — and enough to send the bill to the “ suspense ” file for further financial review .
According to the appropriations committee report , this legislation would have annual costs of about $ 400 billion . For perspective , the total state general-fund budget — already an exercise in waste and excess — is $ 124 billion . One piece of legislation would more than triple the budget . It ’ s astounding . The bill ’ s advocates argue they would grab existing state , local , and federal medical expenditures , but even that — if the feds approve of the diversion from Medicare , and that ’ s doubtful — would only shave $ 200 billion off the price tag .
The appropriations committee then assumes that California ’ s new health bureaucracy would eliminate $ 100 billion to $ 150 billion in current , private health care spending . That optimistic scenario would still leave a $ 50 billion to $ 100 billion short fall . The analysis admits that its estimates “ are subject to enormous uncertainty. ” Every government program ends up costing multiple times what its designers initially predicted . All this would be paid for by a 15 percent payroll tax — provided there are any businesses foolish enough to remain here after its passage . Not that the bill ’ s backers seem dissuaded by financial realities .
A previous health committee analysis made these obvious points : “ There is likely to be increased utilization of health services over fee-for-service Medi-Cal ” and “ this bill strongly limits the state ’ s ability to control costs. ” Well , yeah . The cost estimates can ’ t possibly factor in the degree of demand that would overwhelm the system . Or the magnet that California would increasingly become for everyone from everywhere . If you ’ re in our state , you ’ d have — as a human right , mind you — access to every health care procedure you demand ( but queue up in line for that operation , which you ’ ll be sure to receive sometime in the next century ) .
Some of the bill ’ s advocates actually argue that putting a bureaucracy in charge of the health market will increase efficiency because it gets rid of the administrative duplication of multiple health plans and agencies . As the Mercury News explained , the bill ’ s primary author , Sen. Ricardo Lara , D-Bell Gardens , “ insisted S.B . 562 would ‘ clamp down ’ on health care costs in several ways , including eliminating the need for insurance companies and their administrative costs and profits . ”
If that ’ s so , then the Soviet economy should have been the model for the world because it eliminated those darn profits ! Obviously , our current government-dominated health care system is no model of free-market economics , but the answer is to make it less bureaucratic and more competitive . These same fans of single-payer will no doubt yell and scream about the evils of monopolies ( which only exist when government grants them but I digress ) , yet think a health care monopoly is wonderful .
Why waste our breath ? A simple Facebook meme says it all : It shows a photo of a bountiful grocery market created by “ evil capitalists exploiting people ’ s hunger ” juxtaposed with a photo of food riots in Venezuela courtesy of “ noble socialists making food a human right. ” I suppose as we die waiting for medical care in this utopian California single-payer health system , we can at least feel happy knowing that we aren ’ t the victims of medical profiteers . Or at least those of us who haven ’ t moved elsewhere .
That this bill has gotten as far as it has is a reminder that the biggest threat to our lives comes not from members of a party devoted to overthrowing our government , but from members of a party who already control our government .