Sebelius has become the face of the Obamacare website mess . | M.Scott Mahaskey/███ Sebelius : 'Hold me accountable '
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said Wednesday that America “ deserves better ” than the botched Obamacare rollout and said she ’ s accountable for fixing HealthCare.gov problems that were far worse than the administration anticipated .
“ You deserve better . I apologize . I ’ m accountable to you for fixing these problems and I ’ m committed to earning your confidence back by fixing the site , ” Sebelius told a House panel .
Even as she took responsibility for the balky rollout , HealthCare.gov was down Wednesday morning , creating a brutal split-screen moment on cable TV that showed the website “ system down ” message and a cabinet secretary under fire .
Her testimony represents a high stakes moment in public perception of the first month of the Obamacare rollout . Sebelius tried to take responsibility for what she herself called a debacle , while sending a message to the American people that the landmark health care law isn ’ t a total disaster .
Sebelius acknowledged , though , the law ’ s messy rollout has hurt the administration ’ s credibility , even as it now assures the public that the Obamacare website should be running smoothly for most users by Nov. 30 .
“ I know there ’ s no confidence in that date until we deliver on that , ” she said .
Sebelius said she won ’ t release signup numbers until mid-November or allow contractors to speak about them until she knows the information is confirmed and reliable . Right now , she acknowledged , even the insurers aren ’ t getting accurate and complete data about their new customers .
“ They [ insurers ] are not getting reliable data all the way through the systems , ” she said . “ The system isn ’ t functioning so we are not getting that reliable data . Insurers who I met with said that is the case . ”
Despite a growing chorus of Republicans calling for Sebelius to resign , no one during the three-and-a-half hour hearing demanded that she quit . Only Rep. Michael Burgess ( R-Texas ) requested that Sebelius call for the resignation of Gary Cohen , the administration official heading the federal exchange office within HHS . Sebelius declined .
But short of demanding that she exit , Republican lawmakers wasted no time ripping into Sebelius at the House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing , her first congressional appearance in months .
“ Over the months leading up to the Oct. 1 launch , the secretary and her colleagues at HHS repeatedly looked us in the eye and testified that everything was on track , ” said chairman Fred Upton ( R-Mich. ) . “ But something happened along the way – either those officials did not know how bad the situation was , or they did not disclose it . ”
Rep. Henry Waxman and other Democrats offered their confidence in Sebelius . “ I would urge my colleagues to stop hyperventilating , ” the California Democrat said . “ The problems with HealthCare.gov are unfortunate and we should investigate them , but they will be fixed . ”
Sebelius has become the face of the Obamacare website mess , and she didn ’ t get the same polite treatment that Marilyn Tavenner , administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services , received Tuesday when she testified before a separate House panel .
Even as the lawmakers questioned her , HealthCare.gov experienced problems because of an outage at a data center hosted by Verizon Terremark — just days after a similar outage took down the system Sunday night . HealthCare.gov is the main portal for coverage in the 36 states that are not running their own health insurance exchanges , and the system also provides key information to the state-run exchanges .