Although the administration expects many enrollees to make their own way to the government ’ s health care website or the state exchanges , the door-to-door effort is aimed at people without computers , email addresses or the wherewithal to show up at health fairs and other enrollment events at Kmarts or grocery stores . Officials say the labor-intensive targeting program , while frustrating , could eventually add thousands of people to the rolls of the insured .
The campaign is staffed by organizations deploying thousands of paid and volunteer canvassers across the country . Planned Parenthood , one of the most aggressive groups , has raised millions of dollars for the effort . It is paying about 400 workers like Ms. Morwin $ 12 an hour . They are knocking on an average of 18,000 doors a day in eight states : Arizona , Colorado , Florida , Georgia , New Mexico , Ohio , Pennsylvania and Texas .
Enroll America , a nonprofit group that is trying to expand the health care rolls , has hired 266 people and recruited 14,000 volunteers to not only canvass neighborhoods but also make calls at phone banks and host events at community colleges in 11 states . The group has also spent $ 7 million to advertise on the Internet .
The efforts are important for Mr. Obama , who has been damaged politically by the initial failures of his health care website . Now , with HealthCare.gov finally working , his administration and outside supporters are racing to meet their goal of signing up seven million people by March 31 . By the end of January , nearly 3.3 million people had enrolled . To the canvassers , at least , the original goal seems a long way off .
Image A map of areas targeted by health insurance canvassers in Broward County , Fla. Credit Planned Parenthood Federation of America
“ Can ’ t sweat the small stuff , not in this biz , ” Ms. Morwin said , after retreating from a run-down rental property on a modest street lined with palm trees in Hollywood , where she was once again informed that the person on her list no longer lived there . “ You see the challenges I have ? ”