The Republicans who attack the Affordable Care Act are so twisted in their vulgar logic that they trip themselves up whenever they seek justification from history . At that warped assembly misnamed the “ Values Voter Summit ” last week , Dr. Ben Carson , an African-American neurosurgeon and Fox News contributor , literally called Obamacare “ the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery. ” Recognizing how odd these words must have sounded coming from a person of color , he doubled down : “ And it is slavery , it is , in a way , slavery , because it is making all of us subservient . ”
When outspoken conservatives look for historical analogies in support of their “ Obamascare ” tactics , they always seem to herald their imagined outrage over American slavery . Former Speaker of the New Hampshire House of Representatives William O ’ Brien has compared healthcare reform to the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 . Is granting Americans the right to buy health insurance as destructive to “ personal and individual liberty ” as federal agents being forced to recapture slaves and return them to their southern masters ? When asked to defend his remarks , O ’ Brien later added that both laws allowed the federal government to “ go into states and order individuals and state governments to enforce federal laws in the states. ” ( He foolishly thinks that states can pick and choose which federal laws they will enforce . )
Both Dr. Carson and Speaker O ’ Brien reflect the conservative impulse to exploit people ’ s fears by making anathema what is actually humane progress . They routinely deny actual historical experience and abandon coherent logic . In his speech yesterday , Carson casually segued from slavery to Leninism–yes , it was Lenin , he stressed , who pronounced that socialized medicine was the “ keystone ” to full-blown socialism .
Whatever smacks of “ government takeover ” is fair game for these guys , knowing that fear is currency and media distortions their sure-fire means of controlling minds that are the most susceptible . Which is why they accuse the president of doing what they , in fact , are doing . Carson railed : “ It was never about healthcare ; it was about control. ” Really ? That was President Obama ’ s motive in 2008 and 2009 ?
Is it historical amnesia or something more sinister when conservatives liken healthcare to tyranny and slavery and servitude ? Here ’ s the clownish Sarah Palin on Fox News : “ What Barack Obama seems to want is to go back before those days when we were in different classes based on different incomes , based on color of skin . ”
Yes , Sarah , it ’ s President Obama who wants to return us to the pre-Civil War era , when slavery , racial discrimination , and individual rights were based on the legal definition of whiteness . By her reasoning , the Affordable Care Act returns him to a subordinate status , one of the class of non-citizens who were denied equal rights–let alone high office . The analogy is utterly racist . Ms. Palin and all the sheep-like , tea-besotted haters who take in this garbage are unable to escape their netherworld . The fact is that no one has to return the United States to an era “ when we were different classes , ” as she puts it , because we have a thriving and unequal class system right now . It is based on the concentration of wealth within giant corporations ; it is reflected in the riches that allow CEOs and paid lobbyists to make government policy . Our unequal class system enables the ruling elite class–the only people who could directly identify with Mitt Romney–to pay a lower tax rate than schoolteachers and nurses .
The Affordable Care Act is indeed about class difference , but not in the way the Republican talking heads pretend . Obamacare aims to help those regular , hardworking people whom Republicans dismiss as deadbeats . New Hampshire ’ s motto “ Live free or die ” can be construed as the Republicans ’ “ survival of the fittest ” ideology : those who hate Affordable Care evidently intend for financially strapped Americans , debtors , the sick with hospital bills , the poor without insurance , to sink or swim . By professing that America ’ s healthcare system is being ruined by Romneycare , Obamacare , or whatever you want to call it , these critics are saying that people who have insurance should not give a hoot about those without it .
Still , the slavery comparison remains the most perverse example of the conservative rewrite of our past amid the Obamacare debate . The Nation reported that Louisiana Representative John Fleming was on a radio call-in show earlier this month when a listener asked him whether the Republican crusade to stop Obamacare resembled earlier Republicans ’ struggle against slavery and segregation . “ Precisely correct , ” replied Fleming . Even the historically informed conservative columnist George Will analogized Obamacare to the Fugitive Slave Act , as if the two were comparable on moral grounds .
Ted Cruz goes a step further . He claims that only the South can save American freedom and defeat Obamacare . And why does the Texas Senator resent the handful of Republicans from outside the South who have clamored for an end to the government shutdown ? Because for southern politicians , still steeped in a nostalgia for the unequal , impoverished Confederacy , the government shutdown is a stand-in for secession . We all know where the greatest poverty is to be found . It ’ s in the Southern states–where federal programs stand to do the most good . So , killing Obamacare does nothing to revive the cause of the Republican Party of Lincoln in its formative struggle against slavery . Rather , protesting Obama is a clarion call for the revival of the southern-based Democratic Party of yore , whose avowed enemy were those they called the “ Black Republicans. ” To put it another way , today ’ s southern-led Republicans are re-instituting the “ Lost Cause ” of the Confederacy : even though they lost the 2012 election to Obama ( which was a proxy civil war ) , they persist in claiming that their battle continues to be fought through social policy .
So , if you want a proper analogy to the Civil War era that explains why Republicans hate Obamacare , it is to be found in the controversy over the post-bellum Freedmen ’ s Bureau . This was the program that helped displaced slaves and poor whites , the two groups whom former Confederates feared would cut into their entrenched power if given the opportunity to exercise “ personal liberty. ” Empowering former slaves served to weaken the racial division that the powerful planters cultivated by upholding the morality of the slavery system . Empowering landless whites threatened to shift the balance of political power to the northern-inspired federal government . This is what the Republicans who follow the Texan Cruz worry about : if struggling middle-class and working-class whites ( especially in the South ) see the benefits of the Affordable Care Act , then the Republican Party ’ s southern strategy will collapse . Here ’ s the thing : Only by keeping white Republicans angry at the federal government can they keep their fragile coalition together .
Misuse of the slavery metaphor is nothing new . The original Tea Party protesters , in Boston in 1773 , disguised themselves as Native Americans when they boarded East India Tea Company ships and dumped its cargo . They were not identifying with real Indians , any more than today ’ s Republicans have a legitimate connection to the abolitionists of the 1850s . The Boston patriots compared themselves to slaves , too . In fact , their highly effective rhetoric exceeded today ’ s Tea Partiers : “ My sons scorn to be slaves ! ” pronounced a Son of Liberty . Or even better : “ Shall we tamely suffer the pestilential breath of tyrants to approach the garden of our fathers and blast the fruit of their labours ? ” Southerners claiming to fear that British tax policy would lead to their “ enslavement ” were taunted by the English wit Samuel Johnson , who charged in 1775 that the “ loudest yelps for liberty ” were issuing from the actual “ drivers of negroes . ”
In his draft of the Declaration of Independence , Thomas Jefferson blamed King George for forcing Americans to trade in slaves . All the while , Jefferson ’ s landowning Virginia peers lived like aristocrats in the midst of a voiceless mass of landless white tenant farmers . So that has always been the game : you turn slavery on its head , teaching the less privileged whites who are truly oppressed to spout your language of blame . A nasty , cruel , tax-mad distant authority is exploiting you . Today , it ’ s the “ pestilential breath ” of the Kenyan King , imposing his tyranny upon ordinary Americans–if you ’ re following the conservatives ’ script .
If freedom-worshipping Republicans really want to rescue the aggrieved who are being “ enslaved ” by Obamacare , they should organize a new underground railroad and , like their 19th-century forebears , smuggle those good folks into Canada . Oh wait , don ’ t they have universal government healthcare up there ?