Update 5 p.m . ET : Pennsylvania Eastern District Judge Wendy Beetlestone has issued a nationwide injunction , blocking the Trump administration ’ s birth control rules from taking effect anywhere in the country , citing concerns that states could be impacted by fallout associated with residents losing contraceptive coverage .
In a statement , HHS spokeswoman Caitlin Oakley said the rules “ affirm the Trump Administration ’ s commitment to upholding the freedoms afforded all Americans under our Constitution. ” Original post below .
As of Monday , employers in 37 states are no longer mandated by law to provide birth control coverage for their workers , thanks to new rules rolled out by the Trump administration . The guidelines will not go into effect in 13 other states and the District of Columbia , after a judge in Oakland , California , blocked implementation hours before the rules were set to take effect .
The government has said the new rules “ protect a narrow class of sincere religious and moral objectors , ” but advocates like Planned Parenthood say the rules threaten birth control access for tens of millions of women who gained coverage when the ACA went into effect .
Under the Affordable Care Act , employers were required to offer birth control coverage to their employees at no additional cost . Religious organizations that objected were previously exempt from providing coverage , but the Trump administration broadened the provisions to exempt any employers with either religious or “ moral convictions ” that would preclude them from offering birth control coverage .
The state of California sued to prevent the rules from going into effect . On Sunday , Judge Haywood Gilliam granted an injunction to those states that joined California ’ s suit — Connecticut , Delaware , Hawaii , Illinois , Maryland , Minnesota , New York , North Carolina , Rhode Island , Vermont , Washington , Virginia , plus the District of Columbia — but he declined to block the rules nationwide .
Gilliam acknowledged that the ruling meant women in states not covered by the injunction could lose birth control coverage , but said the “ high threshold ” needed to implement a nationwide injunction wasn ’ t met .
Nevertheless , California Attorney General Xavier Becerra hailed the decision in a statement Sunday . “ The law couldn ’ t be more clear — employers have no business interfering in women ’ s health care decisions , ” Becerra said . “ Today ’ s court ruling stops another attempt by the Trump Administration to trample on women ’ s access to basic reproductive care . It ’ s 2019 , yet the Trump Administration is still trying to roll back women ’ s rights . Our coalition will continue to fight to ensure women have access to the reproductive healthcare they are guaranteed under the law . ”
Courts previously blocked a similar rule the Trump administration attempted to implement back in 2017 .