One day after the Health Insurance Marketplace closed for its longest maintenance work yet , the government announced the Obamacare website will be unavailable to applicants every night — with additional down times to be determined .
`` The Health Insurance Marketplace online application is n't available from approximately 1 a.m. to 5 a.m. EST daily while we make improvements . Additional down times may be possible as we work to make things better . The rest of the site and the Marketplace call center remain available during these hours . ''
The pressure to mend the failing system is on . President Obama selected former CEO Jeffrey Zients , now a White House economics advisor , to head a “ tech surge ” to repair the site . The team is confident it will have the site running smoothly for the “ vast majority of users ” by the end of November .
Some argue the site should not be operating at all until all technical bugs have been squashed .
“ It 's pretty clear I think to those of us that have been watching this roll out that the technological base was not sufficient….I said this directly to the president 's chief of staff , they ought to take down the website until it was right , ” Senator Dianne Feinstein ( D-CA . ) said on CBS ’ Face the Nation Sunday .
Republican Representative Mike Rogers ( R-MI . ) expressed similar sentiments to CBS :
“ Here 's the problem . They 're trying to change a tire on a car going 75 miles an hour down the expressway . That 's not the way cyber security works . And unfortunately , both Diane and I both know the real threats to these systems when you have nation states , organized crime groups and criminals trying to get information that is now available on these websites . They need to take the site down , stabilize it -- meaning they ca n't continue to add code… ”
Security seems to be a growing concern . Insurance companies have already reported flawed incoming enrollment data such as duplicate forms , missing fields and spouses listed as children .
Additionally , a security breach was disclosed this week by a man from North Carolina . As reported by the Heritage Foundation :
Justin Hadley logged on to HealthCare.gov to evaluate his insurance options after his health plan was canceled . What he discovered was an apparent security flaw that disclosed eligibility letters addressed to individuals from another state . “ I was in complete shock , ” said Hadley , who contacted Heritage after becoming alarmed at the breach of privacy .
The government is taking liberties with personal information in a way that private corporations would never dare , according to Rep. Rogers :
“ Amazon would never do this . ProFlowers would never do this . Kayak would never do this . This is completely an unacceptable level of security . ”
Questionably unsafe and indisputably glitch-laden , HealthCare.gov has already consumed over $ 500 million in taxpayer money — how many more resources must it be fed before it ’ s secure and operating ?