FILE - In this March 25 , 2015 file photo , Margot Riphagen of New Orleans , La. , wears a birth control pills costume during a protest in front of the U.S. Supreme Court in Washington . A U.S. judge will hear arguments Friday , Jan. 11 , 2019 , over California 's attempt to block new rules by the Trump administration that would allow more employers to opt out of providing no-cost birth control to women . The new rules are set to go into effect on Monday , Jan. 14 , 2019 . ( AP Photo/Charles Dharapak , File )
FILE - In this March 25 , 2015 file photo , Margot Riphagen of New Orleans , La. , wears a birth control pills costume during a protest in front of the U.S. Supreme Court in Washington . A U.S. judge will hear arguments Friday , Jan. 11 , 2019 , over California 's attempt to block new rules by the Trump administration that would allow more employers to opt out of providing no-cost birth control to women . The new rules are set to go into effect on Monday , Jan. 14 , 2019 . ( AP Photo/Charles Dharapak , File )
HARRISBURG , Pa. ( AP ) — A federal judge on Monday put a nationwide hold on Trump administration rules that allow more employers to opt out of providing women with no-cost birth control .
U.S. District Judge Wendy Beetlestone in Philadelphia agreed with a lawsuit originally filed by Pennsylvania , citing the potential harm to states should the rules be enforced .
Numerous citizens could lose contraceptive coverage , Beetlestone wrote , resulting in the increased use of state-funded contraceptive services , as well as increased costs to state services from unintended pregnancies .
The rules , scheduled to take effect Monday , would change a mandate under 2010′s Affordable Care Act by allowing more employers , including publicly traded companies , to opt out of providing no-cost contraceptive coverage to women by claiming religious objections . Some private employers could also now object on moral grounds .
Pennsylvania ’ s attorney general , Josh Shapiro , called the court ruling a “ victory for the health and economic independence of women ” and the rejection of a Trump administration move to violate a federal law that requires insurers to cover the services .
“ Congress hasn ’ t changed that law , and the president can ’ t simply ignore it with an illegal rule , ” Shapiro said .
In issuing the injunction , Beetlestone wrote in her opinion that the states were likely to win their lawsuit ’ s claims that Trump ’ s administration violated procedural requirements for how regulations must be created and that the rules exceed the scope of authority under the Affordable Care Act .
The Department of Justice did not say whether it would appeal , saying only that it will “ continue to vigorously defend religious liberty. ” The Department of Health and Human Services said the rules affirm the administration ’ s commitment to upholding constitutional freedoms .
“ No American should be forced to violate his or her own conscience in order to abide by the laws and regulations governing our health care system , ” Health and Human Services Department spokeswoman Caitlin Oakley said in a statement .
On Sunday , a federal judge in California blocked the rules from taking effect in the jurisdictions in the lawsuit before him . Those included California , New York and 11 other states along with Washington , D.C .
At issue is a requirement under former Democratic President Barack Obama ’ s health care law that birth control services be covered at no additional cost .
Obama officials included exemptions for religious organizations . But the administration of President Donald Trump , a Republican , sought to expand those exemptions and added “ moral convictions ” as a basis to opt out of providing birth control services .
The Justice Department has argued that the new rules “ protect a narrow class of sincere religious and moral objectors from being forced to facilitate practices that conflict with their beliefs . ”
Beetlestone had previously blocked an interim version of the rules in a December 2017 ruling . In November , the Trump administration rolled out a final version of the rule , prompting another challenge by states .