New Silicon Valley recruits part of `` tech surge '' to fix HealthCare.gov site .
WASHINGTON — An engineer from technology giant Google has been recruited to help fix HealthCare.gov , the new federal insurance exchange website .
Software companies Red Hat and Oracle will also assist , according to Julie Bataille , spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , which has coordinated the development of the site that has experienced numerous problems in its first month of operations .
`` As part of the 'Tech Surge , ' we 've added key personnel from the government and private sector , including expert engineers and technology managers , '' Bataille wrote in a blog item posted Thursday . `` These dozens of people are strengthening and reinforcing the team we have working 24/7 to address the problems around HealthCare.gov . ''
During a question-and-answer session at Oracle 's shareholders ' meeting today , CEO Larry Ellison said the database giant `` thinks it is our responsibility as a technology provider in the technology industry to serve all of our customers , and the federal government is one of our customers , so we are helping them in every way we can . ''
`` Most of us want to see our government operating efficiently and effectively , and it is incumbent upon us to help them do that , '' Ellison said .
Michael Dickerson , a site reliability engineer at Google , has taken leave to help rid the federal exchange of its glitches . Greg Gershman , a former Presidential Innovation Fellow and Baltimore software engineer , will help with creating better user experiences .
As a fellow , Gershman worked to make it easier for outsiders , rather than government employees , to navigate the 1,200 websites with federal government information .
Dickerson is working with QSSI , the general contractor coordinating the fixes to the site , Bataille wrote . Gershman is working with CGI Federal , the site 's largest contractor , `` to improve HealthCare.gov 's performance , and helping the development process be more agile so HealthCare.gov can release improvements more rapidly , '' Bataille wrote .
Thursday 's announcement came as a frustrated group of Senate Democrats vented their ongoing concerns about the rollout during a private meeting with White House officials , including chief of staff Denis McDonough , Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Administrator Marilyn Tavenner , and Jeffrey Zients , whom President Obama tapped to fix the problems with HealthCare.gov .
`` I 'm extraordinarily frustrated , '' said Sen. Jeff Merkley , D-Ore. `` I do n't think there 's confidence from anyone in the room . This is more a show-me moment . ''
Merkley said there is support from senators like himself for extending the enrollment period to make up for the glitch-riddled rollout .
`` Many of us feel there has to be a sufficient window for citizens to be able to exercise their judgment in signing up , '' Merkley said , `` Citizens need to have that window . If there is this kind of delay on the front end , I certainly am advocating that we need to extend the window on the back end . ''
Sen. Mark Begich , D-Alaska , said he could also support a short-term extension for a few weeks to make up for the first three-to-four weeks of enrollment . `` I do n't think we need to go further than that . '' Begich also stressed that citizens are not being prevented from signing up . `` Right now if people want to apply , they can , '' he said .
Senate Majority Whip Richard Durbin , D-Ill. , said the White House officials assured wary senators that the site would be fully operational by the Nov. 30 target . `` The administration has a plan , '' Durbin said . `` They 're taking the basic architecture of this and improving it and trying to make up for some of the problems that they 've had . ''
McDonough was tight-lipped when asked if they successfully assuaged Democrats ' concerns . `` I think we had a really good discussion , '' he said .
Merkley was more candid . `` We were all confident the system was going to up and operating by Oct. 1 and now we 're not confident until it 's real . ''