Sebelius Calls For Review Of HHS Practices That Led To Debacle
Those are the words of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , published Wednesday just before she met with people who share those views : members of the House Energy and Commerce Committee .
With her agency under fire since the website 's failed release last month , Sebelius announced an internal inquiry and other steps that will focus on improving the contracting process , project management and employee training .
`` I believe strongly in the need for accountability , and in the importance of being good stewards of taxpayer dollars , '' Sebelius wrote in a blog post ahead of the hearing .
Those dollars run in the billions . With the agency 's Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services division spending $ 5.3 billion on contracts in 2013 , Sebelius said , HHS is the third-largest contracting agency in the federal government .
Sebelius wrote that `` structural and managerial policies '' led to the flawed website 's launch . And to prevent a repeat of the problems , she laid out three steps :
Asking HHS Inspector General Dan Levinson to review the development of HealthCare.gov , focusing on how the contractors were chosen , program management and contractor performance , in addition to payment issues .
Creating a new position of CMS chief risk officer , who will focus on mitigating risk across CMS 's programs . Sebelius will seek recommendations from the risk officer within two months .
Update training for CMS employees on best practices for contractor and procurement management , rules and procedures .
`` The administration originally hoped to have 500,000 people enrolling in coverage in October alone , '' NPR 's Scott Horsley reported this morning . `` As it is , there were only about 365,000 enrolled by the end of November . ''
The Associated Press reports that as a result of the new system , `` an additional 803,077 people have been determined to be eligible for Medicaid , the safety-net program shaping up as the health overhaul 's early success story . ''
The website 's problems , and the new health care system 's unwelcome changes to some Americans ' policies , have exposed Sebelius to regular criticism from Republicans and Democrats in Congress .
Sebelius faced a barrage of questions from the House Energy and Commerce Committee , in a session that sometimes saw members yelling over one another .
One heated exchange took place with Rep. John Shimkus , R-Ill. , who was eventually upbraided by his colleagues for peppering the HHS secretary with questions and not allowing her time to respond .
Shimkus said the new federal system is putting an undue burden on Medicaid . He also sought a promise from Sebelius to provide a list of insurance policies that include abortion coverage ( a topic he 's asked her about before ) .
As Sebelius sought to answer his questions , Shimkus responded by saying , `` It 's like talking to the Republic of Korea or something . ''
That remark might raise eyebrows in South Korea , the U.S. ally whose formal name Shimkus invoked . We presume he meant to allude to the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea , the famously opaque and enigmatic country known as North Korea .
Soon afterward , Shimkus ' questioning was ended by the rapping of the chairman 's gavel , as his time had expired .
The last time Sebelius appeared before the same panel , at the end of October , the HealthCare.gov website was found to have crashed .
Sebelius is in a complicated situation , in which she seemingly remains in good standing with President Obama even as her agency endures criticism from the White House .
As Politico notes , `` when Jeff Zients , the management consultant the White House recruited to head the website repair efforts , declared the fixes largely successful at the end of November , he suggested his team had discovered 'weaknesses in how the project was being managed ' — comments that were hard not to read as a slap at the oversight that took place under Sebelius , or at least on her watch . ''