███ Pro How not to count to 7 million Behind the Obamacare numbers mixup .
Controversy over inflated Obamacare enrollment numbers has renewed demands for the administration to be far more open about sign-up data and other crucial aspects of the health care law .
And it ’ s not just Republican opponents on the Hill insisting on change : Consumer groups , health experts and even strong Obamacare advocates are pushing for the administration to be more forthcoming . Journalists have also voiced frustration over the lack of timely and complete enrollment reports from a White House that pledged to be transparent .
“ Everybody needs the data , ” said Betsy Imholz , special projects director at Consumers Union . “ Out in the real world , what we want is regular , transparent data so we can make good policy choices going forward — snapshots in time regularly . ”
House Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa ’ s committee revealed Thursday that nearly 400,000 dental plans were included in recent enrollment figures that made it appear — wrongly — that the administration had hit the 7 million target for Obamacare ’ s first year . The panel has called CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner and former Obamacare adviser Jonathan Gruber — the center of a separate flare-up over the law ’ s passage — to testify next month about the “ repeated transparency failures and outright deceptions . ”
The second season of Obamacare began last Saturday , and there ’ s been no enrollment update since Sunday morning , when HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell tweeted that there were more than half a million log-ins on HealthCare.gov on the first day and that 100,000 applications were submitted .
By contrast , several of the 13 health insurance exchanges run by states have been regularly releasing traffic and enrollment-related data . Massachusetts is issuing daily traffic counts .
CMS declined to provide an enrollment update Friday afternoon . The agency has said it would provide detailed monthly reports of plan selection , although that would fall far short of a detailed list of suggestions that the Association of Health Care Journalists sent to the agency in late October . The group requested weekly or biweekly releases with more granular data than last year ’ s reports provided .
Federal health officials have yet to fully explain the nature of what Burwell said Thursday was an “ unacceptable ” mistake in including the dental plan data in the August and October enrollment totals .
But in a letter to Issa , Tavenner suggested Thursday that part of the problem was the still unfinished back end of HealthCare.gov — the part that communicates with insurance companies . The insurers generally have more reliable data on the number of people paying premiums , and Tavenner acknowledged as much .
“ [ O ] nce the automated system for effectuated enrollment is functional , [ CMS ] will be able to more easily report the number who has paid their premiums , ” Tavenner wrote .
Yet the administration seemed able to turn the numbers around pretty quickly when Obamacare ’ s initial drama started turning around .
“ Once HealthCare.gov started rocking in the early months of 2014 , HHS eased up a bit , blasting out releases on key mileposts as they reached them , ” Erik Wemple wrote in The Washington Post this week . “ In February and March , enrollment hit 4 million and 5 million , respectively , and HHS saw no need to wait weeks to tell the public . ”
The agency ’ s record on transparency with the health care law has been uneven at best .
During the month after the disastrous rollout of HealthCare.gov last October , for instance , HHS was virtually a black box — except for when it released faulty information , such as its initial explanation that the website ’ s main problem was too much traffic by an eager public .
As the administration ’ s emergency “ tech surge ” began to salvage the failing site , HHS pivoted sharply , holding near-daily conference calls with reporters to update repair progress .
Data disclosure continued to lag , however ; the administration refused to release any figures for more than two months . In December , it began giving detailed monthly reports . Those stopped after May and the close of the regular enrollment season — until the brief flawed announcement from Tavenner before a congressional panel in September .
“ A mistake was made in calculating the number of individuals with effectuated Marketplace enrollments . While there were 7.3 million effectuated enrollments , approximately 393,000 individuals had both Marketplace medical and dental coverage as of August 15 , 2014 , ” Tavenner noted in her letter to Issa .
The mistake was repeated in a November update . CMS now says 6.7 million had private Obamacare coverage as of Oct. 15 .
The agency does have highly detailed enrollment data for other health programs it oversees , including Medicare Advantage and Part D prescription drug coverage for seniors , although Capitol Street Managing Director Ipsita Smolinski said , “ It ’ s kind of apples and oranges ” to compare data from the exchanges and those programs .
Yet if that kind of information was public for Obamacare , data discrepancies like the one that emerged Thursday would be more easily identified , said Larry Levitt of the Kaiser Family Foundation .
“ This could raise broader questions about whether detailed enrollment data by insurer and plan should be made public or kept confidential because it is proprietary , ” he said .
But it took some time before such detailed data became available for the Medicare prescription drug program , and the federal system handling Obamacare is not even finished .
“ I don ’ t think it ’ s sinister , ” Imholz said . “ I just think it ’ s so complex and evolving ; I just think we ’ re at the beginning of the process . ”