The Supreme Court announced on Monday that it will hear California v. Texas and United States House of Representatives v. Texas , two consolidated cases that represent an existential threat to Obamacare , and that were brought by a coalition of Republican-governed states . For the third time since President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act in 2010 , the justices will hear a lawsuit seeking to eviscerate the legislation .
Texas turns on Congress ’ s decision to repeal Obamacare ’ s individual mandate . As originally enacted , the Affordable Care Act requires most Americans to either obtain health insurance or pay higher taxes . The tax law President Donald Trump signed in 2017 reduces the amount of that tax to zero .
Because the Supreme Court upheld the fully functional mandate as a valid exercise of Congress ’ s power to tax in 2012 , the Texas plaintiffs argue that the zeroed-out version of the mandate is unconstitutional — how can something be a tax if it raises no money whatsoever ? They also claim that the entire Affordable Care Act must fall if the deactivated mandate is unconstitutional .
The Republican legal arguments against Obamacare in this case are widely viewed as ridiculous , even by many lawyers and scholars who spent much of the last decade trying to convince the courts to repeal President Obama ’ s signature achievement .
Jonathan Adler , a conservative law professor — and a leading evangelist for an earlier lawsuit seeking to undercut the Affordable Care Act by reading a poorly drafted provision of the law to cut off much of the act ’ s funding — labeled many of the red states ’ arguments “ implausible , ” “ hard to justify , ” and “ surprisingly weak. ” The Wall Street Journal ’ s editorial board labeled this lawsuit the “ Texas Obamacare Blunder. ” Yuval Levin , a prominent conservative policy wonk , wrote in the National Review that the Texas lawsuit “ doesn ’ t even merit being called silly . It ’ s ridiculous . ”
And yet , the lawsuit has received very favorable treatment from Republican federal judges . Judge Reed O ’ Connor , a former Republican Senate staffer turned district judge , ordered the whole Affordable Care Act repealed in its entirety . Two Republican federal appeals court judges reached a somewhat more mild conclusion — striking down a small portion of the law and then sending the case back down to O ’ Connor to reconsider which other provisions should fall . But , while that holding creates more work for Judge O ’ Connor , he remains likely to kill as much of the law as he can .
In addition to weighing the merits of the plaintiffs ’ arguments , the Supreme Court will need to consider whether any federal court has jurisdiction to hear this case . As a general rule , no one is allowed to challenge a law in federal court unless they can show they were injured by that law . Because the zeroed-out mandate does nothing , it ’ s highly doubtful that anyone is allowed to challenge it .
Assuming that President Trump does not get to replace any of the current justices , the Supreme Court is unlikely to agree with the lower-court judges who ruled against Obamacare . Chief Justice John Roberts twice broke with his conservative colleagues in lawsuits attacking Obamacare , and Roberts is especially likely to reject the Texas plaintiffs ’ legal arguments . But , so long as this lawsuit exists , it remains a threat to Obamacare . And there is no guarantee that the court ’ s membership will not change .
As noted above , the Affordable Care Act originally required most Americans to either carry insurance or pay higher taxes . The Supreme Court famously upheld this provision , known as the “ individual mandate , ” as a valid exercise of Congress ’ power to levy taxes in NFIB v. Sebelius ( 2012 ) .
Congressional Republicans spent much of 2017 debating various plans to repeal Obamacare , but they ultimately did not have the votes for a broad repeal . They did , however , manage to repeal the individual mandate in the 2017 tax legislation . Though the United States Code still contains Obamacare ’ s language requiring individuals to pay a tax penalty if they do not have insurance , the amount of that penalty is now zero dollars .
The Texas plaintiffs claim that this shell of a mandate is unconstitutional . The fully functional mandate was constitutional because it is a tax , but a zero dollar tax is no tax at all . So the Texas plaintiffs argue that it must be unconstitutional .
That ’ s not a frivolous argument , but so what ? The zeroed mandate already does nothing . So who cares if a provision of the law that literally does nothing at all is constitutional or not ?
To achieve anything meaningful , the Texas plaintiffs don ’ t just need to convince the courts that a nothingburger mandate is unconstitutional . They also have to get a majority of the justices to embrace two other arguments : the claim that the Texas plaintiffs may challenge a legal provision that does nothing and the claim that the entire Affordable Care Act must fall . That , as Levin wrote , is utterly ridiculous .
By conventional standards , no federal court should be allowed to hear this case
Before anyone is allowed to challenge a law in federal court , they must show that they ’ ve been injured in some way by that law — a requirement known as “ standing. ” That alone should be enough to doom the Texas litigation . Because the plaintiffs challenge a provision that does nothing at all , no one is injured by it . So no one has standing .
The plaintiffs argue they can get around this problem by pointing to the way Obamacare ’ s language laying out the individual mandate is structured . The first subsection of that language says that most individuals “ shall ” carry health insurance ; the second says that people who don ’ t buy insurance pay a tax penalty ; the third sets the amount of that penalty — which , again , is now zero dollars .
Although the penalty for not buying insurance is nothing , the plaintiffs claim that individuals are still bound by the language saying that they “ shall ” carry insurance — and therefore are injured by a law that commands them to do something they don ’ t want to do .
The biggest problem with this argument is that it runs counter to the Supreme Court ’ s decision in NFIB , the decision upholding the fully functional individual mandate . As Chief Justice Roberts explained :
Neither the Act nor any other law attaches negative legal consequences to not buying health insurance , beyond requiring a payment to the IRS . The Government agrees with that reading , confirming that if someone chooses to pay rather than obtain health insurance , they have fully complied with the law .
Thus , the Supreme Court explicitly rejected the Texas plaintiffs ’ argument that they are bound by a command to buy insurance . There are no “ negative legal consequences to not buying health insurance ” except having to pay a tax penalty . Anyone who pays that penalty has “ fully complied with the law. ” And the amount of that penalty , in case this isn ’ t already clear , is now zero dollars .
But let ’ s assume , for a moment , that these plaintiffs have the standing to challenge a law that does nothing . Let ’ s also assume that the ex-mandate is unconstitutional . What then ?
When a court strikes down one provision of a broader statute , it often must ask whether other provisions of the statute must fall along with it . This inquiry is called “ severability , ” and it ’ s typically a speculative inquiry . Courts ask which hypothetical law Congress would have enacted if it had known that a particular provision was invalid .
There ’ s no need to speculate in Texas , however , because Congress already answered this question . Lawmakers spent most of 2017 debating how much of the Affordable Care Act to repeal . Ultimately , they only had the votes to repeal one provision , the individual mandate , while leaving the rest of the law intact . So we know that Congress would have enacted a law that eliminated the individual mandate and kept the rest of the law because Congress enacted a law that eliminated the individual mandate and kept the rest of the law .
This conclusion is bolstered by the Supreme Court ’ s decision in Murphy v. NCAA ( 2018 ) , which held that courts should apply a very strong presumption against striking additional provisions of a law when one provision is declared unconstitutional . “ In order for other ... provisions to fall , ” Justice Samuel Alito wrote for the Court in Murphy , “ it must be ‘ evident that [ Congress ] would not have enacted those provisions which are within its power , independently of [ those ] which [ are ] not . ’ ”
The question facing the Supreme Court now , in other words , is whether the Court will apply its ordinary standing rules as well as the rule it announced in Murphy , in a politically charged case involving a law that Republicans hate above all others . Roberts has twice signaled that he is not willing to embrace dubious legal claims in order to undercut Obamacare , so the Texas plaintiffs are unlikely to prevail .
But if Trump gets to fill another Supreme Court seat , all bets are off .