So now it turns out Obama knew that 93 million Americans would have their health insurance canceled the whole time he was claiming , `` If you like your insurance , you can keep it . Period . ''
Obama lied . Period . `` Hope and Change '' was actually `` A Sucker Is Born Every Minute . ''
Even without the 2010 Health and Human Services ( HHS ) report admitting that 93 million Americans would lose their health insurance , anyone with half a brain ( which is a pre-existing condition ) knew that millions of Americans would be thrown off their insurance plans under Obamacare . Under the law , HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius is to determine what every health insurance plan must cover -- and any plans that do n't are illegal .
As a result , gay guys are now going to be forced to buy plans that cover maternity care . Mormons will have to buy plans that cover gambling addiction therapy . Elderly couples can buy only insurance that includes pediatric dental care . Catholic hospitals will be required to provide birth control and abortions .
Our federal overseers , led by the arrogant and smug gender-feminist Sebelius , know what 's best for us . ( Which is so nice of her since , as she recently pointed out , she does n't work for us . ) Her idea of flexibility is not requiring Catholic priests to perform abortions . Not yet , anyway .
Obviously , health insurance premiums are going through the roof with all these federal mandates . Michael Tanner of the Cato Institute reports that health insurance premiums will be higher than before Obamacare in at least 45 states -- an astronomical 256 percent higher in some cases . The Los Angeles Times says middle-income families in California will pay 30 percent more for health insurance , even with the subsidies .
Policies are being canceled because your old plan -- the one you shopped for and liked -- is now illegal . It does n't cover Sandra Fluke 's dental dams . Obama is blaming the insurance companies for discontinuing policies that he made illegal . ( At least he is n't blaming the cancellations on a guy who put a movie trailer on the Internet this time . )
Is n't it your basic duty as a caring human being to buy an expensive health care plan you do n't really want ? Because who knows better about the health care needs of 310 million Americans than a smug gender-feminist ? Certainly not you .
And absolutely not your doctor . While campaigning for national health care , our `` Conspiracy Theorist-in-Chief '' repeatedly claimed that a doctor would rather amputate your foot or leg and make $ 50,000 than treat you for diabetes because `` if that same diabetic ends up getting their foot amputated , that 's $ 30,000 , $ 40,000 , $ 50,000 -- immediately the surgeon is reimbursed . '' ( Leaving aside Obama 's unwarranted slander against doctors , Medicare reimburses a surgeon $ 740 to $ 1,140 for a leg amputation . )
Why would you want to keep these psycho doctors anyway ? Trust Kathleen Sebelius . Under Obamacare , you 'll get a nice nurse practitioner to attend to your needs -- provided your needs are limited to birth control and psychotherapy . Meanwhile , your doctor will now be offering shoe repair to make ends meet .
Mickey Kaus , a huge supporter of Obamacare , has reacted to its disastrous implementation on his Kausfiles blog by proposing an `` Obamacare Review Commission to monitor the rollout of the exchanges and recommend significant fixes . ''
Kaus continues : `` This commission could issue periodic warnings -- this software project is n't going fast enough ! Death spiral at 3 o'clock ! CMS staff is n't up to the job ! ... It could suggest that the list of mandated 'essential benefits ' -- including maternity care and pediatric dentistry -- be pared back , which would lower 'sticker shock ' for all . ... Maybe everyone stuck in the individual market should get some subsidy -- $ 100 , $ 200 , $ 400 -- financed by tax dollars . Maybe the lucky 80 percent or so with employer plans should pay more than the current system asks . Maybe de facto temporary subsidies of the insurance industry should be made explicit and permanent . ''
It gives me a headache just thinking about it . But the government is forcing me to think about it .
The best we can hope for is that influence-peddlers and government bureaucrats make wise decisions about our health care , just as they did with Solyndra , Social Security , public education and the Amtrak food service . Oops ! ( Only the government could lose billions of dollars with a monopoly . ) From the people who brought you the Postal Service ... here 's Obamacare !
It 's the homework requirement that is the most annoying aspect of Obamacare . Sure , millions of Americans will lose their health insurance and be forced to buy plans they do n't want . And many , many millions will no longer be able to go to the doctor of their choosing -- or any doctor at all !
But we 've also all been given homework -- mountains of reports , exchanges , insurance plans and mail to study . I 'd prefer a 50 percent tax hike to this forced busy-work under Obamacare .
What if Americans do n't want to spend weeks online figuring out their new insurance options ? What if we do n't want to provide the government with reams of personal information simply to be able to buy health insurance ? What if we just want to pay our doctor directly for a yearly checkup ? Why do we have to examine HHS regulations to find out how much that 's going to cost us in fines and taxes ?
And for what ? Eighty-five percent of Americans were happy with their health care before Obamacare , according to the American Customer Satisfaction Index -- higher than almost any other product or service polled , with even Amazon coming in at 88 percent satisfaction . Even uninsured Americans were as satisfied with their health care as Canadians were with their national health care .
Kausfiles assured us there would be no death panels or benefits cuts under Obamacare because the voters would rise up and punish politicians if they dared cut our benefits !
What about those of us who do n't want to be in a constant state of agitation just to get the health care of our choice ? Not everyone is better off in a world where the pushy win and the quiet and unassuming die because their rare diseases did n't attract a band of noisy lobbyists .
No group of government bureaucrats can substitute for hundreds of millions of Americans making individual choices about their own lives and their own health . It would be as if the government took it upon itself to tell us whom to marry . Only someone who went to Harvard would think central planners should do that .
The smart people in the Soviet Union tried to plan the nation 's agriculture , and the result was 50 years of `` bad weather . '' And they were dealing with inert objects -- land , seeds and crops .
They did n't have to consider whether the fertilizer was a teetotaler who did n't anticipate needing substance abuse therapy or a priest who preferred to skimp on marital counseling insurance .
Our central planners think they can direct something infinitely more complex than farmland : human beings and their individual health needs . Under Obamacare , the pushy and the connected win . Everyone else loses .