The confluence of two pieces of news last week will place Republicans at a moral crossroads -- either by this weekend , or whenever Healthcare.gov can legitimately be described as a `` working '' website .
The first came from Jeffrey Zients -- the Obama administration point person in charge of fixing Healthcare.gov -- who told reporters on Friday that the site will be able to handle 50,000 users at a time and 800,000 users a day by the the end of next week . That 's double the current capacity , and right in time for an expected surge in demand just before the end of the year .
The second came from the pro-reform group Families USA , which examined options available to 15 million people who are currently covered on the individual market ( many of whose policies have been canceled and will lapse by the end of the year ) under the Affordable Care Act .
According to Families USA , over 70 percent of those currently insured will either qualify for premium tax credits on state-based insurance exchanges , or become newly eligible for Medicaid coverage under the healthcare law .
`` Nationally , 71 percent of people in the individual market under age 65 have incomes at or below 400 percent of poverty , '' according to Families USA . `` Under the Affordable Care Act , these people are income-eligible for financial help to purchase an insurance plan , either through new premium tax credit subsidies or through expanded Medicaid . ''
Together that combines all of the ingredients any marketplace needs to be successful :
This is particularly excellent news for the 5-or-so million people whose existing policies are about to lapse . Many of them were n't aware that the Affordable Care Act offered them comparable or better deals . But even if they were , they did n't have easy access to those deals if they lived in states with federally facilitated insurance exchanges . Healthcare.gov 's failure left even the most informed consumers without reliable access to replacement coverage . If the site had been working , the Families USA study suggests most of the people currently facing the prospect of a coverage gap would have actually been able to purchase similar or preferable alternatives right away .
For the past couple of months , the Healthcare.gov failure allowed Republicans to ignore the moral imperative they face to direct these constituents toward new options . The cash registers are n't working , they could tell themselves , so what good would we be doing by directing people to the market anyhow . This was always dodgy logic , but it enjoyed a real sheen of plausibility . And that 's why Republicans have spent most of November soliciting Obamacare horror stories , rather than trying to help the narrators .
A working site that can service nearly a million people a day destroys that excuse . Some conservative groups have been craven and reckless enough to actively discourage people from enrolling in Affordable Care Act coverage . Elected Republicans have generally used their influence more subtly , by drawing attention to the hassles and supposed dangers of using Healthcare.gov . Manipulation vs. direct appeal . They 've also maligned an administrative solution President Obama devised that will allow carriers in some states to reissue canceled policies .
But the real fix for 70 percent ( or so ) of people whose policies have been canceled is to get new , subsidized coverage through exchanges , or to enroll in Medicaid . Once Healthcare.gov is working at high capacity , they 'll owe people with canceled coverage more than just the play-acting they 've offered for the past month .
Democrats will be helping these people find such coverage . Will Republicans ?