Moreover , divisions are emerging over the wisdom of pulling the law out , root and branch . Some Republicans , facing re-election in swing districts , are openly suggesting that some measures should remain .
Others worry that the Republican leadership has yet to detail what the party would replace the health care law with . Representative Nan Hayworth , an ophthalmologist and a freshman Republican from New York , said she and others have a clear framework : bolstered health savings accounts , the option to purchase insurance across state lines , medical malpractice limits and a government-subsidized insurance pool for sick people who can not buy insurance on their own . But those alternatives have not been broadly aired .
“ We need to start expressing our principles promptly , ” she said .
Such concerns are a sharp contrast to the first repeal vote , when a new , vigorous Republican majority was confident that they owed their triumph to voter anger over the health care law . Democrats were on the defensive , with all eyes on which survivors of the 2010 midterm tsunami would switch their votes for the law and embrace repeal . The House voted 245-to-189 to undo President Obama ’ s signature domestic achievement , with three Democrats joining in .
Representative Pete Sessions of Texas , chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee , said the health care law was passed “ with deception at its core ” — a penalty for those who fail to purchase insurance has been unmasked by the Supreme Court as a tax on the middle class . He said he was still convinced that the issue would be “ probably the biggest driver ” ensuring Republican victory in November , outside of the tax increases that could come next year with the expiration of the Bush-era tax cuts .
His deputy at the Republican Congressional Committee , Representative Greg Walden of Oregon , was more circumspect .
“ We ’ re going to be talking about jobs and economy , but there are lots of elements to that discussion , one of them being health care , ” Mr. Walden said .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
Democrats , on the other hand , say they will be playing offense . The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee started an advertising campaign Monday morning portraying Republicans as controlled by insurance companies and intent on taking away the popular consumer protections in the law . A series of news conferences are planned that will include real-life families whom Democrats say would be harmed by repeal .
But they will also frame the repeal vote as a political stunt , taking Congress ’ s time away from job-creating legislation . A video to be released Monday will use Speaker John A. Boehner ’ s oft-repeated phrase , “ Mr . President , where are the jobs ? ” to mock the repeal exercise .
“ There ’ s a strong sense that we don ’ t want to carry on this fight , over and over , ” said former Gov . Tim Kaine of Virginia , a Democrat who is running for the Senate . “ Let ’ s move on . ”
For Republicans in solidly conservative districts — a majority of Republicans in the House — the repeal vote is a no-cost way to energize the base and prove to angry constituents that the fight has not ended .
Representative Patrick McHenry , a Republican from western North Carolina , spoke of “ fire and passion for repeal ” still seething in his district .
“ Activist and average folks regularly bring up full repeal , ” he said . “ They ’ re still keenly aware of it , demand it and understand this law is holding back economic growth . ”
But Republican campaign consultants are more cautious . Those voters are already energized by the prospect of voting against Mr. Obama in November . How a rehashing of the health care debate will affect independent voters is less clear .
Democrats are driving the narrative that voters are ready to move on . Dan Maffei , a former House Democrat from upstate New York who is campaigning to get his seat back , is using the Supreme Court ’ s decision to push the debate toward improving the health care law he helped pass , not whether it should stay or go . To him , another vote — the 30th this Congress has held to repeal or partially repeal the law — is more evidence of the rut Washington is in .
“ They ’ re stuck in this eternal recurrence , rerunning the debate on the bill over and over again instead of moving forward , ” Mr. Maffei said .