Obama is leaning heavily on outside allies to help advocate for the law . Obamacare 2.0 : Shaky like 1.0
Obamacare fires are flaring up all over — in Hill hearings , in scary headlines about big rate hikes and in closed-door meetings of nervous Democrats .
President Barack Obama ’ s messaging gurus and their allies say they will step on the gas before enrollment begins this fall , but the effort , they concede , is not in full swing .
Obama ’ s allies know the health care law needs a massive outreach effort , but Obamacare Round 2 is already starting to look a lot like Round 1 , when Democrats roundly accused the White House of botching its appeal to the public , giving Republicans the upper hand on defining the law .
It ’ s a clear contrast with the immigration reform effort , where the rollout has been filled with business and advocacy groups praising the Gang of Eight bill and quickly knocking down any attacks . This week , there has been plenty of fodder for GOP critics of the health care law but mostly silence from the administration .
Part of that is because the White House team is in flux . Tara McGuinness , who just joined the White House to run the messaging of the law , told ███ that her shop is “ ramping up on the health care communications and outreach . ”
She pointed out that Democratic senators met with White House chief of staff Denis McDonough on Thursday , the first in a series of Hill meetings .
Meanwhile , the groups that will be responsible for on-the-ground work say they ’ re waiting .
Obama is leaning heavily on outside allies , and on Friday he asked Planned Parenthood to help sell the law with a pitch heavy on benefits to women , like contraceptive coverage and preventive care — the same targeted themes he stressed during his reelection campaign .
But Enroll America , the coalition of health care advocates , industry groups , and labor and civil rights organizations that ’ s planning a massive outreach effort , says it ’ s still planning to kick into full gear its “ Get Covered America ” campaign this summer — it ’ s not speeding up the timetable . Headed by Anne Filipic , the former deputy director of the White House Office of Public Engagement , the coalition is planning a campaign of online organizing , grass-roots outreach and paid advertising .
Organizing for Action has been planning its own outreach campaign for the summer , too , which is shaping up as a big test of the strength of its armies of volunteers . OFA officials didn ’ t respond to questions about whether they ’ ll speed up their plans .
Why wait ? The answer , the law ’ s supporters say , is that if they do the outreach too early — and people are told they can sign up for Obamacare coverage with generous subsidies but there ’ s nowhere to go right now — they ’ ll just tune out .
But Democrats are worried now — about the messaging and the mechanics of the rollout .
“ I ’ m concerned — because we did take substantial criticism for putting this plan in place — that it achieve its true purpose , ” said Rep. Lloyd Doggett of Texas . “ There ’ s so much work to do in such a short period of time . ”
Other Democrats say the public is still confused about the law and they want to see more outreach and public education . Sen. Max Baucus , an author of the law , raised that concern in a recent hearing , arguing that if the administration doesn ’ t act , they ’ ll face a “ huge train wreck coming down ” — a comment that got serious attention from Republicans this week .