Washington ( CNN ) - The White House had to defend its rollout of the President 's signature health care legislation Saturday after two scathing reports that allege missteps , miscommunication and lack of leadership sank the launch of Obamacare 's online exchanges .
The New York Times and the Washington Post each reported on a meeting between contractor CGI Federal and government employees at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services in late August .
CGI won the main contract to build the Obamacare website , and CMS , the branch of the Department of Health and Human Services that was overseeing the launch , was growing worried the site was riddled with flaws and unprepared for day one .
The meetings were candid , but tense , according to the reports . Only five and a half weeks until the October 1 deadline , the majority of the 95 elements needed for the site ’ s functionality were not ready , by CGI 's own evaluation ; later , more than a dozen that were categorized as ready failed further testing .
In interviews with administration officials and a review of government and contractor documents , the reports show that CGI argued an October 1 deadline was impossible , given how complex and cutting-edge the government said the site needed to be . What ’ s more , without a high-level point person leading the operation for the government , CGI said it was difficult to get timely answers and understand the administration ’ s shifting vision , said the Times .
For the administration , that October 1 deadline was non-negotiable , and despite the warnings , it ordered CGI to push ahead while growing more and more frustrated with the contractor ’ s sloppy coding and missed deadlines , according to the report .
`` If we could fire them , we would , '' said Michelle Snyder , CMS 's chief operating officer , according to the New York Times .
The White House confirmed the meetings , via a statement from CMS on Saturday .
`` In the months leading up to October , CMS engaged in hundreds of operationally focused planning conversations on processes , procedures and work to prepare for the beginning of open enrollment on October 1st . The meeting between CMS and contractors on August 22 and 23rd was part of the ongoing discussion , '' it said .
The statement went on to defend the troubled rollout and try to explain the decisions detailed in the reports , arguing the October 1 deadline was most important and promising further functions down the line .
`` This was a complex project with a short timeline , and CMS prioritized essential functionality to be live on October 1st to ensure that consumers would be able to apply for eligibility and select a plan . A variety of operational topics were discussed at the meeting , and decisions were later made about priorities for October 1 . Other functionality will come online over time , '' it said .
CGI Federal declined to comment , saying , “ While we understand our silence leaves us exposed to others ' conclusions , out of respect for CMS and all of our clients , we strongly believe in honoring our contractual commitments . ”
The administration has now pledged that the site would be fully functional for most users by November 30 .