By repealing Obamacare , many Republican lawmakers want to give states the right to find their own health care answers .
But that prospect is revealing a problem : States can ’ t afford to go it alone .
Massachusetts and Wisconsin took radically different paths toward the goal of expanding access to health-care insurance . But the prospect of a repeal of the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) – and the loss of the federal money that goes with it – is threatening to blow significant holes in both state programs .
For Massachusetts , the issue is that its aggressive attempt to provide universal coverage is propped up by billions of federal dollars .
By contrast , Wisconsin ’ s Republican governor reformed the state ’ s health-care system precisely to prepare for an ACA repeal , yet the loss of federal money would still leave a broad swath of low-income families without coverage .
In short , no matter which approach they take , states might face a difficult choice : Who should they not cover ?
As recently as six years ago , 18 percent of Americans had no health-care insurance . Today , that percentage has been cut roughly in half , and even Republicans , in their 2016 “ A Better Way : Health Care ” plan , say they want a system that “ ensures access to coverage for all Americans . ”
A repeal could test how much Americans ’ expectations about health care coverage have or haven ’ t shifted under Obamacare .
For now , states are facing uncertainty , not knowing when Republicans might repeal the ACA and how .
For health officials in many states , the concerns is that Republicans in Congress could pare back or eliminate two key provisions :
• The subsidies that help low-and middle-income Americans pay for heath insurance .
• The expansion of Medicaid , passed along with the ACA , that allowed states to cover more of their uninsured . Until 2020 , it is fully paid for by the federal government . After that , the federal government would pay 90 percent of the costs .
Thirty-one states accepted the Medicaid expansion , while the subsidies are available in all states . In Massachusetts , for example , the expansion provides coverage for 306,000 people who would otherwise not have any , while the subsidies have enabled 191,000 more to buy insurance .
Without those federal funds , Massachusetts and other states would have to try to find other ways to insure those people .
But Massachusetts ’ predicament runs much deeper . Its first-of-its-kind health-care law , signed in 2006 by then-Gov . Mitt Romney ( R ) and seen as the model for Obamacare , is dependent upon a special pot of federal money that Massachusetts has been getting since the late 1990s . Indeed , when the George W. Bush administration threatened to take away the money , Governor Romney and then-Sen. Edward Kennedy spearheaded the creation of Romneycare in part to justify continued federal spending .
On one hand , the gambit has paid off . Under Romneycare , Massachusetts has cut has the ranks of its uninsured to 4 percent – the lowest of any state .
But Romneycare is also a cautionary tale . Without major federal funding , Massachusetts ’ bold attempt to provide universal coverage at the state level could fall apart .
“ The lesson of Romneycare and Obamacare is if you want your social safety net to be relatively stable and secure , then you need to fund it yourself and not rely on Washington , ” says Michael Cannon , director of health policy studies at the Cato Institute , a libertarian think tank in Washington .
Acting before President-elect Trump takes office , the Obama administration in November locked in another $ 30 billion in federal funding for Massachusetts over the next five years . But after that , its future is uncertain . And even with it , the loss of Medicaid expansion and federal subsidies – if Republicans rein them in – will cause significant stress here and elsewhere .
“ It ’ s unrealistic to expect states to make progress on health care coverage while the federal government is pulling billions of dollars out of states , ” says Joshua Sharfstein , an associate dean for public health practice at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore .
When originally signed into law in 2008 , it had grand goals . It was intended to make “ health care in Wisconsin a birthright , not a ticket to bankruptcy , ” said then-Gov . Gov . Jim Doyle , a Democrat .
Then Gov . Scott Walker ( R ) took over and turned BadgerCare into a model for the Republican vision of health-care reform . That began by declining the Medicaid expansion money .
“ The way federalism is supposed to work is states create a program like in Wisconsin , and then other states can say ‘ OK . What did they achieve ? What did it cost ? ’ And they can learn from each other and get a better safety net , ” says Mr. Cannon of Cato . “ But if states don ’ t have to face the cost of their policy decisions , if it is all being crowded out by federal programs like Medicaid , you don ’ t get that experimentation and learning . ”
To that end , Governor Walker experimented . Unlike other states that rejected the Medicaid expansion , he still expanded coverage to everyone living below the poverty level in the state .
Though Wisconsin ’ s uninsured rate is going down slower than many other states , it is going down . And everyone living in poverty is insured .
But there is a catch . To cover everyone up to 100 percent of the federal poverty level , the state left those above it uncovered , knowing that the federal subsidies in Obamacare would be a safety net .
If Obamacare subsidies go away , those families could lose their insurance , notes Donna Friedsam , health policy director at the Population Health Institute at the University Wisconsin in Madison .
BadgerCare “ has provided the coverage for people below 100 percent , but it still has quite a lot of people heavily invested in federal subsidies for directly purchasing insurance through ” Obamacare , she says . “ The people who would normally have been covered under a Medicaid expansion – like the expansion in Massachusetts – instead are directed ” to Obamacare .
Some Republicans in Washington have spoken of reforming health-care spending by giving money to states as lump sum block grants , rather than reimbursing costs , but many experts suggest that would lead to a decrease in federal spending .
If the federal assistance expanded under Obamacare is pulled back , the only answer to fill the gap could be state taxes – an unpopular solution .
“ In a Republican future with state-led reform , there are plenty of opportunities for Massachusetts to go forward and keep doing what it wants , ” says Thomas Miller , a health-care expert at American Enterprise Institute , conservative think tank in Washington . “ They just won ’ t have money from the other 49 states to do it . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
For Massachusetts – and any state seeking to replicate its Obamacare-like solution – that is a daunting prospect .
“ None of this is known for sure , it depends on details of the repeal , but the way they are talking about it now is the funding we had before would be squeezed dramatically , ” says Brian Rosman , director of policy and government relations at the Boston-based advocacy group Health Care for All . “ Because we have the lowest uninsured rate in the country , we have the most to lose . ”