As thousands of consumers receive health insurance cancellation notices , President Obama is continuing to fine tune his promise that Americans who like their health plans would be able to keep them under his signature health care law .
The president told about 200 of his campaign supporters and health care activists Monday that the administration had promised Americans they could keep their current coverage -- as long as their plans hadn ’ t changed since ObamaCare was signed into law .
`` If you have or had one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law and you really liked that plan , what we said was you could keep it if it has n't changed since the law 's passed , '' Obama said . `` So we wrote into the Affordable Care Act you are grandfathered in on that plan . But if the insurance company changes it , then what we 're saying is they have got to change it to a higher standard . They 've got to make it better . ''
Obama said his health care law is making the insurance market better for everyone , even though millions of Americans who buy individual plans have been receiving cancellation notices . He said the notices `` can be scary for people , '' but added they were often getting `` a very bad deal . ''
`` The bottom line is -- is that we are making the insurance market better for everybody and that 's right thing to do , '' he said .
The president also acknowledged that technical problems with the health care website to shop for insurance are making it tougher for people to find other plans . He said he 's `` not happy about it , '' but promised , `` We 're going to smooth this thing out . ''
At least 3.5 million Americans have been issued cancellations , but the exact number is unclear , The Associated Press reported . In a speech at Boston 's Faneuil Hall this past week , Obama said the problem is limited to fewer than 5 percent of Americans `` who 've got cut-rate plans that do n't offer real financial protection in the event of a serious illness or an accident . ''
In the Republican-controlled House , officials say a vote is likely as early as next week on a bill to let insurers continue selling any individual policies that were in effect on Jan. 1 , 2013 , even if they provide coverage deemed insufficient under Obamacare .
The measure , drafted by Rep. Fred Upton , R-Mich. , and backed by roughly 100 fellow Republicans , would remain in effect throughout 2014 , after which the issue would presumably be reviewed .
`` Despite the president 's repeated promise of 'if you like your plan , you can keep it , ' many Americans are now learning the sad reality that their current plan will no longer exist beginning on January 1 , '' Upton , chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee , said in a statement when he announced his legislation last week .
`` This legislation is about providing folks the peace of mind that they will be allowed to keep their current coverage if they so choose . ''
While Upton 's legislation permits insurers to sell existing coverage plans that would otherwise be banned , Sen. Mary Landrieu , D-La. , introduced legislation during the day to go one step further by requiring it .
Aides told The Associated Press that under her measure , insurance companies would be obliged to continue offering existing paying customers continued coverage under any plans in effect at the end of 2013 . No new consumers could enroll .
`` A promise was made that if you like your health plan , you can keep it - and I will do everything I can to see that the promise is kept , '' said Landrieu , who is gearing up for what is expected to be a challenging re-election campaign next year .
Both measures are designed to cut through a complicated system in which some plans for individuals that fall short of coverage standards are allowed to continue under Obamacare , while others are not .