Yes , this isn ’ t exactly breaking news , given all of the evidence we ’ ve seen since the rollout . Today , though , we have two conflicting reports pointing fingers at the government and at the contractors hired by the government , with both sides claiming that the other ’ s incompetence is what created the biggest debacle in the launch of a major government program in memory , and perhaps ever . First , CNN spoke to former Obama administration tech adviser Clay Johnson , who blamed the problem on “ sloppy ” contractors , but notes that the problems run deeper in government , too :
Clay Johnson , who served as a Presidential Innovation Fellow beginning in August 2012 , wrote in a blog post on October 7 that signs of flaws on Healthcare.gov were apparent from the day it went online , including the use of placeholder text in the site ’ s code . “ The contractors who made this website were at best sloppy , and at worst unqualified for the job , ” Johnson wrote . … A separate posting on Johnson ’ s blog from Monday offered a few ways the site could be fixed , including the recommendation the administration hold the contractors responsible for the poorly-concocted website responsible . “ The problem here isn ’ t just the result of bad programming , ” he wrote . “ It ’ s the result of bad systems and bad architecture from the get-go . When you try and build the world ’ s biggest shopping mall and the only place you can buy your support beams from is a balsa-wood mill , your building is going to collapse. ” Opening the website to outside experts will help fix some of the problems , he wrote , but expecting substantial changes in a short amount of time could be unreasonable .
Au contraire , says the Associated Press , which interviewed the contractors . They tried raising red flags “ for months ” about the problems arising in the development of Healthcare.gov and the systems behind it , but the Obama administration ignored them . Furthermore , HHS decided to do its own testing rather than bring in experts , which explains why it happened late and had no impact on the rollout :
Crammed into conference rooms with pizza for dinner , some programmers building the Obama administration ’ s showcase health insurance website were growing increasingly stressed . Some worked past 10 p.m. , energy drinks in hand . Others rewrote computer code over and over to meet what they considered last-minute requests for changes from the government or other contractors . As questions mount over the website ’ s failure , insider interviews and a review of technical specifications by The Associated Press found a mind-numbingly complex system put together by harried programmers who pushed out a final product that congressional investigators said was tested by the government and not private developers with more expertise . … A review of internal architectural diagrams obtained by the AP revealed the system ’ s complexity . Insurance applicants have a host of personal information verified , including income and immigration status . The system connects to other federal computer networks , including ones at the Social Security Administration , IRS , Veterans Administration , Office of Personnel Management and the Peace Corps .
Johnson makes a larger point about the lack of competence in government for private-sector activities :
“ Healthcare.gov got this way not because of incompetence or sloppiness of an individual vendor , but because of a deeply engrained and malignant cancer that ’ s eating away at the federal government ’ s ability to provide effective online services , ” he wrote . “ It ’ s a cancer that ’ s shut out the best and brightest minds from working on these problems , diminished competition for federal work , and landed us here – where you have half-billion dollar websites that don ’ t work , ” he wrote , linking to USASpending.gov .
First , that problem seems to have first appeared on Obama ’ s watch . The Medicare Advantage website does exactly what the Healthcare.gov website is supposed to do — allow consumers to make choices of private insurance plans in part with subsidies from the federal government in the form of Medicare and Social Security benefits . That doesn ’ t involve a connection to the IRS , but neither do most of the problems seen at Healthcare.gov , either . Why HHS couldn ’ t use that as a model in its 42-month development of the exchange system is a mystery .
More importantly , though , this confirms that the issues aren ’ t the contractors , but the federal government agency that hired them . And if we take Johnson ’ s larger point to its natural conclusion , then we shouldn ’ t have the government involved in brokering private-sector transactions at all , nor in mandating that activity as tax law . Johnson ’ s right that the federal government has proven itself incompetent in running this kind of private-sector activity , which is why it should cease doing so and look for other ways to reform the health-insurance system .
Finally , when the finger-pointing starts , it ’ s a clear sign that ( a ) the project is a massive failure , and ( b ) no one really knows how to fix it .
Update : Glenn Reynolds wonders whether technology might end up saving us from ObamaCare :
Despite all the problems with Obamacare , there ’ s some good news on the horizon for medical care and costs . The good news has nothing to do with exchanges , reimbursement rates or “ navigators , ” but everything to do with a phenomenon that has cut costs elsewhere in American society : technology . … This phenomenon holds true even for far more sophisticated technologies than just spring-loaded needles . Many schools — as well as malls , airports , and other public facilities — are installing Automated External Defibrillators . These are designed so that almost anyone can use them to administer life-saving resuscitation to someone whose heart has stopped or gone into deadly ventricular fibrillation . A computer in the device reads the victim ’ s EKG and administers a shock if called for . Voice commands tell the user what to do . How simple are these gadgets ? So simple that you can buy them on Amazon , to install in your home . The proliferation of these defibrillators is a good thing , since sudden cardiac death is a serious problem , and it often strikes unlikely victims . But this is just the start .
That model has adults making their own decisions on purchases and preparing themselves to take charge of their own health care . The ObamaCare model forces government control in health care and treats adults like children . Given the competence demonstrated in the latter model , I ’ d hope that the former model emerges … and soon .
Update : I fixed a sentence that was left incomplete in the original post .