Obama may have won reelection , but Obamacare remains unpopular , author says . Obama won , but Obamacare did n't
During the campaign , President Barack Obama minimized discussion of his first term ’ s most consequential new law : the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , or what ’ s commonly referred to as Obamacare .
That was no accident . Undoubtedly , the campaign knew that Obamacare is , as it always has been , deeply unpopular with the American people . In fact , Obamacare epitomizes the public ’ s greatest concerns about this administration : the massive expansion of government and failure to deliver a new era of post-partisanship to Washington , since the law was jammed through using a party line vote and every available legislative trick . Bringing up health care risked stirring the passions that fueled the tea party ’ s rise and the Democrats ’ defeat in 2010 .
Yet , research conducted by the polling company , inc./WomanTrend for Independent Women ’ s Voice ( IWV ) shows that health care was an important concern for Americans on Election Day . The president was reelected in spite of voters ’ lingering distaste for Obamacare , and the health care issue will remain a critical issue for voters moving forward .
Just a quarter , or 26 percent of those surveyed by the polling company on Election Day supported implementing Obamacare completely . Even less than half ( 48 percent ) of self-identified Democrats want full implementation , suggesting that the health care law remains a liability , even within the president ’ s party .
Forty-three percent of voters surveyed want Congress to either “ just repeal the law ” ( 30 percent ) or move toward repeal , while pursuing other measures - including defunding , amending , and blocking - to prevent its implementation ( 13 percent ) . Another quarter ( 23 percent ) favor amending the law , rather than full repeal .
Jobs and the economy was the hands-down winner ( at 41 percent ) as the issue most often cited by voters asked what issue was most important for determining their vote . But health care was the second most often cited issue ( at nine percent ) , followed by “ government programs like Social Security , Medicare , and Medicaid ” ( eight percent ) , and “ government spending , ” both of which could include concerns about Obamacare .
When asked specifically about the role health care played in determining their vote , two-thirds ( 67 percent ) of voters said it was “ very important ” that the candidates they supported want to “ repeal and then replace ” the new health care law . Only five percent of voters thought this was “ not at all important. ” Indeed , on this measure , 2012 voters echoed 2010 voters in identifying Obamacare as a key symbol of government overreach .