Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan is emerging as the key congressional Republican in negotiating with Democrats to solve Washington ’ s two fiscal crises with a plan that only delays efforts to defund ObamaCare , not derail them .
Ryan , chairman of the House Budget Committee , is proposing a plan to increase the federal debt that is tied largely to simplifying the tax code , make enough changes to Medicare to offset cuts to domestic spending and defense programs and a solid promise from Senate Democrats and President Obama to continue talks about reopening the federal government .
Failure to increase the debt limit within roughly the next week would result in the country defaulting on its debt for the first time in history . The partial government shutdown started Oct. 1 .
“ I 'm working to get a budget agreement , ” Ryan told a group of conservatives meeting this weekend in Washington . “ We need to completely rethink government ’ s role in helping the most vulnerable . … That means we can never give up on repealing and replacing ObamaCare . ”
His remarks , in a video message for the Value Voters summit , were reassuring to conservatives concerned that Ryan in a recent Wall Street Journal op-ed piece seemed to have abandon the idea of defunding or altogether dismantling ObamaCare as part of fiscal negotiations -- considering how hard they , led by Tea Party favorites Sens . Ted Cruz , Texas , and Mike Lee , Utah , worked to garner support for the effort .
Still , Ryan appears to have support from establishment and conservative Republicans as well as a good relationship with Washington Democratic Sen. Patty Murray , chairwoman of the Senate Budget Committee , with whom he has yet to meet on the fiscal issues but will likely negotiation with her .
House Republicans pitched a plan to the White House on Thursday night to approve a short-term debt-ceiling increase , but President Obama pushed back because it did not address the partial shutdown .
Senate Republicans are now crafting an alternate proposal that deals with both . It includes a provision dealing with ObamaCare , but is far short of what Cruz campaigned for -- and advocated with a 21-hour address on the Senate floor last month .
The Senate on Saturday planned to take up a one-year extension of the debt limit . Democratic sponsors , though , may have difficulty advancing the measure given the ongoing negotiations .
The emerging proposal comes from Sen. Susan Collins , R-Maine , and others . It would propose a six-month extension of government spending , a repeal of the health care law 's medical device tax and greater flexibility for agencies to deal with across-the-board spending cuts in effect this year .
Returning from a two-hour meeting at the White House , Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell told reporters Friday that the session with Obama was useful and he hoped that Senate Republicans could find a way out of the impasse .
Where the budget and debt talks go from here is unclear . Obama called House Speaker John Boehner at mid-afternoon Friday , and Michael Steel , a spokesman for the leader of House Republicans , said , `` They agreed that we should all keep talking . ''
Jay Carney , the president 's press secretary , said Obama `` appreciates the constructive nature of the conversation and the proposal that House Republicans put forward . Yet , the spokesman said , `` He has some concerns with it . ''