The U.S. medical system is absurdly expensive . You knew that already . But you probably did n't realize just how absurdly expensive it is compared to other countries .
These 21 graphs ( one of them you 'll see above ) from the International Federation of Health Plans , via Ezra Klein , start to paint the picture . The average routine office visit in the U.S. is three-times more expensive than in Canada . The average CT scan is five-times more expensive than in Canada . And as a share of GDP , our health care costs are an ignominious colossus towering over the rest of the world :
In the U.S. health care system , everything costs more . Being in a hospital cost more . Because our drugs cost more ( prescription drug prices can be 10X the rate in the UK or Germany ) . And our doctors cost more ( a US family physician makes 3X her German counterpart ) . Because their education costs more ( the education for a German physician 's education is nearly free ) . And on it goes .
Why is American health care so expensive ? Books could be written about this topic . And books have been written about this topic . In The Healing of America , T. D. Reid explored why American medicine falls behind other countries in quality while it races far ahead in cost of care .
Near the end of the book , Reid expands on two big reasons why U.S. health care is so expensive : ( 1 ) Unlike other countries , the U.S. government does n't manage prices ; and ( 2 ) the complications created by our for-profit system adds tremendous costs .
First , it really starts with the prices . While some developed countries have one health care insurance plan for everybody -- where the government either sets prices or oversees price negotiations -- the U.S. is unique in our reliance on for-profit insurance companies to pay for both essential and elective care . Twenty cents from every $ 1 goes , not to health care , but to `` marketing , underwriting , administration , and profit , '' he says . In a system where government does n't negotiate prices down , prices will be higher . In a system where for-profit companies need profit margins and advertising , prices will be higher .
Second , the absurd complexity of U.S. health care creates its own costs . There is a separate health care system for seniors , veterans , military personnel , Native Americans , end-stage renal failure , under 16 in a poor family , over 16 in a poor family , and working for the federal government , Reid writes . That 's on top of hundreds of private plans :
All these systems require another inefficiency -- the existence of compilers , middlemen who compile the bills doctors submit and shuttle them thru the payment system . The US Government Accountability Office concluded that if we could get administrative costs of our medical system down to the Canadian level , the money saved would be enough to pay for health care for all the Americans who are uninsured .
It 's not like all this money buys us nothing . Complexity creates jobs , for high- and low-skilled workers alike . American health care is the world 's envy in some categories , especially in cancer care , wait times , and access to new technologies for affluent and insured families . We have the highest share of adults ( 90 percent ) who report being in good health . The OECD average is 69 percent . But in terms of coverage and cost , we rank embarrassingly low among developed countries . It would be nice to say this is a bug of the American medical system . But it 's a feature . It 's a choice we 've made . In some countries , government sets a lower price and does n't charge patients for marketing and margins . To this model , we 've essentially said : No , thanks .