NEW YORK ( ███ ) - President Donald Trump ’ s reversals in the past week on maintaining Obamacare subsidies to insurers are sowing new confusion over what kind of health insurance will be available to consumers , and at what price , when enrollment for 2018 begins in two weeks .
Trump said last week his administration would stop paying billions of dollars in subsidies that help insurers give discounts to low-income households , one of several moves to dismantle the signature healthcare law of his Democratic predecessor , Barack Obama .
Since then , Trump has alternately supported , and dismissed , an effort by Republican and Democratic senators that would reinstate the subsidies for two years , until a broader replacement to the 2010 Affordable Care Act , commonly known as Obamacare , can be negotiated .
“ We are worried that consumers on ( Obamacare ) plans will be confused by all the back and forth and proposed policy changes and that this will cause them to not seek out assistance , ” said Bryna Koch , special projects coordinator at the Arizona Center for Rural Health , which helps consumers choose and sign up for individual health plans offered under Obamacare .
Trump , who promised during his election campaign to repeal and replace Obamacare , which he has called a “ disaster , ” has said the subsidies amount to a bailout for insurance companies .
By law , health insurers must still offer the discounts on deductibles , co-pays and other out-of-pocket costs , even if the government stops reimbursing them . Insurers say they do not profit from the subsidies .
Anticipating Trump ’ s move , insurers proposed higher prices on monthly premiums in 2018 to recoup the money . In all but a handful of states , they submitted two sets of premium rates – a lower rate to use if the subsidies remained , and a higher rate to use if the funding was cut .
The fate of the subsidies remained in limbo on Thursday . A senior White House aide said that Trump would demand steps toward repealing Obamacare in any healthcare legislation , comments that cast doubt on the prospects for the bipartisan effort to shore up insurance markets .
A California court is expected to consider on Monday a request by Democratic attorneys general to keep the subsidies flowing until a legal challenge to Trump ’ s decision is resolved .
If the funding is not restored when 2018 enrollment opens on Nov. 1 , many consumers will see premium rates that are on average 20 percent higher than they would have been otherwise .
Even before Trump ’ s decision on the subsidies , the Congressional Budget Office said the Republican president ’ s policies to roll back Obamacare enrollment efforts would lead to 4 million fewer people signing up for insurance in 2018 than previously forecast . The CBO still expects 11 million people to sign up for next year - an increase from this year ’ s enrollment of 10 million .
The federal government has already halted a subsidy payment to the insurance industry for October . But leading insurers are not yet sure whether that is the last word .
Anthem Inc Chief Executive Officer Joseph Swedish told ███ he could not yet predict how ending the subsidies or restating them through “ potential congressional action ” would affect pricing next year . Anthem has submitted premium rates that account for the subsidies being cut .
Should the subsidies be restored at any time after Nov. 1 , insurers may be able to revert to the lower monthly premium rates , or provide rebates for consumers .
“ A midyear change in premiums would be highly unusual , but this would be the right thing to do , ” said Marc Harrison , CEO of Intermountain Healthcare , a Utah-based health plan and hospital chain . “ Intermountain Healthcare would pursue this . ”
Washington state ’ s insurance regulator said it would allow insurers to change rates as soon as practical - even the next month - if lawmakers reinstate the funding , an approach backed by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners . But that could run up against federal government objections .
The Affordable Care Act does not allow for changes to premium rates after they have been finalized , an official for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services said . At the same time , the administration is working to approve higher rates in several states that did not take into account Trump ’ s cut in subsidies for 2018 .