The Trump administration plans on making a 90 percent cut to the advertising budget for Obamacare during the upcoming enrollment period .
Interested in Health Care Overhaul ? Add Health Care Overhaul as an interest to stay up to date on the latest Health Care Overhaul news , video , and analysis from ███ . Add Interest
In 2016 , the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services spent $ 100 million on Obamacare advertising and outreach , but for this year ’ s open enrollment period , CMS plans on spending $ 10 million .
They also plan on cutting grant money for Navigator programs ( which are required by the ACA ) , which receive funds to assist with public enrollment in Obamacare . Navigator programs in this upcoming enrollment period will only receive funding based on their performance during the previous enrollment period . If a Navigator program , for example , only reached 70 percent of its enrollment goal , they will only receive 70 percent of the previous year ’ s funding in the next enrollment period .
Randal Serr , director of Take Care Utah , the network of Navigator programs in Utah , told ███ it ’ s an “ absurd ” way to measure funding .
“ The cuts undervalue the work that Navigators do -- we don ’ t just help people enroll , we help them stay healthy , keep their insurance , we make sure doctors and medications are covered . A lot of times we spend days or weeks helping them navigate glitches in the system . ”
CMS claims that they have not found any correlation between advertising spending and enrollment increases , and Navigator programs have been costly . These cuts are simply a way to save money and save Americans from “ a bad deal , ” according to the Department of Health and Human Services .
“ Trump Admin is deliberately sabotaging our healthcare system . When number of insured drops & costs rise , American ppl will know who to blame , ” wrote Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , D-New York , on Twitter .
Trump Admin is deliberately sabotaging our healthcare system . When number of insured drops & costs rise , American ppl will know who to blame https : //t.co/CiVvqphiWE — Chuck Schumer ( @ SenSchumer ) August 31 , 2017
Sen. Chris Coons , D-Delaware , echoed concerns that this is a way to get less people enrolled . “ Plain and simple : this is the Trump Administration working to ensure that * fewer * people get health insurance , ” he wrote on Twitter .
Plain and simple : this is the Trump Administration working to ensure that * fewer * people get health insurance . https : //t.co/nMVudG9WFh — Senator Chris Coons ( @ ChrisCoons ) August 31 , 2017
“ Judging effectiveness by the amount of money spent and not the results achieved is irresponsible and unhelpful to the American people . Under the Trump Administration , we ’ re committed to more responsible , effective government . Obamacare ’ s Navigator program has been ineffective . During the upcoming enrollment period , Navigators will be funded in proportion to their performance , ” said Department of Health and Human Services press secretary Caitlin Oakley in a statement .
“ A healthcare system that has caused premiums to double and left nearly half of our counties with only one coverage option is not working . The Trump Administration is determined to serve the American people instead of trying to sell them a bad deal . ”