As technical issues continue to plague the sign-up for Obamacare , several major health insurer CEOs headed to Washington to talk to White House officials Wednesday .
Aetna ( AET ) CEO Mark Bertolini , Wellpoint ( WLP ) CEO Joseph R. Swedish and Humana Inc. ( HUM ) CEO Bruce Broussard attended the meeting , White House spokesman Jay Carney confirmed .
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius also met with the CEOs , CNN confirmed .
On Oct. 1 , the Affordable Care Act started allowing consumers to shop and sign up for subsidized health insurance coverage . But the President 's signature healthcare sign-up Web page has not been able to keep up with the traffic volume and been plagued by glitches , making it tough for Americans to sign up for insurance coverage .
Carney said the CEOs were invited to chat with senior White House staff about `` implementation and enrollment , and efforts to address the technical issues identified with healthcare.gov . ''
Wellpoint is one of the larger participants in Obamacare , with health exchanges in 14 states where it operates on Blue Cross Blue Shield licenses .
Related : To fix Obamacare website , blow it up , start over
Aetna offers coverage in 10 states , through Aetna or Coventry Health Care , which was acquired this spring , spokeswoman Cynthia Michener confirmed . The firm is also offering coverage in seven other states , but just in `` limited geographic areas , '' she said .
Aetna has received much criticism for withdrawing from a number of states where it had originally applied to offer health insurance , including California , New York and New Jersey .
Humana is another larger participant offering insurance on state health exchanges in Illinois , Mississippi , Kentucky and Colorado , among others .
Cigna ( CI ) CEO David Cordani was invited but was unable to attend , according to a spokesman .
Carney said other CEOs attending the meeting included Michael Neidorff of Centene Corp. ( CNC ) , James Roosevelt of Tufts Health Plan and Bernard J. Tyson of Kaiser Permanente . Also invited was Karen Ignagni , head of the lobbying group America 's Health Insurance Plans , which represents most of the big health insurers .
In an interview with CNN 's Dr. Sanjay Gupta , Sebelius said Tuesday she and her department are concerned about the technical problems surrounding the Obamacare website 's rollout .
The site was supposed to make it simple for people to search and sign up for new health care policies starting on Oct. 1 . But instead , it has been clunky and , at times , inoperable .
`` We 're not at all satisfied with the workings of the website , '' Sebelius said . `` We want it to be smooth and easy , and let consumers compare plans . ''
The Secretary attributed some of the problems to `` extremely high '' volume , saying nearly 20 million people have come to the Obamacare website in the first three weeks after it launched .
Yet only a fraction of those visitors have signed up for new health-care policies .
In the meantime , a team of high-tech experts from within the government and from Silicon Valley is going to tackle the issues , Sebelius said . Jeff Zients , acting director of the Office of Management and Budget , will lead the team .
Besides Sebelius , the insurance chiefs were meeting with White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough and Valerie Jarrett , a senior adviser to President Obama , Carney said .
`` Obviously these are very important players in this process , and Denis and others look forward to the meeting , '' Carney said .
Asked whether President Obama would take part in the meeting , Carney said he was n't officially scheduled to participate . But , he added , `` it 's a small building . ''