The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com .
They live on the street , often foraging through dumpsters . Some threaten us . Occasionally , they assault people .
Thousands of mentally ill people cycle in and out of hospital emergency rooms . They strain our medical system , scare the public and sometimes harm themselves .
Most , says DJ Jaffe , are schizophrenic or bipolar and have stopped taking their medication .
Jaffe gave up a successful advertising career to try to improve the way America deals with such people .
`` John Hinckley shot President Reagan because he knew , not thought , knew that was the best way to get a date with Jodie Foster , '' Jaffe tells me in my latest internet video collaboration with City Journal .
Years ago , such people were locked up in mental hospitals . That protected the public , but the asylums were horrible , overcrowded places , where sick people rarely got good treatment .
`` We decided we would largely replace that system with mental health care in the community , '' says Stephen Eide , a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute .
Community treatment made sense . Care would be easier and cheaper in the patients ' own neighborhoods . Patients would be closer to their families , who could visit .
But community treatment never really happened . Politicians did n't fund it . Neighborhood mental health facilities were not popular with their constituents .
Many mentally ill people now end up in prison . `` Prison is no place for somebody with schizophrenia , '' says Eide . `` However , that 's where they 're going to remain .
Today , more seriously mentally ill people are locked up in Los Angeles County Jail , Cook County Jail and New York 's Rikers Island jail than in any mental hospital .
In jail , they barely get treatment . As a result , they stay in jail longer than other inmates .
`` They get abused and victimized and thrown in solitary , and they ca n't visit their families , '' says Jaffe . `` It 's a horrific place to be . ''
America has some high-quality mental hospitals , but they do n't have enough money to give the extended treatment that most seriously ill people need .
Jaffe says , `` It 's become harder to get into Bellevue ( a New York City mental hospital ) than Harvard . If you 're well enough to walk into a hospital and ask for care , they 're going to say you 're not sick enough to need it . ''
Hospitals often practice what Jaffe calls `` treating and streeting . '' The police call it `` catch and release . ''
Jaffe says that a big part of the problem is that governments , instead of treating the sickest people , often offer `` something for everyone . ''
That 's a line from Chirlane McCray , wife of New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio . De Blasio named his wife director of the city 's program to combat mental illness . McCray promised to spend `` almost a billion dollars '' on `` 54 initiatives . ''
Unfortunately , most of those initiatives address people who are not very sick . `` They wrap anything that makes you sad -- bad grades , poverty , coming from a single-parent household -- in a mental health narrative , '' says Jaffe .
`` Blurring the lines between mild mental disorders such as anxiety or mild depression -- and schizophrenia -- is not a bug ; it 's a feature of the program , '' says Eide . `` They believe the only way New Yorkers will support improvements to mental illness policy is if they are convinced that everybody has a mental illness . ''
So most funds do n't go to helping the people diving into dumpsters or to protecting us from threatening people on the street .
`` If we 're going to spend all our money on people who are anxious or ca n't sleep , what 's left for the seriously ill ? '' asks Jaffe . `` Ask any cop what we need , he 's going to say : more hospitals , easier civil commitment , so that when I bring somebody they 're admitted . We need to keep them on their medications so they do n't deteriorate . ''
Why then do authorities focus on comparatively minor problems ? `` They do n't cost as much to help ! Serving the seriously mentally ill is a really difficult task , '' he adds .
So the seriously mentally ill live on the street or get locked up in jails .
`` We tend to think of ourselves as a very compassionate society , '' says Eide , `` but a century from now , when people look at the situation with the seriously mentally ill , they 're going to look back on us and wonder how compassionate we really were . ''