Republicans are not in the position to lose votes if they hope to repeal ObamaCare , so pressure is being placed on senators like Sen. Dean Heller , R- Nev. , to declare allegiance on the newly crafted bill .
If Heller supports the bill , he would likely be parting ways with Nevada 's popular GOP Gov . Brian Sandoval in a state that did not support President Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential election .
But if he opposes the bill , conservative groups will likely come after them like they did earlier this year after he opposed the GOP 's initial health care bill .
And Democrats plan to target his seat either way in next year 's mid-term elections .
Trump on Friday tweeted encouragement to Republicans on the Hill to `` do what is right for the people '' and get their `` failed ObamaCare replacement approved . ''
Trump declared a day earlier that failure would make him `` very angry '' and that he would blame Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky .
“ I will be at my desk , pen in hand ! ” Trump tweeted .
The reworked bill Sen. Mitch McConnell presented to fellow Republicans aims to win conservatives ' support by letting insurers sell low-cost , skimpy policies . At the same time , he seeks to placate hesitant moderates by adding billions to combat opioid abuse and help consumers with skyrocketing insurance costs .
███ ' Sean Hannity took aim Thursday night at Republican senators who expressed skepticism of or opposition to the revised health care measure that would repeal and replace ObamaCare .
`` You made us a promise , the American people , for seven years . You guaranteed you ’ d end ObamaCare , '' the `` Hannity '' host said . `` You assured all of us you would develop a health care bill that actually worked for the American people . Stop your whining , roll up your sleeves , get to work , put your egos aside , get it done . ''
Last month , a pro-Trump group reportedly planned to launch the seven-figure ad campaign against Heller .
Heller is up for re-election in 2018 and is considered one of the most vulnerable GOP senators .
`` Obamacare is collapsing . This is a crisis for the American people . There is no excuse for any Republican or Democrat to oppose the Senate health care bill outright , '' Brian Walsh , president of the group , said in a statement at the time . `` Senator Heller ... appears to be heading down a path with Nancy Pelosi , Chuck Schumer and the radical left . ''