In 1993 , Republican strategist ( and Weekly Standard editor ) William Kristol was running the Project for the Republican Future , where he thought about how to assure a — you guessed it — Republican future . And at the time , the path forward seemed clear : Republicans had to kill President Clinton 's health-care plan .
This was far from consensus when Kristol proposed it . Many congressional Republicans thought they would need to bargain with Clinton , propose their alternative , get Democrats to make some concessions , and eventually compromise on something . That 's how Washington worked , after all . You could n't beat something with nothing .
Kristol , predicting the more partisan shape of the politics to come , cut through that nonsense . His famous ( or , if you prefer , infamous ) memo is a seminal document not just because it helped drive the Republican strategy against Clinton 's health-care bill , but because it stands , even today , as the clearest rationale for the anti-cooperative lawmaking that has become the norm .
`` Any Republican urge to negotiate a 'least bad ' compromise with the Democrats , and thereby gain momentary public credit for helping the president 'do something ' about health care , should also be resisted , '' Kristol wrote . `` Passage of the Clinton health care plan , in any form , would guarantee and likely make permanent an unprecedented federal intrusion into and disruption of the American economy — and the establishment of the largest federal entitlement program since Social Security . ''
If Republicans let any version of Clinton 's bill pass , Kristol continued , the political consequences would be grim . `` It will relegitimize middle-class dependence for 'security ' on government spending and regulation . It will revive the reputation of the party that spends and regulates , the Democrats , as the generous protector of middle-class interests . And it will at the same time strike a punishing blow against Republican claims to defend the middle class by restraining government . ''
Kristol 's memo has attained the status of legend in Washington . In a 2010 Slate column , Jacob Weisberg accused Kristol of killing the `` Responsible Republican , '' writing that his `` message marks the pivotal moment when Republicans shifted from fundamentally responsible partners in governing the country to uncompromising , hyperpartisan antagonists on all issues . ''
I think that gives Kristol too much credit , and the objective realities of American politics too little agency . American politics was polarizing with or without Kristol , and the zero-sum lawmaking that dominates the Republican Party today was probably an inevitable result of these trends — Kristol simply saw this earlier , and leaned into it more eagerly , than his peers .
Either way , we now live in the world Kristol foresaw . Today 's GOP lawmakers would n't need a memo to know that working with President Obama to pass a massive new entitlement does n't dovetail with their electoral or ideological interests . Where Republican strategists once had to work to prevent cooperation , today obstruction has become the norm , and it 's compromise that requires an extraordinary effort .
But 22 years later , it 's not just the politics that have changed ; it 's the policy , too . Democrats did pass a massive health-care reform bill — and they passed it over the kind of lockstep opposition from Republicans that Kristol proposed in 1993 . So we can now look back at Kristol 's memo and try to ask what he got right and what he got wrong .
For all his apocalyptic pronouncements — and there are a lot of those — Kristol is about as happy a political warrior as you 'll find . I reached him after he landed in Israel , over a crackling phone connection , and he was a lot more cheerful than I would have been after an international flight .
Kristol freely admits he was trying to shock the Republican Party into a political strategy many of its members would have been too genteel to mention , much less follow . `` I was trolling before anyone knew what trolling was , '' he laughs . But trolling , he argues , was what Clinton 's bill called for . `` When I wrote that memo , there was a real prospect of it getting bipartisan support . ''
In retrospect , Kristol thinks his memo was misinterpreted as more Machiavellian than it actually was . `` I wasn ’ t scared of [ Clinton 's bill ] because it was good policy , but because bad policy can become institutionalized , '' he says . `` When these things get passed it ’ s hard to unwind them . ''
Obamacare , he continues , proves the point . Already , congressional Republicans are falling all over themselves to show that if the Supreme Court repeals the law 's subsidies , Republicans will somehow fix the resulting mess . A party that ca n't even permit the Supreme Court to destroy Obamacare is never going to be able to do it alone .
Now that Obamacare is delivering health insurance to millions of people , Kristol says , it can be replaced , but it ca n't simply be eliminated . `` You need a credible alternative . You ca n't just return to the health system of 2009 . ''
In his original memo , Kristol warned that in the short run , Clintoncare 's passage would `` do nothing to hurt ( and everything to help ) Democratic electoral prospects in 1996 , '' and in the long run would `` revive the reputation of the party that spends and regulates '' while striking `` a punishing blow against Republican claims to defend the middle class by restraining government . ''
Democrats always took a certain comfort in Kristol 's memo : if they could just get health reform over the finish line , vast political riches awaited them .
But Obamacare has n't worked out that way . In a 2012 paper , political scientists Brendan Nyhan , Eric McGhee , John Sides , Seth Masket , and Steven Greene estimated that the 2010 vote share of congressional Democrats who supported health reform was 5.8 points lower than comparable Democrats who opposed it . Running the numbers , the researchers conclude that `` health-care reform may have cost Democrats their House majority . ''
Nor does Obamacare look to be getting more popular with age . A March poll conducted by PerryUndem for ███ found that 83 percent of Americans still hold the same opinion on Obamacare they did in 2010 . Of those who changed their minds , 58 percent of them have become more negative toward the law . This is true despite the fact that the law is covering about 17 million people at a far lower cost than Congress initially projected .
Kristol notes that though Clintoncare 's details are mostly forgotten now , the plan was much more ambitious than Obamacare — it would have upended the health insurance of most Americans . That 's part of what made it easier to defeat , he says .
Obamacare 's relative modesty is a reaction to the lessons of the 1990s . The White House was wrong when it promised that everyone who liked their health insurance could keep it , but the overwhelming majority of Americans will see little or no change from Obamacare . That makes it hard for the law to build a constituency in the way , say , Social Security does .
Similarly , Social Security sends out checks that say Social Security on them . It 's one program , and everyone who gets it knows they 're getting it . Obamacare is n't . In California , the private insurance is routed through a program called `` Covered California , '' while the public insurance is delivered by Medi-Cal . In Kentucky , the private insurance runs through the state 's `` Kynect '' program ; in one of my favorite anecdotes about Obamacare , a Huffington Post reporter watched a Kentucky resident who was thinking about signing up for Kynect tell a health worker , `` This beats Obamacare I hope . '' By design , no one ever gets a check with the word `` Obamacare '' on it .
Kristol 's perspective on this will be of some comfort to liberals . `` I was never convinced that single-payer wouldn ’ t be more attractive than Obamacare , '' he says . `` I think there was some truth to the left-wing critique of Obamacare . You ’ re building this giant contraption , making people worried about disruption , but you ’ re helping a rather limited number of people . In a funny way , if you ’ re doing a middle-class entitlement , you should do a big middle-class entitlement . ''
Obamacare 's political legacy is likely to be a fading negative for Democrats . At this point it wo n't hurt them much , but it 's unlikely to ever help them much , either . In 2014 , House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi told ███ that Democrats were `` not running on or from the Affordable Care Act , '' and that 's probably going to be the party 's strategy after Obama , too .
Instead , Obamacare 's legacy will be its substance : it has permanently reshaped the social contract in America . It is now the federal government 's role to make heath insurance affordable and available to all its citizens , and any Republican president who seriously wants to repeal or reform Obamacare will need to propose a replacement that fulfills that basic bargain .
Kristol now chairs the 2017 Project — another effort meant to dream up a Republican future . Under the heading `` A Winning Alternative to Obamacare , '' the organization warns that `` While most Americans would personally like to see Obamacare repealed '' — I do n't think that 's a correct read of the polling , but agree to disagree — `` they are not likely to yank newly obtained insurance away from millions of their fellow citizens . ''
Kristol 's group goes on to propose a trillion-dollar replacement that would give every American without employer or government-provided insurance a refundable tax credit that would be at least enough to let them purchase bare-bones , catastrophic coverage . The plan , they say , would be `` a historic blow for limited government and liberty . ''
That is Obamacare 's legacy . It wo n't help the Democrats much , but it will do an enormous amount for the uninsured .