A Supreme Court decision to rule against the individual mandate that requires Americans to buy insurance coverage would sour the health care industry on President Obama ’ s health care reforms . But the extent of the damage such a ruling would create has a lot to do with whether the sickest Americans will still be able to enter the insurance market .
If the justices uphold the part of the Affordable Care Act requiring insurers to cover patients with pre-existing conditions , insurance companies would suffer a blow , but doctors , hospitals and drugmakers would find themselves with more insured , high-need patients .
But if the court strikes down the insurance reforms , the situation changes .
Insurers would no longer have to cover the most costly Americans , but health care providers could lose out on a lucrative pool of patients they had been counting on under the original deal .
No one knows who the final winners and losers will be when the nine justices release their decision — which could come as early as this week — but stakeholders are preparing for the possibility that the court could strip away some of the “ carrots ” that enticed them to support Mr. Obama ’ s overhaul to begin with .
Insurers and providers were expecting that the law with its mandate would push 27 million uninsured Americans to obtain coverage . Minus the mandate , about 15 million uninsured are expected to enroll largely owing to a major Medicaid expansion and the availability of new federal insurance subsidies .
Given that health care stakeholders consented to a slew of new taxes and regulations with dramatic enrollment increases in mind , they may not be as eager to deliver on their part of the deal without the mandate , analysts say .
“ They ’ ve all agreed to pay these small taxes to fund reform , with the idea they ’ re going to have something close to universal coverage , and now they ’ re going to have a lot less of it , ” said John Holahan , director of the Urban Institute ’ s health policy center .
Pharmaceutical companies agreed to contribute $ 80 billion over a decade toward the cost of health care by footing half the cost of drugs in the Medicare Part D “ doughnut hole ” coverage gap and paying a health care reform fee and higher Medicaid rebates .
Hospitals accepted new Medicare penalties for high readmission rates and reimbursement cuts for hospitals treating a disproportionate share of the medically indigent , while medical device makers face a 2.3 percent tax on their sales .
And besides paying a new tax on premiums , insurers face dozens of new regulations , from restrictions on how much they can spend on administrative costs to mandates that they cover benefits deemed “ essential ” by the government and fully cover preventative services without charging out-of-pocket fees .
All of that will stay in place if the court throws out the mandate but leaves the rest of the law alone . But some analysts say that even in that scenario , the industry will still end up with a good deal from the extra enrollment owing to the Medicaid expansion and insurance subsidies .
“ Without the mandate , certainly there ’ s less inducement to get coverage , but just the increased access to affordable options is very useful for a lot of people , ” said Carter Price , a mathematician at the Rand Corp. who published a study on enrollment projections earlier this year .
And Robert Laszewski , a consultant in the insurance industry , downplayed the effect of the mandate on insurance enrollment .
“ I think whatever the Supreme Court does , the subsidies are going to be there , and we ’ re still going to pick up a lot of new customers , ” Mr. Laszewski said . “ The hospital industry ’ s going to see a lot more people come in with insurance cards . ”
No one knows how many of the currently uninsured will enroll if the court drops both the mandate and the pre-existing condition reforms . While the sickest Americans could find it impossible to buy coverage , premiums would drop and perhaps attract younger , healthier Americans .
But even if that kept enrollment numbers about the same as if the court struck down just the mandate , the fact remains that not nearly as many Americans will buy insurance if the government doesn ’ t require them to , analysts say .
“ A lot of that coverage you ’ re getting is because of the premium subsidies , ” Mr. Holahan said . “ You ’ re still only getting 40 [ percent ] to 50 percent as many people covered . ”