Donald Trump ’ s archconservative allies in the House are trying to keep the Obamacare repeal dream alive — but one key member is also starting discussions about fixing the law .
Freedom Caucus Chair Rep. Mark Meadows has started negotiating a deal with a top House moderate , Rep. Tom MacArthur ( R-NJ ) , which would work to stabilize Obamacare ’ s individual markets , funding key payments to insurers while giving states more flexibility for their own health care programs .
Meanwhile , on Friday , while most of Congress was home on recess , three House Freedom Caucus members — Reps. Jim Jordan ( R-OH ) , Scott Perry ( PA ) , Tom Garrett ( VA ) — were on the House floor introducing and signing a discharge petition that would force the House to vote on a clean Obamacare repeal bill .
Republicans have been stuck in an intra-party battle between reviving Obamacare repeal or moving on and taking small steps to stabilize the law since last month ’ s failure in the Senate . The Freedom Caucus is now at the heart of that predicament : While they make a very public gesture to force another repeal vote , their leader is also setting up a scenario in which the law could largely remain in place .
There is a new more moderate plan in nascent stages
Meadows has entered into initial talks with MacArthur about a much more modest health care bill that would actually be designed to stabilize Obamacare , as Axios first reported .
A House aide emphasized that these talks are in their early stages and do not represent an endorsement from the full Freedom Caucus .
The outline of the emerging deal is pretty simple , per the aide :
Congress would authorize cost-sharing reduction payments , which compensate insurers for providing discounts on out-of-pocket costs for lower-income customers .
In exchange , states would be given more flexibility under an existing Obamacare waiver program to pursue their own health care policies .
The cost-sharing reduction payments , which ███ has explained in great detail , have been repeatedly threatened by Trump in recent weeks . Because of an ongoing lawsuit , Trump could cut off the payments at any time , which could cause insurers to either hike their premiums or drop out of the market altogether . Some top Republicans in Congress have urged Trump not to follow through on the threat , but congressional action is the only sure way to prevent it .
But other Republicans , particularly the most ardent anti-Obamacare members in the Freedom Caucus , would be reluctant to support funding for the health care law without getting anything in return . So their win in this deal would be more flexibility for the state waivers already available under Obamacare .
Conservatives have been seeking such state flexibility throughout the Obamacare repeal debate — it ’ s not yet clear how the new proposal would differ from previous iterations . There is a wide range of possibilities : The waivers could give states a blank check to undo Obamacare ’ s insurance regulations or they could leave most of the law ’ s safeguards in place . It would depend entirely on the specific legislative language .
Part of the theory for conservatives , per the House aide , is that addressing the waivers in the stabilization bill would eliminate the need to deal with them in a bigger repeal-and-replace bill that Meadows and others still hope to revive . Those proposals have consistently run into trouble under the Senate ’ s procedural rules , which limit what policies Republicans can include in a “ budget reconciliation ” bill that needs only 50 votes to advance in the upper chamber .
But it ’ s not clear how this actually helps Republicans get the 50th vote in the Senate for any Obamacare repeal bill . The objections from the Republican senators who voted against three different repeal bills last month were not about the waiver proposals .
Republican leaders also have a packed schedule for the foreseeable future , with government funding and the federal debt ceiling on tap in September , and seem genuinely eager to move onto other issues like tax reform rather than continuing to litigate health care .
So in the end , this could wind up being the best deal the Freedom Caucus and other anti-Obamacare Republicans can get . State flexibility , in exchange for making sure the health care law they hate so deeply doesn ’ t collapse .
Of course , it could still be a struggle . The leader of another conservative group in the House tweeted his skepticism about the nascent deal shortly after it went public .
Stabilize = Bailout . We promised to dismantle Obamacare , not to prop it up and ask the American people to pay more . https : //t.co/UQEDX4J9TB — Rep. Mark Walker ( @ RepMarkWalker ) August 11 , 2017
Meanwhile , the Freedom Caucus is also making its party walk the plank on clean repeal
Meanwhile , the discharge petition is an attempt to force a vote on a proposal the Senate already failed to pass in late July ( seven Republicans voted against a proposal to repeal Obamacare and replace it later ) . But that vote hasn ’ t deterred House conservatives from pushing forward .
If they get 218 signatures on their petition , House Leadership would have to bring a clean Obamacare repeal bill to a full floor for a vote . That vote would be difficult for the dozens of moderate Republicans in vulnerable House seats , and it wouldn ’ t provide a clear path to repealing and replacing the health care law .
The clean repeal proposal would “ wipe the health law ’ s coverage expansion off the books without a replacement in 2020 , ” ███ ’ s Sarah Kliff wrote , in what Republicans have named a “ repeal and delay ” strategy . However , the Congressional Budget Office , which evaluates the impact of bills , says it would still leave 17 million less people insured in the first year .
The House voted to pass a repeal bill in 2015 knowing it would go nowhere under then president Barack Obama . But voting for a repeal bill now is more than just a symbolic statement . There is a sizable contingent of moderates worried about any bill that would amount in a loss of health insurance coverage — including the most politically vulnerable members of the House , such as Rep. Darrell Issa .
Forcing vulnerable moderate members into yet another difficult vote on health care is a big risk for a Republican Party looking to keep their majority . But the Freedom Caucus , adamant on making a statement that they still believe in repealing Obamacare , hopes this petition would bully members into a party-line vote . Even if it fails , a signed petition will show who has flipped on Obamacare repeal between 2015 and 2017 , one Freedom Caucus aide said .
Freedom Caucus members think that the House passing the repeal bill would put added pressure on senators to change their votes if the measure came up again — but there isn ’ t any indication that would be the case .
House Leadership doesn ’ t appear to be behind the new attempt . “ The House has already passed a plan to repeal and replace Obamacare , '' House Speaker Paul Ryan ’ s spokesperson AshLee Strong told ███ , referencing the 2015 vote .
In other words , there is no need to put members through it again now .
So while with one hand archconservatives members are taking steps down a road that could lead to Obamacare largely remaining the law of the land , they are hankering for another showdown with their colleagues over Obamacare repeal .