Insiders say Ryan 's budget wo n't be much different than last year 's . Ryan floats change to Medicare plan
Paul Ryan ’ s budget will show how Republicans can balance a budget that ’ s trillions of dollars out of whack . But the most significant unresolved issue comes down to a minuscule number : one year .
Ryan — the House Budget Committee chairman — has privately been floating the idea of allowing his changes to Medicare to kick in for Americans younger than 56 . In previous budgets , those 55 and older were exempted from his plan to turn Medicare into a premium-support — or voucher — program .
It might not seem like much of a distinction — and it doesn ’ t help Republicans achieve their stated goal of balancing the budget in 10 years .
Republicans have been arguing for two years that their plans wouldn ’ t affect Medicare coverage for anyone older than 54 , and Democrats will surely pounce on any change as Republicans breaking faith with their own pledge to seniors . The Ryan budget served as a favorite battering ram for Democrats against Republican candidates on the campaign trail .
Ryan , according to Republicans familiar with his pitch , wants to take a stand on a program they say doesn ’ t have a future for the next generation of retirees if major reforms aren ’ t made soon . If the GOP gradually makes the argument to change the program incrementally , they hope the public will begin to accept it .
Republican leaders just want to pass a budget , and they ’ ll most likely back whichever plan eases that path .
The Wisconsin Republican plans to roll out the outlines of his budget Wednesday in a pen-and-pad session with reporters , and the age issue is one of only a handful of unresolved questions remaining . Also in the Ryan budget : a filibuster-proof pathway toward tax and entitlement reform — a process known as budget reconciliation . It ’ s the way Republicans think they ’ ll be able to jump-start a grand deficit compromise with Senate Democrats and Obama .
Balancing the budget in the next decade will be markedly easier , given the sequester ’ s spending cuts and the fresh injection of new governmental revenue at the beginning of 2013 .
The truth , insiders say , is the new Ryan budget isn ’ t much different than last year ’ s — or the one from the year before .
“ It ’ s not going to be that much different , except for the fact that it will balance in 10 years , ” Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy ( R-Calif. ) told ███ in an interview .
GOP leaders acknowledge the budget has potential downsides : It requires deep cuts to achieve balance in the next decade . But they think they will pass the spending blueprint easily .
It ’ s a telling test for the GOP , one that pits ideology against pragmatism and also underscores how far the center of gravity in the House Republican Conference has shifted to the right in just a few years . When Ryan first started talking about changing Medicare , many of his colleagues thought he was leading them on a kamikaze mission . Now , they ’ re arguing over whether it would be better to exempt nine years or 10 years ’ worth of people from the changes , even though the plan has no chance of becoming law .
CORRECTION : Corrected by : David Cohen @ 03/05/2013 01:00 AM CORRECTION : An earlier version of this story misstated the age group for which the Medicare change would take place .