The Obamacare that consumers will finally be able to sign up for next week is a long way from the health plan President Barack Obama first pitched to the nation .
Millions of low-income Americans won ’ t receive coverage . Many workers at small businesses won ’ t get a choice of insurance plans right away . Large employers won ’ t need to provide insurance for another year . Far more states than expected won ’ t run their own insurance marketplaces . And a growing number of workers won ’ t get to keep their employer-provided coverage .
Every branch of the federal government played a role in weakening the law over the past three years , the casualty of a divisive legislative fight , a surprise Supreme Court ruling , a complex implementation and an unrelenting political opposition . The result has been a stark gap between the promise of Obamacare and the reality — one that has fueled a deep vein of skepticism about the law as it enters its most critical phase .
“ Oh , I ’ ve heard of Obamacare , yes , but I didn ’ t know all that was involved , ” said Cindy Bishop , a part-time worker from Lexington , Ky. , who stopped by an Obamacare information booth at the state fair last month . “ Everybody that I have ever talked to is totally against it . They ’ re afraid all the doctors are going to pull out , and you ’ re going to have to be like Canada and have to be on a waiting list . ”
Obama will take a lead role during the six-month enrollment period in trying to convert critics like Bishop . He doesn ’ t expect to boost the subpar approval numbers , at least not in the near term . Democrats stopped anticipating a bump a long time ago when voters defied prediction after prediction that they would fall in love with Obamacare .
His best defense against Republican repeal efforts is a robust consumer response , and his best hope to soften years of public antipathy is a successful rollout . That ’ s why Obama is asking millions of Americans to just give the law a chance — go to the Web , sign up for a health care plan starting Oct. 1 and claim a new benefit that ’ s there for the taking on Jan. 1 . It ’ s also why Republicans are mounting such an aggressive last stand this week to revoke funding for the law .
The early hiccups may not matter in the long run if the Affordable Care Act survives Republican challenges and goes on to become an entitlement as popular as Social Security or Medicare and if the early gaps between hope and practice narrow as more states agree to expand Medicaid .
Administration officials said the regulatory delays won ’ t have a significant impact on the overall implementation . And already , despite the unceasing GOP campaign to sink the law , Obamacare has exceeded expectations in some significant ways .
The growth rate for health care costs has slowed to its lowest level in decades , although experts dispute whether the recession or Obamacare should receive the credit .
More than 3.1 million young adults gained coverage because they could stay on their parents ’ insurance ; 17 million children with pre-existing conditions can no longer be denied coverage ; and insurers have been forced to issue more than $ 500 million in rebate checks to consumers because they failed to spend at least 80 percent of premiums on medical care .
“ The Affordable Care Act has put historic consumer protections in place that have improved the quality and cost of health insurance and will soon provide a simple way for uninsured Americans and their families to shop for quality , affordable coverage in the health insurance marketplaces , ” White House spokeswoman Jessica Santillo said . “ The landmark improvements to the health system are taking effect on time and are already helping make better coverage available at a more affordable price . ”
The broad pillars of Obamacare remain intact : the exchanges , the subsidies and the security of coverage for so many Americans who otherwise couldn ’ t afford it . But in ways large and small , the changes to the law are making the reality of health reform more challenging .
Chief Justice John Roberts handed the Obama administration an unexpected victory last year with his 5-4 opinion upholding the law . Less understood at the time : the dramatic consequences for his split-the-difference solution that a mandatory Medicaid expansion must be an option for each state .