Officials say the estimate represents their best approximation after gathering figures . | REUTERS White House broadens Obamacare exemptions
Millions of Americans who had their health plans cancelled will be exempt from the Obamacare individual mandate , the administration said Thursday — a surprise move that comes just before Monday ’ s deadline to sign up for coverage starting Jan. 1 .
The administration also said people who had their plans cancelled could get a scaled-back catastrophic plan , which has more limited benefits than those included in other Obamacare health plans .
The move prompted sharp criticism from Republicans and concern from the insurance industry that another last-minute change would disrupt coverage and lead to tumult in the new marketplaces .
“ This latest rule change could cause significant instability in the marketplace and lead to further confusion and disruption for consumers , ” said Karen Ignagni , president of America ’ s Health Insurance Plans , an industry trade group .
Republicans who have fought the individual mandate as one of the most hated aspects of the sweeping health law said the change was one more sign of a failed policy .
“ The administration is recognizing the grim reality that more Americans have lost health insurance than gained it under Obamacare , ” Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) said Thursday evening . “ Holding a fire sale of cheap insurance is not a responsible fix for a broken program . This is a slap in the face to the thousands of Americans who have already purchased expensive insurance through the Obamacare exchanges . ”
President Barack Obama had often said that people who liked their health plans could keep them under his health law and the wave of millions of cancellations was politically damaging , particularlyas the HealthCare.gov debacle made it so hard for people to shop for replacement coverage . Obama , whose poll numbers have dropped sharply , was forced to concede last month that he was wrong to have made that pledge .
The administration said fewer than a half-million people whose plans had been cancelled had not yet found new coverage . But the new rules outlined Thursday night will allow people to get a “ hardship exemption ” if their new alternatives are too expensive .
Joanne Peters , a spokeswoman for the Department of Health and Human Services , said , “ This is a common sense clarification of the law . For the limited number of consumers whose plans have been canceled and are seeking coverage , this is one more option. ” Administration officials noted that some of the people who lost plans were able to get subsidized ones in the new exchanges .
The catastrophic plan , which was always a part of the Affordable Care Act , is an option for people under 30 and for those who qualify for specific exemptions , such as affordability . Under the new policy , people would have to provide proof of a canceled policy to qualify for the exemption .
“ These consumers should qualify for this temporary hardship exemption and I can assure you that the exemption will be available to them , ” HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius wrote in a letter to six Senate Democrats who requested a policy change . “ As a result , in addition to their existing options these individuals will also be able to buy a catastrophic plan to smooth their transition to coverage through the Marketplace . ”
The administration does not expect many people will take up the new option , but wants to ensure that catastrophic coverage is available to those who had plans canceled . But making catastrophic health plans more broadly available also poses problems for insurers . It could disrupt the insurance pools , since insurers and actuaries had assumed that people shifting from the old individual market would go into the new bronze , silver or gold plans on the Obamacare exchanges . And allowing people to opt out completely could further depress enrollment , already below target because of all the website problems .