Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison ( Mitch ) Mitchell McConnellOvernight Defense : Dems subpoena Giuliani for Ukraine docs | DOJ says Trump contacted foreign countries over Russia inquiry | Top Armed Services Republican Thornberry to retire | Milley sworn in as top general ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff US sanctions Russian individuals for interference in 2018 elections MORE ( R-Ky. ) is tempering expectations that the Senate will pass an overhaul of the nation ’ s healthcare system , promising his colleagues a vote but not success .
McConnell in his public comments and private conversations about the ObamaCare repeal-and-replace bill is painting a more sober picture than Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanDemocrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Three-way clash set to dominate Democratic debate Krystal Ball touts Sanders odds in Texas MORE ( R-Wis. ) , who in March guaranteed passage through the House .
He says he will bring a bill to the floor for a vote but is not making any promises whether he will get at least 50 members of the 52-member Senate Republican Conference to back it .
“ Mitch has been very clear in our conference , and that is there will be a bill and we will be voting on it , ” said Sen. Dean Heller Dean Arthur HellerThis week : Barr back in hot seat over Mueller report Trump suggests Heller lost reelection bid because he was 'hostile ' during 2016 presidential campaign Trump picks ex-oil lobbyist David Bernhardt for Interior secretary MORE ( R-Nev. ) .
But that ’ s as far as the GOP leader has been willing to go .
“ He hasn ’ t gone beyond explaining that , ” said Heller , who recently met with the special working group that is negotiating the healthcare bill .
McConnell warned in an interview with Reuters that passing healthcare reform will be tougher than tax reform , another of President Trump ’ s top priorities .
Expectations for repealing major parts of ObamaCare soared after the House passed its bill earlier this month , but McConnell cautions the votes in the Senate aren ’ t there yet .
What ’ s more , he ’ s not sure of the path to success .
“ I don ’ t know how we get to 50 [ votes ] at the moment . But that ’ s the goal . And exactly what the composition of that [ bill ] is I ’ m not going to speculate about because it serves no purpose , ” McConnell told Reuters on Wednesday .
“ We ’ ll have 218 when this thing comes to the floor , ” Ryan declared , referring to the number needed to pass a bill through the House . “ I can guarantee that . ”
That prediction almost blew up in his face when House leaders were forced to pull the bill from floor consideration later that month because it did not have enough support .
The House bill squeaked through , however , with 217 votes on May 4 after conservatives negotiated a compromise with Rep. Tom MacArthur ( R-N.J. ) , a leader at the time of the centrist Tuesday Group .
McConnell ’ s interview with Reuters caught some Republican colleagues by surprise .
“ I don ’ t know why he ’ s doing media on it , but he might be lowering expectations , ” said a GOP senator who requested anonymity to speculate on the leader ’ s motivations .
Other lawmakers have long been skeptical of the chances of passing healthcare reform through the Senate .
One GOP senator told ███ shortly before the House vote that healthcare legislation based on the House bill had only a 1 in 5 chance of passing the upper chamber .
Senate Republicans are using special budgetary rules to prevent a Democratic filibuster , meaning they need just 50 votes to pass healthcare legislation , with Vice President Pence breaking a tie . But that means McConnell can only lose two votes .
McConnell has to find a way to balance the concerns of moderates , who are worried about capping the federal contribution for expanded Medicaid enrollment and higher costs for older , low-income Americans , with those of conservatives , who are leery about creating a new health entitlement .
Sen. John Boozman John Nichols BoozmanVA chief pressed on efforts to prevent veteran suicides McConnell ups pressure on White House to get a budget deal There is a severe physician shortage and it will only worsen MORE ( R-Ark . ) said McConnell “ is just being realistic . ”
The legislation that passed the House earlier this month can not pass the Senate , Republicans in the upper chamber say .
Yet Senate Republican Whip John Cornyn John CornynThe Hill 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff GOP senators attack whistleblower 's credibility Republicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump MORE ( Texas ) told reporters this past week that the Senate bill will overlap the House bill by as much as 70 or 80 percent .
That means the daunting task for McConnell is to find a way to replace 20 to 30 percent of the House bill in a way that will bring him 50 GOP votes .
A report released Wednesday by the Congressional Budget Office underscored a variety of problems moderates have with the bill .
It would leave 23 million more people uninsured by 2026 compared to ObamaCare and increase premiums for older , low-income Americans by as much as 850 percent .
“ There does seem to be a consensus that the House bill could never pass the Senate and I ’ m certainly of that belief as well , ” said Sen. Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsYes , President Trump , we do have a homelessness crisis and you 're making it harder for us to address The policy-driven presidential campaign could be drowned out by impeachment Flake tells GOP : Trump 'does not deserve reelection ' MORE ( R-Maine ) , who cited the CBO report ’ s finding that 23 million people would lose insurance under the House bill over the next decade .
In March , four moderate-leaning Republican senators warned McConnell in a letter that the House bill , which cuts nearly $ 900 billion in Medicaid funding , did “ not include stability for Medicaid populations . ”
Sens . Rob Portman Robert ( Rob ) Jones PortmanHillicon Valley : Democrats seize on whistleblower complaint to push for election security | Google taps GOP Senate aide to lead lobbying | Warren calls for congressional tech office Google taps Senate GOP aide to lead lobbying efforts Senators fret over prospect of Trump trial MORE ( Ohio ) , Shelley Moore Capito Shelley Wellons Moore CapitoGaetz : Some lawmakers reviewed transcript at White House On The Money : Trump takes aim at China in UN address | Consumer confidence fell as trade tensions rose | Senate proposes billion for Trump border wall Senate proposes billion for Trump border wall MORE ( W.Va. ) , Cory Gardner Cory Scott GardnerThe policy-driven presidential campaign could be drowned out by impeachment Juan Williams : Trump 's grip on GOP Senate may come loose Embracing President Mike Pence might be GOP 's best play MORE ( Colo. ) and Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiRepublicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump GOP battens down the hatches after release of Trump whistleblower complaint Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran MORE ( Alaska ) signed the letter .
Portman said earlier this month that he would like to see “ a longer runway ” for reforming Medicaid instead of abruptly capping enrollment for the program in 2020 .
Another sticking point with moderates is language defunding Planned Parenthood for a year , something to which Collins and Murkowski have both voiced objection .
If McConnell tries to woo moderates by boosting subsidies for older Americans or by softening Medicaid reforms , he risks losing the support of a trio of conservatives : Sens . Rand Paul Randal ( Rand ) Howard PaulSenate passes stopgap spending bill , sending it to Trump Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Ky. ) , Ted Cruz Rafael ( Ted ) Edward CruzHillicon Valley : Treasury sanctions Russians over 2018 election meddling | How Facebook fought back on FTC fine | WeWork calls off IPO | Elon Musk unveils Mars rocket Cambridge Analytica whistleblower 's book coming out next week O'Rourke : Trump should resign MORE ( R-Texas ) and Mike Lee Michael ( Mike ) Shumway LeeIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules To win the federal paid family leave debate , allow states to lead the way GOP opposition threatens to sink Trump 's ATF pick MORE ( R-Utah ) .
Paul is philosophically opposed to establishing new taxpayer-funded subsidies to help people buy private insurance .
“ There ’ s not been a louder voice up here for repealing ObamaCare . I really want to repeal it . I just don ’ t want to replace [ it ] with ObamaCare lite or another federal program , ” he told Fox News recently .
Cruz has warned it would be “ catastrophic ” if Republicans fail to repeal ObamaCare .
He is holding back from criticizing the House bill while participating in negotiations on a Senate rewrite , but one of his big problems with the House legislation is that he felt it did not do enough to lower premiums .
He and other conservatives feel the best way to lower premiums would be to remove the mandate on insurance companies to provide coverage to older , sicker Americans — but that proposal is not popular with moderates .
“ It ’ s a challenge anytime you ’ re trying to get a consensus on a complex issue when you have to get 50 of 52 votes , ” said Sen. Lamar Alexander Andrew ( Lamar ) Lamar AlexanderGOP battens down the hatches after release of Trump whistleblower complaint Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Tenn. ) , chairman of the Senate Health Committee .