President Obama said Thursday he was “ sorry ” Americans are losing health insurance plans he repeatedly said they could keep , and vowed to work with those who are finding themselves in a “ tough situation ” as a result .
His remarks came as a bipartisan bill was introduced in the Senate to delay the implementation of the individual mandate of ObamaCare by one year , meaning Americans would avoid a $ 95 penalty for not having health insurance that is scheduled to kick in next year .
Referring to those who are losing their health insurance plans , Obama told NBC News , `` I am sorry that they are finding themselves in this situation based on assurances they got from me . We 've got to work hard to make sure that they know we hear them and we are going to do everything we can to deal with folks who find themselves in a tough position as a consequence of this . ”
The White House , while defending the health care law and vowing to fix the problems with the website , has not explicitly ruled out the possibility of delaying the individual mandate .
House Speaker John Boehner responded to Obama 's apology late Thursday , saying `` an apology is certainly in order , but what Americans want to hear is that the president is going to keep his promise . ''
Thursday 's bill was introduced by Senators Joe Manchin , D-W.Va. , and Mark Kirk , R-Ill. , who said since the Affordable Care Act was passed , there have been “ many identifiable problems exposed in the law that need to be addressed . ”
“ We need to start working together to fix this law and make it work so that all Americans have access to affordable and reliable health care coverage , ” Manchin said in a statement . “ We can start with a one-year delay of the individual mandate to eliminate penalty fees if individuals choose to not enroll for a health care plan in 2014 .
`` This common sense proposal simply allows Americans to take more time to browse and explore their options , making 2014 a true transition year . ”
The legislation acknowledges there are many positive components of the Affordable Care Act that will lead to health care becoming more affordable for all Americans , and these reforms must “ continue to be implemented . ”
“ Nevertheless , it is important to recognize when a new program is not meeting the high standards that the American people expect , ” the bill reads . “ So far , the federal healthcare exchanges have failed , and we must deliver a better product . ”
The bill also says that delaying the entire implementation of ObamaCare would not be “ responsible , ” but Congress should take action to make “ commonsense reforms ” to the law .
“ Healthcare should not be a burden on consumers , which is why we must delay the penalty for individuals , ” Kirk said in a statement . “ Last July , American businesses were given more time to provide employees health coverage . If a delay is good enough for businesses , it should be good enough for all Americans . ”