This is a rush transcript . Copy may not be in its final form .
AMY GOODMAN : Twenty-two million Americans would lose their insurance under the Senate Republicans ’ healthcare bill just over the next decade . In addition , Medicaid would see a $ 772 billion cut over the next decade , while wealthy Americans would receive $ 541 billion in tax cuts . This is according to the Congressional Budget Office , which released its assessment of the Republican healthcare bill in the Senate Monday .
Following the release of the CBO report , Republican Senators Susan Collins of Maine and Rand Paul of Kentucky joined Senator Dean Heller of Nevada in pledging to vote against even debating their party ’ s healthcare bill this week . Senator Ron Johnson of Wisconsin has suggested he , too , would oppose voting on the bill . Republican leaders had been pushing for a vote this week , ahead of the July 4th recess .
The Republican bill also faces major opposition from all Senate Democrats , a slew of governors from both parties , the majority of the healthcare industry , hospitals , doctors , nurses , patient advocacy groups , the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops , and even members of the far-right Koch brothers ’ political network , who claim the legislation is not sufficiently conservative .
This is Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders speaking Monday on the Senate floor .
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS : Mr. President , today ’ s Congressional Budget Office analysis of the Trump-McConnell healthcare bill gives us 22 million reasons why this legislation should not see the light of day . What CBO tells us , in truth , is that this bill really has nothing to do with healthcare . Rather , it is an enormous transfer of wealth from the sick , the elderly , the children , the disabled and the poor into the pockets of the wealthiest people in this country . Mr. President , according to CBO—and that report just came out a few hours ago—this bill would throw 22 million Americans off of health insurance , cut Medicaid by over $ 770 billion , defund Planned Parenthood and substantially increase premiums for older Americans . … Mr. President , this , in fact , is a barbaric and immoral piece of legislation .
AMY GOODMAN : On Monday , the American Medical Association came out against the Senate bill . In a letter to Senate leaders , the AMA wrote , quote , “ Medicine has long operated under the precept of Primum non nocere , or 'first , do no harm . ' The draft legislation violates that standard on many levels , ” unquote .
Meanwhile , a stunning new study in the Annals of Internal Medicine is estimating some 28,600 people could die early deaths if they lose health insurance .
We ’ re joined now by the author of the study , Dr. Steffie Woolhandler , professor at CUNY-Hunter College , primary care physician , lecturer at Harvard Medical School and co-founder of Physicians for a National Health Program .
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : We reviewed the world ’ s scientific literature on the relationship between health insurance and mortality . And there is really now a scientific consensus that being uninsured raises the death rates . It raises your death rates by between 3 and 29 percent . And the math on that is that if you take health insurance away from 22 million people , about 29,000 of them will die every year , annually , as a result . That ’ s what we found by reviewing the literature . There was a similar review in New England Journal of Medicine . We punished our own study in the Annals of Internal Medicine , which is the official organ of the American College of Physicians , the nation ’ s largest medical specialty society . So , being uninsured raises your death rate . That is established scientific consensus . And many of the Republicans have been trying to say , “ Oh , you can take away health insurance from 22 million people , and nothing will happen. ” That ’ s simply contradicted by the scientific consensus .
AMY GOODMAN : And explain how people die as a result .
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : Well , people might have an acute illness , like major trauma . You get hit by a car , and you have to go to the hospital . If you ’ re uninsured and you have major trauma , your death rates are higher . You might have an illness like breast cancer . If you ’ re uninsured and you have breast cancer , your death rates are higher . But mostly this has to do with that routine medical care to treat high blood pressure , to treat diabetes , before they cause complications , and to prevent those serious complications and deaths . Seems like hypertension , high blood pressure , is probably the largest single contributor to deaths among uninsured people . You need to be taking medicines to control high blood pressure to prevent strokes and heart attacks and death .
AMY GOODMAN : So this number , 22 million people will lose their health insurance over the next 10 years , and then it only goes up from there .
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : Well , according to the Congressional Budget Office , yes , it goes up from there , because the Medicaid cuts in the Senate bill are delayed , but then they ’ re very , very deep . They ’ re even deeper over the long run than what was in the House bill . So , Medicaid is going to be cut not just for poor people , but for people in nursing homes . You know , most people in a nursing home eventually have to rely on Medicaid to pay the bill , because nursing home care takes all your money , and you have to rely on Medicaid . If you have a disabled child , you have to rely on Medicaid . If you have a relative who has serious mental illness or substance abuse , they ’ re going to be relying on Medicaid . So it takes money from all of these people , not just the folks who are poor now , to give this giant tax cut to the top 1 percent of taxpayers .
AMY GOODMAN : I wanted to turn to a comment made by the Idaho Republican Congressman Raúl Labrador during a town hall meeting last month . He came under fire for his answer to this question from an audience member .
AUDIENCE MEMBER : You are mandating people on Medicaid accept dying . You are making a mandate that will kill people .
REP. RAÚL LABRADOR : No , no one wants anybody to die . You know , that line is so indefensible . Nobody dies because they don ’ t have access to healthcare .
AMY GOODMAN : “ Nobody dies because they don ’ t have access to healthcare. ” Dr. Steffie Woolhandler ?
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : Well , Raúl Labrador said it . Senator Ted Cruz has said that . Marco Rubio has said that . Secretary Tom Price , the secretary of health and human services , has implied that , that you can be uninsured and nothing happens . That ’ s simply not true . The science is showing us that if you lack health insurance , you don ’ t get the care you need to stay healthy , and that people die earlier as a result . And I think it ’ s a—the Republicans recognize this is a very dangerous idea for them , that people are going to die because of their behavior . But that ’ s what the scientific consensus is saying .
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : Well , right now , the betting markets are saying it ’ s 50/50 that this Senate bill will pass . So when something ’ s 50/50 , that means now is the time to mobilize . You know , you can call your senator . You can call your congressman . You can demonstrate . There ’ s demonstrations all over the country about this bill . You can tweet about it . You can tell your friends about it . But now is the time to really get active on this issue .
We also need to be saying , “ Let ’ s move forward to single payer , that covers everyone , not backward through this repeal. ” You know , even under the Affordable Care Act , 28 million Americans have no health insurance . Many Americans are underinsured . They have insurance they can ’ t afford to use because of gaps in their coverage , like copayments , deductibles and uncovered services . So we need to be fighting this Republican step backward , but also saying to our Democratic legislators , “ We need to be moving forward to single payer , ” that will actually improve care for all Americans .
AMY GOODMAN : You were never an advocate of Obamacare . And now , what will happen ? I mean , even if they don ’ t vote on it , the gutting of the health insurance—of health insurance today is , you know , moving full speed ahead . So what does it look like even if this bill doesn ’ t move forward ?
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : Well , there ’ s more support for the Medicare-for-all , single-payer idea than ever in history . Polls are showing 56 percent of the American people support the idea . The majority of House Democrats have endorsed the Conyers bill , HR 676 , a Medicare-for-all bill . More than half of House Democrats have endorsed that bill , about 112 . Senator Sanders is putting a bill into the Senate in July . So this is a great time for people to be saying , “ We need to move forward from the ACA to single payer . ”
AMY GOODMAN : And what would Medicare for all look like ?
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : OK , well , it would be expanded and improved Medicare for all . You would get a Medicare card the day you were born , and have it your entire life . All medically necessary care would be covered by a tax-funded Medicare-for-all program , that ’ s—it would be a lot cheaper over the long run , because you save so much money on administrative costs . All that billing and insurance enrollment is extremely expensive in the United States , consuming 31 percent of total U.S. health spending , according to our research that ’ s appeared in New England Journal of Medicine . By going to a simple single-payer system , you could save about half of it , about $ 500 billion a year , which you could use to get to universal healthcare and to remove copayments and deductibles from people who now have them .
So , a single—that ’ s what ’ s happened in other countries . Canada has a single-payer system—doesn ’ t work perfectly , but it does cover everyone . Scotland has a single-payer system . Much of Western Europe has single-payer systems . They cover everyone . They live two years longer . They pay less for healthcare than we do .
AMY GOODMAN : Well , now , this is important , because you talked about mortality , if this bill were to pass and become law , that close to 29,000 people a year could die , more Americans could die . What is our mortality rate with our insurance system compared to others ?
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : Well , Americans live two to three years shorter than people in Canada , just across the border , with very similar culture , very similar lifestyle , yet we live two years shorter . Similarly , we live about two years shorter than people in many Western European countries . And some of the studies we reviewed in our article actually look at the international evidence , which , again , is totally consistent with the idea that being uninsured is bad for your health , it can cause deaths , and that being fully covered for all medically necessary care , as would happen under Medicare for all , makes people healthier , and it prolongs their life .
AMY GOODMAN : I wanted to turn to President Trump being interviewed recently by Peter Hegseth of Fox & Friends .
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP : Because I want to see—I want to see—and I speak from the heart—that ’ s what I want to see . I want to see a bill with heart .
DR. STEFFIE WOOLHANDLER : Well , Trumpcare has no heart whatsoever . The House bill was going to throw 23 million people off insurance . The Senate bill is going to throw 22 million off in 10 years but then keep throwing more off . You know , they ’ re going to make health insurance worse for people with private coverage by getting rid of the rules about what has to be covered , so your private insurance will no longer have to cover maternity care . They ’ re actually robbing money from the Medicare trust fund . They ’ re taking $ 117 billion out of the Medicare trust fund , which pays for the health insurance when people turn 65 . $ 117 billion is taken out of that trust fund to give tax cuts to the top 1 percent of taxpayers . That is not heart . That ’ s the opposite of heart .
AMY GOODMAN : Well , I thank you very much for being with us , Dr. Steffie Woolhandler , professor at CUNY-Hunter College here in New York , primary care physician , lecturer at Harvard Medical School , co-founder of Physicians for a National Health Program . And we ’ ll link to her report on the mortality that would be related to the Republican healthcare bill becoming law . Roughly 28,600 more Americans could die per year .
This is ███ ! When we come back , a Supreme Court decision . Stay with us .