This report was prompted by two stories we 've covered this week : ( 1 ) Kathleen Sebelius ' belated admission that some Americans will , in fact , see their premiums rise due to the `` Affordable '' Care Act , and ( 2 ) the American Society of Actuaries ' determination that insurers will see claim pay-outs on individual plans rise by 32 percent as a result of the law . This was n't how things were supposed to be , according to the administration 's deeply dishonest sales pitch . CNN aired this segment last night :
Yes , that report really included a clip of a White House lackey assailing a nonpartisan actuarial organization for rudely producing rigorous estimates that deviated from the president 's preferred narrative . Obama vs. math -- how thoroughly appropriate . ( Perhaps Obama 's SuperPAC can run some ads accusing the bookkeepers of giving their numbers cancer . `` These anti-women calculators are too extreme ! '' ) . In spite of the administration 's churlish attacks , the professional accountants are standing by their politically- inconvenient numbers . The concession from Sebelius is doubly notable because of her infamous 2010 threat against insurers who told the truth about Obamacare 's impact on costs and premiums :
Witness Kathleen Sebelius 's Thursday letter to America 's Health Insurance Plans , the industry trade group—a thuggish message even by her standards . The Health and Human Services secretary wrote that some insurers have been attributing part of their 2011 premium increases to ObamaCare and warned that `` there will be zero tolerance for this type of misinformation and unjustified rate increases . '' Zero tolerance for expressing an opinion , or offering an explanation to policyholders ? They 're more subtle than this in Caracas . What Ms. Sebelius really means is that the government will prohibit insurers from doing business if reality is not politically convenient for Democrats . ObamaCare includes a slew of mandated benefits for next year , such as allowing children to remain on their parents ' plans until age 26 and `` free '' preventative care ( i.e. , no direct out-of-pocket cost sharing for consumers ) . The tone of Ms. Sebelius 's letter suggests that she does n't understand that money is exchanged for goods and services , and that if Congress mandates new benefits , premiums will rise .
The HHS Secretary 's updated line is a classic exercise in goalpost-moving and expectations management , an even starker example of which we covered over the weekend . Out : Legislative perfection ! In : ( Hopefully ) not a `` third-world experience ! ''