Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius is finally admitting that the Affordable Care Act is n't actually that affordable . Think tanks have been warning for years about the expensive cost of ObamaCare and many have already seen their health insurance premiums rise as a result of its implementation yet , the administration has denied the bill will actually increase costs for consumers until now .
Some people purchasing new insurance policies for themselves this fall could see premiums rise because of requirements in the health-care law , Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told reporters Tuesday .
Ms. Sebelius ’ s remarks come weeks before insurers are expected to begin releasing rates for plans that start on Jan. 1 , 2014 , when key provisions of the health law kick in . Premiums have been a sensitive subject for the Obama administration , which is counting on elements in the health law designed to increase competition among insurers to keep rates in check . The administration has pointed to subsidies that will be available for many lower-income Americans to help them with the cost of coverage .
The secretary ’ s remarks are among the first direct statements from federal officials that people who have skimpy health plans right now could face higher premiums for plans that are more generous . She noted that the law requires plans to provide better benefits and treat all customers equally regardless of their medical claims .
“ These folks will be moving into a really fully insured product for the first time , and so there may be a higher cost associated with getting into that market , ” she said . “ But we feel pretty strongly that with subsidies available to a lot of that population that they are really going to see much better benefit for the money that they ’ re spending . ”
Most people who have `` skimpy plans '' have them because they either a ) do n't need a fancy health insurance plan b ) ca n't afford a health insurance plan . Forcing consumers into plans they do n't need or ca n't afford is counter productive . Not to mention , Sebelius argues consumers will see a `` much better benefit for the money that they 're spending . '' Better benefits ? Does she mean better benefits of having fewer doctors ?
Most physicians have a pessimistic outlook on the future of medicine , citing eroding autonomy and falling income , a survey of more than 600 doctors found .
Six in 10 physicians ( 62 percent ) said it is likely many of their colleagues will retire earlier than planned in the next 1 to 3 years , a survey from Deloitte Center for Health Solutions found . That perception is uniform across age , gender , and specialty , it said .
Another 55 percent of surveyed doctors believe others will scale back hours because of the way medicine is changing , but the survey did n't elaborate greatly on how it was changing . Three-quarters think the best and brightest may not consider a career in medicine , although that is an increase from the 2011 survey result of 69 percent .
`` Physicians recognize 'the new normal ' will necessitate major changes in the profession that require them to practice in different settings as part of a larger organization that uses technologies and team-based models for consumer ( patient ) care , '' the survey 's findings stated .
About two-thirds of the survey responders said they believe physicians and hospitals will become more integrated in coming years . In the last 2 years , 31 percent moved into a larger practice , results found . Nearly eight in 10 believe midlevel providers will play a larger role in directing primary care .
Or how about the better benefits of fewer life saving medical devices thanks to the innovation and job killing medical device tax in ObamaCare ?
Biomedical or medical device engineering firms are already laying off workers who develop crucial medical products due to the `` unforeseen '' costs , or in other words , the costs of ObamaCare . Not to mention , the more money these companies pay to the government , the less money they have to invest in research and development .
The Obama administration is no longer trying to lie about ObamaCare , instead they 're simply trying to justify the lies by making everyone feel better about the so-called benefits ObamaCare will offer at a much higher price .