A federal judge blocked Kentucky ’ s Medicaid work requirements on Friday , ruling that the Trump administration did not adequately consider before approving the state ’ s proposal whether work requirements would violate the program ’ s purpose of providing health care to the most vulnerable Americans .
The court decision is at least a temporary blow to the ambitious plans of Republican-led states and the Trump administration to remake the program .
The ruling came in a lawsuit involving Kentucky , one of the first states to have its proposal requiring certain Medicaid recipients to work ( or else lose their benefits ) approved by the Trump administration . District court Judge James Boasberg , an Obama appointee , came down in favor of the plaintiffs , led by the National Health Law Program and Kentucky Equal Justice Center , who sought to block the work requirements from taking effect on July 1 as planned .
The federal government is obligated under federal law to consider whether a Medicaid proposal advances the program ’ s objectives , the judge wrote , and the Trump administration failed to meet that standard before approving Kentucky ’ s plan .
“ The Secretary never adequately considered whether Kentucky HEALTH would in fact help the state furnish medical assistance to its citizens , a central objective of Medicaid , Boasberg said in his decision . “ This signal omission renders his determination arbitrary and capricious . ”
The ruling puts the future of Medicaid work requirements in doubt . The Trump administration has made them a priority , encouraging states to put forward proposals that require many nondisabled , nonelderly adults to work or look for employment . If they fail to meet these requirements , they could lose their health insurance .
Four states — Kentucky , Indiana , Arkansas , and New Hampshire — have had their work requirements approved by the administration . Seven others — Arizona , Kansas , Maine , Mississippi , Ohio , Utah , and Wisconsin — have proposals waiting for approval by the federal government .
Friday ’ s court decision is unlikely to be the end of the matter , as the ruling is expected to be appealed . But at the very least , it should delay the implementation of work requirements in Kentucky .
The underlying case hinges on a pretty simple argument : Does requiring Medicaid recipients to work to receive benefits further the program ’ s goals ? Many advocates , who argue that Medicaid is first and foremost a health insurance program , believe that work requirements are contrary to Medicaid ’ s purpose if they cut people ’ s access to health care .
The state of Kentucky and the Trump administration obviously feel differently . They argue that requiring work should improve Medicaid recipients ’ economic station and therefore their health — in spite of evidence that most Medicaid recipients already work or would not be expected to work . And those who do work could still lose their coverage because the work requirements are not structured in a way that reflects the realities of low-income work , like irregular or seasonal hours .
The Kaiser Family Foundation has estimated that 1.4 million to 4 million Americans — out of about 70 million covered by Medicaid — could lose their coverage if work requirements were imposed nationwide . The vast majority of the coverage losses would result from enrollees failing to report their compliance to the state , not because they were failing to fulfill the work or job search criteria .
In his ruling , Boasberg specifically chastised the Trump administration for failing to consider Kentucky ’ s own internal estimate that as many as 95,000 people could lose their Medicaid coverage within the first five years after Medicaid work requirements took effect .
“ At bottom , the record shows that 95,000 people would lose Medicaid coverage , and yet the Secretary paid no attention to that deprivation . Nor did he address how Kentucky HEALTH would otherwise help “ furnish ... medical assistance , ’ ” the judge wrote . “ In other words , he glossed over ‘ the impact of the state ’ s project ’ on the individuals whom Medicaid ‘ was enacted to protect . ’ ”
Kentucky has notably raised the stakes in its lawsuit . Not only is it trying to institute work requirements , but the state is threatening that , if the court blocks it from putting these rules in place , it will end Medicaid expansion entirely . The roughly 400,000 people covered by the expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare in this state would lose their insurance .
According to several people who were present during the oral arguments , Kentucky ’ s lawyer attempted to paint a dire scene : If the judge rules against work requirements , Medicaid expansion would quickly end . That isn ’ t actually true , but the desired effect was clear . “ Blackmail much ? ” one person who was there told me .
If you look at the text of Kentucky Gov . Matt Bevin ’ s executive order that set up this Catch-22 , it ’ s a bit more complicated . The order says that the Medicaid expansion must end only when three conditions are met :
Any part of Kentucky ’ s Medicaid work requirement waiver is invalidated by a court .
███-mark Sign up for the newsletter VoxCare Email ( required ) Zip Code By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Notice and European users agree to the data transfer policy . For more newsletters , check out our newsletters page Subscribe
Adding to the confusion , Bevin didn ’ t even really need to issue that executive order . He could end Medicaid expansion any time he wants .
” It was just a threat to the judge , ” Joan Alker of Georgetown University ’ s Center for Children and Families told me . “ He could terminate the waiver and expansion with six months ’ notice . ”
But the through line here is clear : Bevin is trying to take Medicaid expansion hostage , arguing that if Kentucky isn ’ t allowed to impose a work requirement , then there will be no more expansion . By the Bevin administration ’ s logic , work requirements do advance the goals of Medicaid , because without them , Kentucky is going to end its expansion and hundreds of thousands of the state ’ s most vulnerable citizens will lose their insurance .
But even if Bevin is willing to follow through on his threat , the story isn ’ t likely to be over .
” If he tries to end coverage , there will be massive political backlash and much litigation under various theories to slow him down , ” Sara Rosenbaum , a health law professor at George Washington University , told me . “ Lots of potential legal arguments , beginning with the fact that they would need to redetermine eligibility under traditional rules for every single enrollee . ”
The district court ’ s decision is probably just the first blow in a protracted legal battle . But it is a win for health care advocates who believe that requiring people to work to receive Medicaid violates the program ’ s principles .