Among the pearls of wisdom conveyed in Ecclesiastes is that everything has its time .
`` A time to be born ... a time to die , a time to plant ... a time to uproot , a time for war ... a time for peace . ''
The founders of the United States drew up a Constitution to serve as an operating manual , in its checks and balances , for peaceful , deliberative government . They understood human nature and set up a system in which competing interests would have to give in . Compromise , they understood , is a necessary lubricant for the wheels of government `` of the people , by the people , and for the people '' to turn and allow us to move forward .
But compromise is meant for those competing interests -- not for the core principles of the country that the Constitution exists to protect and secure . When the principles of our free nation under God are under siege , it is a time for confrontation , not compromise .
The other day , I watched a short video of Rafael Cruz 's presentation at a July event by FreedomWorks , a Washington , D.C.-based political action committee that usually supports tea party causes . Cruz is the father of the junior Republican senator from Texas , Ted Cruz , who is now in the spotlight .
Rafael Cruz is a self-made businessman , an immigrant from Casto 's Cuba , and a born-again evangelical Christian pastor .
Most of the time when someone cites the Declaration of Independence , they mention its famous opening sentences . But Rafael Cruz , in this brilliant summation of what America is about , quoted the signers ' closing words : `` ... with a firm reliance on the protection of divine Providence , we mutually pledge to each other our lives , our fortunes and our sacred honor . ''
Take a walk around Washington any evening . The fancy restaurants are filled with lobbyists and legislators .
Try to find anyone who would pledge his or her life and fortune for anything .
The American government is no longer about doing the business of the people while preserving and protecting the principles of a free nation . The principles of freedom have been drowned out by the power elite -- whether politicians , big business lobbyists or big media -- who use their influence to feather their own beds .
A Jeremiah-like Ted Cruz , ringing the alarm that things are not OK , is an annoyance to the comfortable establishment . As the class of `` haves '' protects its interests , it assures a dismal future for our young and for our poor . Its members play while the ship sinks .
There is no more powerful predictor of economic growth and prosperity than a nation 's economic freedom .
The just-published `` 2013 Economic Freedom of the World Report '' shows that the United States has dropped from being the world 's second-most economically free in 2000 to number 17 in this year 's report . The report comes from the Fraser Institute , a Canadian public-policy think tank .
Our economic arteries are clogged because of excessive government , which is dragging us down and ruining everything that made America great .
The Affordable Care Act is just the latest huge incursion into the freedom of American citizens in a long process of deterioration .
Every year , the trustees of Social Security and Medicare provide a report showing the dismal financial state of these huge entitlement programs . And every year , the political class in Washington ignores it , not having the courage to fight for real change , while things continue to worsen .
Now big business , unions and Congress are getting themselves exempted out of Obamacare , ready to leave the rest of country to be shepherded into socialized medicine .
But Sen. Cruz , like his brave father Rafael , is putting his life , his fortune and his sacred honor on the line to save our beleaguered country .
When Abraham Lincoln took office , he still believed that slavery could be purged from America through deliberation . But soon it became clear that only war would do it .
America must stand by Cruz and other brave tea party Republicans who understand the message of Ecclesiastes : that there is a time for everything , and that today is the time for confrontation .