Humana 's announcement came hours after the insurer and Aetna said they would drop their $ 37 billion merger bid . | AP Photo Humana becomes first major insurer to quit Obamacare exchanges The company said it does n't see any signs that the law 's marketplaces are getting healthier .
Health insurance giant Humana on Tuesday said it will quit Obamacare 's insurance markets altogether , announcing it will stop selling individual coverage in 2018 .
The decision makes Humana the first major insurer to fully exit Obamacare amid uncertainty about the GOP 's undefined health care plans . Other major insurers said they could also withdraw from Obamacare marketplaces next year if Republicans do n't take immediate steps to shore up the law before replacing it .
President Donald Trump , whose administration is soon expected to issue rules meant to stabilize Obamacare 's marketplaces , cited Humana 's decision as the latest sign of the law 's struggles .
`` Obamacare continues to fail , '' Trump tweeted . `` Humana to pull out in 2018 . Will repeal , replace & save healthcare for ALL Americans . ''
Humana 's announcement came hours after the insurer and Aetna said they would drop their $ 37 billion merger bid , declining to challenge a January court ruling that blocked their deal on antitrust grounds . And a second major health insurer merger appeared in jeopardy today after Cigna said it would terminate its agreement with Anthem and sue the company .
Neither merger was primarily centered on Affordable Care Act business — the Aetna-Humana deal was focused on private Medicare plans and Cigna-Anthem had major implications for the major employer market . But the companies said uncertainty about the health law and federal health policy factored into their decisions .
“ While we continue to believe that a combined company would create greater value for health care consumers through improved affordability and quality , the current environment makes it too challenging to continue pursuing the transaction , ” Aetna CEO Mark Bertolini said in a statement .
Humana said it did n't see signs that the Obamacare market is getting any healthier in 2017 , two weeks after the annual enrollment period closed . The company said it expects to lose $ 45 million on its Obamacare business this year .
“ We are again seeing signs of an unbalanced risk pool based on the results of the 2017 open enrollment period , ” CEO Bruce Broussard said in an investor call . “ Therefore we ’ ve decided we can ’ t continue to offer this coverage in 2018 . ”
Humana had already sharply reduced its footprint in the Obamacare exchanges over the past year following financial losses . It sold plans in 156 counties across 11 states in 2017 , down sharply from 1,351 counties throughout 19 states the previous year .
The Trump administration is soon expected to propose new rules meant to convince insurers to continue offering coverage as Republicans draw up a replacement plan . But Broussard expressed skepticism that the administration could offer any policy tweaks that would prompt Humana to reverse its decision to exit the marketplaces .
“ We ’ re really feeling that this organization needs to stay focused on what we do well , and I think what we do well is serving chronic conditions , ” he said . “ I think it ’ s going to be hard for us to get back into that marketplace . ”
Humana has about 152,000 Obamacare customers , which is a relatively small slice of that market . But its decision to withdraw could be telling .
Insurers starting in April will have to file 2018 plans if they want to remain in the marketplaces . But the Trump administration ’ s initial regulatory fixes likely won ’ t be enough to single-handedly convince other big insurers to stay , said Tom Carroll , a health care analyst at Stifel Nicolaus . And there 's little confidence within the industry that Congress can come up with an Obamacare replacement plan in the next few weeks that will put insurers at ease , he said .
`` We really have n't heard much of anything [ out of Washington ] , '' Carroll said . `` There 's nothing really to hang your hat on . ''
HHS Secretary Tom Price is expected to meet with Senate Republicans on Wednesday to discuss a replacement strategy . House health care leaders are also scheduled to spell out health care plans on Thursday . But Trump acknowledged earlier this month that the replacement effort may spill into 2018 .
Aetna had previously expressed concerns about the uncertainties created by Republicans ’ push to repeal and replace Obamacare . The insurer late last month warned that the individual insurance market is deteriorating and that it planned to shed most of that business . In early February , Aetna officials including Bertolini met with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to discuss the GOP ’ s health reform efforts .
Aetna and Humana earlier on Tuesday agreed not to appeal a U.S. district court 's ruling on its merger . The Obama administration and several states objected to the deal , warning it would leave seniors with fewer and costlier Medicare Advantage options . Following a 13-day trial , District Court Judge John D. Bates last month emphatically sided with the Obama administration and struck down the merger .
Meanwhile , Cigna said it would seek at least $ 13 billion in damages from Anthem , on top of a $ 1.85 billion breakup fee . Cigna argued that Anthem should compensate its shareholders for the money lost during the companies ’ unsuccessful bid to combine . Anthem , however , said that Cigna has no right to terminate the deal before April 30 and it plans to appeal the ruling against the $ 54 billion merger .
`` Cigna ’ s purported termination of the Merger Agreement is invalid , '' said Anthem spokeswoman Jill Becher in a statement .
Cigna in a securities filing this afternoon said that it decided there was “ no feasible path to ever completing the merger , ” in part because of its breach of contract allegations against Anthem . The company also noted that it could n't find any recent examples where the D.C . Circuit Court of Appeals has overturned a similar antitrust verdict .