ObamaCare is poised to “ destroy the foundation of the 40 hour work week that is the backbone of the American middle class. ” And that ’ s the president ’ s supporters talking .
The dire warning came last month in a letter from three of the nation ’ s most influential union bosses to Democratic leaders in Congress .
“ The unintended consequences of the ACA [ Affordable Care Act ] are severe , ” the labor leaders bemoaned . “ Perverse incentives are already creating nightmare scenarios . ”
Specifically , they noted , “ the law creates an incentive for employers to keep employees ’ work hours below 30 hours a week , and many of them are doing so openly . The impact is two-fold : fewer hours means less pay while also losing our current health benefits . ”
The White House maintains that such concerns , originally raised by analysts at The Heritage Foundation and elsewhere before ObamaCare was signed into law , are purely chimerical .
Those news reports of employers cutting workers ’ hours to escape the ObamaCare mandate ? Not to worry , the administration says soothingly , it ’ s merely “ anecdotal . ”
Yet anecdotal reports are becoming increasingly frequent—indicating that a wave of reductions in workers ’ hours may well be in the offing .
For example , reporters from NBC recently interviewed nearly 20 employers around the country , from fast-food franchises to colleges , and found that “ almost all said that because of the new law they ’ d be cutting back hours for some employees . ”
This is just the latest piece of evidence indicating that ObamaCare is unfair , unaffordable and unworkable . Consider some other recent news items :
Far from “ bending the cost curve down , ” consumers in many states will find coverage offered through the ObamaCare insurance exchanges stick them with average premium prices next year that are 30 % or 40 % higher than what they would have paid last year .
The federal government ’ s new “ data hub ” that the state insurance exchanges will use to screen applicants won ’ t be fully functional in time . Thus , the exchanges won ’ t be able to verify some applicant ’ s incomes when determining how big a subsidy they get . They also won ’ t be able to verify if the applicant has employer coverage , and thus is ineligible for subsidies .
The federal government may also be unprepared to protect ObamaCare ’ s information technology system from hackers and identity thieves . Security testing is months behind schedule , Reuters reports . Writing in The Weekly Standard , former HHS General Counsel Michael Astrue warned that `` unless delayed and fixed '' the ObamaCare exchanges will `` inflict on the public the most widespread violation of the Privacy Act in our history . ''
The problems with ObamaCare are very significant , very widespread , and very real . The president can remain in denial if he wants , but the stakes are too high for Congress to bury its collective head in the sand . With an ObamaCare “ train wreck ” heading down the track it is still not too late for Congressmen and Senators who originally voted for ObamaCare three years ago to now repent and repeal .