When Mr. Schiliro was leaving , Mr. Obama said , “ The White House will not be the same without Phil. ” Mr. Schiliro was one of only two in the White House whom Mr. Obama honored with a pen from among the set that the president used to sign the Affordable Care Act into law in 2010 .
As Mr. Obama ’ s chief liaison to Congress in his first two years , starting in November 2008 with the postelection presidential transition , Mr. Schiliro helped shepherd one of the heaviest legislative agendas in any Congress , reflecting both the new president ’ s ambitions and the circumstances of a global recession and financial crisis .
Among the other laws he helped to pass in what was then a Democratic-controlled Congress were a two-year , $ 800 billion economic-stimulus package and the Dodd-Frank law overhauling regulation of the banking system . The president has also credited Mr. Schiliro with helping to win Senate ratification of an arms-control treaty with Russia and confirmation of two Supreme Court justices . But the health care law was Mr. Schiliro ’ s labor of love .
More than three years later , however , problems with the state and federal insurance marketplaces , delays in some of the law ’ s major provisions and Republican attacks have undermined public support for it . A few moderate Republicans — arguing that repeal is impossible so long as Mr. Obama is president , and even then would be unlikely as more Americans benefit from the law — have called instead for addressing problems as they become evident . Some Democrats , including a few senators in tough re-election contests , also have argued for policy fixes .
“ I ’ ve never seen a law of the complexity of this one not be followed by legislation to correct some problems , ” said Representative Henry A. Waxman , Democrat of California . “ But that can ’ t even be contemplated because the only thing that Republicans want to talk about is repealing it . ”
For a White House often criticized for not engaging enough with lawmakers of either party , Mr. Schiliro brings relationships among House and Senate members developed over decades . For more than a quarter-century , he worked for Mr. Waxman , including as his chief of staff and as his Democratic staff director on the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee . In 2004 , he was a senior adviser to Senator Tom Daschle , then the minority leader , and other Senate Democratic leaders .