Disenchanted by high prices and technology woes , more than half of the households that used an Obamacare exchange last year said they would not use the portal again in the upcoming sign-up period , according to a survey released Monday .
Bankrate.com , which sponsored the survey , said 51 percent don ’ t want to use HealthCare.gov or their state-run insurance marketplaces again — a less-than-ecstatic review for the overhaul , which finds itself steeped in another high-profile legal battle less than two weeks before open enrollment starts again .
About two in five people cited “ much higher prices for health plans ” on the exchanges this year , making it the No . 1 concern along those surveyed .
About a quarter said too many people remained uninsured after the health care law went into effect , and 21 percent cited technological problems that hamstrung the federal Obamacare website and some state-run exchanges in the first go-around .
Despite that dour assessment , more than half said they personally had a positive experience during the previous enrollment , while 43 percent said they had a bad experience .
The Obama administration is hoping that the second round of enrollment from Nov. 15 to Feb. 15 will continue to chip away at the nation ’ s uninsured rate . To meet congressional scorekeepers ’ target of 13 million enrollees in 2015 , they will need roughly 7 million existing enrollees to re-up in their plans and nearly 6 million more first-time enrollees .
Americans who can afford coverage but fail to get it are subject to a tax penalty unless they qualify for an exemption . If these people avoid the exchanges , it may be because they do not qualify for income-based subsidies and will shop in the off-exchange market .
“ That ’ s a reasonable alternative because the law regulates those so-called ‘ mirror ’ policies to where there aren ’ t significant differences . But I don ’ t think there are any huge bargains there , ” Gerald Kominski , director of the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research , told Bankrate.com .
Eighteen states on Monday sought to protect Obamacare subsidies for those who do qualify , filing a legal brief to oppose high-profile lawsuits that claim the subsidies should only flow to states that set up their own exchanges .
“ There is no plausible reason to believe that Congress intended such a draconian result , ” they wrote in a brief to the U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia , which will hold oral arguments on the case in December .
Opponents of the Affordable Care Act say the law reserved income-based credits for customers who use an exchange “ established by the state . ”
They took that to mean the 16 exchanges set up by the states , and them alone . But the Obama administration says the law ’ s framers intended the federal government to stand in the shoes of the states that did not want to run their own insurance portals .
The full D.C . Circuit is considering the case after a three-judge panel ruled against the administration earlier this year . On the same day , the Fourth Circuit ruled in favor of the administration , producing a split in the federal appeals courts .
The Supreme Court is expected to decide in the coming days whether it will take up the Fourth Circuit case or if it will wait to see if the D.C . Circuit sides with the administration , eliminating the circuit split and tempering the need for high-court review .