Police in Texas have charged Eddie Ray Routh , a 25-year-old U.S. Marine reservist , with capital murder . Arrest records indicate that Routh had been twice taken to a mental hospital in recent months , and had told police he was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder .
It 's not clear whether a doctor had diagnosed Routh with the disorder before he allegedly murdered Chris Kyle and his friend Chad Littlefield . Kyle , a retired Navy SEAL and author of the book American Sniper , had taken Routh to a shooting range apparently as a form of therapy .
A few hours later , Routh 's sister Laura Blevins called 911 . In a recording of that call , she said : `` My brother just came by here ... He told me that he just committed a murder . ''
She then put her husband , Gaines Blevins , on the line .
`` He said he killed two guys at a shooting range , '' he said . `` But he 's recently diagnosed with PTSD , and he 's been acting real weird . ''
Todd Vance , who is also an Iraq War vet , coaches a mixed martial arts group for veterans in San Diego . He says many veterans see hiking , hunting or shooting as a way to re-create their military experience , but without the danger . Vance , who 's getting a degree in social work , has also received treatment for PTSD . Now , he says fighting in the gym helps him .
`` Everybody deals with it differently , '' he says . `` Somebody could look at me and say , 'You get punched in the face seven days a week — that seems like pretty risky behavior , as well . ' But in reality , it 's keeping me out of trouble . ''
Vance says what he does is a perfectly normal activity , and that it could even be used as a form of exposure therapy , one of the cognitive therapies known to help with PTSD . The idea is to help a patient remember traumatic events without re-experiencing the trauma .
It 's not clear that 's what Kyle was trying to do by taking a fellow veteran to the shooting range — and any sort of therapy is meant to be done with a doctor 's supervision .
Cognitive therapies and a limited number of drugs are the only treatments for PTSD backed by empirical studies . But with hundreds of thousands of veterans suffering , there are a lot of experimental methods out there .
`` The big challenges here ... [ are ] what we know that works does n't work for everyone , '' says Dr. Farris Tuma , with the National Institutes of Health . `` And there 's limited availability of the things we know do work. ``
Treatments include everything from virtual reality to yoga , and even spending time with dogs or horses . Doctors sometimes try other drugs , from antipsychotics to the recreational drug Ecstasy . Tuma just wishes he had evidence to say what helps and what hurts .
Many suffering from PTSD are `` essentially using their own experience and maybe something they 've read about , '' says Tuma . `` But the bottom line is ... we do n't have good guidance for them . ''
The Pentagon has financed a major study , due out next year , to assess all these treatments . Sandro Galea , the head of the epidemiology department at Columbia University , is leading the effort , and he says there 's new funding , new understanding of PTSD , and new research on how the brain works .
`` So there is a lot going on , and it is that depth of activity that makes me say I 'm optimistic , '' Galea says . `` There 's a lot of effort invested by practitioners of all stripes to deliver PTSD care to those who need it . ''
Galea says he hopes the public will soon see PTSD as an injury — like a broken arm — that can be treated . But destigmatizing PTSD has already had another effect : A lot more people are seeking treatment .