“ It still needs to be tweaked , ” said Trumka , who pointed to the possibility that union members will lose their health insurance because of the inability of some union plans to qualify for federal tax subsidies .
“ It still needs to be tweaked , ” said Trumka , who pointed to the possibility that union members will lose their health insurance because of the inability of some union plans to qualify for federal tax subsidies .
“ ObamaCare is a major step in the right direction but yeah , I said , we made some mistakes , ” Trumka told reporters at a Christian Science Monitor breakfast .
“ We have been working with the administration to find solutions to the inadvertent holes in the act , ” Trumka said . “ We are working to try solve problems , just like they tried to solve problems with employers , with large business and small business groups . ”
When you and the President sought our support for the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) , you pledged that if we liked the health plans we have now , we could keep them . Sadly , that promise is under threat . Right now , unless you and the Obama Administration enact an equitable fix , the ACA will shatter not only our hard-earned health benefits , but destroy the foundation of the 40 hour work week that is the backbone of the American middle class .
Like millions of other Americans , our members are front-line workers in the American economy . We have been strong supporters of the notion that all Americans should have access to quality , affordable health care . We have also been strong supporters of you . In campaign after campaign we have put boots on the ground , gone door-to-door to get out the vote , run phone banks and raised money to secure this vision .
Since the ACA was enacted , we have been bringing our deep concerns to the Administration , seeking reasonable regulatory interpretations to the statute that would help prevent the destruction of non-profit health plans . As you both know first-hand , our persuasive arguments have been disregarded and met with a stone wall by the White House and the pertinent agencies . This is especially stinging because other stakeholders have repeatedly received successful interpretations for their respective grievances . Most disconcerting of course is last week ’ s huge accommodation for the employer community—extending the statutorily mandated “ December 31 , 2013 ” deadline for the employer mandate and penalties .
Time is running out : Congress wrote this law ; we voted for you . We have a problem ; you need to fix it . The unintended consequences of the ACA are severe . Perverse incentives are already creating nightmare scenarios .
President of the AFL-CIO Richard Trumka , who has been an honored guest at President Obama 's State of the Union addresses and a major advocate for Obamacare in the past , admitted this week that Obamacare needs fixing . Trumka 's words come more than a month after presidents from the Teamsters , UFCW and UNITE-HERE sent a scorching letter to the White House demanding Obamacare be changed before it permanently destroys the 40 hour work week .
The question now is , will the unions get a big fat Obamacare waiver on the backs of taxpayers so long as they keep pumping money to Democrats ? It would n't be surprising .
As a reminder , Trumka gloated after Obamacare was passed and was more than happy to brag about driving the legislation `` down the throats of Republicans . '' He also thanked Nancy Pelosi , who famously said , `` We have to pass the bill in order to find out what is in it . ''