In utter defiance of historical trends , people are dying younger and younger in America . But what ’ s especially troubling is how these people are dying , a new report released this week found .
Life expectancy for Americans overall has dropped the last three years data is available , starting in 2014 . Today , an average American can expect to live 78.6 years , down from 78.9 years in 2014 .
That reversed a longtime trend of rising life expectancy . Between 1959 and 2016 , the average American lifespan shot up from 69.9 years to 78.9 years .
But what ’ s most disturbing about the decline in life expectancies is why . The decline over the last few years has largely been caused by young-to-middle age people dying from things like suicide or overdoses .
Midlife deaths began ticking up in the ‘ 90s but have increased sharply since 2010 .
“ During 2010-2017 , midlife all-cause mortality rates increased from 328.5 deaths/100 000 to 348.2 deaths/100 000 , ” read the report published Tuesday in the Journal of the American Medical Association . “ By 2014 , midlife mortality was increasing across all racial groups , caused by drug overdoses , alcohol abuse , suicides , and a diverse list of organ system diseases . ”
READ : The latest stats on American men 's lifespan are alarming
Still , there ’ s no single thing to fix to prevent people from dying young . Experts instead point to something broadly in American society that ’ s leading people to make destructive life choices . The U.S. has the worst midlife mortality rate among 17 high-income countries , the report found .
“ There ’ s something more fundamental about how people are feeling at some level — whether it ’ s economic , whether it ’ s stress , whether it ’ s deterioration of family , ” Ellen Meara , a professor at the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice , told the Washington Post . “ People are feeling worse about themselves and their futures , and that ’ s leading them to do things that are self-destructive and not promoting health . ”
Pitted against comparable nations , the U.S. fares horribly in life expectancy . People in Japan live , on average , to be 84.1 years old . In Australia , it ’ s 82.5 years . In France , it ’ s 82.4 . The U.K. is 81.2 .
Death rates have risen especially in the New England states — New Hampshire , Maine and Vermont — and the Ohio Valley , which includes West Virginia , Ohio , Indiana and Kentucky . In other words , opioids country .
Steven Woolf , director emeritus of the VCU Center on Society and Health and the study ’ s lead author , pointed to a lack of social programs and support systems for working families as a major reason why Americans are dying younger . Without a safety net , rough spells can lead to so-called deaths of despair that involve drugs , alcohol abuse , overeating , or other harmful behaviors .
“ We ’ re making a huge mistake if we don ’ t step back and look at the root causes , ’ ’ Woolf told USA Today . “ The prescription for the country is we ’ ve got to help these people . And if we don ’ t , we ’ re literally going to pay with our lives . ’ ’
Cover : Discarded syringes for injecting heroin , are scattered on the street in the Kensington neighborhood of Philadelphia , Pa. on Saturday , April 28 , 2018 . ( AP Photo/Jonathan Elderfield )