President Trump said Friday that he ’ s winning over Republican lawmakers who were opposed to the administration-backed health care bill to replace and repeal Obamacare , and he predicted the measure will now pass the House .
Meeting with members of the Republican Study Committee in the Oval Office , Mr. Trump told reporters that “ we made certain changes ” in all-night negotiations with Congress .
“ These folks were mostly ‘ no ’ s ‘ yesterday , ” Mr. Trump said , gesturing to the group of about a dozen GOP lawmakers . “ And now every single one is a ‘ yes . ’ ”
The influential bloc of conservatives said Mr. Trump committed to two key changes in the plan — giving states the option to impose work requirements on able-bodied people who get Medicaid , the insurance program for the poor , and letting governors accept a block grant of federal funding for the program instead of a per-capita allotment .
RSC Chairman Mark Walker of North Carolina said he would still like to make the work requirements mandatory , but that the president ’ s pledges were enough to win members over .
“ We went ahead and signed off on it , supporting the president and the vice president , who were both in the room in the Oval Office this morning , ” he said .
House Minority Whip Steve Scalise of Louisiana said the changes bolster leaders ’ chances of getting the 216 GOP votes needed to pass the bill , though members of the hardline House Freedom Caucus have said they want more drastic changes and may still be able to block the bill .
“ Absolutely not true that conservatives have flipped to yes on the health care bill . It doesn ’ t repeal Obamacare . It remains a disaster , ” Rep. Justin Amash , Michigan Republican , said on Twitter .
Those members could face more pointed pressure from Mr. Trump , however , now that he ’ s predicting victory .
“ These changes definitely strengthen our number , but also show that President Trump ’ s all in now , ” Mr. Scalise said outside the House chamber .
The lawmakers meeting with Mr. Trump were Mr. Walker and Rep. Patrick Henry , both of North Carolina ; Mr. Scalise ; Reps. Robert Aderholt and Gary Palmer of Alabama ; Andy Barr of Kentucky ; Jim Banks of Indiana ; Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee ; Blake Farenthold and John Ratcliffe of Texas ; Mia Love of Utah ; Barry Loudermilk of Georgia and Bruce Westerman of Arkansas .
Mr. Trump himself hadn ’ t specified what changes would be made to the legislation , but said “ we have rejiggered it ” to satisfy some of the GOP opponents . One of them , Mr. Palmer , had voted against the bill in the House Budget Committee just a day earlier .
“ I want the states to get the money and to run the program if they want to run it , because they can do it better than the federal government , ” Mr. Trump said .
The president was so enthused about the development that he brought it up moments later in an unrelated White House meeting on veterans benefits .
“ We just had a meeting with probably 12 congressmen , and it was an amazing meeting , ” Mr. Trump said . “ They all have given me a commitment , they ’ re voting for our health-care plan . Health care looks like it ’ s really happening . ”
Emerging from the White House , Mr. Scalise said Mr. Trump “ asked every member , with these changes , to vote for the bill . ”
“ President Trump himself committed that he is all in , 100 percent in for this bill , ” Mr. Scalise said . “ And of all of these members were in various places — some were for , some undecided , some even against this bill initially . With these changes that President Trump has brought to us , [ all ] are now a ‘ yes ’ on this bill . ”
Yet some lawmakers are still concerned that refundable , age-based tax credits in the plan aren ’ t generous enough for Americans aged 50 to 64 who will face higher premiums under a part of the bill that allows insurers to charge older customers five times as much as younger ones .
The AARP , an influential lobby for older Americans , sent a letter to all 435 House members on Friday urging them to oppose the health care plan .
“ We are still in a negotiation process . Everybody ’ s still talking . Everybody ’ s got a lot of good ideas out there , and let ’ s see what we can put in there before we vote , ” said Rep. Roger Williams , Texas Republican .
Republican leaders are hoping to bring up the bill in the House Rules Committee on Wednesday to set the stage for a final floor vote by Friday .
“ It ’ s always better if you know you have the votes , but sometimes you roll the dice like we did with Medicare Part D in 2003 , ” said Rep. Tom Cole , Oklahoma Republican , referring to the vote on prescription drug benefits that was held open for three hours to wrangle votes . “ I ’ ve seen it both ways . ”
Some Senate Republicans have urged House lawmakers to rewrite the bill , however , saying it can ’ t pass on their side of the Capitol as written .
House lawmakers insist they won ’ t bend to their wishes . They said both chambers can work their will before trying to smooth over differences in a conference committee .
“ Sometimes I think they ’ re afraid to vote over there , ” Mr. Cole said .