But the bargain was one that the president deemed necessary to forestall industry opposition that had thwarted efforts to cover the uninsured for generations . Without the deal , in which the industry agreed to provide $ 80 billion to expand coverage in exchange for protection from policies that would cost more , Mr. Obama calculated he might get nowhere .
“ Throughout his campaign , President Obama was clear that he would bring every stakeholder to the table in order to pass health reform , even longtime opponents like the pharmaceutical industry , ” Dan Pfeiffer , the White House communications director , said Friday . “ He understood correctly that the unwillingness to work with people on both sides of the issue was one of the reasons why it took a century to pass health reform . ”
Republicans see the deal as hypocritical . “ He said it was going to be the most open and honest and transparent administration ever and lobbyists won ’ t be drafting the bills , ” said Representative Michael C. Burgess of Texas , a Republican on the House Energy and Commerce Committee examining the deal . “ Then when it came time , the door closed , the lobbyists came in and the bills were written . ”
Some liberals bothered by the deal in 2009 now find the Republican criticism hard to take given the party ’ s longstanding ties to the industry .
“ Republicans trumpeting these e-mails is like a fox complaining someone else raided the chicken coop , ” said Robert Reich , who was labor secretary under President Bill Clinton . “ Sad to say , it ’ s called politics in an era when big corporations have an effective veto over major legislation affecting them and when the G.O.P . is usually the beneficiary . ”
In a statement , the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America , the drug industry lobby known as PhRMA , called its interactions with the White House part of its mission to “ ensure patient access ” to high-quality medicine : “ Before , during and since the health care debate , PhRMA engaged with Congress and the administration to advance these priorities , ” the lobby statement said .
If the negotiations resembled deal-making by past presidents , what distinguished them was that Mr. Obama had strongly rejected business as usual . During his campaign , he singled out the power of the pharmaceutical industry and its chief lobbyist , former Representative Billy Tauzin , a Democrat-turned-Republican from Louisiana .
“ The pharmaceutical industry wrote into the prescription drug plan that Medicare could not negotiate with drug companies , ” Mr. Obama said in a campaign advertisement , referring to 2003 legislation . “ And you know what ? The chairman of the committee who pushed the law through went to work for the pharmaceutical industry making $ 2 million a year . ”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
Mr. Obama continued : “ That ’ s an example of the same old game playing in Washington . You know , I don ’ t want to learn how to play the game better . I want to put an end to the game playing . ”
The e-mails document tumultuous negotiations , at certain times transactional , at others prickly . Each side suspected the other of operating in bad faith . Led by Rahm Emanuel , Mr. Obama ’ s chief of staff at the time , and Jim Messina , his deputy , the White House appeared deeply involved , and not averse to pressure tactics .
In May , the White House was upset industry had not signed on to a joint statement . One industry official urged colleagues to sign : “ Rahm is already furious . The ire will be turned on us. ” By June , tension flared again . “ Barack Obama is going to announce in his Saturday radio address support for rebating all of D unless we come to a deal , ” wrote Bryant Hall , a PhRMA lobbyist , referring to a Medicare Part D change that would cost the industry .
A public confrontation was averted and an agreement announced , negotiated down to $ 80 billion from $ 100 billion . “ We got a good deal , ” Mr. Hall wrote .
The White House thought it did , too , and defended it against Democrats in Congress . “ WH is working on some very explicit language on importation to kill it in health care reform , ” Mr. Hall wrote in September .
Mr. Emanuel , now mayor of Chicago ; Mr. Messina , now the president ’ s campaign manager ; Ms. DeParle , now deputy White House chief of staff ; and Mr. Bryant , now heading his own firm , all declined to comment .
The e-mails released Friday also underscored detailed discussions about an advertising campaign supporting Mr. Obama ’ s health overhaul . “ They plan to hit up the ‘ bad guys ’ for most of the $ , ” a union official wrote after an April meeting . “ They want us to just put in enough to be able to put our names in it — he is thinking @ 100K. ” In July , Mr. Hall wrote , “ Rahm asked for Harry and Louise ads thru third party , ” referring to the characters the industry had used to defeat Mr. Clinton ’ s health care proposal 15 years earlier .
Industry and Democratic officials said advertising was an outgrowth of the deal , not its goal . The industry traditionally advertises for legislation it supports .
In the end , balky House Democrats imposed additional conditions on the industry that pushed the cost above $ 100 billion , but the more sweeping policies it feared remained out of the legislation . Mr. Obama signed it in March 2010 . He had the victory he wanted .