The 2012 video features MIT 's Jonathan Gruber speaking about Obamacare flaws . An Obamacare gotcha moment
One of Obamacare ’ s chief architects , MIT professor Jonathan Gruber , just handed conservatives a gotcha moment .
Health law opponents and conservative academics are highlighting a two-year-old video of Gruber — who has advised both the Obama administration and then-Gov . Mitt Romney ’ s Massachusetts health reform effort — in which he seems to agree that the law ’ s health insurance subsidies can ’ t be awarded through federal-run exchanges , only through the state-run markets .
That ’ s the hot legal and political question in health care this week , after one federal appeals court ruled that the subsidies shouldn ’ t run through federal exchanges , and another appeals court said they could less than three hours later . The Obama administration and most backers of the health law say the subsidies should go to eligible people in either settings .
The question , which threatens the heart of the Affordable Care Act coverage expansion and could directly affect millions of Americans receiving financial help , may well eventually end up in the Supreme Court .
“ I couldn ’ t have said it better myself , ” the Cato Institute ’ s Michael Cannon , who has pushed the state-exchange only argument , said of the Gruber clip .
Tea Party Patriots co-founder Jenny Beth Martin called the Gruber tape a “ shocking revelation. ” “ The administration … knew exactly what they were doing and they knew exactly why they were doing it — Gruber himself described it as blatant , ugly politics , ” she said .
The January 2012 video — uncovered and posted online late Thursday by the Competitive Enterprise Institute and quickly hitting blogs and social media — features Gruber telling an audience at a Noblis meeting that if states don ’ t set up their own exchanges , their citizens can ’ t get the subsidies , which are delivered as tax credits .
“ I hope that ’ s a blatant enough political reality that states will get their act together and realize there are billions of dollars at stake here in setting up these exchanges , and that they ’ ll do it , ” he said .
Gruber said Friday he misspoke , but his comments at the time are the opposite of what he and other liberals are arguing now : that Congress wrote the law to provide the subsidies for low- and middle-income Americans through all the state exchanges , regardless of who runs them . Last year , he told Mother Jones that cases challenging that interpretation are “ nutty . ”
Gruber referred callers Friday morning to the response he gave The New Republic , where he called his own 2012 comments “ just a ‘ speak-o ’ —you know , like a typo . ”
“ I honestly don ’ t remember why I said that . I was speaking off-the-cuff . It was just a mistake . People make mistakes . Congress made a mistake drafting the law and I made a mistake talking about it , ” Gruber told the magazine .
Whether Congress intended to withhold the subsidies unless states run exchanges themselves is a crucial question in the legal battles . But Gruber insisted Friday that was not the intent and said his 2012 remark may have stemmed from questions of whether the federal website would be ready in time .
“ At this time , there was also substantial uncertainty about whether the federal backstop would be ready on time for 2014 , ” he said . “ I might have been thinking that if the federal backstop wasn ’ t ready by 2014 , and states hadn ’ t set up their own exchange , there was a risk that citizens couldn ’ t get the tax credits right away . ”
As a consistent cheerleader for the health law , Gruber is often at odds with its critics . American Enterprise Institute ’ s Tom Miller was dismissive of his comments .
“ I am willing to compromise and stipulate that most , if not all , of what Jon has said about the ACA — before , during and well after its passage — was and remains a mistake , ” Miller emailed .