Among the most frequently repeated talking points promulgated by the White House and its media allies about Obamacare ’ s latest premium spikes is that they only affect the “ small ” number of people who buy coverage on the individual market , leaving those with employer-based coverage unscathed . The New York Times dutifully parrots the party line , “ These increases really matter only for those who buy their own insurance. ” This is just another in the long list of lies the law ’ s apologists have told to save the President ’ s “ signature domestic achievement. ” In reality , this premium spike will adversely affect the lives of 177 million Americans .
But before we get to the people with job-based coverage , let ’ s take a look at the actual Americans the Times so lightly dismisses as insignificant . The Kaiser Family Foundation estimates that 21.8 million individuals “ purchased or are covered as a dependent by non-group insurance. ” In other words , these gigantic premium spikes “ really matter only ” to a number of people equivalent to the combined populations of these 16 states — Alaska , Delaware , Hawaii , Idaho , Maine , Montana , Nebraska , New Hampshire , New Mexico , Nevada , North Dakota , Rhode Island , South Dakota , Vermont , West Virginia , and Wyoming .
One can certainly see why neither the Obama administration nor the media would worry about such a paltry number of people . Besides , Secretary of Health & Human Services Sylvia Burwell assures us that “ 85 percent of Americans impacted by the increases will be eligible for subsidies. ” The problem with that rosy figure is that it fails to include people who buy coverage outside Obamacare ’ s “ marketplaces. ” If an individual ’ s income exceeds 400 percent of federal poverty guidelines , he doesn ’ t qualify for a subsidy . Thus , millions of Americans ignore the exchanges , meaning that Secretary Burwell ’ s subsidy claim is fiction .
A more plausible estimate is that about half of the people who buy individual coverage will receive subsidies . But these subsidies don ’ t fall from Heaven like so much manna . They are paid by the taxpayers . In other words , all those Americans with employer-based health insurance who are being told by the Obama administration and the “ news ” media that the impending premium spike won ’ t affect them will actually have to foot the bill . A portion of their federal tax payments will be used to pay the subsidies . And it ’ s not small change . The Congressional Budget Office estimates that the subsidies will total $ 672 billion over the next 10 years .
For the 156 million Americans with employer-based health coverage , this comes on top of increases in their own out-of pocket health expenses that can be directly attributed to the “ Affordable Care Act. ” Most lost their pre-Obamacare insurance plans , despite the President ’ s assurances , because their coverage didn ’ t include the minimum essential benefits mandated by the law . Their insurers attempt to keep premiums as low as possible , but can only do so by increasing plan deductibles . These workers are thus paying more for their own health care while their taxes subsidize skyrocketing premiums on plans sold through the exchanges .
Predictably , Obamacare ’ s apologists studiously ignore such inconvenient realities , while frantically revising history concerning the purpose and effects of “ reform. ” Some legacy media outlets were so desperate to explain away the blindingly obvious that they exhumed some of the law ’ s original architects to refute the facts . The editors of the Washington Post , for example , trotted out Ezekiel “ I want to die at 75 ” Emanuel . The good doctor dutifully advised the Post ’ s readers to hark back to the deplorable conditions that prevailed during the Bush years . I ’ m not kidding . Eight years after Barack Obama was elected President , Emanuel writes :
While health-care costs and premiums are rising — the recent announcement notwithstanding — they are rising much more slowly than they did during the George W. Bush administration.… For instance , from 2001 to 2005 , per-person health-care spending rose an average of more than 7 percent per year … Conversely , from 2011 to 2015 , per-person costs rose an average of just 3.4 percent per year .
Emanuel employs two profoundly disingenuous rhetorical tricks here . First , he shamelessly cherry picks his data , including two years from the Bush era that he knew to be atypical and would skew the averages upward for that period . Second , he compares them to a trend during the Obama years that could not have been caused by the Rube Goldberg “ reform ” scheme he helped design . The genuine history of “ per-person health care spending , ” as this CMS report will confirm , is that a long-term decline began in 2003 and continued through 2013 . Not coincidentally , this trend ended in 2014 , with Obamacare ’ s incompetent rollout .
As to the plight of those with employer-based coverage , Emanuel uses another gambit much beloved of Obamacare apologists , comparing its performance to an unknowable alternate reality : “ Premiums for employment-based coverage will be 10 to 15 percent lower in 2025 than they would have been without the ACA. ” This BS may sell inside the Beltway , but among the people who must live with the pig ’ s breakfast Emanuel and his accomplices made of reform , no one ’ s buying . Obamacare is harming individuals who buy coverage through its crumbling exchanges as well as those covered via their jobs . It ’ s long past time to stop the madness .