After a disagreeable phone call with Speaker John A. Boehner on the budget impasse , President Obama Saturday accused House Republicans of trying to “ plunge this country back into a recession ” in their battle with the president over Obamacare .
In his weekly address , Mr. Obama blamed the gridlock on “ a faction on the far right of the Republican party who ’ ve convinced their leadership to threaten a government shutdown if they can ’ t shut off the Affordable Care Act . ”
“ Some are actually willing to plunge America into default if they can ’ t defund the Affordable Care Act , ” Mr. Obama said . “ Think about that . They ’ d actually plunge this country back into recession — all to deny the basic security of health care to millions of Americans . ”
The president called Mr. Boehner Friday night after the House approved a stopgap funding bill to keep government open while blocking all funding for Obamacare . An aide to Mr. Boehner said the call was “ brief ” and the two men disagreed about House Republicans ’ intention to link an increase in the nation ’ s borrowing limit with other budget issues , including health care .
“ The president called the speaker … to tell him he wouldn ’ t negotiate with him on the debt limit , ” the Boehner aide said . “ Given the long history of using debt limit increases to achieve bipartisan deficit reduction and economic reforms , the speaker was disappointed but told the president that the two chambers of Congress will chart the path ahead . ”
The House vote set up a showdown next week with Senate Democrats and the administration over a possible government shutdown on Sept. 30 , when funding for the current fiscal year expires .
Mr. Obama said in the weekly address that he won ’ t allow the country to default on its obligations .
“ That ’ s not happening . And they know it ’ s not happening , ” he said of the GOP . “ The United States of America is not a deadbeat nation . We are a compassionate nation . We are the world ’ s bedrock investment . And doing anything to threaten that is the height of irresponsibility . That ’ s why I will not negotiate over the full faith and credit of the United States . ”
The president said Washington is “ running out of time to fix this , ” but said the solution is simple .
“ We could fix it tomorrow , ” Mr. Obama said . “ Both houses of Congress can take a simple vote to pay our bills on time , then work together to pass a budget on time . ”