After receiving federal approval to make some changes to Medicaid , Kentucky will become the first state to be allowed to implement a work requirement for Medicaid recipients . Those requirements , however , face strong criticism from Democratic lawmakers and potential legal challenges down the road .
Starting in July , some able-bodied adults on Medicaid ( many of whom were added under the Obamacare expansion ) would have to work or volunteer at least 20 hours a week or be enrolled in school or job training to keep their health benefits .
This group would exclude the elderly , disabled , medically frail , pregnant women or some adults caring for children or other relatives , according to USA Today .
Kentucky Gov . Matt Bevin 's administration estimates the work requirement would impact roughly 200,000 Medicaid recipients added under the Obamacare expansion .
Bevin has previously estimated that the plan could save Kentucky more than $ 300 million in Medicaid costs over the course of five years .
The plan could result in as many as 95,000 Kentucky residents losing their Medicaid coverage .
It will give able-bodied Medicaid recipients the dignity of work , and allow them to `` rise up out of poverty , '' according to Bevin
Without the plan , the cost of Medicaid was `` not sustainable '' for the state
It 's illegal , because Medicaid is a health law that is not meant to encourage employment
Medicaid will become overly complicated and bogged down in red tape , resulting in lost or terminated coverages
People who do n't receive notification or understand the plan may lose coverage because they do n't know to apply for exemptions
Kentucky is just one of more than a dozen states that sought approval for Medicaid work requirements . Seema Verma , the nation 's top Medicaid official , said any state seeking the requirements will receive approval from the federal government , which had been denied under the Obama administration .
How things go in Kentucky over the next few years will have a significant impact on the direction other states decide to go with their Medicaid programs .