Obamacare ’ s future will once again be at stake Tuesday when a federal appeals court considers a Trump-backed lawsuit aimed at scrapping the health care law in the heat of the 2020 election cycle .
The court will hear oral arguments on whether the Affordable Care Act is no longer valid after Congress eliminated the tax penalty for not purchasing health insurance . The lawsuit , brought by 18 Republican-led states , could jeopardize health care coverage for more than 20 million people insured through the 2010 health care law , eliminate insurance protections for preexisting conditions , and severely disrupt the country ’ s $ 3.5 trillion health care system .
Should the 5th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans rule against the law , that would all but guarantee the Supreme Court would again take a case directly challenging the ACA ’ s survival . The high court , which has twice upheld the health care law since it passed in 2010 , would likely deliver a final verdict on the ACA as the 2020 campaign season ramps up .
A group of red states filed this latest legal threat to Obamacare in February 2018 , months after Republican-led efforts to repeal the law collapsed in Congress . They argue that Congress ' decision to scrap the individual mandate penalty in 2017 rendered the law unconstitutional because the Supreme Court previously upheld the mandate as a valid exercise of taxing power . In December , U.S. District Court Judge Reed O ’ Connor sided with the Republican-led states , stunning legal experts .
“ If ultimately the trial court 's decision does get upheld , it ’ s going to have really far-reaching consequences , ” said MaryBeth Musumeci , associate director of the Kaiser Family Foundation ’ s Program on Medicaid and the Uninsured . “ That will be pretty complicated to disentangle and reach nearly everyone in the country . ”
Legal experts across the political spectrum , who had earlier dismissed the lawsuit as a long shot , contend Reed ’ s decision was an overreach . Even if the individual mandate was unconstitutional , they say unrelated provisions of the law — like the expansion of Medicaid to millions of low-income adults in nearly two-thirds of states — should be allowed to stand . Even a pair of Republican attorneys general in Ohio and Montana , which both expanded Medicaid , have argued that O ’ Connor ’ s ruling went too far and would have detrimental consequences .
“ There ’ s a pretty strong bias … to try to preserve things under law , rather than knock them down , ” said Tom Miller , a health care expert at the conservative American Enterprise Institute . “ The preponderant stance has been to go minimal in terms of knocking out broad federal laws . ”
Democrats seized on failed Republican efforts to dismantle Obamacare as a top rallying cry in the last election cycle , which helped them win control of the House and minimize losses in the Senate . In particular , the Trump administration ’ s stance in the lawsuit has been a political gift for Democrats .
Last year , the administration refused to defend Obamacare but urged the court to strike only the law ’ s popular protections for pre-existing conditions . In March , the administration expanded its legal attack by urging the 5th Circuit to uphold the federal judge ’ s ruling against the entire law .
“ The scale of cruelty is so large it 's almost unimaginable , ” Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said on a call with reporters Monday . “ President Trump and the Republicans are just playing a dangerous political game with people 's lives . ”
Democrats ’ health care messaging has been muddled this year by growing calls among progressives , including some 2020 presidential candidates , to vastly expand government coverage and virtually abolish private insurance . Republicans have lambasted such a universal , government-run system as socialized medicine that will lead to skyrocketing taxes and rationing of care , and moderate Democrats fear “ Medicare for All ” could cost the party its advantage on health care in 2020 .
“ The Republicans ’ best argument … is , ‘ Hey , you folks thought we were crazy a couple of years ago ? Look at these ‘ Medicare for All ’ Democrats , ” said Miller of AEI , the conservative think tank .
However , an appellate court ruling against the ACA would again put pressure on Republicans to produce a health care plan after failing to agree on a viable replacement for years .
California and 19 other Democratic-led states have led the legal defense against the ACA lawsuit . The House of Representatives also joined the defense this year after Democrats won back control of the chamber in November .
Even before oral arguments , the conservative-leaning 5th Circuit spooked ACA supporters by questioning whether the blue states or the House have the legal standing to appeal the federal judge 's decision invalidating the law . The inquiry , issued two weeks ago , was sparked by the Trump administration ’ s recent shift in legal strategy to support the judge ’ s decision , essentially putting the plaintiffs and defendants on the same side of the lawsuit .
Obamacare advocates feared that the appeals court could let O'Connor 's ruling against the law stand without a review by a higher court . But in legal briefs filed last week , all of the parties involved in the lawsuit — including the Republican-led states behind it — argued that the appeal should be allowed to proceed .
If the appeals court reverses the judge 's decision and finds the ACA is constitutional , the red states and the Trump administration could appeal the decision to the Supreme Court , which again could determine the law 's fate . In previous major cases , the court narrowly saved the individual mandate in 2012 , and in 2015 it upheld the law ’ s premium subsidies in a 6-3 decision .
“ Judge O'Connor is not going to get to decide the constitutionality of the ACA — either in the red states or nationwide — without some kind of Supreme Court review , ” said Nicholas Bagley , a University of Michigan Law School professor who ’ s written extensively about the case . “ By hook or by crook , the Supreme Court will get the case . ”
The ACA has remained in effect since the judge found it unconstitutional , and the Trump administration has said it will enforce it while the lawsuit winds through the courts . Meanwhile , the law ’ s insurance marketplaces have largely stabilized after a few rocky years . Enrollment has decreased slightly and many insurers are turning a profit , despite the elimination of the individual mandate penalty .