In the meeting , Ms. Palmieri said , officials urged the groups to hold back , at least for the first several days of December , to see how much traffic the website is getting . Ms. Palmieri summarized the message : “ Our recommendation is that we expect there to be really high traffic . You shouldn ’ t be driving traffic . ”
If the website again crashes repeatedly , Mr. Obama ’ s critics are sure to pounce and some of his Democratic allies may become anxious and apprehensive . Since the website went live eight weeks ago , the botched system has become a symbol of what Republicans say is an overreaching , incompetent federal government . The debate about the website ’ s failures , and the broader role of government , may shape the outcome of next year ’ s congressional elections .
Aides to Mr. Obama have spent the last several days trying to manage expectations by offering high estimates of potential traffic at the end of the month , and by acknowledging that the system will still have problems in the weeks ahead .
“ The system will not work perfectly , ” Jeffrey D. Zients , who took over management of the website repair effort , told reporters on Friday . He said the site would be able to handle 50,000 users , but added , “ To be clear , there will be times that volume on HealthCare.gov will exceed this capacity . ”
Luke Chung , the president of FMS , a database company in Virginia , said building the website to handle 50,000 simultaneous users was “ not unreasonable. ” But he said the government must be prepared to handle much larger numbers at peak times like Dec. 23 , just as the Internal Revenue Services does at the tax filing deadline in April .
In an effort to ease pressure on the website , officials have created what they call a waiting room for times when the site is operating slowly . People can ask the government to notify them by email of a better time to use the site , and they will then go to the front of the line , officials said .
Earlier this fall , the administration had envisioned an all-out push to persuade millions of uninsured Americans to log on to HealthCare.gov to buy insurance .