President Donald Trump announced on Saturday that if Congress doesn ’ t act soon on health care , he could end federal “ BAILOUTS ” for insurance companies , which could effectively force Congress to act or else put health insurance companies in the difficult position of having to raise rates on people who can ’ t afford to pay them or to leave Obamacare exchanges entirely .
`` After seven years of 'talking ' Repeal & Replace , the people of our great country are still being forced to live with imploding ObamaCare ! '' Trump wrote on Twitter .
`` If a new HealthCare Bill is not approved quickly , BAILOUTS for Insurance Companies and BAILOUTS for Members of Congress will end very soon ! '' Trump continued .
The “ BAILOUTS ” to insurance companies Trump referred to in his tweet are “ cost sharing reduction ” payments , which help health insurance companies keep premiums , deductibles and copays lower than they might otherwise be for lower-income Americans .
If Trump were to withhold these funds from health insurance companies , it would likely result in many insurers choosing to leave the Obamacare health insurance exchanges or pass on insurance costs to lower-income people , who likely can ’ t afford to pay the added costs .
If health insurance companies choose to leave the insurance exchanges , which is the most likely response , it could catalyze the collapse of the Obamacare exchange system , making it more difficult for members of Congress to wait on implementing a repeal and replace bill .
In June , the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services updated its county-level projections for Obamacare exchanges in 2018 , and it found 1,300 counties , more than 40 percent of all counties , are expected to have only one Obamacare health insurance provider available to consumers , according to a report by CNBC . That means 2.4 million people will be forced to buy health insurance from their one and only option or else pay the Obamacare penalty imposed on those Americans who don ’ t have qualifying health insurance .
CMS also predicts there will be 49 counties in which consumers will have absolutely no health insurance options on their Obamacare exchange .
`` I am deeply concerned about the crisis situation facing the individual market in many states across the nation , '' Seema Verma , CMS administrator , said in the report .
In reaction to Trump ’ s threat , Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) said Trump is “ playing politics with people ’ s lives . ”
`` If the president refuses to make the cost sharing reduction payments , every expert agrees that premiums will go up and health care will be more expensive for millions of Americans , '' Schumer said .
`` The president ought to stop playing politics with people 's lives and health care , start leading , and finally begin acting presidential , '' Schumer added .