“ I never knew a time when I didn ’ t have the best insurance in the world. ” Frank Hawkey , 70 , held a union job at the Bethlehem steel mill in Northampton County , Pennsylvania , for 31 years , right up until the plant closed in 1996 . Hawkey , like a lot of his former colleagues , recalls the camaraderie of the place , the practical jokes that would break up a shift , how all the families would get together outside work for birthdays and barbecues .
Another thing the former steelworkers all remember : how good the health coverage was .
“ When I was at Bethlehem Steel , we ’ d get billed zero , ” Hawkey said . “ And that was probably one of the biggest cultural shocks in the world , when we lost our healthcare . When they went bankrupt , we lost our insurance . ”
The steelworkers truly needed health insurance . The most common injuries in the plant were from collisions with moving objects , as iron ore and additives were smelted and shaped into super-hot beams that rolled through the mill , except when they jumped the track . Between 1965 and the mill ’ s closure , 45 people were killed at the plant , according to Frank Behum , a former steelworker and oral historian .
“ This was the most dangerous steel mill in the United States , and the local people never knew it , ” Behum said . “ Osha [ the occupational safety and health administration ] didn ’ t come in until 1974 , and it actually wasn ’ t fully implemented until 1980 . And that made a big difference . ”
The steel era is gone , taking with it thousands of “ womb to tomb ” jobs that came with comprehensive health benefits . In Northampton County , fewer people are getting injured on the job , but residents now contend with new health challenges : obesity , heart disease , cancer , drug addiction .
The need for care is still there , but affordable coverage might not be . Judging by dozens of interviews in recent months , frustration about healthcare was a significant factor at the ballot box when , last November , Northampton County voted for Donald Trump for president , after having voted for Barack Obama twice .
“ My healthcare payments just kept going up , every month , every year , ” recalled a lifelong Northampton resident named Rachelle , 36 , who did not want to give her last name because she works in education and wanted to keep politics out of it .
Rachelle was a Democrat who voted twice for Obama , before switching her party registration in March to vote for Trump during the Republican primary season , as many other Democrats in Northampton County did . “ I think I finally woke up , ” she said . “ I finally realized that Donald Trump – he spoke to the common folk . ”
Hours before Rachelle spoke with ███ , the Congressional Budget Office had released a report on the Trump-endorsed Republican plan to replace Obama ’ s healthcare law . It said that 14 million people would be ejected from insurance rolls by next year , healthcare costs for low-income patients would increase , while tax breaks would be delivered to top earners .
Rachelle said she did not believe the media reports . She trusted Trump to get healthcare right .
“ I think it ’ s still too early to determine , and I ’ d like to wait and see how this will roll out , ” she said . “ I trust whatever ’ s he ’ s going to do . I am sure they are going to make it work . ”
Frank Hawkey , the steelman , did not vote for Trump , in part because he viewed the candidate ’ s promises to bring back American manufacturing as patently false . “ Trump says he ’ s going to restart the steel industry – well , I ’ ve got news for him , and it ’ s all bad , ” Hawkey said . “ The older guys , they don ’ t believe it . They ’ re realists . The steel mill ’ s not coming back . No two ways about it . ”
Still , Hawkey said , some Democrats who lived through the heyday of steel bought into Trump ’ s promise . If you can say , “ I never knew a time when I didn ’ t have the best insurance in the world , ” the slogan Make America Great Again might resonate .
The realization that the Republican healthcare plan could be devastating for people who depend on healthcare subsidies has been attended by wrenching stories from across the country of low-income Trump supporters with major health problems who are alarmed at the idea that they could now lose care as a result of Trump ’ s win .
That ’ s not the main story in Northampton . Enrollment here in Medicaid , the subsidies program for low-income patients , is slightly below the national average . The top two employers in the county are healthcare networks , both of which have drawn on federal funds for their continued expansions , in exchange for which they are required to provide a significant amount of free or reduced-rate care . People say access to care and the care itself are generally good .
What is unusual about Northampton County – and one reason healthcare was such an influential issue here in the 2016 election – is how immediate the pressures of the global marketplace can seem to the average voter . Many people here still remember how the dumping of foreign steel on the American market , beginning in the 1970s , hastened the decline of the local industry .
“ One of the big things everybody voted for was healthcare , ” said Ken Kraft , a locally based business agent for the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades . “ We ’ re competing in everything against companies that don ’ t pay for healthcare . Here we have to pay a certain percentage . That ’ s paying for the competition to compete against us . So that ’ s a strong reason to vote against the status quo . ”
While a scathing Trump critic himself , Kraft said more than half the members of his union had voted for Trump , many because they bought Trump ’ s promise to make US businesses more competitive by controlling healthcare costs .
With its confluence of freeways , railroads and rivers , and its proximity to the ports of the eastern seaboard , Northampton has an unusually high number of homegrown firms that compete in global markets , including Victaulic ( industrial piping ) , Follett ( refrigeration ) , Crayola ( art supplies ) , and Martin Guitars ( great tunes ) .
Richard Master is CEO and founder of MCS Industries , Inc , the leading US supplier of picture frames and decorative mirrors , with $ 170m in sales , 160 US employees and factories in Mexico and China . He started the business in Easton , in east Northampton County , on the remnants of a box company his father had founded in 1948 .
“ Our healthcare bill for those 160 workers is $ 2m , and the average cost per hour is $ 8 to $ 10 an hour , ” Master said . “ Particularly for family plans , it is a huge , huge expense , a huge part of the overall compensation package for workers .
“ We need to be competitive with the world , and that ’ s why healthcare , which is so expensive in the United States , is a major concern if we ’ re going to reindustrialize consumer products here in the US . ”
Master , a former Bernie Sanders supporter who produced a documentary film called Fix It : Health Care at the Tipping Point , believes that the announcement by the Pennsylvania health department last October that insurers had requested increases in premiums of 25 % or more had given a boost to Trump in the election .
“ This information came out in the weeks preceding the election , ” Master said . “ Policies were being canceled . Old policies were being canceled . There were new policies that were proposed with high double-digit increases . And I think this had a very significant impact on this election . Nationally and certainly locally . There were front-page articles in the local newspapers about this . And it was alarming . ”
After the steel plant closed , Frank Hawkey was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin ’ s lymphoma . His insurer summarily dropped him , citing what it viewed as a pre-existing condition , he said . He went a couple of years without coverage before regaining insurance through his wife ’ s food distribution business . Now he ’ s on Medicare .
Bethlehem , Pennsylvania : the town that built America – in pictures Read more
Hawkey said protections in the Obama law for people with pre-existing conditions were reassuring to him . “ To this day , pre-existing conditions mean a lot to me , because – I don ’ t know if they could kick you off Medicare , but I ’ m sure they could stop treating you . ”
Complaints about Obama ’ s healthcare law in Northampton County are easily come by . When the current executive , John Brown , took office in 2014 , the county faced a penalty under the so-called “ Cadillac tax ” provision of the law , which was designed to combat distorted tax incentives that led some employers to take out excessively costly healthcare plans .
For the coverage it offered its 1,850 full-time employees , Northampton County faced a penalty of $ 9.4m , to kick in from 2018 , a penalty that would have grown in future years , Brown said . “ It seemed to be an overly punitive part of the law for taking very good care of your employees , ” he said .
To avoid the penalty , he came up with a complex solution using multiple insurance policies to keep up the quality of care for his workers – but he was left feeling that a a system intended to put the care of ordinary workers first had failed by over-regulating a considerate employer .
But for all the complaints about Obama ’ s healthcare act , one doesn ’ t have to go far in Northampton County to find someone who loves the law , and views the current Republican effort with trepidation , or worse . Few of the stories are as dramatic as that of Jennifer Newland , who lives in Roseto , in the northern part of the county .
“ Two years ago , I was diagnosed with stage 4 liver , colon and lymph node cancer , ” said Newland , who now works for a Democratic state representative . “ I had no symptoms at all . ”
Shortly before her diagnosis , Newland had left a job and had been offered coverage through Cobra for $ 354 a month , with a $ 2,500 deductible .
“ I was like , ‘ Oh my gosh , how is this going to work ? ’ ” Newland said . “ So I looked at the ACA [ Affordable Care Act ] . And I ended paying $ 149 for a $ 300 deductible plan . ”
Then came the cancer diagnosis . Newland sought treatment in the Lehigh Valley hospital network .
“ There were no hurdles . It was so smooth , ” she said . “ They would have a nurse call me . They would have a caseworker call me . They would check in all the time to make sure – Did I have any questions ? Did I need any more help ?
“ At one point I said to them , could I have physical therapy , because I ’ m just not feeling strong ? And they were like , ‘ absolutely ’ . It was kind of like , no questions asked . If this is the care that you feel you need to get back to 100 % , we ’ ll provide it for you . ’ ”
Newland ’ s cancer is in remission . “ The ACA literally saved my life , and I couldn ’ t be prouder to stand up for it , ” she said .
“ This whole repeal effort really has me worried for the people out there that continue to have it . That ’ s really a huge issue for me . I ’ m sad for the people who might lose their insurance .
“ Even with Trump , I hope that he sees the light . I hope that he gets to hear stories of people that the ACA has touched . ”