President Obama ’ s top health official admitted to Congress on Wednesday that Obamacare ’ s main website faces a litany of problems , including the delivery of inaccurate data to insurers and glitches that do not allow uninsured Americans to enroll , resulting in a “ miserably frustrating experience for way too many Americans . ”
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , under oath , told the House Energy and Commerce Committee she stands by the Affordable Care Act but can not release reliable enrollment figures from state-run and federally facilitated health insurance markets around the country until November .
In a tense back-and-forth with GOP lawmakers , she said she herself will not use Obamacare because she has employer-based coverage from the federal government .
“ I would gladly join the exchange if I didn ’ t have affordable coverage in my workplace , ” she testified .
Mrs. Sebelius also offered a stark mea culpa for the problems at HealthCare.gov , the federal website that processes many requests for coverage .
“ Hold me accountable for the debacle , I ’ m responsible , ” she said .
Even as she apologized and tried to promote the law , a message on HealthCare.gov said the system was down .
“ It ’ s been down the whole time you ’ ve been testifying , ” said Rep. Pete Olson , Texas Republican , said , holding up an iPad .
The hearing produced some theater , such as when a Texas congressman told Mrs. Sebelius , a former governor , they weren ’ t “ in Kansas anymore ” — kicking off a recurring string of Wizard of Oz metaphors .
Calls for Mrs. Sebelius to resign took a backseat to complaints about who knew what , and when , about the flawed website and stories of constituents back home who ’ ve lost their plans and may face higher premiums .
One Republican lawmaker tried to link responsibility for the flaws directly to Mr. Obama , while another called for the resignation of one of Mrs. Sebelius ‘ deputies , Gary Cohen , who oversees the agency ’ s Center for Consumer Information & Insurance Oversight .
Mrs. Sebelius ‘ much-anticipated testimony follows that of Marilyn Tavenner , administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , before the House Ways and Means Committee on Tuesday . Ms. Tavenner also apologized for the website ’ s problems , yet defended the overall law .
The pair ’ s testimony laid some of the blame for the website ’ s problems on a lead contractor , yet vendors who worked on the project said the Obama administration did not test the system “ end to end ” until days before its Oct. 1 launch .
Mrs. Sebelius said too many people are set on fixing blame .
“ What I want to do is fix the problem , ” she said .
But several GOP lawmakers have called for Mrs. Sebelius ‘ resignation , and website problems have been eclipsed this week by concerns that many Americans in the individual market will not be able to keep their existing health plans , as Mr. Obama had promised .
Chairman Fred Upton , Michigan Republican , said Mr. Obama ’ s vow has been cast into doubt by a flood of cancellation notices nationwide .
Mrs. Sebelius said if a plan was in place in 2010 , when Congress passed the law , then it could have been grandfathered in .
She reminded lawmakers that the individual market covers a small percentage of Americans — many are covered by their employers or by programs such as Medicare — and that some consumers will gain a better health plan at similar or lower cost , through the help of government subsidies .
She also said Americans who were dropped from their current plan must be offered an alternative plan .
Mr. Upton said Americans are “ scared ” and “ frustrated ” with the situation , since many of these people can not use the Obamacare websites to explore their options — mere weeks after Mrs. Sebelius and her lieutenants assured lawmakers the federal exchange system was ready to launch .
Rep. Marsha Blackburn , Tennessee Republican , told Mrs. Sebelius , “ you ’ re taking away their choice . ”
“ I will remind you , ” she said , “ some people like to drive a Ford , not a Ferrari , and some people like to drink out of a red Solo cup , not a crystal-stem ” glass .