California Rep. Nancy Pelosi -- one of President Obama ’ s most ardent Capitol Hill supporters -- and other Democrats on Sunday defended the president ’ s handling of ObamaCare amid widespread criticism , particularly his pledge that Americans could keep their health insurance .
“ Democrats stand tall in support of the Affordable Care Act , ” Pelosi said on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press . ”
The House minority leader ’ s comments follow a particularly bruising week for the president and his signature health care law that included the acknowledgement that only 106,000 Americans have so far signed up for ObamaCare , in large part because of the problem-plagued healthcare.gov website .
The report was followed by the president on Thursday qualifying his promise before he signed ObamaCare into law in 2010 that Americans could keep their existing health plans .
“ There is no doubt that the way I put that forward unequivocally ended up not being accurate , ” he said during a press conference in which he proposed a one-year extension on existing health plans that failed to garner overwhelming support .
Pelosi , the former House speaker , also dismissed questions about fellow Democrats up for reelections in 2014 having to defend ObamaCare to voters back home .
“ I do n't think you can tell what will happen next year , ” she told NBC , adding Democrats nevertheless won ’ t run from the issue .
Pelosi suggested Republicans will have to answer for their part in the partial government shutdown that she says hurt the economy .
She also downplayed 39 House Democrats voting Friday on a bill to allow insurance companies to continue offering plans that don ’ t comply with ObamaCare , saying a similar number of them voted on legislation to delay the law ’ s employer mandate .
New Hampshire Republican Sen. Kelly Ayotte said later in the show that ObamaCare is rife with problems , even by the president ’ s own admission , regardless of what Pelosi might say .
“ No matter how Speaker Pelosi tries to spin this , [ ObamaCare ] is a mess , ” she said .
South Carolina Democratic Rep. James Clyburn told CNN 's `` State of the Union '' that most party members who voted in support of the House Republican bill Friday did so to `` insulate themselves against sound bites . ''
Many of them are in competitive races next year and don ’ t want GOP challengers to have campaign ads portraying them as unwilling to fix the ObamaCare problem , Clyburn appeared to suggest .
New York Democratic Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand told ABC ’ s “ This Week ” that Obama can regain the public ’ s trust .
Gillibrand also said she didn ’ t feel misled by the president but allowed , “ He should have just been more specific . ”