'The president should honor the commitment , ' Clinton says . Obama 's critic-in-chief strikes again
President Bill Clinton — the man President Barack Obama once dubbed his “ Secretary of Explaining Stuff ” — once again has some explaining of his own to do with the Obama White House .
In an interview released Tuesday , Clinton called for a fix to the Affordable Care Act that would put an end to the wave of insurance cancellations that have been a public relations disaster for the White House and prompted Obama to apologize last week for having repeatedly assured Americans that they could keep their insurance if they liked it .
Clinton ’ s endorsement of legislation to address the cancellation issue again put the former president in a place Obama had refused to go — a familiar spot for the Oval Office ’ s current occupant .
On issues ranging from the debt ceiling fight to Syria to rhetoric towards the rich , Clinton has parted company with the White House party line — often at crucial times that leave the current president in a tough spot and exacerbate tensions that date back to the 2008 campaign .
“ I personally believe , even if it takes a change to the law , the president should honor the commitment the federal government made to those people and let them keep what they got , ” Clinton said during a discussion of Obamacare problems in an interview with Carlos Watson on the web site Ozymandias . The former president did defend the overall impact of the law — but in backing the idea of changing it to address canceled health policies , he got on board with an approach Obama has yet to embrace .
At Tuesday ’ s press briefing , White House Press Secretary Jay Carney downplayed the notion of any disagreement between Clinton and Obama — telling reporters the former president was still Obamacare ’ s “ explainer-in-chief . However , the spokesman carefully sidestepped the question of whether the two men share views on possible solutions .
“ You ’ ve heard the president address this very issue , ” Carney said , pointing to Obama ’ s comment to NBC last week that he was working “ to make sure that nobody is put in a position where their plan ’ s been cancelled [ and ] they can ’ t afford a better plan , even though they ’ d like to have a better plan . ”
However , Carney would not commit to any particular legislative option or even say that legislation of some sort was necessary .
“ We haven ’ t announced any potential fixes or moves that we might be able to make to address this problem , ” the press secretary said .
It isn ’ t the first time Obama ’ s team has spent a news cycle explaining away their explainer-in-chief ’ s remarks . During last year ’ s presidential race , Clinton angered the Obama team by describing likely GOP nominee Mitt Romney ’ s business record as “ sterling ” just as Obama and his allies were trying to paint Romney as a heartless corporate raider during his time at Bain Capital .
And at a closed-press event in June of this year , the former president took issue with Obama ’ s cautious Syria policy , saying that Obama or any president risks looking like “ a total fool ” if they heed opinion polls showing Americans fearful of any new entanglement in the region .
The recently-published book Double Down digs into the Obama-Clinton tensions in detail , reporting that after the pair golfed together in a patch-it-up effort in 2011 , Obama said : “ I like him…in doses . ”
In an interview last week , Obama himself spoke about trying to address the cancellation problem , but stopped short of backing tweaks to the law .
“ Obviously , we didn ’ t do a good enough job in terms of how we crafted the law . And , you know , that ’ s something that I regret . That ’ s something that we ’ re going to do everything we can to get fixed , ” Obama told NBC .