It was 2012 , and Ferrell Scott was watching television inside Pennsylvania 's Allenwood federal penitentiary when he learned that the sale of marijuana , something he was given a life sentence for just four years earlier , was becoming legal in two states .
Colorado had approved its recreational use , the inmate learned from the broadcast , and so had Washington .
Scott had been struggling with depression since he was incarcerated in March 2008 . But he felt a bit of hope as he watched the framework that had put people like him away without parole begin to crumble .
The country was changing , he thought . Perhaps that would mean a change on the federal level , too . Today , 11 states and Washington D.C. , have legalized recreational use of pot . Scott , still incarcerated at 56 , is angry about the hypocrisy .
`` You would think that selling marijuana is the worst thing in the world because I was given a life sentence for it , '' he wrote to me from prison recently .
Scott and hundreds of other people of color have been living behind bars , watching businessmen like Kevin Murphy , the CEO of one of the nation 's most lucrative marijuana companies , get rich . In the first quarter of this year , his company , Acreage Holdings , reported revenue of $ 12.9 million .
The top tier of the legal pot industry is run almost exclusively by white men , and retailers , dispensaries and pharmacies nationwide are expected to take in nearly $ 45 billion in revenue in 2024 from all cannabinoid sales — which include marijuana along with over-the-counter items like CBD ointments and supplements , according to a study by Arcview Market Research and BDS Analytics .
Scott said he was n't getting rich dealing pot , just trying to make a living for himself and his two kids . If Scott were selling large quantities of marijuana today , he might be on magazine covers hailing him as an entrepreneur . But because he was selling large quantities of marijuana a decade ago , he 's a lifer .
Racial disparities surrounding drug enforcement did n't begin with state legalization . But Scott 's story and the legalization movement highlight a stark reality : Whites have long been getting more of a break on dealing marijuana while blacks have been getting more frequently incarcerated .
The difference in the rate of pot use between whites and blacks in this country is nil . However , the difference in the rate of arrests and convictions is vast , according to data from an American Civil Liberties Union study . In states with the largest disparities , blacks were six times more likely than whites to get arrested for possession in 2010 , the last year of the study .
About 84 % of the more than 2,000 marijuana offenders who were federally sentenced in 2018 were people of color , according to the U.S . Sentencing Commission . Only 11 % were white , even though whites make up more than 60 % of the U.S. population .
Past strikes Ferrell Scott was given a life sentence on a third-strike charge . A look at his previous charges , most of which happened in the 1980s . Click below to view the full document . View document
Scott has been in prison for 11 years on a third strike . He was arrested and convicted twice in Texas in the late 1980s for drug possession and distribution ; he ultimately served about two years of a 15-year sentence for violating probation .
Every day in prison gives him time to think about his biggest regret — not being there for his youngest children . One daughter , Serrell , was 15 , and his son , Skyler , was entering his senior year in high school with a bright future in football when Scott was sentenced to life in Allenwood .
Now Serrell is 26 and has three children of her own . His son never made it as far as they had dreamed . He played professional arena football but lost his focus , Scott said during a recent phone interview : `` ( I ) feel like I failed him . ''
The monotony of daily prison life also gives Scott time to think about the arrest in Texas that led to his life sentence , and his decision not to take a plea deal .
Scott recalled that he was on his way to Skyler 's football practice in 2008 when police pulled him over less than a mile from his son 's school . He had been indicted by a grand jury on marijuana charges dating to February 2007 . A warrant was issued for his arrest in March 2008 .
Ultimately , he was found guilty of conspiracy to possess and intent to distribute more than 2,000 pounds of marijuana .
Scott said he had used a big rig truck to haul and sell marijuana after years of hauling legal freight failed to pay the bills . He also had a couple of men working for him doing the same thing , he said .
He was offered a plea deal — eight years in exchange for the names of others who worked with him selling drugs . He refused , opting instead to go to trial , never thinking that eight years could turn into a life sentence .
The federal First Step Act , enacted last year , will now rescue people from receiving a mandatory life sentence on a third-strike drug charge . But people who are incarcerated for life today are likely to remain .
The law 's passage was meant to eliminate racial disparities in sentencing for crack cocaine vs. powder cocaine . But the use of third-strike provisions in marijuana sentencing and plea deals can also have racial implications .
In lower-level cases , white defendants are more likely to have the harshest charges reduced , according to Carlos Berdejo , a professor at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles who studied thousands of criminal cases and published his findings in `` Criminalizing Race : Racial Disparities in Plea Bargaining . ''
Indicted on previous charges Ferrell Scott was indicted by a grand jury in 2008 before he was arrested . Scott says he had stopped dealing drugs for months when the warrant was issued for his arrest . Click below to view the full document . View documents
`` Many of us already have preconceived notions about individuals based on certain traits , race being one of them , '' Berdejo said during an interview .
Attempts to right the racial inequities surrounding marijuana sentencing are being rolled out slowly across the country . Massachusetts and California started equity and licensing programs designed to help blacks and Latinos open stores and cash in on the legal market .
In Texas , where Scott was prosecuted on federal charges , state legislators legalized hemp this year . After that , prosecutors began dropping cases involving small amounts of recreational marijuana .
Black entrepreneurs are slowly moving into the industry . Sam Adetunji , whose family is from Nigeria , started Veriheal in 2016 . The online company pairs cannabis doctors with patients who might need the drug .
Despite his success , Adetunji is aware that the nation 's history of overincarcerating blacks pushes many people away from the legal industry . Some of his friends have been jailed on marijuana charges .
`` There ’ s a lot of fear with getting into the industry for minorities because there are so many people who look like us getting thrown into jail , '' Adetunji said .
Entrepreneurs in the legal industry must use their wealth and resources to lobby Congress for the release of former dealers like Scott , he added .
`` People had to do what they had to do to make ends meet and feed their families , '' the businessman explained . `` Now that the laws have been changed , there hasn ’ t been as a big of a movement to get those people out of jail . ''
It 's not unusual for fights to break out at Allenwood , causing the entire facility to be on lockdown — something Scott says happened recently when , in the middle of our conversation , the phone went dead .
Guards ran toward the doors of the high-security facility to get the inmates who were in a skirmish under control . An announcement was made over the loudspeakers that inmates would be confined to their cells , Scott says .
`` It 's so hard to make any kind of plans in here . It 's always something going on . It can go from 0 to 100 in no time . Everything can be calm one minute and the next all hell can break loose . I absolutely hate this place , '' Scott wrote in an email . `` The only thing I have in common with the people here is that I 'm locked up just like them ; other than that we have nothing in common . ''
Ferrell Scott has been incarcerated for pot distribution since 2008 . Provided
Scott applied for clemency , and the prosecutor in his case wrote a letter on the inmate 's behalf stating that he believed the life sentence was wrong .
The clemency was denied by the Obama administration in 2016 . That decision sent him into a tailspin and caused him to write in a letter that he wished he were dead .
Three years later , his conversations with his mother help keep him going . She 's 96 , and he calls her every Sunday . `` I really hope something can happen , and I can be with her for whatever time she has left , '' Scott said .
Still , Scott does n't think he would do anything differently in terms of the plea deal . He would n't implicate the people who worked with him . He says he was thinking of the safety of his family and the future of his children when he made that decision . And even more important , he does n't feel like he should have been in a position where a plea deal or life in prison were his only options .
`` You see a lot of states making ( pot ) legal , '' Scott says . `` I do n't think I did anything any different . ''
This is the second installment in a series about prisoners serving life sentences for nonviolent crimes . This series is being published in conjunction with the Buried Alive Project , which is working on a video-driven Letters From Lifers campaign .
Eileen Rivers is the digital content editor for ███ 's Editorial Page and the editor of the newspaper 's online vertical Policing the USA . Reach her on Twitter @ msdc14