Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , poked a hole Sunday in the argument that the ObamaCare rollout is on the upswing and that Kentucky ’ s state-run program is a model of excellence , saying it mistakenly issued his son a Medicaid card .
Paul -- a doctor who left the medical profession to join Congress in 2010 and whose base Senate salary is $ 174,000 -- says he makes enough money that he doesn ’ t need Medicaid , which helps low-income families .
Nevertheless , the Kentucky exchange put his son into the Medicaid program after Paul went online to register him for ObamaCare , he said .
“ I actually tried to get my son signed up through the Kentucky exchange , you know , that the Democrats have said is so good , ” Paul told ABC ’ s “ This Week , ” while holding up what appeared to be Medicaid card . “ We did n't try to get him Medicaid . I 'm trying to pay for his insurance . But they automatically enrolled him in Medicaid . ”
Paul , who has been a sharp critic of ObamaCare , said officials wouldn ’ t talk to him or other members of his family because they were unsure about whether his son existed .
“ He had to go down to the welfare office , prove his existence , ” Paul said . “ Then the next thing we know , we get a Medicaid card . ”
Paul said he remains unsure whether anybody in his family is enrolled , with the sign-up date to get ObamaCare insurance starting Jan. 1 having come and gone .
“ I 'm uncertain now whether I 'm enrolled in D.C. and/or Kentucky , ” he said . “ And it 's a mess . I keep getting an error code every time I go in [ to the state web site ] . It will not let me edit my policy to try to make sure that my family is covered . … This is an unfolding disaster that I do n't think gets better any time soon . ”
He suggested the experience shows most of the people in Kentucky are automatically being enrolled in Medicaid .
The District of Columbia and 25 states , including Kentucky , among the country ’ s poorest , have taken the option to expand Medicaid under ObamaCare .
The Kentucky site sputtered on the Oct. 1 rollout date . But fixes have resulted in roughly a fifth of the state ’ s uninsured population enrolling in ObamaCare and about 75 percent of enrollees signing up under Medicaid , official said in late December .