Today is the deadline for most Americans to have ObamaCare insurance beginning Jan. 1 , but a series of administration fixes and delays is turning the milestone into a day that for many Americans will underscore the uncertainty about the future of the law .
The original plan was simple -- that Americans who enrolled in ObamaCare , online or otherwise , by Dec. 23 and paid in full would have insurance when coverage kicks in New Year ’ s Day .
But the disastrous Oct. 1 start for the federal website and some state-run sites -- marked by crashes and the dissemination of incorrect information -- sent President Obama and other top administration officials scrambling to change the law in hopes of bolstering enrollment numbers .
The president has expressed confidence over the past several days that the changes have helped .
On Sunday , he restated his case that ObamaCare is on the right track but urged those who had yet to enroll to do so by Monday .
“ The law is working , ” he said in a statement . “ If you don ’ t have health insurance , go to [ the site ] right now and sign up . If you do it before December 23rd , you can be covered on the first day of the New Year . … I ’ m asking you to spread the word about getting covered . ”
Among the first changes for individual insurance was the president ’ s proposed legislative fix in mid-November , amid the issuing of millions of insurance cancellation notices . Obama gave insurers the option to extend plans to customers for an extra year , even if the plans failed to meet ObamaCare standards .
`` I completely get how upsetting this can be for a lot of Americans , '' the president said at the time . `` Americans whose plans have been canceled can choose to enroll in the same kind of plan . ''
However , the move drew sharp criticism from congressional Republicans and other ObamaCare critics .
`` There is no way to fix this , '' House Speaker John Boehner said . `` I am highly skeptical they can do this administratively . ''
Last week , administration officials appealed again to insurers , asking them to accept partial payments or backdate policies for those who enroll after Monday -- in hopes that more Americans , not less , would have insurance by Jan. 1 .
They also said the estimated 500,000 who had yet to replace cancelled policies could get bare-bones ones and that roughly 3.9 million lower-income Americans have qualified for ObamaCare through the law 's Medicaid expansion -- collectively closing the enrollment gap created by the estimated 4 million to 5 million cancellations .
The president said Friday that 1 million Americans through the third week in December had enrolled in ObamaCare . It was a sharp increase compared to the mere 365,000 who had enrolled through November 30 and signaled that many of the computer glitches had been fixed . But the number remains far short of the 3.3 million the administration had hoped for prior to the October rollout .
Still , several underlying problems persist , including the accuracy of the numbers and how many of those enrolled have in fact paid for their policies .
Such problems could create far more serious consequences in the coming weeks should people who think they have insurance under ObamaCare go to a pharmacy or doctor ’ s office and find out otherwise .
In addition , the complexity of the law , including who is exempt from what , will continue to confuse Americans , Robert Moffit , director of The Heritage Foundation 's Center for Health Policy Studies , told FoxNews.com on Friday .
“ This whole thing has turned into a rat ’ s nest of rules and regulations , ” he said . “ Who would have thought Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius would grant so many hardships ? … This administration is under the mindset of how America is supposed to work , which has nothing to do with how it really works . ”
The White House ’ s ultimate goal is to provide insurance for an estimate 30 million Americans , which includes subsidizing costs for low-income individuals . The deadline to enroll without facing a tax penalty is March 31 .
Capitol Hill Republicans and other ObamaCare critics have tried numerous times to “ defund ” or replace the law , with the GOP-led House holding at least 40 votes on the issue .
What Congress and Obama will do when they return to Washington remains unclear .
The president is committed to getting insurance for the roughly 20 percent of Americans who previously didn ’ t have coverage , too be sure .
“ Things will get better , ” he said last month . “ I make no apologies for us taking this on because somebody , sooner or later , had to do it . ”
However , Moffit and others think the president might be forced to except changes from Capitol Hill as Democrats seeking re-election in 2014 need to show voters they can and have fixed the problems .