This article was produced in partnership with AL.com , which is a member of the ███ Local Reporting Network . ███ is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power . Sign up to receive our biggest stories as soon as they ’ re published .
In Alabama , the county in which you ’ re arrested could be the deciding factor in who will be financially responsible for your medical bills behind bars .
In Baldwin County , known for its white-sand Gulf Coast beaches and waterfront communities , the sheriff ’ s office ensures that inmates in the county jail do not have to pay anything more than a $ 15 copayment for medical care .
“ Inmates are not billed for the full cost of any medical care either inside or outside ” the jail , Sheriff Hoss Mack said in an email . “ Alabama Code Title 14 assigns financial responsibility of inmates ’ medical treatment to the department where they are being held . ”
Just across the bay in Mobile County , home to one of the busiest ports in the U.S. and the eponymous city of nearly 200,000 people built around it , Sheriff Sam Cochran takes a different tack : Some of his inmates are personally on the hook for the full cost of medically necessary care they receive from outside doctors while incarcerated , even if they are awaiting trial .
The difference between the two sheriffs ’ approaches demonstrates the unique power Alabama sheriffs have to set their own rules and answer only to voters . Legal experts and civil rights advocates say sheriffs like Cochran are likely violating both state law and the Eighth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution , which prohibits cruel and unusual punishment and excessive fines .
It ’ s not just happening in Mobile County . In multiple instances confirmed by AL.com and ███ , inmates have had medical bills sent to collections while they were still behind bars , damaging their credit and putting pressure on their family members to pay up to ensure the care continued .
Get Our Top Investigations Subscribe to the Big Story newsletter .
Brandon DeLaFosse is among them . He was arrested on domestic violence , burglary and robbery charges and booked into the Mobile County Metro Jail in November 2018 , three months after he underwent surgery on his inner ear . Since then , he has received bills totaling thousands of dollars for necessary follow-up appointments and tests , some of which have gone to collections while he remains behind bars .
“ He keeps getting bills in the mail , ” said Alicia DeLaFosse , Brandon ’ s mother , who has paid hundreds of dollars for care he has received while in custody . “ It ’ s all money he owes from going back and forth to the doctor . ”
Like many inmates , DeLaFosse doesn ’ t have significant income or access to public or private insurance in jail .
Alabama law is clear : If an “ inmate develops a medical condition which requires immediate treatment at a medical-care facility outside the county jail , the department shall be financially responsible for the cost of the treatment of the inmate . ”
But Cochran said when the jail ’ s doctors determine inmates need care that goes beyond what in-house medical staff and contracted outpatient providers can handle , they are often taken to private medical professionals who do not have contracts with the jail . And he allows those medical providers to bill at least some of those inmates directly .
“ When that person is taken out to that private medical facility or something like that , then , yeah , they ’ re going to bill him for that treatment , ” Cochran said during an interview in his office last month . “ It ’ s a more than reasonable thing to do . ”
Asked later about the details of Brandon DeLaFosse ’ s case and how the practice squares with state and federal law , Cochran provided an email written by Trey Oliver , warden of the Mobile County Metro Jail .
Oliver wrote that inmates are required to pay “ when they have a follow-up procedure or visit from a surgery conducted prior to being booked . ”
As for DeLaFosse , Oliver wrote , “ There was a follow up visit or two and his mother agreed to pay it beforehand . ”
Most jails and prisons across Alabama and the U.S. either have doctors and nurses on staff or contract with outside companies to provide medical care in their lockups . It ’ s not uncommon for inmates to be charged low copays — typically less than $ 20 — for medications and medical services .
But requiring inmates to foot the bill for their health care takes that practice to another level .
That ’ s “ like charging them for their own food , ” said John Lentine , a Birmingham criminal defense attorney and adjunct law professor at Samford University ’ s Cumberland School of Law and the Birmingham School of Law . “ To me it ’ s a basic human rights kind of thing . ”
Read More An Inmate Needed Emergency Medical Help . The Jail ’ s Response : See if She Has Insurance . Audio obtained by AL.com and ███ shows the jail administrator wanted to see if they would be responsible for an inmate ’ s medical bills before sending her to the hospital . She died a day later .
Michele Deitch , a senior lecturer at the University of Texas at Austin ’ s School of Law and Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs , said the practice is “ absolutely ” unconstitutional .
“ There is a constitutional obligation to provide health care that meets the serious medical needs of people who are incarcerated , ” said Deitch , who co-wrote the American Bar Association ’ s Standards on Treatment of Prisoners . “ That ’ s not negotiable . ”
The tactic is another way in which sheriffs across Alabama are avoiding financial responsibility for inmate medical care . AL.com and ███ reported in September that many sheriffs in Alabama and across the country are finding ways to release inmates from jail just before they incur expensive hospital bills , a tactic known as “ medical bond . ”
In several recent cases , incarcerated people around the country have successfully challenged policies restricting their access to free medical care in prison .
Last year , a federal court ruled that transgender inmates in Missouri ’ s state prisons have a right to receive hormone therapy free of charge while incarcerated , regardless of whether they were already receiving the treatments when they were taken into custody . And this year , prisoners in Minnesota reached a settlement with the state ’ s Department of Corrections that requires the prison system to provide prisoners who have Hepatitis C with expensive drugs that often cure the infection .
AL.com and ███ attempted to contact the sheriffs of all 67 counties in Alabama via email or phone to ask whether they allow inmates to be billed for care they receive while incarcerated . Of those , 13 sheriffs and one chief deputy responded . The sheriff of Mobile County and chief deputy of Jackson County each said they allow providers to bill inmates for necessary care in certain situations . Ten sheriffs said they do not allow inmates to be billed . Two others declined to comment .
Days after Thanksgiving last year , Brandon DeLaFosse was arrested in Mississippi on outstanding warrants stemming from an incident earlier that month in Mobile County , Alabama .
The then-28-year-old was driven back to Mobile , where he stayed in the county jail until Feb. 28 , when he was sentenced to three years in prison .
DeLaFosse ’ s health problems continued behind bars . Since his ear surgery last year , he has suffered from persistent ear infections and severe hearing loss .
In between Marlboro Lights and peanut butter-and-syrup sandwiches at her Irvington home last month , DeLaFosse ’ s mother , Alicia , said she spends many hours each week making calls , sending emails and conducting research to advocate on behalf of her son .
She said a steady stream of medical bills addressed to her son has arrived at her house since his arrest . Billing records show that she has spent more than $ 600 on his care since his arrest , and more than $ 1,000 in outstanding bills have gone to debt collection .
Brandon DeLaFosse with two of his three children ( Courtesy of the DeLaFosse family )
On Dec. 6 , 2018 , while he was in the Mobile County Metro Jail , Brandon DeLaFosse was taken to see an ear , nose and throat specialist at Providence Hospital in Mobile for a surgery follow-up visit recommended by the doctor . But first , his mother said , jail staff required her to make a payment to the doctor ’ s office . After the appointment , the hospital ’ s billing department sent a bill for $ 729 for tests he underwent that day to Alicia DeLaFosse ’ s house .
“ The way the nurse at the jail explained it to me is because it was something that didn ’ t happen at the jail , it ’ s preexisting . ... I had to go pay for it myself , ” she said . “ For the jail to allow him to go see the doctor , I had to go to the doctor ’ s office and pay $ 125 first . ”
A registered nurse at the jail in Mobile noted in Brandon DeLaFosse ’ s medical record that his mother made a payment and that the nurse had scheduled a follow-up visit for later that month . In January 2019 , a nurse practitioner at the jail wrote a note in his file stating she would request another follow-up appointment with his doctor “ with the expectation that it is handled in the usual fashion with his mother arranging for payment . ”
`` I don ’ t think it ’ s fair . They 're responsible for my medical care , so why should it be coming out of my pockets or my family 's pockets ? '' Brandon DeLaFosse said in a jailhouse phone call .
Cochran , the Mobile County sheriff , said via email that he views the situation as a “ legal dispute between [ Brandon DeLaFosse ] , us and our contracted provider . I know of no complaint or claim made against us . ”
“ The mom agreed to pay [ the ] bill . Looks like she reneged , ” Cochran wrote . “ Otherwise if it would have been medically necessary our contracted folks would have handled . ”
Alicia DeLaFosse said she “ didn ’ t renege ” and paid for all of the medical costs she knew about in advance .
Brandon DeLaFosse continued to be billed for outside medical care after he was moved to state prison . On July 23 , nearly five months after his sentence began , he saw a doctor and underwent tests at Providence Hospital . He was sent a bill for $ 224.70 for outpatient diagnostics administered that day , plus $ 71.98 for the doctor visit .
That shouldn ’ t have happened , a spokeswoman for the Alabama Department of Corrections said in a statement .
“ By ADOC ’ S policy , all inmates in the care , custody , and control of any ADOC correctional facility are not charged or responsible for community-based medical care or mental health services , ” the spokeswoman , Samantha Banks , said .
Any state prisoners “ incorrectly ” billed for outpatient medical care should notify the provider that they were incarcerated at the time , the statement explained . “ The medical provider should submit to the Department the appropriate paperwork and any outstanding inmate medical bills will be directed to the appropriate payer . ”
State prisoners in Arizona have reported similar issues with providers billing them directly for medical care they received while incarcerated , as KJZZ radio reported this year . Like in Alabama , the Arizona Department of Corrections has said the bills were sent out in error and that the department or its medical contractor would pay the inmates ’ bills .
But that ’ s a vastly different situation than the one facing inmates in some Alabama counties , where sheriff ’ s offices are not chalking up such bills to error and are in fact deliberately choosing to avoid paying medical bills for inmates in their charge .
Though the public often has little sympathy for inmates , incarcerated people do have clear rights , particularly when it comes to health care behind bars .
Alabama law states that “ necessary clothing and bedding must be furnished by the sheriff or jailer , at the expense of the county , to those prisoners who are unable to provide them for themselves , and also necessary medicines and medical attention to those who are sick or injured , when they are unable to provide them for themselves . ”
In another section of the state code , a definition of a county inmate includes an explicit reference to their health care being provided for : “ any person being held in a public institution under the administrative control and responsibility of the county sheriff and for whom the county is responsible for the provision of medical care . ”
Brandon Blankenship , an assistant professor of law and ethics at the University of Alabama at Birmingham , said that allowing inmates to be billed for care that they receive while incarcerated amounts to cruel and unusual punishment and that the bills are excessive fines .
“ I don ’ t think it ’ s ever been challenged in court in Alabama , but from where I ’ m sitting , the answer to me is that , no , it ’ s certainly not constitutional under the Eighth Amendment . ”
The tactics of some Alabama sheriffs stand in sharp contrast to what ’ s going on elsewhere in the country . This year , California and Illinois banned the practice of charging inmates copays , and a number of other states have taken , or are considering , steps to rein in the practice .
“ They usually can not afford even a $ 5 copay , so the idea that they could pay thousands of dollars for these services is laughable from a practical perspective and it ’ s downright evil on many different levels , ” said Deitch , the University of Texas at Austin professor .
In 1983 , the U.S. Supreme Court decided a seminal case , City of Revere v. Massachusetts General Hospital , involving a person who was hurt during an arrest and taken to a hospital . The court ruled that “ as long as the governmental entity ensures that the medical care needed is in fact provided , the Constitution does not dictate how the cost of that care should be allocated as between the entity and the provider of the care . That is a matter of state law . ”
But that ruling did not answer the question of whether inmates can be stuck with the bill .
Read More These Sheriffs Release Sick Inmates to Avoid Paying Their Hospital Bills Inmates suffering heart attacks , on the verge of diabetic comas and brutalized in jail beatings have been released so sheriffs wouldn ’ t have to pay for their medical care . Some were rearrested once they had recovered .
“ We don ’ t have any clear Supreme Court ruling , ” said Fred Cohen , a professor emeritus at the University at Albany ’ s School of Criminal Justice who has decades of experience in corrections law and serves as executive editor of Correctional Law Reporter .
Cohen said he believes there is a good case to be made that the practice of allowing inmates to be billed for medical care violates their constitutional rights .
“ I don ’ t think it ’ s an open policy question in that inmates should not be required to pay , ” he said . “ I think it could be held unconstitutional by the right court . ”
Several days after Charles Tillman was booked into the Washington County Jail in March 2018 , his left testicle became severely inflamed . He told a guard , and on March 22 , Tillman was taken to Washington County Hospital for treatment and an ultrasound .
The 40-year-old , who has a long rap sheet , was driven back to the jail following the appointment and was released from the facility the following day . ( The Washington County Sheriff ’ s Office confirmed the dates of his incarceration . But the nature of his offense was not clear based on court records , and the sheriff ’ s office would not discuss his charges during a phone call with Tillman and a reporter . )
It wasn ’ t until weeks later that Tillman learned that he had been billed directly for that visit and that the debt had been sent to a collector , upending his credit . He showed AL.com and ███ a copy of his credit report showing it had been negatively affected by unpaid medical bills .
“ They tried to get me to sign paperwork but I refused to sign it , the hospital bill saying I was responsible for it . ”
As of this month , Tillman still owed $ 1,856.42 for medical care he received at Washington County Hospital . The hospital confirmed that it treated him during each of his brief incarcerations in the jail in February 2017 , March 2018 and September 2018 .
“ I got the bills at my [ home ] address , ” said Tillman , who has since been released . “ They ’ re on my credit report now as negative marks — that ’ s what ’ s keeping me from getting a car right now . ”
Washington County Sheriff Richard Stringer was unable to explain Tillman ’ s situation , saying the county ’ s policy is to pay for all medical costs for inmates who aren ’ t covered by insurance .
“ That ’ s not standard procedure , ” Stringer said . “ It would have to be an unusual case for that to happen , and I don ’ t keep up with every case that comes in . But no , that ’ s not our policy. “
Hundreds of miles northeast , Rocky Harnen , chief deputy of the Jackson County Sheriff ’ s Office , said preexisting conditions should be inmates ’ responsibility .
“ If it ’ s something preexisting , say diabetes or something , and you ’ ve got to go to the doctor every now and then , then that ’ s their responsibility to pay for that , ” he said .
“ If it ’ s going to your own doctor , they would be responsible for that . I guess they would bill them at their house . The taxpayers shouldn ’ t be responsible for ongoing issues that are preexisting . ”
Harnen referred subsequent questions about the legality of the practice to County Attorney John Porter , who did not cite any laws that allowed it .
“ I can ’ t say that there ’ s not any medical care that they have to pay for , ” Porter said .
Asked if inmates sometimes have to pay for outpatient care for preexisting conditions , he said , “ I wouldn ’ t say that that ’ s incorrect . … I can ’ t give you a blanket answer to that but it would be depending on the circumstances . ”
That ’ s not the way inmate health care works in many county jails across Alabama . In Etowah County , northeast of Birmingham , inmates are never billed for care they receive while incarcerated , according to Sheriff Jonathon Horton .
“ We provide medical services for inmates in our care so they should not receive any bills , ” Horton said . “ They shouldn ’ t be billed . That ’ s my understanding . ”
Lauderdale County Sheriff Rick Singleton said that he would love to have inmates in his jail in northwest Alabama foot the bill for certain types of medical care , but that he is not legally able to do so . For instance , he said he would like to have avoided the $ 300,000 the county once had to pay for open heart surgery for “ the town drunk ” arrested on a public intoxication charge .
“ If they ’ re in jail on public intoxication and they ’ ve got preexisting health conditions , I don ’ t think the taxpayer should have to foot the bill to pay for it , ” Singleton said . “ If they get injured inside the jail or they get sick inside the jail , we of course pay for it . But my issue is with having to pay for preexisting conditions . But we have to do it . ”
███ and AL.com will be investigating the extraordinary power of Alabama sheriffs all year . Are you from Alabama ? Do you have reason to believe we should be looking into your sheriff or sheriff ’ s office ? Get in touch .