Over the past four years , billions of dollars have been funneled from the federal government to states to construct Obamacare state operated healthcare exchanges . This money has not been well-spent . Several states have failed and others have misused hundreds of millions in taxpayer funds .
When Oregon announced it would become the first state to shutter its taxpayer-funded Obamacare exchange in early 2014 , it was undoubtedly due to mismanagement , not lack of funds . Emails uncovered since show state officials in over their head during the construction and roll-out of the exchange . Perhaps worse , the Governor ’ s office was so determined to win reelection that it gave campaign consultants with zero IT or healthcare experience total control over Cover Oregon ’ s fate .
Despite these allegations , there aren ’ t enough facts or answers two years after the ill-fated state-operated exchange launched .
Taxpayers shelled out $ 305 million for the Oregon exchange , and $ 5.5 billion nationwide , yet strong oversight over the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) from Congress has been lacking for years . This must change . Remarkably , the first Congressional hearing into this issue was ONLY held late last month , when the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight questioned officials from six states under the leadership of Chairman Tim Murphy ( R-Pa. ) . Although this hearing is a step in the right direction , the Committee has its work cut out for it to get to the bottom of this spigot of taxpayer funds .
Tough questions must be asked to the states and to CMS acting administrator Andy Slavitt , who has been nominated by the President to serve in the role permanently . While Oregon is the poster child of troubled Obamacare state exchanges , the list of failures is far beyond a single state and includes Hawaii , Vermont , Nevada , Rhode Island , Massachusetts , andMaryland .
In October of 2013 , Obamacare exchanges across the country were set to go live after years of preparation . While many exchanges floundered , the poor performance of Oregon stood out . Weeks after this first deadline , Cover Oregon had enrolled zero applicants and officials were soon forced to install dozens of extra fax lines so that applicants could fax in a 20 page document .
The debacle was an embarrassment for the state ’ s governor , John Kitzhaber , who had fashioned himself as one of the nation ’ s healthcare reformers .
Cover Oregon started as an ambitious project based around a “ no-wrong door ” approach . This vision would allow Oregonians to easily access all of the government benefits , subsidies , and welfare through one portal . There was just one problem – it was completely unrealistic from a cost-benefit perspective . Oregon officials never even bothered to conduct a cost-benefit analysis .
In the year leading to launch , problems vastly outnumbered any real progress . In fact , each and every month , the state ’ s quality-control contractor Maximus rated the overall health of the exchange as “ high risk . ”
Despite these ominous signs , CMS awarded $ 226 million in early 2013 .
By July , amidst concerns the deadline could not be reached , Cover Oregon ’ s advertising campaign was rolled outfeaturing a “ Long Live Oregonian ” theme that cost taxpayers close to $ 21 million .
Behind the scenes , the scope of the website continued to be narrowed and planned software tests all ended in failure . As it became clearer and clearer that the system would be a disaster , those involved allegedly began to craft a cover-up story and assign blame .
The deadline came and went and the system did not work .
With his reelection campaign kicking into gear , Kitzhaber quickly turned to self-preservation mode , unleashing his “ secret weapon ” to oversee Cover Oregon , an aide known amongst her peers as the “ Princess of Darkness . ”
Documentation uncovered since suggests that the campaign made the call to shut down the exchange based on what was deemed best for Kitzhaber ’ s reelection prospects . However , recovered emails suggest that the Cover Oregon system was close to 90 percent complete when aides made this call .
While the Governor did win reelection , he was forced to resign months later amid a public corruption scandal involving his fiancée and her misuse of public office . In the meantime , the transition to the federal system cost an estimated $ 41 million more , mostly in federal funds .
Now out of public eye , Kitzhaber continues to resist releasing emails in court , claiming they are personal even though it is clear he used these accounts for government business . Previously released emails have provided important information on the Cover Oregon debacle but so much remains unknown .
Two years after the exchange launched and five years since receiving its first grant the picture of Cover Oregon ’ s failure remains incomplete . For far too long , real federal oversight has been missing from this story . With over $ 5.5 billion spent on Obamacare exchanges across the country , taxpayers deserve the truth .