Some Americans could see their insurance bills double next year as the health care overhaul law expands coverage to millions of people . The nation 's big health insurers say they expect premiums — or the cost for insurance coverage — to rise from 20 to 100 percent for millions of people due to changes that will occur when key provisions of the Affordable Care Act roll out in January 2014 . Mark Bertolini , CEO of Aetna Inc. , one of the nation 's largest insurers , calls the price hikes `` premium rate shock . '' `` We 've done all the math , we 've shared it with all the regulators , we 've shared it with all the people in Washington that need to see it , and I think it 's a big concern , '' Bertolini said during the company 's annual meeting with investors in December . To be sure , there will be no across-the-board rate hikes for everyone , and there 's no reliable national data on how many people could see increases .
But the biggest price hikes are expected to hit a group that represents a relatively small slice of the insured population . That includes some of the roughly 14 million people who buy their own insurance as opposed to being covered under employer-sponsored plans , and to a lesser extent , some employees of smaller companies . The price increases are a downside of President Barack Obama 's health care law , which is expected to expand coverage to nearly 30 million uninsured people . The massive law calls for a number of changes that could cause premiums for people who do n't have coverage through a big employer to rise next year — at a time when health care costs already are expected to grow by 5 percent or more .
Throughout the healthcare debate ( and his first campaign ) , President Obama promised that premiums would fall by an average of $ 2,500 annually per family . He also pledged that overall healthcare costs would decline , not increase . Wrong , and wrong . There 's a reason why Republicans are still fighting like hell to repeal and defund this monstrosity . The Associated Press runs through a few of the reasons behind the looming cost spikes :
— Changes to how insurers set premiums according to age and gender could cause some premiums to rise as much as 50 percent , according to America 's Health Insurance Plans , or AHIP , an industry trade group that 's funded by insurers .
— A new tax on premiums could raise prices as much as 2.3 percent in 2014 and more in subsequent years , according to a study commissioned by AHIP . Policyholders with plans that end in 2014 probably have already seen an impact from this .
— Requirements that insurance plans in many cases cover more health care or pay a greater share of a patient 's bill than they do now also could add to premiums , depending on the extent of a person 's current coverage , according AHIP .
While we 're at it , let 's address two more shattered promises of Obamacare . ( 1 ) Remember `` if you like your plan , you can keep it ? '' The Obama administration has announced it 's taking an even bigger meat cleaver to the popular Medicare Advantage program than first anticipated . Democrats attack the Republican budget for `` cutting Medicare on the backs of seniors '' because the proposal includes a bipartisan reform plan for future seniors . Democrats have already sliced $ 716 billion from Medicare to pay for Obamacare , and they 're about to slash the popular Medicare Advantage for millions of current seniors . ( 2 ) In spite of the president 's `` not a single dime '' deficit pledge , the nonpartisan GAO estimates that Obamacare will add $ 6.2 trillion to our long term deficits .