CLOSE Trump called the executive order a first step 'to providing millions of Americans with Obamacare relief . ' Video provided by Newsy Newslook
WASHINGTON — A majority of people who rely on Obamacare insurance agree with Republican critics that the health insurance markets created by the Affordable Care Act are collapsing , according to a new poll .
But most of those surveyed also said their premiums are either lower this year than they were last year , or about the same , and they ’ re likely to continue buying insurance even though Congress has eliminated the ACA ’ s penalty for going without coverage .
The poll , conducted by the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation , also found that Obamacare enrollees are not interested in switching to the skimpier , short-term plans , touted by the Trump administration , which have fewer benefits and lower premiums .
Liz Hamel , director of public opinion and survey research for the Kaiser Family Foundation , said the poll results highlight the contradiction between political rhetoric and reality .
`` When the president is saying things like , ` The ACA is failing . Things are collapsing , ' people hear that , '' Hamel said . `` So they may be answering that question not necessarily based on their own experience this year . ''
Republicans tried unsuccessfully to repeal the ACA last year , arguing the markets created for those who aren ’ t offered insurance through an employer or a government health care plan like Medicare or Medicaid were failing . The plans cost too much , deductibles were too high , and the number of insurers willing to sell plans was shrinking , GOP lawmakers said .
“ Obamacare is collapsing , and we must act decisively to protect all Americans , ” Trump said in his first address to Congress in 2017 .
About half of the public — and 60 % of those who use the Obamacare marketplaces — told pollsters they think the marketplaces are `` collapsing . ''
Democrats charge that any problems with the marketplaces have been exacerbated , if not created , by Republicans in an attempt to undermine the law . Most significantly , the Trump administration ended reimbursements to insurance companies to cover the discounts they ’ re required to give low-income customers . The administration also shortened the sign-up period for 2018 plans and cut outreach funding .
`` When you mix indifference , cruelty , complicated and sabotage , this is what you get .... Trumpcare , '' Andy Slavitt , who had a lead role in implementing the ACA during the Obama administration , tweeted last month .
When you mix indifference , cruelty , complicated and sabotage , this is what you get👇 .... Trumpcare . https : //t.co/7moFjjiaFM — Andy Slavitt ( @ ASlavitt ) March 12 , 2018
Premiums went up in 2018 , in part because of the Trump administration 's move to cut reimbursements to insurance companies .
But one-third of those surveyed said they ’ re paying about the same this year , and one-fourth said they ’ re paying less .
People earning up to four times the federal poverty level qualify for federal subsidies that reduce their premiums . Because the subsidies are tied to the cost of a mid-priced plan , those eligible for help were insulated from effects of the rising premiums . Some subsidies even increased enough that they covered the full cost of the least generous plans .
Although Republicans failed last year to repeal the ACA , they did end the tax penalties the ACA imposed on most people who go without insurance . That effectively killed the ACA ’ s individual mandate , which had been included in the law to prevent healthy people from waiting until they got sick to purchase insurance .
The individual mandate was the most unpopular part of the ACA , but most people surveyed by the Kaiser Family Foundation did not know it has been repealed , effective in 2019 .
And 90 % of people who purchase insurance on their own say they will continue to do so despite the mandate ’ s repeal . Most see health insurance as something they need . For those who go without insurance , many said it 's because they can ’ t afford it .
`` We know that people say that health insurance is important . They want it and they need it , '' Hamel said . `` The mandate isn ’ t the main reason that they ’ re getting it . ''
NEW POLL : Survey of the non-group market finds 9 in 10 enrollees plan to continue buying insurance despite recent repeal of the individual mandate penalty .
Most say the # individualmandate was not a major reason they got coverage in 2018https : //t.co/3SZHUGuJzK # ACApic.twitter.com/Xll0dITekM — Kaiser Family Foundation ( @ KaiserFamFound ) April 3 , 2018
Trump has directed the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to make it easier for people to buy short-term plans — something the Obama administration limited . Such plans tend to cost less , but provide fewer benefits and often do not cover pre-existing conditions . The vast majority ( 84 % ) of those who buy insurance on their own said they would prefer to keep their current plan rather than switch to short-term insurance .
But at least half are worried that there will be no insurance companies left selling plans in their area in the future . And even more fear that premiums and deductibles will become unaffordable .
That 's another reason why respondents may have said the marketplaces are collapsing .
The survey was conducted by telephone in February and March . The margin of error is plus or minus 2 percentage points for all respondents , and plus or minus 9 percentage points for people who buy individual insurance through an exchange .