OBAMACARE MEANS NET LOSS OF POLICIES - ObamaCare seems to have been an insurance killer so far . More than 5 million policies were nixed under the law ’ s new regulations . Announcing that just over 2 million people are potential paying customers is a rather stunning admission of defeat . Some of the millions may have landed on employer-based insurance and others may have become eligible under the expanded Medicaid program , but there are evidently many people who do not have coverage today because of the law .
[ Deadline : ObamaCare enrollees have until Jan. 10 to pay premiums for coverage retroactive to Jan . 1 . ]
WHITE HOUSE NOT SAYING HOW MANY ENROLLED - Democrats are talking big numbers : 2.1 million applicants for ObamaCare and millions more new enrollees in the welfare program that provides free coverage to the poor , Medicaid . But the Obama administration has so far refused to disclose the number that matters : The number of people who actually have obtained insurance under the law . AP reports , “ Insurers say they are receiving thousands of erroneous sign-up applications from the government , and some people who thought they had enrolled for coverage have not received confirmation . Undoubtedly , some will find out they don ’ t have the immediate coverage they thought they did. ” A recent WSJ report revealed only half of enrollees had made their first months payment . The government is touting nearly 4 million who have been “ deemed eligible ” for welfare benefits , but , again , that ’ s not the same as enrollments . The silence so far on the real numbers is reminiscent of the quiet that fell over the administration after the enrollment period began on Oct. 1 . Do they not know ? Scary . Do they not want to say ? Scarier .
‘ LIE OF THE YEAR ’ ADS ROLL OUT , LIKE IT OR NOT - The conservative group Americans for Prosperity announced Wednesday it is greeting three vulnerable Democrats with big ad buys in the New Year . The group is spending $ 2.5 million dollars to hit Sens . Kay Hagan , D-N.C. , Mary Landrieu , D-La. , and Jeanne Shaheen , D-N.H. , for repeating President Obama ’ s “ you can keep it ” pledge , deemed “ lie of the year ” by PolitiFact .
Spin cycle on overdrive - President Obama ’ s permanent campaign apparatus , Organizing for Action , has launched its own online ad campaign in an effort to share ObamaCare success stories . The White House is also ramping up its PR efforts to put the troubled health law in a more positive light . Team Obama is offering social media tools to help spread its “ # GetCovered ” message , including Facebook profile images and banners . They have also launched a new section on the White House Web site encouraging visitors to submit their own health care success stories .
THE HIGH PRICE OF POLITICAL IGNORANCE - George Will considers the consequences of a uninformed electorate in The price of political ignorance : More government . “ Political ignorance helps explain Americans ’ perpetual disappointment with politicians generally , and presidents especially , to whom voters unrealistically attribute abilities to control events . The elections of 1932 and 1980 dramatically illustrated how voters primarily control politicians — by ‘ retrospective voting , ’ refusing to reelect them . ”
[ LAT ’ s Mark Z. Barabak considers how “ throw the bums out ” so often results in the bums staying exactly where they are . ]
PICK SIX : YOUR MIDTERM PREDICTIONS - With control of the Senate within reach of the GOP this year , we asked you to play pundit and give us your six picks for the most likely Republican path to a Senate majority . The consensus : Arkansas Democrat Mark Pryor is toast . But beyond that , most of you forecast additional GOP pickups in Alaska , Louisiana , Montana , South Dakota and West Virginia .
Many of you added your thoughts on how the GOP might get there : “ Republicans have to get their ground game to work . They need to message themselves as pro-freedom , pro-liberty , and pro-America with real solutions to the failed policies of the past 5 years , ” wrote Daniel Seiler . “ They have the upper hand , because they have the argument . They just have to be disciplined enough to get it . ”
DEMS DRUMMING UP SUPPORT FOR JOBLESS BENEFITS - Sen . Majority Leader Harry Reid says the Senate ’ s first order of business will be to resume federal subsidies for extended unemployment benefits when it reconvenes on Monday . Reid told the AP Wednesday the Senate will take up a bipartisan measure from Sens . Dean Heller . R-Nev. , and Jack Reed , D-R.I. , that extends unemployment benefits for three months . ███ has more .
[ Washington Examiner ’ s David Freddoso makes the case against extending unemployment benefits . “ In a market with few good jobs available and long-term unemployment benefits , it was rational for earnest job-seekers to hold out for something better than what was there . But when the issue is forced , some job is better than no job at all . ” ]
Reid ’ s jobs plan includes keeping his own - The Hill reports that Reid ’ s play on restoring extended payments for the unemployed could be a particular boon to some embattled members of his conference , Sen. Mark Pryor , D-Ark. , and Sen. Kay Hagan , D-N.C , both represent states with higher-than-average unemployment .
WITH YOUR SECOND CUP OF COFFEE ... Graham Allison , the director of the Harvard Kennedy School ’ s Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs , poses an uncomfortable question for 2014 : Is the stage set for a large-scale war ? Not likely , he says , but points out that we ’ ve thought that before . “ Precisely a hundred years ago [ Wednesday ] , the richest man in the world sent New Year ’ s greetings to a thousand of the most influential leaders in the U.S. and Europe announcing : mission accomplished . ‘ International Peace , ’ he proclaimed , ‘ is to prevail through the Great Powers agreeing to settle their disputes by International Law , the pen thus proving mightier than the sword. ’ ” We know how that turned out , Mr. Carnegie . Read it all from The National Interest .
Obama Job Approval : Approve – 42.6 percent//Disapprove – 53.4 percent
Direction of Country : Right Direction – 30.1 percent//Wrong Track – 63.3 percent
Generic Congressional Ballot : Democrats – 43.3 percent// Republicans 43.1 percent
BUBBA CHANNELS ELIZABETH WARREN - In his remarks at the swearing in of New York ’ s new Mayor Bill de Blasio , former President Bill Clinton wasn ’ t looking for any Third Way out . The event featured an invocation that deemed New York a “ plantation ” and was focused on de Blasio ’ s call for “ a new progressive direction ” and big tax hikes on top earners . Clinton said he “ strongly endorse [ d ] ” de Blasio ’ s platform and called the gap between rich and poor in New York a “ moral outrage. ” Former first lady Hillary Clinton did not speak , but the enthusiastic endorsement by her husband , widely distrusted by the Democratic left as too good a friend of Wall Street , might go even farther in quelling anxieties from those still hoping a liberal challenger will emerge to the party ’ s 2016 frontrunner . “ I have to say I strongly endorse Bill de Blasio ’ s core campaign commitment to shared opportunities , ” the former president , said . “ And this inequality problem bedevils the entire country . ”
Did they try stopping and frisking ? - New York Mayor Bill de Blasio took the oath on the same Bible used by fellow New Yorker Franklin Roosevelt in his 1933 presidential inauguration . But when the ceremony ended , the Good Book was gone . A massive search , that included sifting through garbage , ended when a NYPD detective uncovered the Bible . NY Post has the story .
NO ALOHA SPIRIT FOR HAWAII DEMS - A bitter Senate primary is shaping up in President Obama ’ s home state . Gov . Neil Abercrombie ’ s , D-Hawaii , appointed former Lt. Gov . Brian Schatz to fill the seat of the late Sen. Daniel Inouye , D-Hawaii , even though Inouye had made clear before his death in December 2012 that he wanted Rep. Colleen Hanabusa , D-Hawaii , to get the gig . Now , Hanabusa is giving up her House seat to challenge Schatz , who has won the endorsements of former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg and former Vice President Al Gore . Bloomberg is headlining a fundraiser for Schatz today . Hanabusa was a stalwart for Hillary Clinton , while Schatz was an early booster for Obama . Abercrombie didn ’ t help calm things in his interview with WaPo ’ s Philip Rucker : Abercrombie said he disagreed with Inouye ’ s wishes , adding that he didn ’ t want to ‘ get into a discussion about letters and deathbed notices. ’ The governor said he thought Hanabusa , now 62 , was too old to build enough seniority in the Senate to continue Inouye ’ s legacy of steering an outsize allowance of federal money to Hawaii . Noting that Inouye entered the Senate in 1963 at age 38 , Abercrombie said : ‘ Brian Schatz is 41 . Colleen isn ’ t . She ’ s in her 60s. ’ ” If the acrimony deepens , Republicans might actually have a chance in the Aloha State , with former Rep. Charles Djou ready for action .
MORE RUMBLINGS ON SPRINGTIME IMMIGRATION PUSH - NYT : “ Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio has signaled he may embrace a series of limited changes to the nation ’ s immigration laws in the coming months , giving advocates for change new hope that 2014 might be the year that a bitterly divided Congress reaches a political compromise to overhaul the sprawling system . ”
Yes , but… - This sounds like the NYT playing some catch up here . The odds of Boehner doing anything like “ comprehensive ” immigration changes look low indeed . How many anonymous sources in stories like these are just looking to divide GOPers . And how much of this is Boehner playing for time with big business groups demanding action on conditional amnesty for illegals ?
SIX CALIFORNIAS - Is California so large it has become ungovernable ? That ’ s the conclusion of venture capitalist Tim Draper . Draper ’ s solution : create six states out of the Golden State . According to the venture capitalist ’ s proposed ballot initiative , new states known as Silicon Valley and West California would be anchored by the cities of San Francisco and Los Angeles , respectively . South California would include Orange County and San Diego . Remaining counties would be divided into areas called Central California , North California and Jefferson . The proposal contends that the sheer size of the state creates problems for governance , its costly media markets make elections expensive , and the competing interests of coastal and inland regions promote policies that only favor certain areas .
[ Walter Russell Mead likes it : “ We may disagree with the boundaries somewhat , but the idea is a sound one—indeed , it ’ s potentially one of the most important US reform possibilities out there . ” ]
ROB FORD GOING TO HIT IT AGAIN - Toronto Mayor Rob Ford , who gained notoriety in 2013 for his past affinity for crack use and his unruly antics , may be grabbing headlines again in 2014 . ███ ’ John Roberts got the scoop that Ford will seek re-election this year . Ford files today . Voters in Toronto will elect their next mayor Oct. 27 . Toronto ’ s The Star has more .
HEY HOSER , DON ’ T BURN THE DONUTS , EH - Two men driving through a remote mountainous section of Alberta , Canada resorted to some unorthodox methods to keep warm when their car became stranded . The Calgary Sun reports that with temperatures dropping to 5 degrees , the two removed the seats of the Honda and lit them on fire to provide warmth , later deciding to torch the entire car . In the morning , they realized they were in easy walking distance to a home . That ’ s where police found them after passersby reported the smoke plume from their roadside pyres . The duo was treated for minor burns and frostbite . And it turns out both men were in possession of cell phones . The sage advice from the Mounties : “ We certainly do n't recommend lighting your vehicle on fire to stay warm , '' Royal Canadian Mounted Police Cpl . Jeffrey Feist said . “ Stay inside your vehicle and call 911 if you can . ”
AND NOW A WORD FROM CHARLES… “ Obama ’ s active agenda is dead on arrival . His polling numbers are going to hover around 40 . With that , if you are a lame duck , you only hold one of the two houses , you are not going to get any run on that agenda . I do think it will be one of the great ironies that it will be Senate Democrats who drive the stake through ObamaCare ’ s historic repudiation of liberals of their own singular achievement . ” —Charles Krauthammer , on “ Special Report with Bret Baier . ”
Chris Stirewalt is digital politics editor for ███ . Want ███ First in your inbox every day ? Sign up here . To catch Chris live online daily at 11:30 a.m . ET , click here .