REUTERS Opinion The Obamacare Lie That Ca n't Be Fixed Even Bill Clinton is lecturing Barack Obama on keeping his word .
Who knew that the day would come when Bill Clinton would be in a position to lecture President Barack Obama about honoring his word ?
In an interview with Ozy.com , the former president addressed those millions of Americans getting cancellation notices from their insurance companies , even though Obama had infamously promised that they could keep their plans . “ I personally believe , ” Clinton said , “ even if it takes a change in the law , the president should honor the commitment the federal government made to these people and let them keep what they got . ”
Clinton has a black belt in verbal escape hatches and has never been one to let a strict adherence to truthfulness become an obstacle , so his statement hit with extra force . The words were barely out of his mouth before the speculation over his motives began . For the sake of argument , let ’ s be overly credulous and literal and assume that he simply thinks it ’ s wrong for a president to lie to people about whether they can keep their health insurance .
The problem with Clinton ’ s advice is that Obama can ’ t possibly take it .
Obama ’ s promise on insurance wasn ’ t just injudicious , it was completely impossible . It wasn ’ t an incidental falsehood but ran counter to the central premise of his own health care law . People losing their current insurance isn ’ t an unintended consequence of the law ; it is an intended consequence without which much of the law doesn ’ t work .
In short , Obama ’ s lie runs so deep that perhaps even Clinton — who had his law license suspended for dissembling under oath — can ’ t fathom all of its implications .
If Democrats were inclined to catch the falling flag of Obama ’ s credibility , they might take a page from the 1990s and insist that “ everyone lies about historic health care legislation. ” Almost by the hour , it becomes clearer that they aren ’ t so inclined . They not only tied themselves to the law , they repeated Obama ’ s false promise themselves , and evidently don ’ t appreciate it one bit .
Maybe they genuinely didn ’ t know better . Our representatives in Congress can ’ t be expected to read or understand legislation they support to transform a major sector of the American economy . These are busy and important people . But at the very least , the president ’ s policy staff could have let them in on the joke .
Some of them now support legislation , one way or another , to grandfather canceled insurance policies so people can really keep them if they like them . The bills are opposed by the White House , despite the president ’ s prior promise , despite his semi-apology for misleading people , despite his stated desire to fix the problem .
The White House ’ s posture , in other words , is that the president is sorry that he lied and all , and he really wants people to keep their coverage — but it just can ’ t be done .
And , on its own terms , it is right . It is possible to let people keep their current insurance , but only by unraveling a key element of Obamacare . To make the law work , people in the individual insurance market content with their current coverage have to be forced out of their plans and onto the exchanges . That ’ s the only way to ensure the exchanges aren ’ t overwhelmed by older and less healthy consumers .
The president couldn ’ t be honest about this at time of the law ’ s passage and still can ’ t be honest about it . The White House acts as though it is doing the people whose insurance is getting canceled a favor by protecting them from “ substandard ” policies , rather than admitting that it is asking them to make a sacrifice .
The great engine of the welfare state is the hidden cost . Usually , the costs of a new program or regulation are too diffuse or distant to matter much politically in comparison to the promise of a direct benefit . This time , the costs aren ’ t hidden . They are immediate and concrete in the canceled policies and the higher premiums , and they are making the politics of Obamacare toxic .
The Obama administration clearly hopes it can brazen it out . It came up with a date for fixing the website , Nov. 30 , so it could have a date to use to hold off the dogs , for now . It will come up with some sort of administrative “ fix ” to the problem of cancellations so it can have something it can call a fix and try to use to stop Democratic defections . Its strategy is always based , at bottom , on spin and muddling through . These are the same people who believe they possess the administrative mastery to run highly complex laws remaking swaths of the American economy .
You know it ’ s a hell of a predicament , though , when Bill Clinton thinks keeping your word is the only way out .