City officials in the nation ’ s capital on Wednesday awarded $ 6.4 million in grants to nearly three dozen community groups charged with helping residents navigate benefits within the new health care law .
D.C. Health Link unveiled awards ranging from $ 80,000 to $ 400,000 to local organizations charged with serving as “ in-person assisters ” who will raise awareness about President Obama ’ s signature reforms and help consumers determine if they qualify for government subsidies on the city ’ s health exchange , Medicaid coverage or other benefits .
Among notable grantees , Planned Parenthood of Metropolitan Washington , D.C. , obtained $ 375,000 .
The assisters will be touting the Affordable Care Act at local events they would attend , anyway , and ramping up outreach in libraries , partnering businesses and houses of worship .
“ It does take a village , and it will take a village , for us to be successful , ” said Mila Kofman , executive director of the D.C. Health Benefit Exchange .
The announcement in downtown Washington offered a ground-level view at how jurisdictions that embraced Mr. Obama ’ s law from the start are preparing to get residents enrolled on their health exchanges , starting on Oct. 1 , for coverage that takes effect on Jan. 1 .
“ We are laser-focused on October , opening our doors and doing well for our consumers , ” Ms. Kofman said , noting the city has met crucial deadlines in setting up the exchange ’ s information-technology infrastructure .
The exchanges , or “ marketplaces ” as they are also known , are an integral part of the law offering premium tax credits to those who earn between 100 percent and 400 percent of the federal poverty level .
The District and 16 states are building their own health exchange . More than half the states , 26 , opted to let the federal government set up one for them , and the remaining seven states are sharing the duty with the feds .
Authors of the law provided the financial assistance to help Americans comply with the “ individual mandate ” requiring almost everyone in the country to obtain some form of insurance .
The Obama administration hopes young and healthy residents will sign up for insurance on the exchanges to keep premiums in check when sicker Americans with pre-existing conditions enroll , since they can no longer be denied coverage .
But critics of the law say premiums will skyrocket in some states because of the law ’ s stipulations . They also say the in-person assistance programs are ripe for abuse and could let bad apples gain access to enrollees ’ personal information .
Ms. Kofman said grantees in the District must have their finances in order and that individual assisters must be fingerprinted and pass criminal background checks . She also noted her professional background is steeped in rooting out health care scams .
The D.C. grantees were chosen from among 87 applicants , who had requested an aggregate amount of $ 75 million .
Expert reviews and officials from the exchange selected groups — they range from health centers to churches to community nonprofits — based on their ability to cover a broad spectrum of the District , particularly in areas with a high proportion of uninsured residents . They also sought groups with assisters who could speak Spanish or Amharic , the latter a reflection of the city ’ s large Ethiopian population .
“ For many , this may be the first time they have had a fair shake at getting insurance , ” said Diane Lewis , chairwoman of the D.C. exchange .
The District has a relatively low proportion of uninsured residents , but officials said the resources will go a long way toward reaching those who still lack coverage .
“ Amen , somebody , ” said Rev . Henry White , senior pastor of Brown Memorial African Methodist Episcopal Church , which received a $ 95,000 grant .
Congressional staffers who live in the city will be among the enrollees in the D.C. exchange , because of a provision in the law aimed at making sure members of Congress and their aides feel the effects of the reforms firsthand .
The Obama administration sparked controversy when it recently decided to let the government offer a traditional subsidy that offsets 75 percent of members ’ and staffers ’ premium costs , even though they will be gaining coverage through the exchange .
The proposed rule by the Office of Personnel Management said individual lawmakers will designate who is an official staff member subject to the exchange .
Ms. Kofman said she is having preliminary discussions with Capitol Hill to make the transition “ as seamless as possible , ” but she does not yet have an official roster or tally of congressional employees who will enter the city ’ s exchange .