Per the Urban Institute , the proposal will increase the number of Americans insured by 1.7 million while reducing costs to taxpayers .
On February 20 , the Trump administration released a proposed rule that would make it much easier for Americans to escape the inflated costs of Obamacare ’ s health-insurance exchanges . It would repeal an October 2016 regulation with which the departing Obama administration had sought to restrict the availability of “ short term , limited duration ” ( STLD ) insurance — a market exempt from the Affordable Care Act ’ s regulations , on which health insurance could be purchased for around $ 124 per month , compared with $ 393 on the exchanges . Obama ’ s regulation stipulated that these plans could last only three months , while the previous rule had allowed them to last a year and permitted guaranteed renewal of enrollment beyond then .
Congressional Democrats have denounced the Trump administration ’ s attempt to restore the STLD market to health as an attempt to sabotage the ACA . They have argued that the availability of affordable plans outside of the ACA ’ s risk pool could deprive the exchanges of essential revenues from healthy enrollees , and thus increase premiums for those who remain .
But when premiums on the exchanges rise , public subsidies automatically expand to guarantee that insurance will be available to enrollees at a limited cost as a share of their income , regardless of their medical risks . There is no need to force unwilling healthy individuals to pay hugely inflated premiums for this to be the case . Punishing them with an individual-mandate tax was unnecessary and unfair , while seeking to prohibit cost-effective alternatives that actually did meet their needs was similarly senseless .
Yesterday ’ s study from the Urban Institute demonstrates with unprecedented clarity just how small a trade-off would be associated with the substantial gains from the policy .
The report bears a dispassionate title , and the executive summary picks out several statistics related to the combined effects of the mandate and the STLD deregulation . But as was made clear during last year ’ s legislative attempts to replace the ACA , estimates of the mandate ’ s impact are so speculative and likely exaggerated that they serve to obscure less ambiguous and more important statistics .
More interesting , and unmentioned in the introduction to the Urban Institute ’ s report , are some remarkable findings that can be observed directly in the report ’ s Table 1 . From this table it is clear that :
7.4 million on the exchanges eligible for tax credits would see no change in premiums .
4.2 million would enroll in STLD plans , whose premiums would be far below those for plans currently available . ( STLD premiums in the fourth quarter of 2016 were 68.4 percent lower than those on the exchanges . )
4.5 million on the exchanges without tax credits would see premiums rise somewhat ( by an average of 18.2 percent , compared with 8.3 percent in states prohibiting STLD plans , according to Table 4 on page 16 ) .
While there are roughly similar numbers of winners and losers , the scale of benefits far exceeds the costs . Furthermore , while the modest premium increases would be felt only by unsubsidized high-income enrollees , the savings would be enjoyed across the income distribution — including by large numbers of low- and moderate-income households .
On balance , the Urban Institute also estimates that Trump ’ s proposal would reduce the number of uninsured Americans by 1.7 million — a finding the report buries by grouping those enrolled in STLD plans together with the truly uninsured .
In other words , restricting the sale of attractive , affordably priced health insurance isn ’ t necessary to forestall the collapse of the exchanges , but it has needlessly concentrated enormous costs on millions seeking health insurance and forced many to go entirely without .
The Urban Institute ’ s study is also enlightening with respect to the net fiscal impact of STLD deregulation . As a cheaper alternative to the exchanges becomes available , low-risk subsidized individuals may disenroll , and hence the government may save money . But as the risk pool on the exchanges becomes sicker , subsidies expand , costing the government money . The net impact of these effects has as yet been unclear .
The Urban Institute finds that the number of people on unsubsidized ACA-compliant plans would fall by 1.5 million , while the number on subsidized plans would fall by 600,000 . As a result , the reform would slightly reduce federal spending on health care for the nonelderly — by $ 686 million , or 0.2 percent — and should allay whatever federal budgetary concerns may have impeded the proposal ’ s more thorough implementation .
These empirical findings ( from authors who had expressed opposition to STLD insurance ) suggest that the deregulation of STLD plans overall substantially reduces the cost of health insurance , covers more people , and slightly reduces the burden on taxpayers . States should embrace it — and give their residents a real chance to purchase affordable insurance coverage for themselves and their families .