More than four out of every 10 people likely to be sanctioned for not having health insurance in 2014 heard “ nothing or only little ” about the Obamacare tax penalty , according to a new study that underscores the potential backlash administration officials could face from uninsured Americans before the April 15 tax deadline .
Researchers Urban Institute also found that only a quarter of uninsured people with incomes that expose them to the “ individual mandate ” tax expect to pay the penalty .
Making matters worse , 65 percent of those likely to pay the penalty had either not heard about Obamacare ’ s insurance exchanges , had heard about them but didn ’ t know the deadline for signing up , or thought the deadline was in March ( it was Feb. 15 ) .
The penalty for lacking insurance in 2014 is the greater of $ 95 or 1 percent household income above the filing threshold . In 2015 , the penalty rises to $ 325 or 2 percent of income .
Congressional Democrats and advocates worry that people who do not know about the penalty will also have to pay up next year , since the deadline to enroll in 2015 coverage under Obamacare elapsed on Sunday .
Washington State and Minnesota ’ s state-run exchanges have announced special enrollment periods for penalty payers , although the Health and Human Services Department is still mulling relief for customers in 37 states that use HealthCare.gov .
The Urban institute , with funding from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation , surveyed people with incomes above the federal poverty level , because poorer Americans were more likely to be exempt from the tax .
The institute concluded that a special enrollment period through the end of tax season would help people learn about the penalty and avoid more hurt in 2015 .
“ When people file their tax returns , many will learn for the first time about the penalties for not having insurance , ” said Kathy Hempstead , director for coverage issues at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation . “ Because of the gap between the deadlines for open enrollment and tax filing , some people will end up paying the penalty two years in a row because they didn ’ t know this information when they could have acted on it . ”