That 's how many Americans had successfully enrolled in the federal health care exchange by the morning of October 2 , according to documents provided to the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee .
Notes from a `` war room '' meeting at the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance between administration officials and contractors working on the rollout of HealthCare.gov underscore the beleaguered debut of the online marketplace .
Posted online Thursday by the House committee , the documents indicate that the six enrolled individuals were issued policies from five different insurance companies .
`` Healthcare Service Corporation had the two enrollments , '' the notes recorded .
By the next meeting , held that afternoon , notes showed `` approximately 100 enrollments '' had taken place since the launch of the federal exchange .
Notes released by the committee 's chairman , Rep. Darrell Issa , R-California , do not include official enrollment statistics and represent an incomplete accounting of the enrollment totals , said Joanne Peters , a Health and Human Services spokeswoman .
Again , the department declined to release the number of Americans who have been able to successfully enroll in the exchange .
`` We will release enrollment statistics on a monthly basis after coordinating information from different sources such as paper , online , and call centers , verifying with insurers and collecting data from states , '' Peters said .
Peters reiterated that a slow start does not mean that the exchange will not boast a healthy roll call by the deadline to enroll .
`` We have always anticipated that the pace of enrollment will increase throughout the enrollment period , '' Peters said .
Citing the quiet pace at which Massachusetts residents registered for that state 's health program , the spokeswoman remained confident that enrollment totals would tick up as more people learned about the exchange .
HHS remains focused on providing accurate enrollment totals and can not yet give those figures because of collection issues .
`` We have had more than 20 million visitors to the Marketplace , showing an overwhelming interest in Americans learning more about their options for affordable health care , '' Peters said .
The Center for Consumer Information and Insurance is part of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services .