Aside from the direct enrollment option , insurers and federal officials are examining other ways in the coming weeks to sign up the millions of Americans looking for health insurance . However , none of the options represent a quick fix . One idea being considered would allow people to enroll before the paperwork is completed . At the extreme , despite strong resistance from the insurance industry , there is even talk of extending the deadline for obtaining insurance on the exchanges by months .
Consumers must now enroll by Dec. 15 for insurance coverage that would begin Jan. 1 . The open enrollment period is to end on March 31 . The main stumbling block for some consumers is the need to determine their eligibility for subsidies , and the amount . Insurance companies can now only estimate the amount for them . It is up the government to verify eligibility , using personal financial information from tax returns and the like .
“ The question is , can they create a separate direct pathway so consumers can get that information on their subsidies ? ” asked one industry official . “ If they don ’ t have Healthcare ? .gov up and running by the end of the month , direct enrollment is critical . ”
The other option , allowing consumers to obtain their own estimates , seems more palatable . It is unclear whether that proposal is possible . Insurers are worried that they will have offered coverage to individuals whose actual subsidies are less than they have estimated , potentially leaving the insurers or the people themselves financially exposed .
“ I think there are potential work-arounds , ” said an executive of a major insurer . “ I think we have some leeway here so long as people are not in a situation where individuals have to pay significantly more than expected or plans end up in a position with cash-flow issues . ”
Insurers are opposed to the idea of extending the enrollment period . They say it encourages people to wait to sign up , particularly the young and the healthy , an age group that insurers need to balance the cost of insuring people with expensive health conditions . They are also worried about the effect of the delay on their ability to price plans for 2015 .
By all accounts , the administration is making an enormous effort to rescue the website . The appointment of Quality Software Services late last month as the project ’ s general contractor has established a sense of order amid chaos . Henry Chao , the technology official from the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services , who had managed the project since its infancy , has been sidelined , people involved in the effort said .