The revised GOP ObamaCare replacement bill is testing the promises that centrist Republicans have made during the legislative debate .
Several moderate Republican senators previously raised alarm with an amendment from Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael ( Ted ) Edward CruzHillicon Valley : Treasury sanctions Russians over 2018 election meddling | How Facebook fought back on FTC fine | WeWork calls off IPO | Elon Musk unveils Mars rocket Cambridge Analytica whistleblower 's book coming out next week O'Rourke : Trump should resign MORE ( R-Texas ) that they worried would undermine protections for people with pre-existing conditions . They also expressed opposition to the deep Medicaid cuts in the bill .
Now , the Cruz amendment has been included in the bill and the Medicaid cuts remain , putting centrists on the spot .
So far , Sen. Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsYes , President Trump , we do have a homelessness crisis and you 're making it harder for us to address The policy-driven presidential campaign could be drowned out by impeachment Flake tells GOP : Trump 'does not deserve reelection ' MORE ( R-Maine ) is the only moderate to oppose the measure , with the others saying they are undecided and still reviewing it .
Whether leaders can flip these moderate Republican senators will decide whether the bill lives or dies . Collins and conservative Sen. Rand Paul Randal ( Rand ) Howard PaulSenate passes stopgap spending bill , sending it to Trump Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Ky. ) have already announced their opposition , so one more “ no ” vote would sink the bill .
Sen. Bill Cassidy ( R-La . ) has been one of the most vocal Republicans on the issue of protecting people with pre-existing conditions , touting the “ Jimmy Kimmel test , ” that no one should be denied care .
He praised the previous version of the bill , which did not include the Cruz amendment , as being “ very cognizant of pre-existing conditions . ”
Cassidy says he is still reviewing and making up his mind about the revised bill .
The Cruz provision would allow insurers to sell plans that do not meet ObamaCare ’ s requirements , including the ban on discriminating against people with pre-existing conditions . Conservatives argue this would allow younger and healthier people to buy cheaper plans .
Moderates and many health experts , though , warn that only sick people would remain in the more generous ObamaCare plans , leading to price spikes for people with pre-existing conditions . That dynamic could make coverage prohibitively expensive for some .
Sen. Chuck Grassley Charles ( Chuck ) Ernest GrassleyIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules GOP senators urge Barr to probe Clinton , Ukraine GOP senator : Trump has changed presidency 'not necessarily toward the positive ' MORE ( R-Iowa ) warned earlier this month that the Cruz amendment could be “ subterfuge to get around pre-existing conditions [ protections ] , ” according to Iowa Public Radio .
Now that the amendment has been included , Grassley ’ s office says he is studying the bill and awaiting an analysis from the Congressional Budget Office that is scheduled for release on Monday .
The revised bill does include $ 70 billion aimed at helping bring down costs for people with pre-existing conditions remaining in the ObamaCare plans .
But the inclusion of the amendment appears to break from the previous GOP line that protections for people with pre-existing conditions were not being touched .
“ We 're not going to do anything to change the current law when it comes to pre-existing conditions , I know which is a big concern with the House bill , ” Sen. John Cornyn John CornynThe Hill 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff GOP senators attack whistleblower 's credibility Republicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump MORE ( R-Texas ) , the No . 2 Senate Republican , said last month .
Separately , moderates had also objected to the Medicaid cuts in the initial Senate bill . The language ended funds for ObamaCare ’ s Medicaid expansion in 2024 and imposed a lower cap on Medicaid spending starting in 2025 .
Those cuts remain in the newer version of the bill , though the new measure does add $ 45 billion in additional funding for opioid abuse treatment .
Moderates such as Sen. Shelley Moore Capito Shelley Wellons Moore CapitoGaetz : Some lawmakers reviewed transcript at White House On The Money : Trump takes aim at China in UN address | Consumer confidence fell as trade tensions rose | Senate proposes billion for Trump border wall Senate proposes billion for Trump border wall MORE ( R-W.Va. ) had previously said that opioid funding was not enough to win their support for the bill and that they needed Medicaid changes as well .
“ More opioid funding would be very good and very beneficial , but the core for me is the Medicaid provision , ” Capito said last month .
Capito says she is reviewing the latest bill and waiting for the CBO analysis .
Other senators have taken even stronger positions in defense of ObamaCare ’ s Medicaid expansion .
`` You have to protect Medicaid expansion states . That ’ s what I want , '' Sen. Dean Heller Dean Arthur HellerThis week : Barr back in hot seat over Mueller report Trump suggests Heller lost reelection bid because he was 'hostile ' during 2016 presidential campaign Trump picks ex-oil lobbyist David Bernhardt for Interior secretary MORE ( R-Nev. ) said at a press conference last month announcing his opposition to the original bill in strong terms .
Sen. Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiRepublicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump GOP battens down the hatches after release of Trump whistleblower complaint Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran MORE ( R-Alaska ) , who is also still reviewing the bill , likewise said last month that , “ my position on Medicaid expansion and my support for it hasn ’ t changed . ”
Some of the moderates have suggested their concerns with the Cruz amendment have been eased by the fact that the language does not repeal ObamaCare ’ s requirement that there be a single “ risk pool , ” helping prevent the market from splitting in two — one for healthy people in cheaper plans , and one for sick people in expensive plans .
“ There are some other issues but there is an attempt at a single risk pool , ” Cassidy said of the Cruz amendment on Thursday .
However , experts dispute that there would , in practice , be a single market if the amendment became law .
Sabrina Corlette , a professor at Georgetown University ’ s Health Policy Institute , said the requirement for a single risk pool is an “ illusory requirement , ” and that in effect , sick people would be in a separate pool and “ have to pay a heck of a lot more . ”
Joe Antos , a healthcare expert at the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute , agreed that the market would in effect be split into healthy and sick pools under the amendment , and argued that there is not enough money in the bill to make coverage affordable for people left in the sick pool , where the plans still comply with the ObamaCare regulations .
“ You have to pour a lot more money into the compliant plans to make this work , ” Antos said .
It is possible that more moderates will announce their opposition after reviewing the bill , though they will be under intense pressure from leaders to support it .
“ It 's 172 pages , guys , ” Heller told reporters on the way to his car on Thursday . “ So I 've got a weekend of reading . ”