The GOP puts Sebelius on the spot in her third visit since the rollout . | John Shinkle/███ Sebelius takeaways : 1 cranky hearing
What ’ s the one thing worse than taking fire from Congress in a crowded hearing room ? Taking fire from really cranky members of Congress in a half-empty hearing room .
That ’ s what Kathleen Sebelius went through on Wednesday , as she parried Obamacare questions from a House subcommittee while much of Washington had moved on to other things . But in the hearing room , the Obamacare tensions were as high as ever , with Republicans and Democrats snapping at each other and one GOP lawmaker griping that trying to get answers out of the Health and Human Services secretary was like talking to North Korea .
Republicans did manage to put Sebelius on the spot , in her third visit to Capitol Hill since the bungled website launch , about how many people would actually have coverage in January and the possibility of more canceled policies . But some Republicans also drifted into overreach , and Democrats fought back with a renewed passion now that the website is improving .
Here are the main takeaways from Sebelius ’ s two-hour testimony before the House Energy and Commerce health subcommittee :
Sebelius is getting sick of these hearings , and so are some of the lawmakers themselves .
That much became clear at several points in the proceedings , as Sebelius came as close as she ever does to telling a couple of Republicans to shove it — and a Republican and a Democrat got into a shouting match over the frequent interruptions to her answers .
At one point , Sebelius showed her impatience as Ed Whitfield ( R-Ky. ) pressed her on how many pages of regulations had been issued on the health care law . “ I just told you I don ’ t know , ” Sebelius said , as he refused to drop the subject . She said she would “ get you that number . ”
Later , Sebelius nearly lost her cool again as John Shimkus ( R-Ill. ) pushed her for a list of all the health plans in the Obamacare health exchanges that cover abortion . “ Sir , it is on the website , ” she said , noting that all health plans have to disclose what benefits they cover .
That was around the time that Shimkus — after pushing another line of questioning about whether the law ’ s preventive care services are actually free , since they ’ re factored into people ’ s premiums — muttered that talking to Sebelius was “ like talking to the Republic of Korea. ” ( Shimkus presumably meant North Korea , which is also known as the Democratic People ’ s Republic of Korea . The Republic of Korea is actually South Korea , a close U.S . ally . )
And that ’ s when Frank Pallone ( D-N.J. ) jumped in , scolding Shimkus for interrupting Sebelius ’ s answers too much .
“ I do not have to allow … ” Shimkus started , rolling his eyes .
“ You ’ ve got to let her answer the question ! ” Pallone yelled .
And Mike Burgess ( R-Texas ) lost his temper with Sebelius as he claimed the HealthCare.gov website wouldn ’ t let him pay his first premium as he tried to sign up for coverage in Texas .
“ I will tell you it ’ s impossible . I have never seen a business transaction where you are told you can ’ t make the payment . That is a flawed system , ” Burgess said .
The whole session had the feel of a “ me-too ” hearing , since the full committee had already questioned Sebelius about six weeks ago . But Republicans proved they ’ re a long way from running out of tough questions , as they grilled Sebelius on enrollment figures and canceled policies — as well as old GOP standbys like the murky legal authority for the federal Obamacare health exchange to give subsidies .
Subcommittee chairman Joe Pitts ( R-Pa. ) pressed Sebelius on the possibility that there could be a spike in the number of uninsured Americans on Jan. 1 . He suggested that the new enrollment figures released Wednesday — showing that 365,000 people have signed up for private health coverage in the federal health exchange since Oct. 1 — are far short of the number of people who will have to replace individual insurance that has been canceled .
Sebelius said she doubts that will happen , arguing that many of those people have likely signed up for new policies offered by their insurers . “ Losing coverage and being notified that your plan doesn ’ t exist anymore are two different things , ” she said .
But she said it won ’ t be clear until January how many of those 365,000 people have actually enrolled , as opposed to just selecting a plan , since people aren ’ t officially enrolled in the private health plans until they ’ ve paid the first premium .
Pitts also got Sebelius to acknowledge that some small businesses could get similar cancellation notices next year — though Sebelius refused to concede that the law might be responsible .
“ Yes sir , and again , insurers cancel plans every year . They change plans , they change networks , ” Sebelius said .
And Sebelius had to resort to legalese when some Republicans revived an old charge that the language of the Affordable Care Act doesn ’ t specifically allow subsidies for people who enroll through the federal health insurance exchange . That would be a huge problem if the courts ruled against the Obama administration , since the federal exchange serves 36 states .
But even though Sebelius ventured that “ we feel that the law covers both state and federal exchanges , ” she mostly punted to the Treasury Department , which issued the regulations that allow the federal exchange subsidies , and the Justice Department , which is defending that decision in court .
“ I am not a lawyer , and I would defer to the Justice Dept for the statutory authority , ” Sebelius told Leonard Lance ( R-N.J. ) .