Defeated Democrats Find 'Vindication In Spades ' In High Court 's Health Care Ruling
James L. Oberstar was riding pretty high in Congress . Over the course of 18 elections , the Democrat had never received less than 59 percent of the vote in his northeastern Minnesota district , and he had finally realized a longstanding ambition by chairing the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee .
Then , he voted for the big health care bill in 2010 . Oberstar soon lost his seat , along with 63 other House Democrats .
`` The Supreme Court decision is vindication in spades for me and I hope for others who voted for it , '' he says .
Oberstar was one of 13 Democrats who were defeated chiefly because of the health care bill , according to a study by two political scientists .
`` Most of the time in the midterm elections , the president 's party loses seats , '' says study coauthor Seth Masket of the University of Denver . The health care bill , though , `` was like additional doom . ''
Oberstar says the chance to extend health care coverage to millions of Americans was too great an opportunity to pass up . He recalls bringing lunch to his steelworker father on a picket line in 1952 , when his dad was striking for health benefits .
`` I voted for it because I thought it was the right policy for this country , '' he says . `` I thought it was the kind of transformational legislative initiative that candidate Obama promised and President Obama delivered . ''
If anything , Oberstar sounds dissatisfied that the legislation did n't go far enough , saying he favored a single-payer approach .
His former colleague Ciro Rodriguez , of Texas , agrees . Rodriguez says more work remains to be done to get pharmaceutical costs under control .
Rodriguez notes that more than 30 percent of the people in his district in southwestern Texas lack health insurance . `` This decision will definitely be beneficial for everyone , regardless of whether they have insurance , '' he says .
Polls indicate that a large share of the public still is n't sold . That means support for the law poses dangers to ousted representatives such as Rodriguez who are trying to get their seats back this fall .
`` The health care law remains very controversial , '' Masket notes . `` Where it was unpopular two years ago , it remains unpopular today . ''
Rodriguez is betting his political resurrection on the idea that , once all aspects of the law take effect , most people will decide that its virtues outweigh any drawbacks .
`` Of course , that 's what I said two years ago , '' he admits .