If Carney 's comments are indeed rhetorical bread crumbs nudging us toward the eventual capitulation , this morning 's astoundingly tone-deaf Obamacare celebration in the Rose Garden will quickly become a distant , laughable memory . Republicans have been pushing for a delay of this disastrous law for months . The White House has rebuffed each effort , routinely insisting that the program would be ready to roll on October 1 . In fact , those who sought a needed delay in return for fully re-opening the government were assailed by the White House as suicide-bombing kidnapping arsonists . And now , three weeks in , the president 's top spokesman reveals a hairline fracture in Obama 's happy-talk facade :
White House press secretary Jay Carney hedged Monday on whether ObamaCare ’ s individual mandate could be delayed because of problems with the healthcare law ’ s enrollment web site . Carney did not directly say the individual mandate could be delayed , but he did say that if people could not get access to ObamaCare , they would not be penalized . Under the healthcare law , uninsured Americans are required to sign up for health insurance . If they don ’ t , they could be hit with a fine . Carney was asked Monday if people would have to pay a fine if they couldn ’ t enroll in ObamaCare because of a glitchy website that the administration has struggled to fix .
This is the first official indication that the president may be seriously considering a sweeping Obamacare delay . After today 's ridiculous bit of kabuki theater , how exactly would a sudden about-face blanket postponement work politically ? And is such a delay even logistically viable at this stage ? Dan McLaughlin argues that the administration 's own legal positions during the Obamacare Supreme Court case could end up haunting them when the next round of lawsuits begin to fly . ( Question : Will Obama ask Congress for the delay , or just impose it unilaterally ? If past is prologue , we already know the answer ) . Meanwhile , Carney could n't help but cling to his `` we were overwhelmed by web traffic ! '' excuse during today 's briefing , which even Obamacare fanboy Ezra Klein concedes is a deeply misleading characterization of the problem . NBC 's Chuck Todd pressed Carney on this point , asking why the president was still making ludicrous promises to the American people mere days before this train derailed -- as the administration knew it would :
A besieged Carney had no choice but to mutter about `` finding solutions , '' and call on the next reporter . Nobody is buying the spin anymore . The New York Times notes that five million lines of code may need to be rewritten , a process that could take weeks or months to accomplish . The White House 's now excitedly exclaims that they 've enlisted expert to help orchestrate a `` tech surge '' that will repair the various issue ( more than three years after the president signed this law , and more than three weeks since it fell apart on the launchpad ) . Who , pray tell , is participating in said `` surge '' ? Carney whiffed on that question , too . A comprehensive clusterfark . Even the president 's communications department face-planted badly today . As Allahpundit quips , Team O had three weeks to find a dozen or so real people who 've managed to sign up for coverage under Obamacare . These people were needed , you see , to stand smiling behind the president during today 's photo-op . Against all odds , Obama 's theater of the absurd somehow becomes more absurd :
... After reading the White House-provided descriptions of each of those behind the president , it 's clear the administration was stretching to present people who , beyond supporting Obamacare , have actually gained from it in any tangible way . For example , a Pennsylvania man named Malik Hassan was in the group , and this is the White House description of his situation , in full : `` Malik Hassan works at a restaurant in Philadelphia . Hassan , who does not receive coverage through his employer , is looking forward to enrolling for health coverage this fall . He recently used Healthcare.gov . to process his application and is waiting for the options for potential plans in Philadelphia . '' So , Hassan is employed , not covered , and has not yet succeeded in finding coverage through Obamacare . That is , in the White House 's estimation , an Obamacare success story . Then there is Nathaniel Hojnacki , who recently finished his schooling . Here is the White House description of his situation , again in full : `` Nathaniel Hojnacki recently received his Master 's degree at Johns Hopkins University SAIS and is in an employment situation without benefits . Hojnacki recognizes the importance of coverage and is planning to enroll after he explores his coverage options on the DC exchange . '' So , Hojnacki has a job , does not have coverage , and is planning to explore finding coverage through Obamacare . Another success story .
Indeed , it appears that just three of today 's 13 human props are actually enrolled in Obamacare 's exchanges . Perfect . Will anyone be held accountable for these mounting , crippling , mind-warping mistakes ? Will Kathleen Sebelius even appear before Congress to explain herself ? Maybe . At some point .