WASHINGTON -- The House of Representatives has passed a health care measure that would repeal much of Obamacare .
The GOP-crafted American Health Care Act made it through on a vote of 217 to 213 . It now heads to the Senate where it is expected to face fierce debate .
Although the measure will likely see changes once in the Senate , as it stands now , here are five things the bill does :
Eliminates Obamacare tax penalties for those who do n't buy coverage
Includes Medicaid cuts & allows state work requirements for Medicaid recipients
Continues family policies that cover grown children until age 26
Many pro-life Republicans have praised the bill for blocking federal funding for Planned Parenthood .
`` It 's about time that Planned Parenthood start looking somewhere else for revenue rather than American taxpayers , who have no interest in funding abortion . House leadership should be commended for listening to their constituents and getting a bill passed that defunds Planned Parenthood , the nation 's largest abortion vendor , '' said Kristan Hawkins , president of Students for Life .
Americans United for Life 's Acting President and Senior Counsel Clarke Forsythe said , `` American taxpayers should not be responsible for subsidizing Planned Parenthood and the abortion industry . ''
`` The House 's 217-213 vote today would remove funding from Planned Parenthood for the next year and redirect that money to the full-service Federally Qualified Health Centers and community health centers across the nation that outnumber Planned Parenthood 20 to 1 , '' he added .
Other backers of the bill include some members of the House Freedom Caucus who 'd opposed the first draft of American Health Care Act .
`` If you vote no now then you 're telling your constituents , 'Oh , I only voted to repeal Obamacare when I knew it would n't count or if the president would veto it . I was just playing a game I never had any intention to repeal it , ' and yet most everybody in our party has been on camera saying I support full repeal of Obamacare , '' Congressman Louie Gohmert , R-Texas , told ███ News .
`` Well this is n't even full repeal , '' he noted `` You ca n't even vote for partial repeal when it 's going to help bring premiums down ? And I know there 's concerns about some people 's premiums going up , but we have got to bring premium downs for the majority of the American people . We have just got to -- they ca n't stand it anymore . ''
Despite the victory of the measure in the House , as it heads to the Senate there are still many questions surrounding the bill . Cost is one concern . The Congressional Budget Office has not yet released an estimated cost for this version of the bill .
Another area of concern is pre-existing conditions . The bill allows states to get federal waivers that would free insurers from other Obamacare coverage requirements . With waivers , insurers could charge people with preexisting conditions higher rates than their peers and raise prices for older consumers .
A last-minute amendment to the measure includes $ 8 billion over five years to cover such conditions . That amendment helped secure enough votes to narrowly get the measure through the house .
Amid the remaining questions about the measure , 20 Republicans voted against it . All voting Democrats also voted no .