“ When you have insurance reforms without requiring everyone to participate , it becomes a sickness fund , not an insurance system , ” said Karen Ignagni , president of America ’ s Health Insurance Plans , the national trade association representing the health insurance industry .
Mitt Romney , the presumptive Republican presidential nominee , favors repeal of the law . He said last week that he would preserve coverage for people with pre-existing conditions , but only if they had been insured before and lost coverage when they were laid off or changed jobs , a more limited protection than the current law provides . He did not explain how he would get insurers to cover such people .
Some experts argue that even if the mandate is struck down , along with protections for people with pre-existing conditions , there are still options that could lift them to a more secure place .
States would still have regulatory powers , said Sara Rosenbaum , a professor of health law and policy at George Washington University , and the law contains tools to encourage voluntary participation . The penalty for people who do not participate is so weak , she added , that even with the mandate , enrollment was expected to be low at first anyway .
It is people like Eric Richter and his wife , Dani — uninsured and living in the unstable space between poverty and the middle class — that the law was intended to help . They earned too much to qualify for government-sponsored health care , but worked in jobs that did not come with health benefits .
Under the law , about half the newly insured would be covered by Medicaid , which would extend to individuals earning less than $ 15,400 . The other half , the working poor , individuals with incomes up to $ 44,600 , would receive subsidies .
According to a subsidy calculator provided by the Kaiser Family Foundation , the Richters ’ insurance premium would be $ 165 a month under the new law , a sum they said they would eagerly pay . The small stone drilling firm where Mr. Richter works offers no health coverage , and the family could not afford the more than $ 600 a month it would have cost to buy it on their own .
“ It ’ s hard to pay for the unknown , when you ’ re struggling to cover the known , ” said Mr. Richter , who is 39 . “ I know it sounds irresponsible , but that ’ s just the way it was . It ’ s a game of roulette you hope you ’ re going to win . ”
After he got the tumor on his leg , the couple said , Mr. Richter tried to better his odds . He cut out sugar and ate beets he grew in his garden because he heard that might help . But the bump kept growing . His wife sewed him special pants to accommodate its size , as big as a melon . He started standing in church . Driving was excruciating .
When they found he had cancer , the family struggled with how they would pay for his care . Once he was turned away from a scan because he did not have insurance . Eventually a doctor took him under his wing , and insisted he be treated .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
In late May , Mr. Richter had surgery . He is waiting for the bill . He has not been able to work as he recuperates .
But a piece of bad luck may solve the family ’ s insurance problem , at least for now . Mrs. Richter lost her job at an electronic records firm . A hospital financial adviser told them that with their income effectively zero and the medical bills mounting , they might qualify for Medicaid . They are waiting to hear .
The Richters would benefit from the law , but in a sign of how poorly it is understood , they said their impression was that it would force people to pay for something they can not afford . “ That ’ s not going to go over well , ” Mr. Richter said . The law includes an exemption for people who can not afford the premium even with the subsidy .
Currently , uninsured people with pre-existing conditions often end up getting care , but at tremendous cost to the public , hospitals , and themselves . Some divorce to have household incomes small enough to qualify for Medicaid . Others get help from hospital charities . Still others rack up large bills that go to debt collection agencies .
JoAnna Hanson , a mother of three in Lincoln , Neb. , who works the night shift at a Walmart , said she tried for years to get health insurance , but because of a rare kidney ailment did not succeed . When a cyst burst in an ovary several years ago and she was rushed to the hospital , her bill was sent to a collection agency . A total of $ 330 a month is now sliced from her and her husband ’ s paychecks , more than a tenth of their income .
“ The thing we worry about most is , do we pay the rent or do we feed our kids ? ” said Ms. Hanson , who is 34 . They have not paid rent on their trailer ’ s lot in three months .
Still , though the law would benefit her , she does not like it .
“ I don ’ t think it ’ s right because you can ’ t force someone to buy something when they can ’ t afford it , ” she said .
But some of those already benefiting from the law like it . Pamela Garland , a retired corrections officer in Lincoln , Neb. , found herself uninsured with a cancer diagnosis in February . No one would cover her , and after 44 years of marriage , she and her husband , Norman , even considered divorce so Mrs. Garland , who is 63 , could qualify for Medicaid .
One night in April , up late in the hospital computer center , Mr. Garland found a better solution : The Pre-existing Condition Insurance Plan , financed through the new law , would take his wife despite her tumor . The plan offers subsidized coverage under the Affordable Care Act . The $ 421 monthly premium was based on her age , not her illness .
“ It was the best thing that our government has done for us in many , many years , ” he said , sitting in the small apartment they rent since selling their house to help pay medical bills .
Without that coverage , Mr. Garland said , his wife probably would not have gotten the quality of care she later received — a new high-tech radiation treatment that stopped the tumor growth near her spine and cost about $ 107,000 . The plan , intended as a bridge , is set to expire on Jan. 1 , 2014 , when major provisions of the law are scheduled to take effect .
With the law ’ s fate uncertain , participants in the plan are worried , like Maryann Kaine , 52 , a music store owner in Fredricksburg , Va. , who signed up for the program after she was shut out of her family ’ s policy because she had had surgery on her back .
“ I can ’ t imagine that they ’ ll just dump all of us back out into the world of no coverage , ” she said .