President Trump on Friday floated a potential Plan B to Senate Republicans who are struggling to break an intraparty logjam and pass a health care bill .
“ If Republican Senators are unable to pass what they are working on now , they should immediately REPEAL , and then REPLACE at a later date ! ” he tweeted .
The idea mirrors one floated by Sen. Ben Sasse , Nebraska Republican , in a Friday letter to Mr. Trump .
It says if Senate Republicans can not agree on an Obamacare replacement by July 10 , when Congress returns from the Independence Day recess , they should revive a 2015 bill that used fast-track budget rules to gut the 2010 law without fear of a Democratic filibuster .
He said senators should then cancel the August recess and work — six days a week — on a reform package that can be passed by Labor Day .
“ You campaigned and won on the repeal of ObamaCare . So did every Republican senator . We should keep our word , ” Mr. Sasse told Mr. Trump .
Sen. Rand Paul , Kentucky Republican , offered his support for the idea on Twitter , saying “ Let ’ s keep our word to repeal then work on replacing right away . ”
Breaking the Republican repeal-and-replace effort into discrete parts would be a departure from the current strategy .
The House already passed a bill that attempts to gut the 2010 Affordable Care Act and replace as much of it as possible under the budget process .
Yet Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is still trying to mollify competing factions within his conference .
Moderates are leery of gutting Obamacare ’ s consumer protections for the sick and curtailing federal spending on Medicaid coverage for the poor , while conservatives have been pushing to kill off as much of President Obama ’ s signature program as they can .
“ On the current path , it looks like Republicans will either fail to pass any meaningful bill at all , or will instead pass a bill that attempts to prop up much of the crumbling ObamaCare structures , ” Mr. Sasse said in his letter . “ We can and must do better than either of these — both because the American people deserve better , and because we promised better . ”
Mr. Sasse had been in touch with the Trump administration , including Vice President Mike Pence ’ s team , for months on repeal-and-replace strategy .
The senator discussed his “ repeal , then replace ” strategy in an interview on the “ Fox & Friends ” television program early Friday , and Mr. Trump tweeted his support for the idea shortly thereafter .
It ’ s unclear how much traction the repeal-then-replace idea will get .
Republican leaders initially planned to pursue a form of that strategy , delivering a quick strike at the law and then using a multi-year transition to usher in a replacement , yet key senators and Mr. Trump pushed for a simultaneous replacement .
Moderate Republicans who ’ ve already balked at a bill that preserves parts of Obamacare would likely be skittish about voting to gut Obamacare without knowing if their party can agree on a replacement .
If Republican Senators are unable to pass what they are working on now , they should immediately REPEAL , and then REPLACE at a later date ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 30 , 2017
A coalition of conservative groups blasted centrists for appearing to get cold feet on full repeal of Obamacare , saying they want to “ trim the hedges ” instead of ripping out the law root and branch .
And they applauded Mr. Trump and Mr. Sasse for prioritizing repeal ahead of the replacement effort , saying it would fulfill a Republican pledge that dates back to the tea party wave of 2010 .
“ This would get repeal done and allow the Democrats and the Republicans to work together on improving our health care system , ” said Jim DeMint , a former U.S. senator and president of the Heritage Foundation who is now adviser at the Convention of States .
The 2015 repeal effort would have scrapped Obamacare ’ s mandate penalties on individuals and employers and then phased out its taxpayer-funded subsidies and expansion of Medicaid a couple years out , so no one would lose their coverage right away .
Conservatives want to replicate that effort , though the free-market Club for Growth said congressional Republicans should try to scrap all of Obamacare ’ s regulations on insurers , too , so lawmakers don ’ t lock them in during the replacement phase .
“ All of it needs to go , ” said Andy Roth , a vice president of government affairs for the group .
The Senate parliamentarian could strike the deregulation push as outside the scope of the budget process , though Mr. Roth said Republicans need to test the waters instead of hiding behind an assumption of defeat to preserve aspects of Obamacare .
Jenny Beth Martin , president of the Tea Party Patriots , said at a minimum , Senate GOP leaders should adopt an idea being pushed by Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas that would allow insurers who sell Obamacare-compliant plans to also offer noncompliant plans that would be cheaper for consumers .
Providing those options could win over the likes of Sen. Mike Lee , Utah Republican , and other conservatives .
Centrist holdouts , meanwhile , are focused on applying savings from the plan to soften the bill and satisfy their priorities , including $ 45
Senators were weighing a proposal that would keep Obamacare ’ s 3.8 percent investment tax on wealthier individuals , which could free up $ 172 billion elsewhere to head off rising premiums or help people in danger of losing coverage .
But idea has run into opposition from conservatives , who want to repeal as many of Obamacare ’ s taxes and regulations as possible .
The Congressional Budget Office also released an updated analysis of Republicans ’ bill on Thursday that said Medicaid spending would drop by 35 percent over 20 years compared to its baseline budget .
Democrats said the figures prove the GOP plan would force states to shoulder more health care costs or slash benefits beyond the 10-year budget window that ’ s typically used to vet legislation .