The Trump administration has spent much of its tenure trying to sabotage the American health-care system . In interviews with major publications last spring , Donald Trump repeatedly threatened to deliberately destabilize the Affordable Care Act marketplaces by abruptly halting subsidies to insurers . Last September , he made good on that threat . Meanwhile , his Health Department spread doubt about whether it would enforce the tax penalty for refusing to sign up for insurance ; cut funding for the law ’ s outreach groups ; slashed Obamacare ’ s advertising budget by 90 percent ; spent a portion of the remaining ad budget on propaganda calling for the law ’ s repeal ; cut the open-enrollment period by 45 days ; announced that it would be taking healthcare.gov ( where people can enroll in Obamacare online ) offline nearly every Sunday during that time period , for “ maintenance ” purposes ; described Obamacare as “ a bad deal ” that Americans “ won ’ t be convinced to sign up for ” in official public statements ; and , most recently , expanded access to “ short-term ” health plans that do not meet Obamacare ’ s benefits requirements ( and thus , are useless to anyone with a preexisting conditions , or who develops a serious condition after purchasing the insurance ) .
Experts expected all of these measures to depress participation in Obamacare , especially among the young and the healthy , thereby forcing insurers on the ACA marketplaces to jack up their premiums . The Trump administration insisted that they were wrong .
“ We expect virtually no impact on the individual market premiums , ” Seema Verma , administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , said of the expansion of short-term insurance , in an interview with Vox .
In a shocking turn of events , a new independent analysis from the Urban Institute suggests the experts have the better of this argument .
Come 2019 , the number of people without health insurance will rise by nearly 5 million , while millions more will enroll in “ short-term ” plans , according to Urban Institute research released Monday…Those short-term plans will be popular because they are dirt cheap , relative to the usual price of health insurance . But that ’ s only because they aren ’ t available to people with pre-existing conditions and leave out key benefits like mental health , maternity care and prescriptions ― which at least some of those beneficiaries will need when they get sick .
Meanwhile , some people who need or want more comprehensive coverage will have to pay more for it , as the study predicts premiums for such plans will rise 18 percent . And the federal government , which subsidizes plans for lower-income consumers through tax credits , will have to spend more money .
In sum : Trump has effectively replaced Obamacare with a federal health-care program that ’ s nearly identical — except that it covers fewer people , charges higher premiums , and costs the government more money .
But it also makes the “ libs ” feel a little bit more “ owned. ” And at the end of the day , that ’ s what really matters .