An Illinois teen issued a stern warning to youngsters from his hospital bed to stop vaping — saying the habit has left his lungs looking like those of a man more than 50 years older .
Adam Hergenreder , 18 , of Gurnee , can not breathe without oxygen tubes since being admitted Saturday to a hospital in Libertyville with a “ vaping-induced acute lung injury , ” the Chicago Tribune reports .
The teen — who started vaping at 16 , with mint and mango his preferred flavors — told the newspaper he ignored warnings to stop from teachers , parents and health officials until it was nearly too late . He was rushed to the hospital after days of uncontrolled vomiting — and faces up to months of recovery , with the possibility of permanent damage to his lungs from scarring due to inflammation .
“ People just see that little pod and think , how could that do anything to my body ? ” Hergenreder said Tuesday from Advocate Condell Medical Center . “ I ’ m glad I could be an example and show people that [ vaping products ] aren ’ t good at all . They will mess up your lungs . ”
Hergenreder started out using about one and a half Juul pods per day , he told WLS-TV .
“ When I first started Juuling , I didn ’ t know what nicotine was , so I just thought it was vape juice , ” the teen told the station . “ I don ’ t even know what vape juice is . ”
Hergenreder then began vaping marijuana , buying devices from street dealers that can be altered or contaminated with unknown substances . That daily regimen led him to an emergency room , where a doctor ordered a scan of his stomach and saw that “ something wasn ’ t right , ” his mother told the Tribune .
The teen ’ s condition has since improved thanks to the oxygen tubes , steroids and antibiotics , but he ’ s one of at least 27 patients in Illinois who have been hospitalized in recent weeks with severe respiratory illnesses , including one who died , according to the newspaper .
Health officials in Oregon on Wednesday also announced that a second person has died from a severe lung illness linked to vaping — and the first such death connected to a vaping product purchased at a marijuana dispensary .
A total of 215 possible cases of severe lung disease associated with e-cigarettes have been reported by 25 states as of late last week , according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention .
In a statement to The Post , a Juul spokesman said the San Francisco-based company takes the health of its users seriously , labeling its products with “ ingredient disclosures ” and health warnings .
“ Our device and manufacturing facilities are subject to numerous quality and certification standards and we conduct extensive preclinical and toxicological testing of the ingredients and analytes in Juul e-liquids and aerosols , ” the statement read . “ Our testing is conducted through reputable , independent third-party laboratories , and shared with relevant regulatory bodies . ”
The company is also working to stop counterfeit products compatible with its devices , which are often marketed in violation of Food and Drug Administration laws , according to the statement .
“ As to this particular reported event , we do not have any details beyond what is being reported by the media , including what or whose products were actually consumed , ” the statement read . “ We will continue to vigilantly monitor for any evidence of safety issues . ”
Hergenreder , meanwhile , hopes to leave the hospital in days if his condition keeps trending in the right direction . But only “ time and further pulmonary testing ” will tell if his breathing will ever return to normal in the weeks and months ahead , his doctor told the Tribune .
“ I feel stupid , ” Hergenreder told the newspaper . “ I want other people to stop . It ’ s going to attack your lungs . ”