The battle over Obamacare continues today as arguments in King v. Burwell kick off in front of the Supreme Court .
The case addresses whether `` the Internal Revenue Service may permissibly promulgate regulations to extend tax-credit subsidies to coverage purchased through exchanges established by the federal government under Section 1321 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act . '' Essentially , the case looks at whether federal subsidies are legal and available to people living in states that did not set up their own Obamacare exchanges . If a ruling comes down in favor of King , the Affordable Care Act could potentially be gutted . Thirty-five states have decided not to set up federal exchanges . Here 's a quick summary of the details :
The plaintiffs , four Virginia residents , argue that Americans who bought insurance through the federal ObamaCare exchange are not entitled to subsidies because the law says only those who bought policies in state exchanges are eligible .
At least 5.5 million Americans last year bought insurance on the federal exchange and received the subsidies .
Both sides in the case -- known as King v. Burwell -- generally agree that if the high court decides that millions of recipients are no longer eligible , they likely will no longer be able to afford insurance under ObamaCare and exit the system .
Dozens of legal organizations like Judicial Watch and Landmark Legal Foundation have submitted amicus briefs in favor of King in the case .
`` This is a case about first principles . The Executive Branch has not only exceeded the boundaries of the legislative power , but has done so in an effort to circumvent the principles of representative government to avoid securing the consent of the governed , '' a brief submitted by Landmark Legal , which is headed by Mark Levin , states . `` The Constitution separates the powers of government to protect the liberty of the American people and prevent the tyranny of a self-aggrandizing government . Attempts by the Executive Branch to assume the legislative function deprives the People of an open debate conducted by their politically accountable representatives and is antithetical to the Constitution ’ s design . ''
`` I think what ’ s important to remember politically about this is , if you ’ re a state and you don ’ t set up an exchange , that means your citizens don ’ t get their tax credits ( subsidies ) , '' Gruber said at a lecture in 2012 . `` But your citizens still pay the taxes that support this bill . So you ’ re essentially saying to your citizens , you ’ re going to pay all the taxes to help all the other states in the country . I hope that ’ s a blatant enough political reality that states will get their act together and realize there are billions of dollars at stake here in setting up these exchanges , and that they ’ ll do it . ''
Obamacare architect Jonathan Gruber , now infamous for calling the American people `` too stupid '' to understand how the healthcare law works , argued two years ago people living in states that do not set up Obamacare exchanges are not eligible for federal healthcare subsidies .
Although arguments in this case will be heard today , a decision will not be announced until June .