WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. President Donald Trump on Friday blasted drugmakers and healthcare “ middlemen ” for making prescription medicines unaffordable for Americans , but healthcare stocks rose as his administration avoided aggressive direct measures to cut prices .
Trump made the remarks at the White House Rose Garden in a speech to introduce what he called “ the most sweeping action in history ” to lower drug prices . The effort comes as a growing number of Americans struggle with the cost of their medications , and cite healthcare concerns as a top priority for Washington ahead of congressional elections in November .
Trump said his administration would take aim at the “ middlemen ” in the drug industry who became “ very , very rich , ” an apparent reference to health insurers and pharmacy benefit managers ( PBMs ) . He also said the pharmaceutical industry is making an “ absolute fortune ” at the expense of American taxpayers .
“ Everyone involved in the broken system - the drugmakers , insurance companies , distributors , pharmacy benefit managers , and many others - contribute to the problem , ” Trump said .
Trump campaigned on lowering prescription drug prices ahead of the 2016 presidential election , even accusing drugmakers of “ getting away with murder. ” Healthcare investors had braced for months for more direct attempts to regulate U.S. prices that would cut into industry profits .
But Trump has since abandoned ideas to lower drug costs he supported during the campaign , including allowing the government ’ s Medicare plan for older Americans to negotiate prices directly with drugmakers , and enabling U.S. consumers to import lower-cost medicines from other countries .
On Friday , Trump ’ s senior health officials outlined more modest policy proposals to introduce more competition among drugmakers and pass on savings to consumers .
Critics said the policies pointed to the influence the pharmaceutical industry wields with the administration .
“ I think very expensive champagne will be popping in drug company boardrooms across the country tonight , ” said Democratic Representative Elijah Cummings .
Senator Ron Wyden , also a Democrat , said the proposals “ amount to asking drug companies nicely to lower their prices with zero accountability . ”
Shares of major drugmakers , insurers and PBMs rose after the speech . The S & P 500 healthcare index .SPXHC , a broad gauge of large healthcare stocks , closed up 1.5 percent , its biggest single-day percentage gain in a month .
Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar listens as U.S. President Donald Trump delivers a speech about lowering prescription drug prices from the Rose Garden at the White House in Washington , U.S. , May 11 , 2018 . ███/Jonathan Ernst
“ The plan was a lot less aggressive than investors expected , ” wrote Alex Arfaei , analyst at BMO Capital Markets .
Trump also placed blame on foreign governments , saying they “ extort unreasonably low prices ” from U.S. drugmakers , forcing companies to charge more in this country .
“ America will not be cheated any longer , and especially will not be cheated by foreign countries , ” he said , adding that he has instructed the U.S. Trade Representative to make the issue a top priority with trading partners .
As the speech was underway , the Department of Health and Human Services released what it called a blueprint titled “ American Patients First ” with details of its plan .
It said near-term actions would include giving commercial plans that administer Medicare Part D prescription drug benefits for seniors more power to negotiate prices with drugmakers . Federal health plans would also test ways to pay for drugs based on their effectiveness .
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration would evaluate requiring drugmakers to include the list prices they set on medicines in their advertising . Drugmakers argue that list prices do not reflect actual cost after discounts and rebates .
Some of the administration ’ s longer-term priorities include restricting use of rebates , creating incentives for drugmakers to lower list prices , and investigating tools to address foreign government practices that it said could be harming innovation and driving up U.S. prices .
“ There ’ s not a big proposal here that is going to make a huge difference . There are a bunch of smaller technical changes , ” said Sam Richardson , Associate Professor of Economics at Boston College .
Regarding forcing other countries to pay more for drugs , Richardson said : “ We don ’ t really have the policy levers to get that to happen . ”
Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar , a former pharmaceutical company executive , said many of the actions the government was considering would not require approval by Congress and could take place through executive action within months . He said it would take years to restructure the U.S. drug system .
Trump also blasted the pharmaceutical and insurance industries for spending hundreds of millions of dollars on lobbying to “ protect the status quo . ”
His remarks follow a renewed focus on the influence of the drugmaker lobby , which spends the most of any lobbying group in Washington .
Earlier this week , Swiss drugmaker Novartis ( NOVN.S ) admitted it paid $ 1.2 million to a consulting firm created by Trump lawyer Michael Cohen .