As Americans scramble to meet all the sliding Obamacare deadlines and rule changes this week , the harried insurance industry is struggling to keep up .
A record two million people visited HealthCare.gov on Monday , while state exchanges , too , experienced record traffic and new applications ahead of the Dec. 23 deadline – which , at the last minute , became a Dec. 24 deadline – to apply for health insurance in order to have coverage in place by Jan. 1 .
This was already an extended deadline from Dec. 15 , which was supposed to give insurance underwriters and carriers just enough time to have their clients signed up and ready to go for the start of the new year . But now they ’ re swamped with less than a week to go .
“ If the launch had gone properly in October , we would not have been put between one rock and one gigantic hard place , ” says David Oscar , communications chair of the New Jersey Association of Health Underwriters . “ All the rules that are coming out last-minute are unfair to both the consumer and the carrier . ”
Insurance workers know that the past weeks have been a matter of `` grin and bear it . '' Like the Obamacare administration , the industry wants to enroll as many people as possible to avoid the specter of skyrocketing premiums next year . But for providers that have had to cope with the White House 's shifting enrollment guidelines and goal posts , recent days have been an unwelcome reminder of how much depends on them , and how little time they have to get it right .
Nearly everyday , Mr. Oscar says , he ’ s on the phone telling a client that what he told them earlier no longer applies . And it has gotten so frequent that his assistants and coworkers decided to make it a game . They printed a picture of a yellow school bus and taped in next to his desk . They also printed little miniature David Oscars .
Now , whenever they hear him apologizing to a client , or explaining new rule changes , they run over and tape a picture of him underneath . “ Health-care reform is throwing me and my industry under a bus , ” Oscar says .
“ We ’ ve been running for a deadline , and everybody wanted this coverage for Jan. 1 , and then you sort of soft move it from Dec. 15 to Dec. 23 , ” he says . “ And then on the 23rd , you let it leak that day ? You don ’ t even give a heads-up announcement ? ”
Earlier this month , after appeals from the Obama administration , the major carriers said they would give people until Jan. 10 instead of Dec. 31 to pay their first month ’ s premium – another problem waiting to happen , many believe , as thousands of people will be technically covered without having paid a dime .
“ The goal posts keep moving , ” William Schiffbauer , an insurance attorney , told The New York Times Tuesday evening . “ That raises questions about whether insurers can collect premiums in a timely manner to pay claims from doctors and hospitals . ”
The industry has tried to accommodate many of these late changes requested by the Obama administration , but it has refused some , including allowing out-of-network coverage and retroactive enrollment .
“ Health plans will continue to do everything they can to help consumers through the enrollment process and mitigate potential confusion or disruption caused by all of these last-minute changes to the rules and deadlines , ” said Robert Zirkelbach , a spokesman for America ’ s Health Insurance Plans , the industry ’ s Washington lobby group , in a statement Tuesday .
Those who began their applications by the Christmas Eve extension , but were unable to complete it , could be given even more extra time on a case-by-case basis by calling the marketplace call center . This means that New Year 's Eve will probably be a busy day , too .
“ Our highest priority is making sure that everyone who wants to enroll to have health care coverage by January 1 is able to do so , particularly since consumers had a hard time accessing HealthCare.gov in October and November , ” said Julie Bataille , communications director at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , in a statement .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Those missing the deadline can still apply for coverage in the open-enrollment period , but their coverage won ’ t begin until Feb. 1 .
“ I was bombarded with phone calls between the 23rd and 24th , ” Oscar says . “ My wife actually looked at me while we were at the Rockettes on Monday , because my leg kept on shaking with my phone buzzing so much . ”