NEW YORK ( ███ ) - Amazon.com Inc ( AMZN.O ) , Berkshire Hathaway Inc ( BRKa.N ) and JPMorgan Chase & Co ( JPM.N ) said on Tuesday they will form a company to cut health costs for hundreds of thousands of their employees , setting up a major challenge to an inefficient U.S. healthcare system .
The move by three of the best-known U.S. business leaders - Amazon ’ s Jeff Bezos , Berkshire ’ s Warren Buffett and JPMorgan ’ s Jamie Dimon - would take on the world ’ s most expensive healthcare system , whose mounting costs have hurt corporate profit . Shares of U.S. healthcare companies fell across the board .
The new , not-for-profit venture will initially focus on technology for “ simplified , high-quality and transparent healthcare ” for their more than 500,000 U.S. employees , the companies said . They did not elaborate on their strategy , but said they are searching for a chief executive officer .
Healthcare industry experts say the new entity could eventually negotiate directly with drugmakers , doctors and hospitals and use their vast databases to get a better handle on the costs of those services .
That could undercut the industry ’ s “ middlemen , ” from health insurers to pharmacies and benefits managers .
“ The ballooning costs of healthcare act as a hungry tapeworm on the American economy , ” said Berkshire Hathaway Chairman and CEO Buffett . “ Our group does not come to this problem with answers . But we also do not accept it as inevitable . ”
Related Coverage Health investors roll out unwelcome mat for Amazon 's arrival
U.S. healthcare spending has been increasing annually faster than inflation , and in 2017 accounted for 18 percent of the economy . Corporations sponsor health benefits for more than 160 million Americans .
“ There are a lot of companies , or arguably almost all companies , in healthcare that benefit from cost inflation running as high as it has been for many years , ” ISI Evercore analyst Michael Newshal said . “ And if there is pressure to lower that , that can flow throughout the entire system . ”
The new initiative grew out of conversations that Bezos , Buffett and Dimon have held over the years and gained momentum in recent months , according to a person involved with the consortium but who was not authorized to speak publicly .
The three CEOs plan for their companies to be the only clients of the joint venture , the person said . However , they intend to share the strategies and technology they ultimately develop to reduce costs for the economy and the government .
Traditional healthcare players have tried to reduce costs without losing their profit margins . Most recently , pharmacy network CVS Health Corp ( CVS.N ) reached a $ 69 billion deal to buy insurer Aetna Inc AET.N , arguing their combination could save money for the nation ’ s employers .
Amazon.com 's logo is seen at Amazon Japan 's office building in Tokyo , Japan , August 8 , 2016 . ███/Kim Kyung-Hoon/File Photo
Investors in the sector expect Amazon will become a major disruptor of healthcare , just as it has done in the retail industry , fueled by media reports in recent months that the company was considering entering the pharmacy business .
Teaming up with JPMorgan , the biggest U.S. bank , and Berkshire , the third-largest public company globally and an insurance provider , offers new opportunities to shake up the industry , analysts said .
For example , JPMorgan could help shape new payment models for consumers and providers , and provide cost data . CEO Dimon has for years expressed concerns about rising healthcare costs .
The bank has said it spent $ 1.25 billion on U.S. medical benefits last year , 2 percent of companywide expenses .
Buffett has long complained that high healthcare costs were hurting American businesses , and publicly began using the term “ tapeworm ” to describe their effects as early as 2010 .
In September 2016 , an investment officer for Buffett , Todd Combs , joined JPMorgan ’ s board of directors , and began seeing Dimon regularly . Combs will help lead the new entity , along with JPMorgan managing director Marvelle Berchtold and Amazon Senior Vice President Beth Galetti , the companies said .
Health insurers that provide benefit management or health plans to Amazon , JPMorgan and Berkshire could be among the hardest hit .
JPMorgan uses UnitedHealth Group Inc ( UNH.N ) and Cigna Corp ( CI.N ) for health benefits for its global workforce , according to ISI Evercore analyst Ross Muken . Neither company was available for comment .
Amazon uses Premera Blue Cross , part of the Blue Cross Blue Shield network , according to Muken . Express Scripts ESRX.O , the pharmacy benefits manager , has disclosed it manages pharmacy benefits for Amazon .
Shares of UnitedHealth Group Inc ( UNH.N ) , Cigna Corp and health insurer Anthem Inc ( ANTM.N ) were 4 percent to 7.2 percent lower at the close . Drugstore operators CVS and Walgreen Boots Alliance ( WBA.O ) , as well as Express Scripts , closed between 3 percent and 5.2 percent lower . Drug distributors Cardinal Health ( CAH.N ) , AmerisourceBergen Corp ( ABC.N ) and McKesson Corp ( MCK.N ) were off 1 percent to 3 percent . Amazon closed up 1.4 percent .