Congressional Republicans may find inspiration from the King of Rock and Roll when comes to passing their replacement bill for ObamaCare .
Imagine Elvis Presley crooning his 1960 number one single , “ It ’ s Now or Never . ”
“ We have a choice , ” proffered House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Kevin Brady , R-Texas , one of the authors of the health care blueprint . “ We can act now or we can keep fiddling around and squander this opportunity to repeal ObamaCare . ”
In 2009 and 2010 , Republicans railed against Democrats as they relied almost exclusively on their own members to approve ObamaCare . Now Republicans are going it alone to repeal ObamaCare and adopt their own health care package . But some conservative lawmakers and interest groups alike are upbraiding the GOP legislation . It only takes a few renegades in both the House and Senate to incinerate the plan .
“ It ’ s ObamaCare-lite , ” argued Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. “ We have to admit we are divided on replacement . ”
“ Obviously we have serious concerns , ” said House Freedom Caucus co-chairman Rep. Mark Meadows , R-N.C .
Michael Needham , the head of the conservative policy organization Heritage Action , declared there was “ no significant difference ” between the GOP replacement package and ObamaCare .
Passage of the Republican health care bill comes down to the numbers . The GOP can only lose 21 votes before the measure fails on a party-line vote .
The Freedom Caucus has a bylaw that compels its members to vote as a bloc if 80 percent of its 40-plus members feel the same on a given issue . That ’ s more than enough to incinerate the health care measure on the floor .
That ’ s why the Trump administration deployed Budget Director and Freedom Caucus founder Mick Mulvaney to liaise with congressional Republicans . Vice President Pence also paid a visit to the Freedom Caucus .
Meadows says Pence told his members the bill was still open for negotiation .
But after a lunch meeting with Senate Republicans , Pence suggested the bill might not be that agile .
“ This is the bill , ” said Pence . “ The president supports it and looks forward to working directly on this bill . ”
Rep. Mark Sanford , R-S.C. , suggested Trump was in negotiation mode .
“ What we have here is an opening bid , ” said Sanford .
“ There better not be a rule that bans amendments which are badly needed to fix this bill , ” said Rep. Louie Gohmert , R-Texas .
The Freedom Caucus is a little like the Democratic Blue Dog coalition which was key to approving ObamaCare . The Blue Dogs , a group of conservative Democrats , are still around . There just aren ’ t many left in the House Democratic Caucus these days . The Blue Dogs , when their numbers were bigger , often made a lot of noise . But when then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , needed Blue Dog votes , most of them heeled .
In March , 2010 , Pelosi lacked the votes to pass the final version of the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) . So she authorized the House Rules Committee to allow but two amendments before the decisive ObamaCare debate . One amendment was for a Republican health care plan . The other amendment was a proposal written by then-Rep. Bart Stupak , D-Mich . The “ Stupak Amendment ” constructed an additional firewall to ensure that federal dollars wouldn ’ t cover abortions . The Stupak amendment ultimately courted the support of just enough conservative , pro-life Democrats . The House okayed the first iteration of Obamacare 220-215 .
The question now is how might lawmakers contour the GOP health care plan to their liking . Also , as Gohmert asks , what amendments might the GOP brass permit ? Is there flexibility ? What happens if just enough Republicans balk at the bill ? Does the president light them up on Twitter ?
“ The American Health Care Act ( ACHA ) is the first test of presidential legislative power , ” suggested House Republican Chief Deputy Whip Patrick McHenry , R-N.C. , after a White House confab .
Meadows understands the risks some conservatives could face should they buck Trump .
“ The president has a powerful bully pulpit and a powerful tweet , ” said Meadows . “ I would not want to take him on in either of those concerns . ”
House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , may not emulate Pelosi when it comes to whipping a vote . But he sure exuded confidence Tuesday .
“ We will have 218 votes , ” predicted Ryan . “ I can guarantee you . ”
Of course , Ryan only needs 216 to approve the ACHA .
Ryan and other ACHA supporters must court members of the Freedom Caucus for their votes . Some top GOP aides and even lawmakers spent the past few days trolling conservatives who weren ’ t on board , privately bad-mouthing them . House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Greg Walden , R-Ore. , co-wrote the ObamaCare replacement bill alongside Kevin Brady . Rand Paul embarked on a Quixotic , if faux , quest to find the “ secret location ” of the bill last week . When the House Republican leadership released the bill , Walden ’ s crew “ hand-delivered ” a copy of the legislation to Paul ’ s office and tweeted a photo of the consignment .
The margin to pass this bill could be tight . Consider the narrow vote engineered by Pelosi to pass ObamaCare . Ryan and other Republican leaders must earn the support of skeptics in their own party , not antagonize them .
Ryan wants to pass the bill by the end of the month . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , hopes to follow suit in early April . The bill probably calcifies if it sits out there too long . In 2009 and 2010 , congressional Democrats burned nearly 10 months approving ObamaCare .
As the King sings , “ It ’ s now or never ” – if Republicans are to repeal and replace ObamaCare . “ Tomorrow will be too late . ”
Capitol Attitude is a weekly column written by members of the ███ Capitol Hill team . Their articles take you inside the halls of Congress , and cover the spectrum of policy issues being introduced , debated and voted on there .