A frantic and impatient White House is pressuring House GOP leaders for another showdown vote on repealing Obamacare next week so it can notch a legislative win before President Donald Trump ’ s first 100 days in office .
But while the outlines of a possible deal are starting to come together , it ’ s far from clear that House Republican leaders have found the sweet spot to pass their embattled alternative health plan .
The White House does not schedule House floor votes . And while some senior administration officials suggested Thursday that a vote will occur next week , multiple House GOP sources told ███ that is unlikely .
Indeed , the vote is not currently on the calendar . Nor do Republican insiders think it ’ s even possible , as Congress will reconvene Tuesday after a two-week Easter recess . That would leave them with one day to whip votes — an unlikely time frame for such a heavy legislative lift .
“ The question is whether it can get 216 votes in the House , and the answer is n't clear at this time , ” a senior GOP aide said . “ There is no legislative text and therefore no agreement to do a whip count on . ”
The conflicting narratives suggest top administration officials and House Republican leaders are either miscommunicating — or , more likely , that White House sources are squeezing Speaker Paul Ryan and his team , telling them to move quickly . Notably , the same senior White House officials who suggested a vote would occur next week also said the text of a new deal will likely be circulated Friday `` or by the weekend . ''
The claim perplexed some GOP insiders who don ’ t expect legislative text for a few days , at the earliest .
The back-and-forth highlights just how impatient Trump is growing with Congress . Administration officials are feeling inordinate pressure to advance the legislation out of the House , fearing that failure to repeal the health care law will dominate coverage of the administration 's first 100 days , which end next week , officials say .
Trump on Thursday predicted that health care legislation would pass `` next week or shortly thereafter. ” During a joint news conference alongside Italian Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni , the president also took issue with the characterization that Republicans gave up on health care after they pulled the original House bill . He reminded reporters that Obamacare was roughly a year-and-half-long effort , while he said he ’ s only had about two months to negotiate a better deal .
But multiple House GOP insiders say the White House doesn ’ t understand how Congress works , and just because Trump officials say there will be a vote next week doesn ’ t make it so . GOP leaders can not whip votes until legislative text is actually written , and it will be tough to get a good sense of where the conference stands until members return to town on Tuesday .
GOP leaders have their work cut out for them in the meantime . While the White House believes it is `` close '' to having the 216 votes needed to get a bill out of the House , one senior official said , others on Capitol Hill are n't nearly as confident .
Insiders say the deal could probably deliver between 15 to 20 conservative House Freedom Caucus members who were previously `` no '' votes , so long as the text says exactly what was agreed to . But moderates — and more than a few traditional Republicans — say the deal is bad policy .
Indeed , several centrist sources were incensed that Tuesday Group co-chair Tom MacArthur , the top negotiator for the moderates , agreed to the changes without getting the backing of his group . They 're not sure he can deliver the votes .
`` The amendment does n't address the things that I had concerns about — the things I think are detrimental to the people I represent , '' said Rep. Dan Donovan , a centrist New York Republican who is currently a `` no '' on the bill .
Donovan said there has been little to no Tuesday Group coordination on the negotiations , and he was skeptical that the deal would move any moderate votes .
The White House began ramping up pressure on GOP leaders two weeks ago , when top Trump officials called Ryan to the White House and chided the Wisconsin Republican for not delaying recess until a deal was struck .
Since then , the White House has worked with Freedom Caucus Chairman Mark Meadows ( R-N.C. ) and MacArthur ( R-N.J. ) to come up with a deal they hope will pick off enough conservatives and moderate support to pass the House .
Trump , meanwhile , has asked repeatedly — sometimes several times a day — about the status of the health care law and seems more engaged than during last month 's failed effort to get Ryan ’ s American Health Care Act through the chamber , a senior administration official said . The president believes that it will be difficult to gain momentum on other issues without `` getting something done on health care , '' according to one person who spoke with him . OMB Director Mick Mulvaney separately said Thursday the White House is ready to negotiate with Democrats on adding key Obamacare insurance cost-sharing subsidies to a fiscal 2017 spending bill to keep the government running -- if Democrats agree to pay for some of Trump ’ s priorities , such as defense and border security money .
According to a draft of the tentative deal obtained by ███ , the latest proposal would allow states to apply for `` limited waivers '' that would undermine Obamacare 's protections for pre-existing conditions . Under these waivers , states could opt out of Obamacare standards setting minimum benefits that health plans must offer and a requirement — called community rating — forbidding insurers from charging different prices to people based on health status .
Both are provisions that the GOP ’ s ultraconservatives have pushed to eliminate as part of the repeal effort , contending that these coverage mandates drive up the cost of insurance . States opting out of the community rating rules would be forced to set up an `` invisible risk-sharing '' program aimed at providing a backstop to health plans while preventing sicker patients from being priced out of the market . The hope is that protecting insurers from the most expensive customers will bring down the costs for the rest of the risk pool . That will allow insurers to lower premiums , which in turn will entice more customers into the individual market .
At the same time , the deal would allow states the option of maintaining insurance protections , supported by centrist Republicans , including community rating .
While the changes will likely win over some conservatives , leaders will have a problem with their centrists . MacArthur said in a statement Thursday that he has insisted during the discussions that any compromise have protections for individuals with pre-existing conditions . But many of his like-minded colleagues believe he did not keep that promise under the current agreement .
███ Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
Many centrists don ’ t approve of MacArthur ’ s negotiating tactics . While Meadows has made a point of ensuring that any potential changes he negotiates will likely get a green light from his members , some Tuesday Group members do not feel MacArthur has done the same .
Moderates and a few traditional Republicans believe the legislative changes will hurt people with pre-existing conditions , a population they vowed to protect on the campaign trail . But since GOP leaders are feeling the heat from the White House , they may have to put the changes on the floor regardless .
House Republicans will likely discuss the latest changes during a Saturday telephone conference call . The call , however , is routine during recess and was actually announced last week — well before the White House , MacArthur and Meadows publicized the new accord .
The renewed effort also comes just days before the high-stakes deadline over funding the government or shutting it down over contentious issues — including whether Republicans will fund a key Obamacare subsidy program , financing for Trump ’ s border wall and boosting military spending , among others .
Trump and some administration officials have threatened to cut off Obamacare cost-sharing subsidies — a decision that would wreak havoc on the Obamacare insurance exchanges — in a bid to get Democrats to negotiate on a replacement plan .
Those subsidies , which are at the center of a court battle begun under the Obama administration , help lower-income people pay medical bills and insurance deductibles . Taking them away would prompt insurers to either flee the market or severely hike premiums to cover those costs . Despite calls from the health care industry , business groups and Democrats to continue the payments , the White House has yet to tip its hand .
Paul Demko , Adam Cancryn and Nolan D. McCaskill contributed to this story .