One of the major pieces of the plan that Trump outlined Friday is an ongoing effort to change the federal government ’ s 340B Drug Pricing Program , which provides rebates to hospitals that treat a high share of Medicaid and uninsured patients . Those rebates are intended to lower the cost of care by forcing drug manufacturers to provide medications—especially high-cost drugs for chronic conditions—at cheaper prices to the neediest populations . But the $ 18 billion 340B program has been the setting for a war between drug manufacturers , who claim hospitals are simply pocketing the savings and not passing them on to patients , and the hospitals themselves . They claim drug manufacturers aren ’ t actually lowering prices , and instead are using the rebates as an excuse to increase their list prices .
In a policy document released Friday , the White House described its commitment to requiring that safety-net hospitals “ use their 340B drug discounts to provide care to more low-income and vulnerable patients. ” But an earlier move from the administration undercuts that commitment . Late last year , the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services slashed the 340B program to the tune of somewhere between $ 900 million to $ 1.65 billion , effectively siding with drug manufacturers who say the rebates aren ’ t worthwhile .
Trump also seemed to take aim at a longtime industry foe in his speech : pharmacy benefits managers , or PBMs . PBMs function as industry middlemen , administering the prescription-drug programs for large insurance programs covering the majority of Americans . These companies handle negotiations between insurers and drug manufacturers on drug prices , including managing rebates from manufacturers that are designed to entice insurers into accepting certain medications on their plans . Drug manufacturers argue that PBMs have wrangled too-high rebates that they keep to themselves instead of passing on to consumers .
In its policy document , the White House vaguely committed to “ requiring Pharmacy Benefit Managers to act in the best interests of patients. ” Trump was much more forceful in his remarks . “ We ’ re very much eliminating the middlemen , ” Trump said , apparently referring to PBMs . “ The middlemen became very , very rich . ”
Drug companies argue that limiting the 340B discounts and PBM rebates will reduce the consumer costs , especially for elderly people receiving their health care through Medicare Part D. But on that front , Trump has also walked back a major campaign pledge : allowing Part D to negotiate directly with insurers to lower costs of the drugs it offers . Trump said in his speech Friday that “ we will have tougher negotiation , ” and the policy blueprint released by the White House pushes for “ allowing greater flexibility in benefit design to encourage better price negotiation. ” But that policy doesn ’ t seem likely to affect the baseline negotiating capacity of the program : Congress would probably need to pass legislation to allow the health and human-services secretary to make deals with drug companies . Without that legislation in place , Trump has little executive authority to change anything .