Obama gradually fell in love with the ugly-duckling issue of health care . Obama 's health care conversion
The most important red line of Barack Obama ’ s presidency was scrawled hastily in January 2007 , a few weeks before he even announced he was running for president .
Soon-to-be-candidate Obama , then an Illinois senator , was thinking about turning down an invitation to speak at a big health care conference sponsored by the progressive group Families USA , when two aides , Robert Gibbs and Jon Favreau , hit on an idea that would make him appear more prepared and committed than he actually was at the moment .
Why not just announce his intention to pass universal health care by the end of his first term ?
Thus was born Obamacare , a check-the-box , news-cycle expedient that would ultimately define a president .
“ We needed something to say , ” recalled one of the advisers involved in the discussion . “ I can ’ t tell you how little thought was given to that thought other than it sounded good . So they just kind of hatched it on their own . It just happened . It wasn ’ t like a deep strategic conversation . ”
It ’ s not exactly fair to call Obama a reluctant warrior on health care reform — not after all he has staked on the biggest single roll of the legislative dice in a half-century . But it took him years to evolve from a skeptical neophyte playing catchup to Hillary Clinton and John Edwards to a chief executive willing to risk his political capital and legacy and the fate of his own party on the principle of affordable , subsidized , government-mandated national health coverage .
The consequences of that offhand promise are still reverberating . Its greatest test lies just ahead on Oct. 1 , opening day for enrollment in Obamacare . A flop would be nothing short of the greatest political and policy cataclysm of his career and a mortal blow to a core Democratic principle that government can still do big things .
The tortured process that led to passage of the Affordable Care Act has been amply documented . Less chronicled is just how Obama gradually fell in love with an ugly-duckling issue , and his slow descent from ambivalent detachment to emotional investment in a cause his aides initially dismissed as “ Hillary ’ s thing . ”
Yet even after the law passed , some of Obama ’ s ambivalence — rooted in his desire to dodge the political backlash — lingered . For Republicans , Obamacare has become a rallying point and fundraising tool , but the West Wing always wanted to pass the thing and move on . That has accounted for a sales job that has been , until this fall ’ s big implementation push , sporadic at best and dangerously lax in the view of many ACA advocates .
Obama ’ s legacy on health care began with the pressure to say something , anything , at the progressive health conference a year before the first presidential primary votes were cast . He needed to keep up with Clinton , his party ’ s front-runner , and Edwards , who was trying to carve out space to Clinton ’ s left as the party ’ s liberal standard-bearer .
Favreau , who would go on to become the chief White House speechwriter , said Obama wanted “ to say something bold and ambitious about health care . ”
“ He had previously talked about how every year and every election we keep talking about health care and nothing ever happens , ” Favreau said . “ So we came up with that promise , really one of the first . ”
The candidate jumped at it . He probably wasn ’ t going to get elected anyway , the team concluded . Why not go big ?
“ In the 2008 campaign , affordable , universal health care for every single American must not be a question of whether , it must be a question of how , ” Obama said at the Families USA conference . “ We have the ideas , we have the resources , and we must find the will to pass a plan by the end of the next president ’ s first term . ”
Even after his pledge , though , it took months for Obama to buy in .
In March 2007 , he found himself on the same stage with a highly confident Clinton at another health care forum , this one sponsored by the Service Employees International Union in Las Vegas .
Obama staggered through a discussion that left policy wonks convinced that he was out of his league , particularly when compared to Clinton , arguably the nation ’ s premier expert on health care after her unsuccessful attempt to enact reform in the 1990s .
While she dominated , he was confronted by an audience member who asked why he didn ’ t have a health care plan yet . He responded that his campaign was only eight weeks old and promised to come up with one soon . At one point , in response to a question about health care disparities among minorities , Obama talked about lead poisoning as Clinton aides giggled .
Obama knew before he walked off the stage that he had screwed up .
“ He conceded that he really got his head handed to him — and that didn ’ t happen very often , ” said former Sen. Tom Daschle ( D-S.D . ) , an early Obama adviser . “ It was a real catalytic moment . ”
Obama crammed , law-school style , on the details . He became “ a student of health policy , ” Daschle said , consulting with liberal think tanks like the Center for American Progress , reading the research , learning the language and drawing up a plan .
He was pulled deeper into the issue as he traveled the country and listened to the stories of health care hardships told by voters along the rope line , aides said .
But the moment that cemented Obama to Obamacare came in January 2008 , when Sen. Ted Kennedy , the party ’ s liberal conscience and most revered elder statesman , told the Illinois freshman he would endorse — on the condition that Obama kept his promise to make health care his top domestic priority beyond propping up the collapsing economy .
It was a bit of a bluff , former Kennedy aides tell ███ : The aging Massachusetts senator , who would soon be felled by a brain tumor , probably would have backed Obama anyway .
But Obama repeated his pledge and Kennedy , hardheaded to the last , immediately steered two of his policy advisers to the task of planning , so Obama couldn ’ t back off for lack of a viable legislative strategy . To this day , some of Obama ’ s current and former aides cite the Kennedy commitment as a key reason why he refused to give up even when most of his inner circle counseled him to do just that .
Still , Obama continued to attack Clinton even as he took up her life ’ s mission .
At the advice of his political advisers , Obama sought to undercut Clinton by accusing her of pushing for an individual mandate — an idea borrowed from Republicans that polled poorly with independents and conservative Democrats in critical battlegrounds like Pennsylvania and Ohio .
Aides say Obama was simply looking for any way to differentiate himself from an opponent whose basic policy positions were indistinguishable from his own . After Clinton dropped out in June 2008 , Obama was privately telling his staff that any health care reform he proposed would most likely include a mandate .