Former President Barack Obama says there ’ s nothing wrong with Obamacare that couldn ’ t be fixed by President Trump doing a better job of managing the health care law .
Emerging Thursday from his post-presidency cocoon , on the seventh anniversary of the Affordable Care Act and the very day that Mr. Trump was struggling to win votes to repeal it , Mr. Obama took a victory lap , saying his signature law reset the terms of the health care debate , added millions of people to the insurance rolls and improved hospital care , saving nearly 100,000 lives so far .
“ The reality is clear : America is stronger because of the Affordable Care Act , ” Mr. Obama said .
“ President Obama must be feeling the time is up , ” White House press secretary Sean Spicer said .
The former president , he said , was changing the goal posts and obscuring the failures of the law , which has dominated the political debate for the past decade .
Democrats hemorrhaged seats in Congress in the wake of Mr. Obama ’ s 2010 signature of the act , passed after a messy legislative fight with not a single Republican supporting the bill .
Now it ’ s Republicans who are in chaos and Democrats who are withholding their votes and cheering from the sidelines as conservatives battle with Mr. Trump .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , said Thursday that the new president , a self-proclaimed master deal-maker , made a “ rookie ’ s error ” by agreeing to an artificial deadline of March 23 — the anniversary of Mr. Obama ’ s original signature — for getting a bill through the House .
“ Rookie ’ s error for bringing this up on a day when clearly you ’ re not ready , ” she said .
Mrs. Pelosi was Mr. Obama ’ s chief cheerleader during the Obamacare debate , and now is its staunchest defender as Democrats fight a rearguard action .
Mr. Obama said Democrats have plenty of ammunition to fire at critics .
He also said that while health care prices are rising — contrary to his goal of bending the cost curve — they are going up at a slower rate than previous decades . Analysts say that was chiefly the result of a pause in the hike of prescription drug costs and that the future likely will see bigger increases , even under Obamacare .
Most critically , though , Mr. Obama said his law is not in the dreaded “ death spiral ” that Republicans and some health care executives have said . Under the death spiral , young healthy customers are chased from the marketplace by rising costs , leaving an older , sicker population that requires even higher premiums and deductibles , lifting prices even higher — and chasing more people from the market .
“ While it ’ s true that some premiums have risen , the vast majority of marketplace enrollees have experienced no average premium hike at all , ” he said .
That ’ s because the more their plans cost , the more taxpayers shell out to help pay the premiums , the Congressional Budget Office said in an analysis this month .
Mr. Obama said Obamacare will remain stable “ so long as the law is properly administered ” — a challenge aimed straight at Mr. Trump .
Enrollment numbers have never hit the Congressional Budget Office ’ s projections , but this year , for the first time , they dropped on a year-to-year basis .
Democrats blamed Mr. Trump , who oversaw only the final 11 days of enrollment . That was when the numbers fell off their pace , Democrats said .
Mr. Trump has already made several tweaks to the law , using the same executive branch powers that Mr. Obama used , to give insurers more predicability about the markets next year .
His administration promises even more unilateral changes — what he calls phase two of the Republicans ’ three-part repeal-and-replace plans .
Even as they rejected his latest bill , Republicans praised Mr. Trump for his negotiating skills .
“ At this point , the president ’ s engagement is unparalleled , I believe , in the history of our country , ” said Rep. Mark Meadows , a North Carolina Republican who is one of the big holdouts . “ This is a president that wants to get things done . ”
He and other conservatives blamed the chaos on the legislative process orchestrated by House Speaker Paul D. Ryan , Wisconsin Republican , and carefully steered clear of blame for Mr. Trump .
In her press conference , Mrs. Pelosi mocked Mr. Trump for being “ transactional ” in his negotiations and making changes to try to win over Mr. Meadows and other conservatives .
“ We are not transactional , ” Mrs. Pelosi said . “ We only can convince people about the merits of the bill . ”
A reporter challenged Mrs. Pelosi , pointing to the “ cornhusker kickback , ” a sweetheart deal that then-Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , Nevada Democrat , included to pay for more of Nebraska ’ s Medicaid , in exchange for winning the vote of then-Sen. Ben Nelson .
“ It came out of the bill . It came out of the bill , ” Mrs. Pelosi said . “ You remember , that came out of the bill . ”
In fact , the provision remained in the bill that cleared Congress — but was stripped in a follow-up budget reconciliation measure , which is the same tactic Republicans are now using to try a repeal .
Mrs. Pelosi didn ’ t address other deals Mr. Reid made , such as including billions of dollars for community health care centers , designed to earn the support of Sen. Bernard Sanders , Vermont independent , or millions of dollars in additional Medicaid money for Louisiana to win the support of then-Sen. Mary L. Landrieu .
And just like Republicans , Mr. Reid was racing a self-imposed deadline trying to get his bill through by Christmas 2009 . In the end , the Senate voted on Christmas Eve .