That , too , has drawn concern . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners , which represents state regulators , wrote a letter to the Senate contending that the provision “ appears to block the ability of states to preserve important consumer protections , effectively oversee the plans , or ensure a level playing field . ”
Association plans , which had been virtually unregulated because they were not under the purview of any state rules , have had a mixed history . Some plans failed because they did not have the money to pay for their customers ’ medical bills , while some insurance companies were accused of misleading people about what they would cover .
These plans are “ just the classic example of insurance that disappears exactly when you need it , ” said Jay Angoff , a former state insurance official in Missouri and New Jersey , who also worked in the Obama administration overseeing the insurance marketplace .
Antony Stuart , a lawyer who lives in California , has brought more than a dozen lawsuits accusing insurance companies of misleading consumers by selling them policies that provided much less coverage than they realized .
Mr. Stuart recalled one case involving a man , Doug Christensen , who bought a policy from Mega Life and Health Insurance , which was the subject of numerous lawsuits and state regulatory actions . Mr. Christensen , who previously had bone cancer , was assured by the insurance agent selling the policy that he would have adequate coverage if the cancer returned . But the plan limited payments toward chemotherapy to just $ 1,000 a day of treatment when the actual cost was sometimes 10 times that amount . Mr. Christensen was left with nearly $ 500,000 in unpaid medical bills .
“ These plans lacked the necessary transparency that would give consumers an idea of what they were actually purchasing , ” said Ashley Blackburn , a senior policy analyst with Community Catalyst , a consumer advocacy group . People buying plans now benefit not only from the standards the federal law sets but also from the fact that policies are clearly divided into categories with set levels of coverage . “ We ’ re really moving back to a market where people are going to have a hard time reading through their plan options . ”
The association plans , in particular , would make small businesses and self-employed individuals more vulnerable to policies that would leave them unprotected . State regulators cracked down after some of these plans became insolvent . Four associations in the early 2000s left their customers with nearly $ 50 million in unpaid medical bills , according to researchers in an overview of the plans ’ history published in the journal Health Affairs .