Well , the House GOP has taken a political consequences be damned position . The House will be voting on the American Health Care Act , the GOP replacement to Obamacare , next Thursday—though both Speaker Paul Ryan and President Trump admitted that changes would need to be made to ensure passage . The president has said he ’ s 100 percent behind this legislation , but you should read Guy ’ s deep dive into this development .
The Obamacare replacement offered by congressional Republicans has received a brutal reception . Democrats are uniformly against it , while the GOP is split . The lackluster CBO score prompted moderate GOP lawmakers to flee—and Sen. Tom Cotton ( R-AR ) warned that this bill doesn ’ t have the votes to pass the Senate . There are some Republican senators who refuse to support a bill if it touches the current funding formula for Medicaid expansion . And the things that conservatives want Republicans to do regarding health care reform , allowing insurance companies to compete across state lines , tort reform , can not be included in the reconciliation process .
Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-SC ) spoke with radio host Hugh Hewitt on Wednesday about his issues with the bill , namely that the three-phase approach , in which the GOP will make into law the areas they can ’ t touch with reconciliation , wouldn ’ t work . He noted that for provisions , like health insurance companies being able to compete across state lines , would need to get 60 votes to pass the Senate . Democrats aren ’ t going to help the GOP on health care , so the two succeeding phases are bound to fail . Graham said that we should just let the law collapse if the GOP could n't get a solid bill using reconciliation , which drew disagreement from Hewitt . For conservatives , the fact that the GOP is haggling over Medicaid is frustrating since the expansion provision in Obamacare is one of the most expensive in the law . Graham also admitted that he could be miscalculating the political consequences for this wait and die strategy .