The GOP holds majorities in both houses of Congress , the president is a Republican , and only a tiny minority of the voters support Obamacare in its present form . It should be possible , under these propitious circumstances , for the Republicans to honor their pledge to repeal the rapidly imploding “ reform ” law . Yet the party that ended slavery and successfully championed women ’ s suffrage , both in the face of violent Democratic opposition , can ’ t muster the courage to repeal even the worst provisions of the Affordable Care Act . This cowardice has now inspired the law ’ s apologists to openly mock the GOP and President Trump .
In fact , the man whose name is inextricably linked to the failed health-care law recently derided Trump for the failure to get repeal done during his first 100 days . CNN reported , “ Obama noted to an audience in midtown Manhattan that ‘ the Affordable Care Act has never been more popular — and it ’ s more popular than the current president. ’ ” This , it will come as no surprise , is another of the former president ’ s trademark whoppers . Fox News just released a poll three days ago showing that only 16 percent of registered voters support Obamacare as is , while 57 percent of voters want it fully or partially repealed .
This renders the diffidence of the GOP even more inexplicable . And it is , indeed , fear that is causing some House Republicans to waver . Now that the conservatives of the Freedom Caucus have finally come around , some members of the moderate “ Tuesday Group ” are dragging their feet in the belief that their constituents will punish them if they vote for repeal . At Real Clear Politics , James Arkin quotes Oklahoma congressman Tom Cole thus : “ Some of our colleagues forget that the Tuesday Group is the group that holds the toughest seats for us . They really are the difference between us being the majority and the minority . ”
There are two obvious problems with this line of reasoning . First , there is no point in having a GOP majority in the House if the Republicans are too pusillanimous to use the accompanying power . Second , every member of the GOP — including the timorous members of the Tuesday Group — ran in 2016 on repealing Obamacare . Thus , the real “ difference between being the majority and the minority ” is inexorably tied to their willingness to honor that pledge . If Congressman Cole believes the current Republican majority in the House will survive the failure to rid us of this turbulent law , he should stop skipping his medication .
As Paul Ryan put it when he was re-elected speaker in January , “ The people have given us unified government . And it wasn ’ t because they were feeling generous . It ’ s because they wanted results. ” But due to infighting between GOP factions , primarily the Freedom Caucus and the Tuesday Group , over the American Health Care Act ( AHCA ) — the results have been underwhelming . All of these characters voted for a repeal bill just as imperfect as AHCA when they were up for re-election and knew it would be vetoed . They ’ re suddenly less courageous now that we have a Republican President ready and willing to sign it into law .
And that Republican President is beginning to lose patience with internecine squabbling in the House . Trump had urged the House leadership to bring an amended version of the bill to the floor for a vote before the symbolic “ 100-day ” milestone came and went , but there still weren ’ t enough sure votes to guarantee passage . The Hill reported Trump made it clear at a Pennsylvania rally on Saturday evening that he would be less than pleased , if it continues much longer : “ I ’ ll be so angry at Congressman Kelly and Congressman Marino and all of our congressmen in this room if we don ’ t get that damn thing passed quickly . ”
But the president is doing more than threatening congressmen . In an attempt to assuage the concerns of cringing Tuesday Group members who are worried about the fate of people with pre-existing conditions , Trump went on Face the Nation yesterday and guaranteed that AHCA takes care of such patients : “ We ’ ve set up a pool for the pre-existing conditions so that the premiums can be allowed to fall. ” Ironically , every Obamacare replacement plan proposed by the GOP has had a mechanism for helping patients with pre-existing conditions . Betsy McCaughey explained how they work using the state of Alaska as an example :
In Alaska , the burden of caring for 500 chronically ill patients was making Obamacare unaffordable for all 23,000 Alaskans in the individual market . They were facing 40 % premium hikes for 2017 . To halt the crisis , in June state authorities created a separate “ high-risk ” pool for the sickest people , with the cost shouldered by all Alaska taxpayers , instead of being thrust on buyers in the individual insurance market . As a result , premium hikes were kept to single digits for 2017 . It ’ s a microcosm of what congressional Republicans propose for all 50 states .
Nonetheless , knowing that the voters have been repeatedly misled on this subject and that the vagaries of public opinion are disproportionately important to the timid Tuesday Group , the president has thrown them a sop . Will it work ? According to Tracy Gore , who recently wrote to the Daily Signal about House Republicans : “ The GOP is a bunch of spineless wimps who are continually outplayed by the bully ‘ illiberals. ’ ” The evidence suggests that Ms. Gore ’ s assessment of the GOP is spot on . One hopes they will grow a collective spine and repeal Obamacare . Otherwise , the Democrats win in 2018 . Not an amusing prospect .