An Obama administration official who supervised the balky rollout of the health care law is retiring , the nation ’ s Medicare agency said Monday .
Michelle Snyder served as chief operating officer at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and oversaw the development and debut of HealthCare.gov , the federal Obamacare website that suffered from rampant glitches in October and November before its turnaround by early December .
“ I regret to announce that , after 41 years of outstanding public service , CMS Chief Operating Officer Michelle Snyder is retiring at the end of 2013 , ” CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner said . “ While we celebrate her distinguished career , we are also sadly saying farewell to a good friend and a key member of the agency ’ s leadership team . ”
Ms. Tavenner said Ms. Snyder was ready to retire at the end of 2012 , but she stayed on to help her with “ the challenges facing CMS in 2013 . ”
Ms. Snyder ’ s deputy , Tim Love , will serve as acting chief operating officer .
Ms. Snyder is the second top CMS official to depart since the disastrous debut of Obamacare ’ s insurance markets on Oct. 1 . The agency ’ s chief information officer , Tony Trenkle , left in November for a job in the private sector .
Before Congress in November , Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius named Ms. Snyder as a key person responsible for the HealthCare.gov project .
Rep. Darrell Issa , California Republican and chairman of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform , offered a few parting shots for Ms. Snyder , saying she gave the troubled Obamacare website the green light despite red flags about its security .
“ Documents and interviews indicate Michelle Snyder ’ s involvement in bypassing the recommendation of CMS ‘ top security expert who recommended delaying the launch of HealthCare.gov after independent testers raised concern about serious vulnerabilities from a lack of adequate security testing , ” he said . “ Americans seeking health insurance are left to shoulder the risk of a website that ’ s still an all-around work in progress because of the cult-like commitment officials had to the arbitrary goal of launching on Oct. 1 . ”