( CNN ) – Longtime Republican Sen. John McCain on Sunday described the enrollment process for Obamacare thus far as a `` fiasco '' and vowed to continue fighting the health care law . But he said Republicans should take a `` rifle shot '' approach rather than the `` meat ax '' strategy of defunding the law altogether , as endorsed by conservatives like Sen. Ted Cruz .
On CNN 's `` State of the Union , '' McCain was not quite ready to call on Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius to step down , unlike others in his party , but he supports the idea of holding congressional hearings over the issue and encouraged more efforts to dismantle the Affordable Care Act .
`` Let 's find out who is responsible for this fiasco and then take the appropriate action , '' he told CNN Chief Political Analyst Gloria Borger when asked about Sebelius .
`` But this is just the beginning of the problems , '' he continued . `` That 's why we Republicans have to keep up the fight . But we have to rifle shot it rather than go at it with a meat ax , which can not succeed . ''
Nearly half a million people have filled out applications for Obamacare coverage since October 1 , despite the highly publicized problems with online sign-ups , administration officials said Saturday .
`` The website is unacceptable , and we are improving it , '' one senior administration official said . `` But the underlying insurance product is good , and across the country , people are getting access to affordable care on January 1 . ''
The Affordable Care Act is intended to serve more than 48 million Americans without health insurance . Most Americans face tax penalties if they do not have health insurance by the beginning of next year .
McCain had his own recommendation on how to fix the rocky rollout .
`` Send Air Force One out to Silicon Valley , load it up with smart people , bring them back to Washington and fix this problem , '' he said . `` It 's ridiculous . And everybody knows that . ''
The 2008 GOP presidential nominee said he believes that the Obamacare glitches would be a bigger story if conservative Republicans had n't staged a strategy that in part led to this month 's government shutdown .
`` Many ironies here , but one of them is the fiasco of this rollout has been obscured because of this … strife that 's been going on in the Republican Party , '' he said .
Spearheaded by Cruz , House Republicans repeatedly attached anti-Obamacare provisions to must-pass spending bills , which the Democratic-controlled Senate refused to take up . The stalemate ultimately resulted in a 16-day partial government shutdown that removed $ 24 billion from the economy , according to an initial analysis from Standard & Poor 's .
McCain has been one of many Senate Republicans to criticize the effort .
`` It was a fool 's errand to start with . It was never going to succeed , '' he said . McCain did n't single out Cruz but blamed `` the whole effort '' instead .
`` Keep up the fight against Obamacare . But do n't shut down the government and have so much collateral damage , '' he added .
Although Cruz has n't ruled out trying to take the same approach when Congress faces another fiscal deadline in January , McCain said he 's confident Congress will not let it happen again . `` The American people will not stand for another one of these things . They just wo n't . ''
Cruz to CNN : ‘ I don ’ t work for the party bosses in Washington ’
This week , the House Committee on Energy and Commerce will hold a hearing on problems with the Obamacare enrollment process . Sebelius was invited to testify . A Health and Human Services official said last week that she wo n't be available for the Thursday hearing , but she 's in `` close communication '' with the committee about its request for her testimony .
Some lawmakers have called on Sebelius to be fired or resign , but Republican Sen. Marco Rubio , like McCain , did n't immediately call for her to step down over the problems . However , Rubio , along with Sen. Roy Blunt , R-Missouri , criticized her for not going to the hearing .
`` Her refusal to testify and be transparent about it , I think , is undermining her credibility , and there may come a point where , in fact , she will have to resign , largely because she no longer has the credibility to do the job , '' Rubio said on `` Fox News Sunday . ''
On the same program , Blunt argued that there will come a point when `` she 'll have to testify . ''
`` I do n't think she can refuse to answer questions about this , '' he said .
Watch State of the Union with Candy Crowley Sundays at 9am ET . For the latest from State of the Union click here .