The Washington Post , desperate to split the GOP as the fortunes of the GOP in 2014 look ever rosier , has a piece asserting that GOP candidates are backing off from repealing Obamacare .
The implicit goal of the Post , of course , is to alienate the conservative base from members of the GOP so that Democrats can sneak through and hold on to what seats in Congress they can .
The Post states that the candidates willing to abandon efforts to repeal Obamacare are more interested in a “ piecemeal approach ” by which they would pick and choose which parts of Obamacare they would retain . The article cites candidates that are championed by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , such as Rep. Joseph J. Heck ( R-NV ) , Republican Massachusetts House contender Richard Tisei , and Oregon GOP Senate candidate Monica Wehby .
The Post cleverly quotes a recent column for the Cook Political Report asserting that “ a shift already is underway ” on the airwaves . One problem : the Cook Political Report comes from the leftist National Journal .
The Post admits that Scott Brown , running for the Senate in New Hampshire , is for repealing Obamacare . The article twists another candidate ’ s view this way : “ In Minnesota , Republican House candidate Stewart Mills pledges in a campaign ad to ‘ replace ’ the law , rather than simply repealing it. ” Somehow the Post doesn ’ t understand replacing something means getting rid of what preceded it .
When the Post is looking for some GOP group to back its thesis , it turns to Glen Bolger , a partner with the GOP polling firm Public Opinion Strategies , who says , “ The sentiment toward the Affordable Care Act is still strongly negative , but people are saying , ‘ Don ’ t throw the baby out ’ with the bathwater . ”
However , if Public Opinion Strategies thinks that the strategy of backing away from repealing Obamacare is a recent phenomenon , then why were they pushing it back in November of 2013 ? Their blog then read like this :
Three . The only way the President can bump up support of Obamacare is by luring an unpopular GOP into a fight in which Republicans are sure to get the partisan short end of the stick .
Four . The president and his allies in the Senate will take every opportunity to tempt the GOP into Republicans-versus-Obamacare fights between now and Election Day . And , they will win most of them .
The Post notes that the House GOP want to postpone a vote on their own health-reform proposal as an argument supporting its thesis , quoting “ lawmakers ” as saying the delay would give the GOP more “ time to work on the bill and weigh the consequences of putting a detailed policy before the voters in the fall . ”
Who would be a reliable source on the motives of the GOP ? Why , Rep. Steve Israel ( D-NY ) , chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , who said the GOP efforts to repeal Obamacare “ backfired… now they ’ re promising fixes but won ’ t be specific . That ’ s like a car dealer offering you a trade-in without telling you the car you ’ re getting in return . No one would buy that , and voters won ’ t buy this Republican scheme . ”
The Post does admit that “ a significant number of GOP Senate and House aspirants still back the idea of fully repealing the Affordable Care Act , including Senate candidates Tom Cotton ( Ark . ) , Terri Lynn Land ( Mich. ) , and Thom Tillis ( N.C. ) . ”
But the Post reserves the bulk of the article for its chief target , Sen. Mitch McConnell ( R-KY ) . It acknowledges he has vowed “ to rip up Obamacare ‘ root and branch ' ” but then segues into an attack on McConnell for asserting that repealing Obamacare is unconnected to the fate of Kynect , Kentucky ’ s state-run exchange . McConnell spokeswoman Allison Moore has stated that Kynect could continue operating even if Obamacare is repealed . She stated , “ If Obamacare is repealed , Kentucky should decide for itself whether to keep Kynect or set up a different marketplace . ”
The campaign manager for Alison Lundergan Grimes , McConnell ’ s Democratic opponent , stated inaccurately , “ McConnell has voted to destroy Kynect – and he has said he will do it again . ”
Finally , at the conclusion of the article , the Post quotes Jahan Wilcox , spokesman for the Republican National Committee , who stated in an email that Obamacare remains a prime target for the GOP , naming opponents such as Sens . Mark Begich ( D-AK ) , Kay Hagan ( D-NC ) , and Senate candidate Michelle Nunn of Georgia . Wilcox said succinctly , “ We are thrilled Democrats are set to embrace their job-killing healthcare law . ”