President Obama often rails against “ perpetual campaigns ” in politics , but the White House is increasingly waging a partisan-edged campaign funded by taxpayers through a flood of daily emails to the public in support of his agenda .
Whether the topic is gun control or immigration reform , the White House is using taxpayer dollars for staff and equipment to promote Mr. Obama ’ s image and frequently to target his opponents in Congress for scorn through a series of e-newsletters .
“ The president thinks Washington has largely taken its eye off the ball on the most important issue facing the country , ” senior presidential adviser Dan Pfeiffer wrote in one such email last month . “ Instead of talking about how to help the middle class , too many in Congress are trying to score political points , refight old battles , and trump up phony scandals . ”
Those irresponsible people in Congress are Republicans , of course , and the “ phony ” scandals involve the Internal Revenue Service ’ s targeting of conservative groups and the House ’ s probe of the lethal terrorist attack at the U.S. diplomatic post in Benghazi , Libya .
In April , after gun control legislation failed to pass in the Senate , the White House sent supporters a mass email titled “ Shameful . ”
“ A minority of senators blocked legislation that would have made America safer and better protected our kids , ” said the message , which included a video and transcript of Mr. Obama lambasting the gun rights lobby and its allies in the Senate , mostly Republicans .
Some government watchdogs say the White House , by using federal employees and equipment to produce this partisan-themed campaign , is testing ethical boundaries .
“ They do excessively refer to the president , so as to cross a reasonable content standard for franked mail , ” said Craig Holman , government affairs lobbyist of Public Citizen . “ When government-paid emails and franked mail are allowed , such as during a non-election season , the content of the messages should still be made nonpartisan and avoid excessive references to the government official . ”
Franked mail , which is paid by the government , involves mailings of more than 500 missives from an elected official to constituents . Lawmakers often use it to boost their image .
Regulations set by the Commission on Congressional Mailing Standards bar lawmakers from unsolicited mass mailings , either email or “ snail mail , ” that criticize policy or legislation in a “ partisan , politicized or personalized ” manner .
“ No grass-roots lobbying or soliciting support for a member ’ s position on a legislative , public policy , or community issue , ” the rules state . “ Members can not generate or circulate a petition under the frank . ”
The mass mailings may not go out within 90 days of a primary or general election . But those rules don ’ t cover the executive branch , and the White House emails such as the Daily Snapshot are not “ unsolicited. ” Recipients subscribe to them simply by signing up on the White House website .
Pete Sepp , executive vice president of the National Taxpayers Union , said it ’ s questionable whether some of the White House emails would be permitted if congressional franking rules applied to them .
“ At the very least , it would arouse criticism from political opponents of a lawmaker , and perhaps a complaint from a political challenger , ” Mr. Sepp said .
As far as policing the content of White House emails , however , Mr. Sepp said there may be “ practical and political problems with making sure taxpayers are getting value from a robust debate between the branches of government rather than being forced to shell out for propaganda . ”
“ After all , Congress polices itself through the Franking Commission , which is not perfect , but who would police the White House ? The Department of Justice ? ” Mr. Sepp asked .
The White House wouldn ’ t answer questions about how much it spends on staff time or other expenses to produce the e-newsletters or maintain its mailing list , although emails typically are much lower in cost than the postage and paper for “ snail mail . ”
The number of people receiving these emails isn ’ t known , but it ’ s likely in the millions . The White House ’ s official Twitter account has more than 4 million followers , and the spinoff group from Mr. Obama ’ s 2012 campaign , Organizing for Action , has a list of supporters ’ email addresses that is said to number more than 12 million .
Some specialists on campaign finance law and ethics in government don ’ t see anything wrong with the White House ’ s high-tech effort . Meredith McGehee , policy director at the nonpartisan Campaign Legal Center in Washington , reviewed several emails from 2013 at the request of The ███ and gave the opinion that they pass ethical muster .
“ There ’ s nothing in them that asks for money , ” Ms. McGehee said . “ They don ’ t look connected to his re-election . Third , are they about policy ? Yes , they are . Now , they ’ re the president ’ s policies . But in my view , that ’ s a legitimate use of the communications office to promote the policies that the president is trying to implement . ”
Federal employees are governed by the Hatch Act , which limits their political activities , such as actively supporting or opposing a political party or a candidate for partisan political office .
Examples of political activity that would violate the Hatch Act while on duty or using government property are sending email invitations to campaign events or using a government agency ’ s Internet connections to forward email messages received from a partisan campaign or someone supporting a partisan candidate .
Making greater use of online technology to promote the president ’ s agenda isn ’ t surprising to many observers , who note that Mr. Obama ’ s 2008 and 2012 presidential campaigns were famous for introducing social media and data-mining to modern elections .
“ Technologically speaking , they ’ re head and shoulders above any other operation , ” Ms. McGehee said . “ It ’ s how they won re-election . Presidents have always had their political operative in place . The groundbreaking change here is technology has enabled any politician or any president to both outsource some of that and to do it on a scale that was unheard-of . ”
Said Mr. Sepp , “ The president ’ s communications team seems to have elevated the bully pulpit to a new , technologically advanced level . ”
Ms. McGehee said the administration ’ s use of enhanced technology poses risks in crossing ethical boundaries , especially with Organizing for Action , which is busy this summer holding events to promote the president ’ s agenda . She said she believes Organizing for Action “ has crossed the line many times . ”
“ It ’ s a very disturbing development , ” she said . “ It ’ s run by his operatives , they ’ re sending administration officials to raise money and appear at events . I think it ’ s very troubling . ”