Bobby Jindal believes the ruling creates a back door to block grants . Red states ' Medicaid power play
The Supreme Court ruling left the Democratic health care law intact — but it also left Republicans in a stronger bargaining position when it comes to Medicaid .
The ruling gives them the right to opt out of the Medicaid expansion envisioned under the law . But they know one thing : President Barack Obama wants them to stay in , and so many might just go along and take the money — after they ’ ve squeezed out as many other concessions as they can get from the feds .
( See also : Full coverage of the health care reform decision )
One of the most health care-savvy governors , Louisiana ’ s Bobby Jindal , is already wondering whether this creates a backdoor way to achieve the Holy Grail for Republican governors — turning his federal Medicaid dollars into a block grant .
“ I believe [ the feds ] can go to the states and negotiate ” to convert their Medicaid dollars into unrestricted lump payments “ for states that want to do this , ” Jindal said Friday in a call with reporters .
There ’ s a long road to get from Thursday ’ s ruling to serious negotiations , of course .
Several governors immediately responded to the ruling by hinting they won ’ t expand their Medicaid program — though most have been careful to leave themselves an out in case they decide it ’ s to their advantage .
“ I would resist any expansion of Medicaid that could result in significant tax increases or dramatic cuts to education , public safety and job creation , ” Mississippi Gov . Phil Bryant said in a statement .
Even Texas Gov . Rick Perry isn ’ t saying “ never ” to a Medicaid expansion . “ The governor ’ s office will be working with Attorney General Abbott and appropriate state agencies to determine the impact of yesterday ’ s Supreme Court decision on the state of Texas , and the appropriate course of action moving forward , ” Perry spokesman Josh Havens said in an email . “ Gov . Perry will stand up and do what is right for Texas , based on the priorities of fiscal responsibility and the best interests of Texas taxpayers . ”
Of course , there ’ s a lot of political pressure on Republicans to take advantage of a court-sanctioned escape from a major health reform provision .
Republicans on Capitol Hill are sending signals to their governors that they should use it if they know what ’ s good for them .
“ The more states that would do that , I think the better , ” said Florida Rep. Tom Rooney . “ Anything that a state can do to try to water [ health reform ] down , the better . ”
But if Republicans don ’ t sweep Washington in the fall and manage to repeal the health care law , governors could have very different pressures weighing on them when budget time comes around .
That ’ s why many experts believe that states could still come to the table . And digging in their heels now may actually strengthen their bargaining position when negotiations begin .
“ You have two sets of calculus , the fiscal calculus and the political calculus , ” said Diane Rowland , executive director of the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured . Bypassing expansion not only means leaving “ money on the table , ” she said — it also means the states would have to pay the price tag for leaving millions uninsured .
The federal government will pick up all of the extra costs of insuring everyone who joins Medicaid under the expansion , at first , and then phase down to covering 90 percent of the costs . Under the health reform law , the program — now targeted at poor kids and the low-income disabled — will cover everyone under 133 percent of the federal poverty line starting in 2014 .