The Better Care Reconciliation Act , Senate Republicans ’ plan to repeal and replace Obamacare , would if passed lead to one of the largest redistributions of income in American history , just as Obamacare itself did .
It would shift hundreds of billions of dollars from health care programs to fund sweeping tax cuts for rich Americans , radically overhaul the way the US supports elderly and disabled people , and allow states to substantially weaken insurance regulations . While it clearly does not yet have the votes it needs to pass the Senate , it could still be tweaked and make it through , and if it does , it will have a strong chance of becoming law .
Here ’ s who stands to gain if that happens , and who stands to lose .
Of the 22 million people the Congressional Budget Office projects will lose coverage under the bill , 15 million are currently covered by Medicaid , which the Senate bill would slashed by about $ 774 billion over 10 years . The cuts will grow even further after the 10 year window is up , because the bill ties Medicaid funding to a slow-growing inflation measure .
These are the poorest and most vulnerable people who ’ ll lose insurance under the bill .
In the 31 states ( and Washington , DC ) that expanded Medicaid following the Affordable Care Act , all adults earning up to 138 percent of the poverty line are eligible for Medicaid . Non-expansion states often feature much lower income thresholds to qualify for Medicaid , particularly for non-parents . The Affordable Care Act ’ s expansion , where it was adopted , effectively turned Medicaid into a universal insurance guarantee for people in poverty , whereas many people fell between the cracks before .
The BCRA would effectively end the Medicaid expansion starting in 2021 . Under current law , the federal government initially paid 100 percent of costs of Medicaid expansion beneficiaries , a percentage set to wind down to 90 percent in 2020 and stay at that level permanently . Under the Senate bill , the federal government would gradually wind down that percentage to the states ’ normal matching rates for Medicaid — rates that are as low as 50 percent in certain states .
The Congressional Budget Office has argued that this will mean no more states pursue expansion . It will also spark states with “ trigger laws ” — which end the expansion if there ’ s any reduction in the federal match — to automatically abandon it starting in 2021 . Those states are Arkansas , Arizona , Illinois , Indiana , Michigan , New Hampshire , New Mexico , and Washington .
Joan Alker , a Medicaid expert at Georgetown University , estimates that those eight states alone could lead to 3.3 million Medicaid enrollees losing coverage . But many of the other 24 states will abandon the expansion due to the lower match rate as well . And keeping it going will be even harder due to other , fundamental changes the bill makes to the Medicaid program .
Replacing Medicaid expansion for poor people are new tax credits that are much less generous than those under current law . Under Obamacare , tax credits were tethered to the cost of plans covering 70 percent of medical expenses . The BCRA would reduce that amount to plans that cover 58 percent . That means higher deductibles , copayments , and other means of cost sharing to make up for lower premiums than a more generous plan would have .
That ’ s particularly bad news for the people being kicked off Medicaid , who would get tax credits but would be forced to use them to buy coverage that could cost them thousands of additional dollars per year . Medicaid , by contrast , has minimal or no premiums , deductibles , or copays , depending on the state . It ’ s true that people in states that didn ’ t expand Medicaid would get tax credits where they currently get nothing , but the coverage they ’ d receive would be dramatically inferior compared with if their governors and legislatures had simply adopted the expansion .
Moreover , the changes to credits are also bad news for low-income people already on the exchanges , who would get smaller credits for worse coverage .
The CBO expects that because of these issues , few low-income people will even bother to use the tax credits to buy insurance . “ The deductible for a plan with an actuarial value of 58 percent would be a significantly higher percentage of income , ” the office writes . “ As a result , despite being eligible for premium tax credits , few low-income people would purchase any plan , CBO and JCT estimate . ”
Loser : disabled people , elderly people , and everyone else who relies on Medicaid
it ’ s not just people who gained coverage under Obamacare ’ s Medicaid expansion who would lose out . The law would also adopt a policy known as a “ per capita cap ” for Medicaid that would hurt all beneficiaries .
Currently , the federal government matches state spending on Medicaid , offering about $ 1 to $ 2.79 for every dollar states spend on it . Poorer states get a bigger match . But the BCRA would change all that .
The AHCA would cap the state match at a set amount of money per person . Until 2025 , the amount would grow from year to year according to the medical component of the Consumer Price Index , to account for inflation . Then it would switch to the overall CPI .
The medical component of CPI is growing more slowly than Medicaid costs are expected to grow right now , according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities , and the CPI as a whole grows far more slowly . So switching to a per capita cap and tying increases to CPI is essentially a federal cut to Medicaid amounting to hundreds of billions over 10 years . In total , the CBO finds that the bill cuts Medicaid by $ 774 billion over ten years — and by much more over a longer time horizon .
A per capita cap is at least somewhat responsive to changes in Medicaid enrollment — unlike a block grant , which gives states a set amount of money , it gives them a set amount of money for every person who ’ s eligible . But it could lead to cuts in some other ways as well . Take a state like Florida that ’ s aging fast . The BCRA includes separate caps for different groups of beneficiaries — the elderly , disabled , non-elderly adults , etc . — so states can ’ t get more money by dumping lots of seniors in favor of 24-year-olds .
However , there is still a lot of variation in cost within those categories . “ Within your elderly group , you have the young and old , 67-year-olds and 85-year-olds , and the latter are much more expensive , ” Georgetown ’ s Alker told me in March . A state like Florida , which has a large senior population , could see costs rise fast as its population ages with time . But a per capita cap wouldn ’ t keep up with that . To get around that , the state might be motivated to kick off older seniors and focus enrollment on younger ones .
There are some federal requirements as to whom states must cover , but they only go so far , and most states now provide additional coverage that they can roll back . “ You do have to cover people on Supplemental Security Income ” — a program for disabled , elderly , and blind people with low incomes — ” but a lot of folks in nursing homes [ are ] optional coverage , ” Alker continued .
This helps explain why disability rights activists are appalled by the per capita cap plan , and have been aggressively protesting the Senate and House bills ; about 50 disabled people , many in wheelchairs , were arrested for protesting outside Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ’ s office .
“ People with disabilities who rely on home- and community-based services through Medicaid — such as personal-attendant care , skilled nursing , and specialized therapies — could lose access to the services they need in order to live independently and remain in their homes , ” the Center for American Progress ’ s Rebecca Vallas , Katherine Gallagher Robbins , and Jackie Odum note .
As if that weren ’ t enough , the bill has also been changed to allow states to impose work requirements on Medicaid , a policy that would not effectively spur people to work or reduce poverty but that could meaningfully reduce access to care for poor families , and which even many conservative health care experts oppose .
Loser : people in states that take a Medicaid “ block grant , ” who could see dramatic cuts in coverage
The BCRA also allows states to forgo the per capita cap and adopt an even more drastic reform if they want to : a full block grant . States would get a fixed pot of money for Medicaid over a 10-year period , increasing every year only with the normal inflation rate . There would be absolutely no allowance for increased population , or for increased need during recessions . States would be forced to raise taxes or restrict eligibility when federal funds inevitably prove inadequate . Seniors and people with disabilities would be exempted , but would inevitably be hurt as the program itself undergoes cuts .
Why would states choose to take this much less money from the feds ? Because , as Edwin Park , Judith Solomon , and Hannah Katch at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities explain , the block grant also provides states with `` virtually unfettered flexibility to decide how to spend the federal funds they receive . … Under the block grant , states would no longer have to comply with most federal Medicaid requirements for children and adults . States could immediately cut eligibility and benefits to avoid any shortfalls and they would be allowed to carry over unused funds to the next year . ''
States would no longer be required to cover poor parents . They could charge unlimited premiums , deductibles , and copayments . They could impose enrollment caps and waiting lists , and they could cut the range of services provided to poor children .
`` Over time , states electing the block grant would be forced to use this flexibility to make increasingly draconian cuts to their Medicaid programs , as the block grant funding cuts became increasingly severe , '' Park , Solomon , and Katch write .
Like the House bill , the BCRA has a provision letting states waive essential health benefits , a key reform from the Affordable Care Act that required all insurers to cover 10 types of procedures and medical services :
Outpatient care without a hospital admission , known as ambulatory patient services
Mental health and substance use disorder services , including counseling and psychotherapy
Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices , which help people with injuries and disabilities to recover
“ This means that plans in the individual market could once again decide not to cover maternity care — like 88 percent of plans did before the Affordable Care Act passed , '' as ███ 's Sarah Kliff explains .
Poor women ( and men , for that matter ) who rely on Planned Parenthood for health services are also out of luck . If you rely on a Planned Parenthood clinic for non-abortion services , such as birth control , pregnancy and STD tests , and cancer screenings like breast exams and Pap smears , the Better Care Reconciliation Act affects you as well . For at least one year , Planned Parenthood could no longer receive Medicaid reimbursements , even though it ’ s already barred from using federal Medicaid money to get abortion services .
In more than 100 counties across the country , Planned Parenthood is the only full-service birth control clinic , so denying the organization Medicaid funds would drastically reduce access to contraception and related services for people in those regions .
So who gains from all this coverage loss , all the Medicaid cuts , and all these stingier private plans ? Mainly , rich people .
The Affordable Care Act was financed by a diverse array of tax increases , mostly targeting high earners . The single biggest tax cut included in the bill is the repeal of the 3.8 percent tax the Affordable Care Act applied to capital gains , dividend , and interest income for families with $ 250,000 or more in income ( $ 125,000 for singles ) .
Repealing that tax is a change that , by definition , only helps the rich , or at least the affluent . If you ’ re part of a married couple and , like the vast majority of Americans , make less than $ 250,000 a year , or earn more than that but have little investment income , it doesn ’ t affect you at all . The Tax Policy Center finds that repealing the tax would amount to an average tax cut of $ 0 for households in the bottom 90 percent — those making $ 208,500 or below . A handful of people in the 80th to 95th percentiles would see cuts , but the vast majority wouldn ’ t .
By contrast , members of the top 0.1 percent , who each on average make more than $ 3.75 million annually , would get an average tax cut of $ 165,090 .
Then there ’ s the 0.9 percent Medicare surtax , a hike on wage income in excess of $ 250,000 a year ( $ 200,000 for unmarried people ) . The Republican bill would repeal this surtax and , in so doing , give everyone in the bottom 90 percent an average tax cut of $ 0 , per the Tax Policy Center . The richest of the rich , the top 0.1 percent , would get an average cut of $ 30,520 .
We don ’ t have a full distributional analysis of the Republican bill yet . But the Medicare surtax and the investment tax alone combine to a tax cut of $ 195,610 for the top 0.1 percent , not far off from the $ 197,340 average cut estimated for full repeal of Obamacare . It ’ s hard to overstate what a massive windfall this is for the richest Americans :
JCT estimates AHCA repeal of NIIT & Medicare taxes on high earners still cost $ 40B/year by 2026 . Means this TPC distribution still accurate . pic.twitter.com/PGTqamJzSO — Lily Batchelder ( @ lilybatch ) May 24 , 2017
But Obamacare did not merely raise taxes on the rich . It raised taxes on a variety of health care–related businesses as well . The biggest hike was a fee on health insurance companies . Which Americans are affected by this fee right now is less clear ; insurers have said they ’ re passing on the cost to consumers in the form of higher premiums , but exactly which premiums are raised and whether insurers actually eat some of it isn ’ t totally clear .
Whether the insurance industry will come out ahead or behind from this bill is a bit unclear . On the one hand , it allows states to loosen regulations that insurers loathe , and includes billions of dollars for insurers to get them to stabilize individual insurance marketplaces . However , there ’ s a real danger that by repealing the individual mandate , the law will cause a death spiral in the individual market with devastating effects for consumers , insurers , and just about everybody else .
But you know who will definitely come out ahead ? Medical device manufacturers . These companies , which make things like X-ray and MRI machines and pacemakers ( devices sold via retail , like hearing aids , are exempt ) , have been paying a medical device excise tax as part of Obamacare , and they hate it . Senators from states with large medical device industries , including otherwise liberal members like Elizabeth Warren and Al Franken , have been pushing to repeal the tax for years . If this bill succeeds , they ’ ll finally see the tax go away for good .
So will tanning salons , which have faced a tax on their equipment due to the health risks associated with the practice . The tax served a worthwhile purpose ; as many as 400,000 cases of skin cancer every year are caused by tanning , But the industry has been lobbying against the measure since before Obamacare was enacted , and will get a big win should the BCRA pass .
Meanwhile , pharmaceuticals will enjoy the repeal of a tax on brand-name drugs . Like the medical device and tanning taxes , it raises a pretty modest amount of money ( about $ 20 billion over 10 years ) compared with the taxes on rich individuals , but it ’ s a major irritant to a powerful industry that the BCRA will quickly eliminate .
The Senate health bill : poor people pay more for worse insurance