“ I want everyone to know I 'm 100 percent behind [ the American Health Care Act ] , ” President Trump said today . “ The press has not been speaking properly about how great this is going to be . I watch , I say , ‘ That ’ s not the bill we ’ re passing . ’
But does Trump really know what ’ s in the bill he ’ s passing , or trying to pass ?
With the help of ███ ’ s Jacob Gardenswartz , I collected and read absolutely everything Donald Trump has said publicly about the AHCA . The transcripts cover speeches , rallies , meetings with congressional leaders , interviews with friendly news outlets , and , of course , tweets .
I learned a few things from the exercise . First , Trump has a very limited set of talking points on health care , and he repeats the same words and sentences constantly — his comfort zone on both the issue and the legislation is very narrow .
Second , Trump seems confused about what the GOP bill does . It is possible , of course , that he knows more than he is saying , and has decided to simply say things that aren ’ t true . But it ’ s also possible he ’ s being spun by more ideologically motivated advisers ( that ’ s certainly the narrative pro-Trump outlets like Breitbart are pushing ) .
Third , Trump has bought into a caricature of Obamacare ’ s condition that heavily informs his thinking on both the politics and the policy of the AHCA . This could prove more consequential than people realize .
The AHCA does literally none of the things Trump says it does
On March 8 , Trump laid out his case for the American Health Care Act . Here ’ s what he said :
It follows the guidelines I laid out in my congressional address : a plan that will lower costs , expand choices , increase competition , and ensure health care access for all Americans . This will be a plan where you can choose your doctor . This will be a plan where you can choose your plan .
These talking points are familiar enough that it ’ s easy to let them fade into the background . But it ’ s worth taking them seriously . This is Trump ’ s case for the bill he ’ s backing . Does he know that literally every single one of these points is wrong ?
The AHCA doesn ’ t lower costs . Apples to apples , the Brookings Institution estimates “ that premiums would be 13 % ( ~ $ 1,000 ) higher under the AHCA than under current law , holding plan generosity and the individual market age distribution fixed at their current law levels. ” To the extent that the AHCA sees lower premiums , it ’ s because older people can ’ t afford care and younger people buy sparer plans . That is no one ’ s idea of lowering costs .
The rest of the problems flow from there . Most people will have fewer affordable choices under the AHCA because their subsidies will be so much smaller ( and many people will have no affordable choice at all , and so will go uninsured ) . Competition is likely to fall as the marketplaces shrink — fewer consumers wielding smaller tax credits will not prove an attractive market to insurers .
The idea that the AHCA will “ ensure health care access for all Americans ” is sufficiently absurd that I ’ m not even going to spend time on it .
But the idea that it will let you choose your doctor and plan is more interesting — it seems entirely possible to me that Trump doesn ’ t realize the limited choices people complain about in Obamacare are the result of people being unable to afford more generous plans with broader networks , and it seems likely to me that he doesn ’ t know the AHCA will make that problem worse , or why conservative health reformers think that ’ s a good thing .
You all remember , you can keep your doctor , you can keep your plan . I know , Greg , you ’ ve never heard that , right ? But it was said many , many times , and it turned out to be not true . This is the time we ’ re going to get it done .
This is either an extremely foolish thing to say or it is the comment of a man who doesn ’ t realize that the plan he ’ s backing would , in a stroke , mean millions of people could no longer afford the subsidized insurance they were using , and would react with fury and surprise when they realize they were betrayed .
The absolute constant in Trump ’ s health care rhetoric is the idea that Obamacare is dead no matter what he does .
“ Remember , folks , ” he said in Nashville , “ if we do n't do anything , Obamacare is gone . It 's not like , oh gee , it 's going to be wonderful in three years . It 's gone . It 's gone . It 's gone . Not working . It 's gone . ”
He went even further at a meeting of the Republican Study Committee :
`` I also want people to know that Obamacare is dead . It ’ s a dead health care plan . It ’ s not even a health care plan , frankly . And I watched the architect of the plan , yesterday , I watched the old clip where he said the American people are stupid to have voted for it . I watched Bill Clinton saying this is the craziest thing I ’ ve ever seen . And only because everyone knows it ’ s on its last dying feet , the fake news is trying to say good things about it , okay . Fake media . And there is no good news about Obamacare . Obamacare is dead . And unless we gave it massive subsidies in a year from now , or six months from now , it ’ s not even going to be here . So when they say “ more people are on the plan , ” there ’ s not even going to be any people on the plan . ''
If your only trusted source of information on Obamacare were the furthest reaches of the conservative press , this is the impression of the law you would have . But it ’ s not true .
In December , Standard & Poor ’ s released a report arguing that the 2017 premium hikes were a `` one-time pricing correction , '' and that insurers were poised `` to start reversing '' their losses under the program . Similarly , the Congressional Budget Office finds that “ the nongroup market would probably be stable in most areas ” even if Obamacare were left untouched .
“ Most areas ” is , of course , an important caveat — there are definitely areas where Obamacare ’ s marketplaces need more competition , better risk adjustment , or some other method of premium stabilization . It ’ s a big , complex law , and it requires tweaking in response to changing conditions and more information .
But Trump ’ s view is much grimmer than that . He thinks “ unless we gave it massive subsidies in a year from now , or six months from now , it ’ s not even going to be here , ” and argued that “ there ’ s not even going to be any people on the plan ” unless he does something . This is flatly nonsense , but it might be nonsense Trump believes .
The irony , of course , is that the AHCA will destabilize individual insurance markets further , and lead to far greater coverage losses than if Obamacare were left untouched . His point about subsidies is particularly notable , given that the AHCA ’ s 10 percent premium decreases rely not just on older Americans fleeing the market and younger Americans buying plans with less coverage , but on $ 80 billion in subsidies from the new Patient and State Stability Fund to keep insurance markets stable .
GOP health care plan : The more you need , the less you get