When the Congressional Budget Office published its score of the Republican Obamacare replacement bill , the American Health Care Act , something that should have already been obvious to the GOP leadership became even more painfully so .
And yet House Speaker Paul Ryan and his team for some reason didn ’ t take the opportunity to articulate it .
What was obvious from the lede of every mainstream media story on the CBO ’ s scoring , namely that the bill would “ drop ” some 24 million Americans off their health insurance , including 14 million in its first year , was that the CBO ’ s score was a guilty verdict on Obamacare — not Ryan ’ s bill .
How so ? Ryan managed to articulate a little of it . Speaking with Fox News ’ Bret Baier on Monday evening , Ryan made the key point but didn ’ t quite sell it like he needed to :
“ We ’ re saying the government ’ s not going to force people to buy something that they don ’ t want to buy , ” he said . “ And if we end an ObamaCare mandate that says you must buy this government one-size-fits-all plan , guess what ? People aren ’ t going to buy that. ” Ryan said “ of course ” the CBO is suggesting that if the government isn ’ t going to “ make people do something they don ’ t want to do , they ’ re not going to buy it . ”
All true as it goes , but that ’ s not quite the indictment of Obamacare it needs to be . Ryan needed — still needs — to say that the CBO just admitted some 14 million Americans are being forced to buy crappy , overpriced health insurance because of a tyrannical , un-American nanny state overreach which is unsustainable in a free society , and the CBO ’ s score proves the moral imperative of reversing that overreach and insuring that government never attempts it again .
Ryan is simply too much of a policy wonk to make such a statement , and that ’ s one reason why he seems to have so much trouble connecting to a Republican base that is animated a whole lot more by principle than wonkery .
Ryan and his team did make good points about the CBO scoring — namely , that this bill would bring deficit reduction compared to Obamacare , that it bends down the cost of insurance premiums and that the bill almost surely brings competition back into a market in which a third of the counties in America operate under a health insurance monopoly . And despite a lot of the caterwauling about the bill on both sides of the aisle , it probably does deliver significant improvement to one-sixth of the American economy . Avik Roy ’ s piece at Forbes on the bill and its CBO score is well worth a read as a primer on the policy effects of Ryancare , and readers of it might well conclude the bill is supportable .
But let ’ s be honest here . As a political exercise , this whole program is a mistake .
Frankly , the GOP leadership needs to pay heed to what Donald Trump has been telling them . Trump has said time and time again the best political move Republicans in Congress can make is nothing . Obamacare is collapsing ; let it collapse and , once it does , it will take the Democrat party down with it .
As it stands , the only real success Obamacare has had has been to put more Americans on Medicaid by expanding that program to cover working-class people who used to have health insurance through the private sector until stupid government regulations drove the cost beyond their means . As Roy notes , the CBO scoring of Ryancare assumes five million people will go off Medicaid and become uninsured if the bill should replace Obamacare .
Think about that for a minute . Medicaid is free . Why would five million people choose to drop free health insurance if the individual mandate in Obamacare were to be repealed ? There is but one answer — Medicaid sucks , and it lacks value to those who have it .
Which is true . Most doctors won ’ t take Medicaid because the paperwork for reimbursement is high and the reimbursement amounts are low . Medicaid is therefore the illusion of health insurance , which is why multiple studies of healthcare outcomes have shown there is negligible difference between people on Medicaid and people who are uninsured .
And signing millions of people up for illusory health insurance is the Democrat party ’ s grand achievement justifying their destruction of the private health insurance market .
The AHCA is supposed to be the first act of a three-act play , followed by a host of regulatory changes DHHS Secretary Tom Price will make and a second bill containing those policy reforms that supposedly can ’ t be passed through the budget reconciliation process . Sen. Tom Cotton ( R-Arkansas ) , appearing Monday on the Hugh Hewitt radio show , put paid to this strategy…
Hugh , there is no three-phase process . There is no three-step plan . That is just political talk . It ’ s just politicians engaging in spin . This is why . Step one is a bill that can pass with 51 votes in the Senate . That ’ s what we ’ re working on right now . Step two , as yet unwritten regulations by Tom Price , which is going to be subject to court challenge , and therefore , perhaps the whims of the most liberal judge in America . But step three , some mythical legislation in the future that is going to garner Democratic support and help us get over 60 votes in the Senate . If we had those Democratic votes , we wouldn ’ t need three steps . We would just be doing that right now on this legislation altogether . That ’ s why it ’ s so important that we get this legislation right , because there is no step three . And step two is not completely under our control .
I honestly believe Ryan et al . mean well with this bill , a belief I have no doubt most of our readers don ’ t share . It doesn ’ t matter . We already know that the Democrats have learned to weaponize their failure to govern , and by trying to fix the damage they ’ ve done with Obamacare Ryan and the GOP majority will merely take ownership of the failure . They ’ re trying to defuse the bomb , and they ’ ll be blown up in the attempt .
Take Trump ’ s advice and let it burn . Drag the Democrats into the conflagration and let them be roasted .
But not the public . Let the public escape . Let the market save the health insurance industry . It isn ’ t all that hard ; it simply requires a willingness to do what it takes to win .
Deem whatever you want to fit within the budget process , and do four things .
Pair an interstate health insurance market with a nominal half-cent “ standardization fee ” or some such trifle ( which you can repeal next year ) , and call that sufficient to pass insurance across state lines through reconciliation . Equalize the tax treatment of individual and employer-based health insurance , which would make insurance portable and eliminate a host of problems in the market ; that ’ s tax policy , so it fits in the budget process . Create an opening to restore health savings accounts to the market , allow every financial institution in America to offer them as a financial product , and allow parents a tax credit to build HSA ’ s for their children ; the long-term effects of doing so are to create an entire generation of Americans who think completely differently about health insurance , and in the short term that makes the whole policy passable through reconciliation . And create a larger opening for people to buy group insurance outside of employment , otherwise known as association health coverage ; the difference in price between individual and group insurance would save untold millions of Americans lots of money and spin off lots of other benefits . How to shoehorn that into the reconciliation process ? Who knows ? Who cares ?
Doing those four things would create cracks in Obamacare the market could seep through and save the entire health care sector when the status quo crumbles to dust in a year or two . None represent a comprehensive health care reform , which is a good thing — comprehensive reform of anything at the federal level is a dubious possibility in the best of circumstances , and it certainly isn ’ t possible when the media and the Democrats are invested in sniping from the trees rather than helping to fix what they destroyed .
Luckily , it isn ’ t needed . Government can ’ t fix the insurance market ; all government can do is destroy it . It so happens that ’ s what the Democrats are counting on . Obamacare was designed to collapse into single-payer socialized medicine , so they ’ re going to do everything they can to resist efforts to alter the current trajectory .
Don ’ t fall into that trap . Just ram through the four reforms mentioned above and let them germinate . In a year or two , an Obamacare repeal won ’ t even be the Holy Grail ; even the Democrats will agree it ’ s an obsolete failure .