While the Catholic Health Association - which represents the nation 's Catholic hospitals - has long been an ally of President Obama , on Friday they officially came out in opposition to the President 's controversial contraception mandate in a letter sent to his Department of Health and Human Services .
President Obama had thought that he had put the matter to rest with a `` compromise '' months ago , the Catholic Health Association has just now spoken up against it .
In a letter to the federal Health and Human Services department , the hospital group said the compromise initially seemed to be `` a good first step '' but that examination of the details proved disappointing . The plan would be `` unduly cumbersome '' to carry out and `` unlikely to adequately meet the religious liberty concerns '' of all its members , the group said .
In its letter , the group said the government should either broaden the exemption for religious employers , or pay directly for the birth control coverage .
While the group had long been believed to be less influenced by the Catholic bishops who steadfastly opposed the contraception mandate , this flips the Administration on its head .
This comes in the wake of the announcement in late May that major Catholic groups are filing a lawsuit against the Obama Administration over the birth control mandate , setting up a legal showdown over religious liberty .
Obama 's `` compromise , '' of course , was not actually a compromise at all . Shifting the mandate from employers to insurance companies does n't mean a thing . Money is fungible , and while it means that Catholic institutions would n't have to directly pay to subsidize birth control , it still means that individual Catholics are paying for it .
What this highlights is the broader problem of government-defined insurance . Obamacare forces everyone in America to purchase health insurance , which means that the definition of `` health insurance '' is up for debate . The White House wants the minimum requirements for coverage to mean that every single plan - both for men and women - to cover birth control . This is silly , of course , but it 's going to set off a lobbying firestorm , as every drug company and device manufacturer will lobby the Obama Administration to get their treatment covered under the definition of minimum insurance .
Up until now , this was a state-based problem . But with the federal government setting minimum requirements for insurance , every single person in America will have to follow federal rules for minimum mandatory insurance .