Nearly every economic analysis of the health care industry rests on the observation that individually purchased private insurance is not a viable business model for providing medical services . Such insurance is broadly affordable only if most policy holders are healthy most of the time .
The fundamental problem is that insurers can often identify specific people — like those with serious pre-existing conditions — who are likely to need expensive care . Any company that issued policies to such people at affordable rates would be driven into bankruptcy , its most profitable customers lured away by competitors offering lower rates made possible by selling only to healthy people .
Economists call this the adverse-selection problem . Because of it , unregulated private markets for individual insurance can not accommodate the least healthy — those who most desperately need health insurance .
Many countries solve this problem by having the government provide health insurance for all . In some , like Britain , the government employs the care providers . Others , like France , reimburse private practitioners — as does the Medicare program for older Americans .
The United States probably would have adopted one of those models had it not been for historical accidents that led to widespread adoption of employer-provided plans in the 1940s . To control costs of World War II mobilization , regulators capped growth of private-sector wages , making it hard for employers to hire desperately needed workers .
But because many fringe benefits weren ’ t capped , employers spied a loophole : they could offer additional benefits , like health insurance . Its cost was deductible as a business expense , and in 1943 the Internal Revenue Service ruled that its value was not taxable as employee income . By 1953 , employer health plans covered 63 percent of workers , versus only 9 percent in 1940 .
Eligibility for favorable tax treatment hinged on the plans being available to all employees , a feature that mitigated a serious defect . Although hiring workers with pre-existing conditions meant paying higher premiums , tight labor markets made many employers willing to bear that cost , because insurance was an effective recruiting tool .
Employer plans are thus a significant improvement over individual private insurance , but they are still deeply flawed . If you lose your job , you can lose your coverage . This problem has been cast into sharp relief by the persistent high unemployment in the wake of the financial crisis . In no other industrial country do we see communities organizing bake sales to help defray the cost of an uninsured neighbor ’ s cancer treatments .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
The decline in the number of workers covered by employer plans began long before the recent crisis . According to census data , 65 percent of workers had employer-backed plans in 2000 , but only 55 percent were covered by 2010 . This decline has been driven in part by rapid increases in health care costs .
Economists agree that no matter how those costs are apportioned on paper , any money spent on employer-sponsored plans ultimately comes at the expense of wages . Real wages have risen little in recent decades , and the prospect that they will keep stagnating portends further erosions in coverage . So even if we ignore the inherent failings of the employer model , it simply won ’ t be able to deliver broad health coverage .
Modeled after proposals advanced by the Heritage Foundation , the American Enterprise Institute and other conservative research organizations in the 1990s , the main provisions of the president ’ s health care law were intended to eliminate the most salient problems associated with the current system .
One provision establishes insurance exchanges , where participating companies must offer coverage to all customers , irrespective of pre-existing conditions . Another imposes a financial penalty on those who fail to obtain coverage — the individual mandate . And a third prescribes subsidies to make insurance more affordable for low-income families . ( The Massachusetts plan engineered by Mitt Romney as governor in 2006 took an almost identical approach . )
WITHOUT each of its three main provisions , the law won ’ t work . The individual mandate , of course , is the most debated . Critics denounce it as a violation of our liberty . Paradoxically , the slim majority on the court that affirmed the mandate ’ s constitutionality seemed to embrace that view , likening the mandate to requiring citizens to eat broccoli for their own good . The court defended the constitutionality of the mandate by calling it a tax rather than a penalty .
But that interpretation will strike many economists as a misreading of the mandate ’ s purpose . It isn ’ t that people should buy health insurance because it would be good for them . Rather , failure to do so would cause significant harm to others . Society will always step in to provide care — though in much more costly and often delayed and ineffective forms — to the uninsured who fall ill. To claim the right not to buy health insurance is thus to assert a right to impose enormous costs on others . Many legal scholars insist that the Constitution guarantees no such right .
No one can be sure how the law will play out . But its critics would be unwise to assume that it would have been easy to draft superior legislation had the law been overturned . Any new attempt would have taken the employer-based system as a starting point .
What ’ s important now is how the health care sector will evolve under the new framework . And here , there are grounds for optimism . While the effects of the court ’ s Medicaid restrictions aren ’ t entirely clear , the law will certainly extend coverage to tens of millions who now lack it . In addition , new insurance exchanges will provide a broader array of care options . Increased competition tends to hold costs in check , even while enhancing service quality , and there ’ s no reason to expect the situation in health care to be different .
Many scholars have argued that private , nonprofit institutions like the Mayo Clinic are the most effective model of providing care , and not only because they can better coordinate across many specialties . They are also less likely than traditional fee-for-service practices to prescribe unnecessary tests and procedures . Given those advantages , such institutions , or ones that mimic them , might have spread even without health care reform . After all , employers have an interest in providing cost-effective care for their workers .
But no matter which model proves most effective , it is likely to spread faster in the competitive environment established by the insurance exchanges .
The new law will hardly be the final word on these issues . Though it takes tentative first steps on cost control , government budgets will be decimated unless we do much more to reduce inflation in medical services . And in Medicare , many tough decisions remain to be made about end-of-life interventions , and whether Medicare should become an optional form of coverage for those who aren ’ t elderly .
The point worth celebrating is that last week ’ s ruling will at last enable our distinctly dysfunctional health care system to evolve into something better .