Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius has repeatedly rebuffed requests by House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan to testify on ObamaCare implementation , ███ has learned , raising more questions about what the administration knew about problems with the site in advance of the troubled launch .
Republicans earlier had complained that Sebelius was not available for an Energy and Commerce Committee hearing set for Thursday . But , after her office cited a scheduling conflict with that date , the secretary is now expected to appear before the committee next Wednesday .
The decision comes as the HealthCare.gov site 's failures have attracted widespread attention , and demands from President Obama to fix them . Yet Ryan , R-Wis. , began asking Sebelius to appear before the House Budget Committee well before the rocky launch on Oct. 1 , in order to provide more details on how the law would be implemented .
Ryan first reached out to Sebelius ’ office on Aug. 15 , asking her to testify on Sept. 11 . HHS staff indicated to Ryan the secretary would not be available .
In another letter on Aug. 22 , Ryan asked Sebelius to provide an organizational chart of the department ’ s implementation efforts . The letter also asked that the HHS produce a list of the offices involved in implementation , the number of full-time employees involved , and all relevant spending items .
Ryan asked the secretary to provide the requested materials by Sept. 11 , but the HHS has yet to do so .
Ryan sent another letter on Tuesday to Sebelius ’ office , asking her to testify again and to provide more information on the logistics behind the Obama administration ’ s so-called “ tech surge ” to work out the problems with the ObamaCare website .
“ Your continued silence on these important inquiries after refusing to testify raises serious questions about the administration ’ s commitment to transparency and accountability , ” Ryan said .
Sebelius is scheduled to testify before the House Committee on Energy and Commerce on Oct. 30 about the problems plaguing the health law ’ s website , after repeated requests from that committee .