With this Ebola epidemic burning on in West Africa — and with no vaccine or cure yet on the market — there has been a lot of discussion about speeding up the drug testing and approval process to get therapies to patients faster .
Just this week , the drug company GlaxoSmithKline announced it will take the unprecedented step of starting mass production on a vaccine that has only just begun being tested in humans . That news followed the WHO 's groundbreaking decision that it 's ethical to try unproven and experimental treatments on people in this public health emergency .
Some have said that this focus and push to discover Ebola therapies might be the silver lining of this epidemic . The companies who make Ebola drugs have said they will do all they can to bring their therapies — if effective — to those who need them . But the reality is that the road to market is a long , tedious , and lined with failure .
Getting a drug or vaccine to market in the US generally follows this pathway :
So the intervention needs to go through three phases of clinical trials in people . But before testing it humans , researchers backing the drug or treatment first need to hand over really promising data from animal studies to the FDA and get the regulator 's approval to start recruiting patients . That 's called the `` pre-clinical '' phase of drug development . It can take a few years , and for every 5,000 compounds discovered at this stage , only about five are allowed to be tried in humans .
If that happens , the researchers need to find hundreds and then thousands of volunteers to participate in clinical trials : in the first phase , they check for safety in a small group of healthy people to make sure the drug is n't immediately making anyone sick or worse , and to figure out how much of the drug people can tolerate .
Then , in a larger group of participants , they test to make sure the treatment actually delivers on its promise and monitor how well it works against the best-available therapies or a placebo . The third phase involves an even bigger group — up to 3,000 people — and , again , researchers compare how the drug works against other treatments on the market and carefully analyze safety data .
This entire drug development process takes an average of 12 years , and it costs between $ 100 million and $ 1 billion .
If the drug makes it through phase three , the data are submitted to the FDA for approval . Only one in five therapies make it this far , and it usually takes the FDA a couple of years to consider the data and bring the drug to market , if it so chooses .
The US has some of the most stringent standards in the world when it comes to getting new medicines to people , and for this reason , the overwhelming majority of promising drugs in animal studies never even make it to phase one trials , let alone past all the regulatory hurdles .
This entire drug development process takes an average of 12 years , and costs between $ 100 million and $ 1 billion .
For its part , GSK is already starting to manufacture an Ebola vaccine that only has promising animal studies behind it , but has n't even been fully tested in humans . The company has said it 'll have 10,000 doses stockpiled should the science for the vaccine check out . But it 's only in phase one , which you know by now , is a long way away from the end of the development road .
When ███ spoke to company representatives , they explained that the normal pathway for bringing a vaccine to market takes 10 years , and that they were already three years into the process with the Ebola vaccine . While this crisis has focused attention on Ebola drug development and helped to galvanize resources , they were not yet clear on what would happen after a successful phase one trial and how much longer it would take to scale-up manufacturing and get the vaccine approved for use in people .
There 's a chance that the usual process might be condensed or phases of clinical testing skipped , since Ebola is an unusually deadly pathogen and will be treated differently by regulators . But even in dire situations , developing safe , new therapies takes time , and unfortunately , mostly ends in failure .
We 're only in phase one with the Ebola vaccine . If data look promising , hopefully regulators will find ways to make sure it 's not seven more years until we can prevent another Ebola epidemic .