Mitt Romney and his running mate , Paul Ryan , are accusing President Obama of hurting seniors by slashing $ 716 billion out of Medicare .
Obama , meanwhile , is attacking Ryan for wanting to `` end Medicare as we know it . ''
These heated exchanges come as both sides look for ways to wring savings out of Medicare before the entitlement program runs out of money . They just differ on who will pick up the tab .
Obama , through his health reform law , cuts the rates of providers , including hospitals and insurers . Ryan , on the other hand , wants to turn Medicare over to the private sector by giving senior citizens vouchers to buy coverage from insurance providers .
Both plans include spending caps . But under Obama 's Affordable Care Act , providers could see larger decreases if costs grow faster than projected , while Ryan shifts any additional expenses to beneficiaries .
`` It 's a different philosophy on who should be bearing the burdens , '' said Marilyn Moon , a former public trustee of Medicare who heads the health program at the American Institutes for Research , a social science research group .
The future of Medicare has come into the spotlight as the two parties battle for the crucial voting block of senior citizens . Both sides are trying to come up with ways to curb the entitlement program before it ca n't afford to cover all its costs , which is expected to happen in 2024 .
Obama 's health reform saves money by reducing payments to hospitals , skilled nursing facilities , home health care agencies and , in particular , insurers who provide Medicare Advantage managed care plans . It also creates the Independent Payment Advisory Board , which is charged with keeping Medicare costs under control .
The law specifies that benefits can not be cut to reduce expenses .
Ryan 's budget proposal would retain a traditional fee-for-service Medicare option , but would also allow insurers to offer seniors a range of choices . At a minimum , the companies would have to provide benefits equivalent to traditional Medicare .
The government would provide a so-called `` premium support '' payment that would cover the cost of either traditional Medicare or the second-least expensive insurer 's plan , whichever is less . Seniors can pay for additional coverage , such as dental or vision benefits .
Romney has not adopted his running mate 's plan , but said it `` makes important strides in the right direction . ''
Consumer advocates worry that seniors would wind up paying much more for care under the Ryan plan . They point to a Congressional Budget Office report that shows spending would be between 35 % and 42 % lower for new enrollees under the Ryan plan versus traditional Medicare .
`` By restructuring the program , it could have a very harmful effect on beneficiaries in the long run , '' said Edwin Park , vice president for health policy at the left-leaning Center on Budget and Policy Priorities .
Supporters of the Ryan plan , meanwhile , say that senior citizens will end up sacrificing under the president 's health reform law . That 's because many providers could stop accepting Medicare if rates are slashed too low . Even the Medicare actuary has said the cuts are unsustainable .
`` They may have traditional Medicare , but they wo n't have a doctor , '' said Rea Hederman , research fellow at the conservative Heritage Foundation .