Sen. Ted Cruz could soon be buying his family 's health care coverage through the Affordable Care Act , a law the Republican presidential candidate has vowed to repeal should he win the White House .
Sen. Cruz formally launched his presidential campaign on Monday , and his wife , Heidi Cruz , began an unpaid leave of absence from her job as a managing director in the Houston office of Goldman Sachs . That meant the family would soon lose access to health insurance through Mrs. Cruz 's job , triggering a need for the Cruz family to find a new policy .
The first-term senator from Texas said he is looking at options available on a health insurance exchange , or a clearinghouse of policies available to Americans who do n't receive coverage through their employers . The Democrats ' health care law , also known as Obamacare , created the exchange system .
Under an amendment to the law crafted by Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R-Iowa ) , the government can only offer members of Congress and their staff health care insurance that 's sold through an exchange .
`` We will presumably go on the exchange and sign up for health care , and we 're in the process of transitioning over to do that , '' Cruz said in an interview with The Des Moines Register .
Cruz could go without insurance , or his family could get its coverage directly from an insurance company at what would likely be a far higher rate than is available via an exchange . Doing so would mean Cruz would not get the contribution from his employer to help offset the full cost of his coverage .
Asked about his plans for health care insurance on Tuesday , Cruz 's staff initially pointed reporters to his interview with the Register . Several hours later , Rick Tyler , a Cruz spokesman , said Cruz and his family had not yet settled on an option or the financial implications of such a choice .
`` Let 's let them make a decision on what coverage they 'll get before we start speculating on every variable , '' Mr. Tyler said .
Cruz has been a vocal critic of the health care law and , in 2013 , set in motion a partial government shutdown as part of an unsuccessful effort to choke off funding for the law .
In his campaign kick-off speech , Cruz pledged to dismantle the law . His advisers said that remains his plan and pointed to his comments to the newspaper from Iowa , which hosts the lead-off caucuses in early 2016 .
`` I believe in 2017 , a new president , a Republican president , will sign legislation repealing every word of it , '' Cruz told the Register .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Democrats highlighted that Cruz is now enrolling in a program he frequently criticizes .
`` The Affordable Care Act , by design , helps Americans who have gaps in employment get coverage , and it 's working , '' Democratic National Committee spokeswoman Holly Shulman said . `` We encourage others to follow presidential candidate Ted Cruz to www.healthcare.gov and get covered . ''