As lawmakers head into talks to avoid the fiscal cliff , doctors are watching closely .
Thanks to bad timing , the Medicare fees that doctors are paid for treating seniors has gotten tangled up in the same high-stakes deal-making to avert the fiscal cliff -- across the board tax hikes and spending cuts that kick in January .
If Congress does nothing , doctors will be reimbursed 27 % less than current rates , starting Jan. 1 . That could spur thousands of doctors to stop seeing Medicare patients .
It 's not a situation any politician wants to see . So , Congress will likely find a way to keep rates from going up in 2013 , experts from both political parties say . The question is when and how .
`` This is something that 's very bipartisan , '' said Ariel Gonzalez , director of health and family advocacy at AARP . `` Folks on both sides of the aisle think ( the annual rate cuts ) need to be scrapped . ''
The problem stems from a 1997 law aimed at cutting deficits by tying the rates doctors are paid for Medicare patients to GDP growth . It did n't impact doctor rates for a few years , but in 2002 when doctors faced a 5 % pay cut , they were up in arms .
Congress overrode the cuts that year , passing what 's known in Washington as the `` doc fix . '' It 's become a Washington must-do every year since .
Each year , the doc fix price tag gets bigger , topping $ 25 billion this year , according to the Congressional Budget Office . But the cost of getting rid of it , without other reforms , could top $ 300 billion .
That 's why stake holders , from the AARP to the doctors ' lobbying group the American Medical Association want Congress to permanently rework the formula in a way that 's fair to doctors and taxpayers , who ultimately pick up the tab for Medicare .
`` The AMA has consistently urged Congress to eliminate the broken Medicare physician payment formula , '' said AMA President Jeremy A. Lazarus . Getting into a better payment system , he said , will help physicians offer more innovative patient care .
There 's no way that lawmakers will figure out a broader solution by the end of the year , say Washington insiders . For now , lawmakers must find one more short-term fix .
But that 's tough , because they ca n't agree on how to come up with the $ 25 billion extra to pay doctors without hiking federal deficits .
Democrats have talked about raiding a fund set aside for withdrawing troops from overseas . And Republicans have said they want the money to come from cuts to entitlement spending , such as the rates at which hospitals are reimbursed for Medicare services .
Finding money could prove particularly tricky this time . Lawmakers are in heated talks over how to raise more revenue and cut spending to stop the nation from going over the fiscal cliff , which would trigger the massive $ 7 trillion worth of spending cuts and tax increases over a decade .
With so much attention focused on the fiscal cliff , it 's possible Congress misses its deadline for doctors . When that happened in the past , the agency running Medicare has delayed paying doctors to ensure they get their full reimbursement , said Paul Van de Water , with the liberal Center on Budget and Policy Priorities .
`` We want to make sure doctors are paid promptly for the services they deliver , '' Van de Water said . `` It creates needless uncertainty on the part of doctors . ''