This is the web version of VoxCare , a daily newsletter from ███ on the latest twists and turns in America ’ s health care debate . Like what you ’ re reading ? Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox here .
Old and busted : 1115 waivers . New hotness : 1332 waivers . ( Sorry , Medicaid fans . As a reminder , 1115 waivers are what states could use to change their Medicaid programs , introduce work requirements , etc . )
Now you 're going to want to get up to speed on Obamacare 's 1332 waivers . Alongside their Medicaid brethren , they 're where some of the big health policymaking could happen now that Obamacare repeal appears dead .
The Affordable Care Act created the waiver program to give states an opportunity to pursue their own health care programs as alternatives to the health care law . States had wide latitude in the specifics of their programs , but they have to meet some strict requirements : Namely , their plans ca n't increase the number of uninsured people , ca n't reduce benefits , and ca n't increase costs for customers or the government .
The best-known 1332 waiver was in the works in Vermont , which sought to create a universal single-player plan but eventually dropped it when the state decided the finances would n't work .
That showed us one possible end of the spectrum . But now , under the Trump administration , Republican-led states are starting to give us a better idea of how they could use waivers to make Obamacare more conservative .
The Wall Street Journal and Washington Examiner have good summaries of Iowa 's new proposal . It might be the most ambitious to be submitted to the feds so far ; other states have largely limited their proposals to reinsurance , which would help insurers recoup their costs to stabilize the insurance market .
Standardize the benefits for plans on the marketplace , eliminating the tiered bronze , silver , gold , and platinum options under Obamacare
Transition from the existing subsidies , which limit your premiums to a percentage of your income , to a flat dollar amount based on income and age
Eliminate cost-sharing reductions , the law 's payments to health insurers that compensate them for reducing out-of-pocket costs for their lower-income customers
Create a reinsurance program for insurers of high-cost enrollees , in part using money saved from the CSRs
Some of the changes — particularly reinsurance — could have stabilizing effects , Larry Levitt at the Kaiser Family Foundation told me . Others , such as the changes to the subsidies , would not necessarily change the dynamics of the market but would still have a significant impact on the people buying coverage .
`` Fixed-dollar subsidies shift the risk of higher premiums , and the benefit of lower premiums , to consumers , '' he said . `` Iowa ’ s estimates of how consumers would be affected are very sensitive to what happens to premiums . ''
███-mark Sign up for the newsletter VoxCare Email ( required ) Zip Code By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the data transfer policy . For more newsletters , check out our newsletters page Subscribe
This is also where the new administration comes in . Obamacare does create these guardrails to prevent states from gutting benefits and/or coverage under the waivers , but there is some administrative leeway in how to interpret the proposals .
The Trump administration is going to be looking for ways to give states what they want .
Trump officials `` can interpret 1332 waiver authority in ways that differ from the Obama administration , '' KFF 's analysts wrote earlier this summer . They added of another proposal : `` A looser interpretation of these guardrails may permit approval of some of these changes . ''
That was in reference to Oklahoma 's emerging waiver . If Iowa is turning up the volume on 1332s , Oklahoma wants to take it to 11 .
The proposal has n't been finalized or submitted yet ; in the interim , Oklahoma has submitted a narrower plan focused on reinsurance . But these are some of the bigger possibilities that a state task force laid out earlier this year :
Change subsidy eligibility from 100-400 percent of the federal poverty level to 0-300 percent , while standardizing subsidies based on age and income
Create two benefit options : a standard plan that covers 80 percent of medical costs , and a high-deductible plan that covers much less but can be used along with a health savings account
Scale back the `` essential health benefits '' that plans are required to cover under Obamacare
Allow insurers to charge older enrollees five times as much as younger enrollees , up from three times under Obamacare
Explore using either high-risk pools or reinsurance , or a hybrid thereof , to cover high-cost patients
That 's just the start . You should read the proposal , still under development , in its entirety to get a better sense of where the state wants to go .
There are still a lot of details to fill in , which makes it difficult to fully evaluate the plan and whether it would even work under the Obamacare restrictions . But it gives us a sense of how ambitious states could be now that Congress has move on from health care .
Opioids and Medicaid expansion . Some Obamacare critics have alleged this year that expanding Medicaid worsened the opioid crisis . Emma Sandoe and Andrew Goodman-Bacon looked at the numbers for Health Affairs .
`` Five governors to testify at hearing on bipartisan healthcare bill '' : `` Five governors will testify in front of the Senate Health Committee next month on ways to fix ObamaCare . Govs . Charlie Baker ( R-Mass . ) , Steve Bullock ( D-Mont . ) , Bill Haslam ( R-Tenn. ) , Gary Herbert ( R-Utah ) and John Hickenlooper ( D-Colo. ) will testify at a hearing on Sept . 7 . '' —Jessie Hellman , the Hill
`` Five governors will testify in front of the Senate Health Committee next month on ways to fix ObamaCare . Govs . Charlie Baker ( R-Mass . ) , Steve Bullock ( D-Mont . ) , Bill Haslam ( R-Tenn. ) , Gary Herbert ( R-Utah ) and John Hickenlooper ( D-Colo. ) will testify at a hearing on Sept . 7 . '' —Jessie Hellman , the Hill `` Reinsurance is n't part of exchange stabilization negotiations '' : `` A key policy idea , reinsurance , is not currently on the table , according to a senior GOP aide . The focus is on funding the Affordable Care Act 's insurer subsidies that help low-income people with out-of-pocket costs , along with making state innovation waivers more flexible . '' —Caitlin Owens , Axios
`` A key policy idea , reinsurance , is not currently on the table , according to a senior GOP aide . The focus is on funding the Affordable Care Act 's insurer subsidies that help low-income people with out-of-pocket costs , along with making state innovation waivers more flexible . '' —Caitlin Owens , Axios `` Sex Education Based on Abstinence ? There ’ s a Real Absence of Evidence '' : `` The evidence isn ’ t there that abstinence-only education affects outcomes . In 2007 , a number of studies reviewed the efficacy of sexual education . The first was a systematic review conducted by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy . It found no good evidence to support the idea that such programs delayed the age of first sexual intercourse or reduced the number of partners an adolescent might have . '' —Aaron E. Carroll , New York Times
`` The evidence isn ’ t there that abstinence-only education affects outcomes . In 2007 , a number of studies reviewed the efficacy of sexual education . The first was a systematic review conducted by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy . It found no good evidence to support the idea that such programs delayed the age of first sexual intercourse or reduced the number of partners an adolescent might have . '' —Aaron E. Carroll , New York Times `` How a doctor stirred national demand for the Bridge detox device — without solid evidence it works '' : `` At a time when drug deaths are soaring , and only a tenth of people with opioid-use disorders make it to medical treatment , the excitement surrounding the Bridge underscores a conundrum of the opioid crisis . New products promising to improve recovery are flooding the market . But advocates worry that vulnerable patients desperate to kick their drug habits are being sold hope ahead of hard evidence . '' —Max Blau , STAT
Are you an Obamacare enrollee interested in what happens next ? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates .