Obamacare is fatally flawed and should be considered null and void , a federal judge said Friday in a bombshell ruling that sides with state Republicans who argue the GOP-led Congress ’ decision to gut the “ individual mandate ” penalty for going uninsured makes the rest of the program invalid .
The court “ finds the individual mandate , unmoored from a tax , is unconstitutional , ” U.S. District Court Judge Reed O ’ Connor , an appointee of President George W. Bush presiding in Texas , wrote in his opinion .
The decision is a huge swipe at the 2010 law and sets the stage for a bigger fight in appeals courts . It will also reverberate on Capitol Hill , where Democrats are set to retake the House majority after running on a pro-Obamacare platform and criticizing GOP candidates who failed to devise a fallback plan if the lawsuit is tossed in the end .
Its timing is also remarkable , coming roughly 24 hours before the deadline to enroll in Obamacare-related coverage on the federal website serving much of the country .
Twenty Republican-led states had argued the Supreme Court cast Obamacare as a package deal , with the mandate to hold insurance — or else pay a tax — tethered to the law ’ s goodies .
Congress slashed the mandate ’ s tax to zero , starting in 2019 , as part of its tax-cut bill . The states said the rest of the law should fall with it , including protections for people with preexisting medical conditions like cancer or diabetes .
Analysts said the ruling might cause chaos in the final hours of Obamacare enrollment but wouldn ’ t have an immediate effect on coverage , since the mandate penalty doesn ’ t shrink to zero until the new year and liberal officials will move for a stay .
The Trump administration did not defend the law in court , and sided with the states on some points . Yet it asked the judge to wait until open enrollment was complete , to avoid chaos in the markets .
The law ’ s consumer protections , subsidies and expansion of Medicaid coverage are now all at risk under the ruling , which would invalidate the entire law . The administration had suggested that only the parts of Obamacare requiring insurers to accept sicker Americans and charge them the same as healthy ones should be invalidated .
Still President Trump , who lambasted his own party for failing to repeal and replace the law as promised , applauded the decision .
Wow , but not surprisingly , ObamaCare was just ruled UNCONSTITUTIONAL by a highly respected judge in Texas . Great news for America ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) December 15 , 2018
Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton , who spearheaded the lawsuit , said the ruling “ will give President Trump and Congress the opportunity to replace the failed social experiment with a plan that ensures Texans and all Americans will again have greater choice about what health coverage they need and who will be their doctor . ”
Mr. Trump told Senate Majority Mitch McConnell and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , poised to become speaker , to “ get it done ” in his tweets .
But Democrats are certain to wait out the case in appellate courts or recommend easier fixes to restore the mandate . They said the ruling exposed the GOP ’ s promises to protect sicker Americans as a con .
“ When House Democrats take the gavel , the House of Representatives will move swiftly to formally intervene in the appeals process to uphold the life-saving protections for people with pre-existing conditions and reject Republicans ’ effort to destroy the Affordable Care Act , ” Mrs. Pelosi said .
Meanwhile , states that support the law scrambled to limit the fallout from the ruling , saying residents can still find coverage on the exchanges through late Saturday or deadlines set by states with their own portals .
House Majority Whip Steve Scalise boasted his chamber passed a law to replace Obamacare in May 2017 , however , leaving the situation in chaos .
Red states filed the lawsuit after the GOP failed to replace the law legislatively in 2017 . Their efforts faced a major public backlash and were the focal-point of Democratic effort to flip seats during the mid-term campaign .
The strategy worked , as Democrats flipped dozens of House seats to retake the majority .
Blue-state attorneys general intervened the pending case , saying the 2010 Affordable Care Act should stand because the tax will still be on the books , even if it isn ’ t actively collecting revenue , and that Congress decided to keep the rest of Obamacare in place despite gutting the penalty .
A few congressional Republicans also thought the arguments posed in the lawsuit were absurd , noting no one in Congress imagined that rest of the law would be struck by their decision to gut the individual mandate in their tax law .
Judge O ’ Connor disagreed , saying Chief Justice John G. Roberts was clear in his 2012 opinion that tethered the law ’ s benefits to the tax , despite what Democrats wanted to achieve eight years ago .
“ In some ways , the question before the Court involves the intent of both the 2010 and 2017 Congresses , ” he wrote . “ The former enacted the ACA . The latter sawed off the last leg it stood on . But however one slices it , the following is clear : The 2010 Congress memorialized that it knew the individual mandate was the ACA keystone .
It ’ s unclear where the appeals courts will land . Analysts have cast doubt on the plaintiff state ’ s arguments , and Justice Roberts remains the swing vote at the Supreme Court , despite the conservative majority on the court ushered in by Justice Brett Kavanaugh ’ s confirmation .
For now , Democrats are fuming , saying it would upend health insurance for millions of Americnas .
“ The ACA has already survived more than 70 unsuccessful repeal attempts and withstood scrutiny in the Supreme Court , ” said California Attorney General Xavier Becerra . “ Today ’ s misguided ruling will not deter us : our coalition will continue to fight in court for the health and wellbeing of all Americans . ”
The American Medical Association decried the ruling as “ an incredible step backward ” for the U.S. health care system .