The vote-a-rama met lawmakers ' pent-up demand for politically charged votes on the law . 'Vote-a-rama ' targets health law
Proving that the Obamacare wars are far from over , the health reform law was one of the favorite targets of amendments during Friday night 's `` vote-a-rama '' on the Senate floor .
Dozens of amendments were filed to the budget resolution picking apart various elements of health care policy : whether employers should provide contraceptives in their insurance policies , whether a tax should be imposed on medical device-makers , whether Medicare can adjust payments based on the state .
Of the more than 100 amendments considered , more than 20 were related to health care , Medicare or the health reform law , which President Barack Obama signed three years ago today .
The vote-a-rama , because it allows an unlimited number of amendments , met lawmakers ' pent-up demand for politically charged votes on the law . But because the votes on a budget resolution are nonbinding , the law is pretty much exactly where it was before voting started on Friday .
The amendments do , however , serve as important test votes for lawmakers to determine which repeal measures might have enough support for passage on a future bill . And opponents of the law say the symbolism ca n't be missed .
`` It 's the beginning of the unraveling of the Obama health care law , '' said Sen. John Barrasso ( R-Wyo. ) . `` Now that the Supreme Court has ruled and the president has been reelected , Democrats are being honest with the fact that this law is loaded with flaws . ''
The biggest victory for the law 's opponents came on Thursday , when 79 senators — including all Republicans and 34 Democrats — voted to strike the law 's tax on medical device-makers .
The Senate also passed by voice vote a measure to repeal the law 's $ 2,500 cap on flexible spending accounts and eliminate the requirement that consumers get a doctor 's prescription before using FSA or health savings account money on over-the-counter prescriptions .
Both measures were originally designed to help pay for the health law but have proven unpopular . The medical device industry is pushing back strongly on its tax , and consumers have protested the new restrictions on how they use their FSAs or HSAs .
Republicans support repealing both measures , even though doing so would technically make the law more expensive . But now that repeal of both has gotten support from a majority of Democrats , Republicans are more likely to push to get either measure on a bill that will become law .
One of the few health law-related amendments proposed by a Democrat came from Sen. Ben Cardin of Maryland . He proposed an amendment that would expand oral health and dental care . It passed by a voice vote .
Democrats also used Friday 's votes as a chance to stand up for the provisions of the health law that they support . An amendment from New Hampshire Sen. Jeanne Shaheen that aimed to protect the law 's birth control provisions passed 56-43 .
Republican Sens . Susan Collins of Maine , Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Mark Kirk of Illinois joined Democrats in voting for it . Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia was the only Democrat to vote against .
Meanwhile , a Republican amendment letting employers opt out of contraception coverage fell — though it gained support from two Democrats : Manchin and Sen. Mark Pryor of Arkansas .
Other amendments that failed include full repeal of the health law , restrictions on illegal immigrants who gain legal status from accessing the health law , a prohibition on funds to advertise the health law and a ban on the health law 's taxes on low- and middle-income Americans .
This article first appeared on ███ Pro at 12:31 p.m. on March 23 , 2013 .