Sen. John McCain of Arizona said Thursday he can not support the GOP ’ s last-ditch plan to replace Obamacare , likely dooming the effort and President Trump ’ s pursuit of a major legislative victory .
Mr. McCain , a Republican , was among three senators who killed off the repeal effort in July , but GOP leaders hoped he would back a plan sponsored by his good pal , Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Sen. Bill Cassidy of Louisiana .
In a statement , Mr. McCain said the plan was being rushed through without a sober analysis of its impact .
“ I can not in good conscience vote for the Graham-Cassidy proposal , ” he said . “ I believe we could do better working together , Republicans and Democrats , and have not yet really tried . Nor could I support it without knowing how much it will cost , how it will effect insurance premiums , and how many people will be helped or hurt by it . ”
Republicans must pin down 50 votes to pass the plan before a Sept. 30 deadline to act under the 2017 budget .
Its arcane rules allow the GOP to avoid a Democratic filibuster , with Vice President Mike Pence acting as tie-breaker .
Yet Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky has refused to back the proposal , saying it leaves too much of Obamacare in place , and Sen. Susan Collins of Maine has voiced concerns , meaning GOP leaders probably won ’ t be able to scrape together enough votes .
The plan isn ’ t dead just yet , though Mrs. Collins told Maine voters on Friday she was “ leaning against the bill , ” according to the Portland Press-Herald .
Sen. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska , who joined Mr. McCain and Mrs. Collins in blocking the July effort , is also a hard sell for GOP leaders .
Bill sponsors had exuded confidence in recent days , saying they were getting closer by the day to pinning down needed support , and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell announced he planned to bring the bill to the floor .
But Mr. McCain said his colleagues were emphasizing next week ’ s deadline over thoughtful reforms .
“ I would consider supporting legislation similar to that offered by my friends Senators Graham and [ Bill ] Cassidy were it the product of extensive hearings , debate and amendment , ” he said . “ But that has not been the case . Instead , the specter of September 30th budget reconciliation deadline has hung over this entire process . ”
The wily Senate “ maverick , ” who is being treated for brain cancer , said Democrats made the same mistake when they muscled through the Affordable Care Act without support from a single Republican .
If Republicans follow suit , he warned , “ our success could be as short-lived as theirs when the political winds shift , as they regularly do . ”
Under the Graham-Cassidy bill , Obamacare money that pays for Obamacare ’ s expansion of Medicaid and that subsidizes coverage for many of those who buy insurance on the exchanges would be pooled and instead given to states as block grants . The states would tailor the money to their own health care plans starting in 2020 .
The plan repealed the most unpopular part of Obamacare — the individual mandate requiring Americans to hold insurance or pay a tax . States could restore the mandate or find another spur to get people covered .
Mr. McCain ’ s home-state governor , Doug Ducey , backed the plan earlier this week , but at least six GOP governors balked , saying it would slash funding to their states through 2026 .
Democrats , who increasingly feared their defense of Obamacare has run out of gas , reacted to Mr. McCain ’ s decision with glee .
“ Good news : 1:50 PM Eastern time , Senator John McCain thumbs down on Graham-Cassidy ! ” House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi wrote to colleagues .
Mr. McCain , meanwhile , stressed he took no pleasure in opposing his colleagues ’ plans .
“ Far from it . The bill ’ s authors are my dear friends , and I think the world of them . I know they are acting consistently with their beliefs and sense of what is best for the country . So am I , ” he said . “ I hope that in the months ahead , we can join with colleagues on both sides of the aisle to arrive at a compromise solution that is acceptable to most of us , and serves the interests of Americans as best we can . ”
Mr. Graham said his friendship with Mr. McCain is based on how he ’ s lived his life — not the votes he takes — but that he “ respectfully disagrees ” with the Arizonan .
The Senate Finance Committee is scheduled to hold a hearing on the bill Monday . Also , the Congressional Budget Office is expected to release top-line numbers on how the plan would affect spending , though a comprehensive analysis isn ’ t expected for weeks .
The Senate Health Committee had been working on a bipartisan bill to stabilize the individual insurance market before Obamacare enrollment begins Nov. 1 . Insurers are supposed to ink contracts to participate in the marketplace before the end of the month .
But Chairman Lamar Alexander , Tennessee Republican , said the effort stalled out this past week amid the hysteria around “ Graham-Cassidy ” and a Democratic push for government-run , single-payer health care .
He said negotiators couldn ’ t strike a balance between state flexibility under Obamacare — something Republicans want — and funding for “ cost-sharing ” payments that Mr. Trump has threatened to withhold .
The potential collapse of the GOP push , coupled with Mr. Trump ’ s ambivalence toward his predecessor ’ s signature program , leaves the insurance markets in limbo .
Sen. Patty Murray , Washington Democrat who ’ d been working with Mr. Alexander , said on Twitter she is “ at the table ” and ready to pick up where they ’ d left off , “ as soon as this latest partisan approach is set aside . ”
A poll released Friday says Americans favor Obamacare over the Graham-Cassidy plan , 56-33 percent .
The ABC News/Washington Post poll found 42 percent “ strongly ” favor the 2010 law , nearly twice the 22 percent who feel strongly about the GOP plan .
A quarter of Republicans — 23 percent — and a third of conservatives ( 31 percent ) preferred Obamacare to the last-ditch plan .