The painful public collapse Friday of Paul Ryan 's biggest endeavor as House speaker — legislation to unwind the Democratic health care law he and his party spent years castigating as a disaster — dealt a serious blow to the Wisconsin Republican .
But as embarrassing a setback as this was — Obamacare is here to stay `` for the foreseeable future , '' Ryan conceded — he is n't going anywhere .
No one is prepared to challenge Ryan for his job , said GOP lawmakers from across the Republican Conference . While some right-wing media and outside groups are agitating to replace the speaker , and his antagonists on the White House staff needle him anonymously in the press , there is no way he will be ousted .
President Donald Trump has n't turned on him , either — at least not yet . And Ryan remains popular with his rank-and-file members , who genuinely like him . Critically , Ryan is not a liability for them back home , the ultimate litmus test for any congressional leader .
Yet the debacle over the American Health Care Act showed how the promise of Ryan as speaker has failed to live up to the reality .
When he took over for former Speaker John Boehner in November 2015 following an uprising by conservatives , Ryan was seen as the one figure who could heal the divisions within the GOP Conference , especially with the hard-line Freedom Caucus . That has n't happened , to put it mildly .
Ryan is still struggling with the same stubborn political dynamic that torpedoed Boehner 's career . On big issues , if Ryan gives into the Freedom Caucus , he alienates more moderate members of his party and loses any ability to work with Democrats . If he tries to cut a deal with Democrats and his own moderates , the Freedom Caucus goes ballistic , attacking him in tandem with its allies in right-wing media and conservative outside groups .
Having a Republican in the White House was supposed to finally tame the group . It was easy to blow up deals Republicans were attempting to cut with Barack Obama ; Donald Trump , the thinking went , would never tolerate it . The health-care debate showed how wrong that was .
`` He 's a really nice guy , a really smart guy , '' said a veteran GOP lawmaker who asked not to be named . But `` he ca n't seal the deal , which is a real problem . ''
Even with Trump , the `` ultimate closer , '' in the White House .
Things wo n't get any easier for Ryan . He will now have to find a way to deliver on Trump 's border wall , which Democrats have vowed to block . The possibility of a government shutdown looms in late April and again in October unless Republicans can figure out how to keep funding going . The debt ceiling has to be increased this summer , always a tough vote for GOP lawmakers . An expensive infrastructure package that conservatives hate will require Democratic buy-in .
That 's to say nothing of the next daunting item on the GOP to-do list , tax reform — arguably tougher to pull off than health-care legislation .
Ryan put his personal prestige on the line to pass his health care legislation , publicly and privately exhorting his colleagues to support it . Ryan became the face of the legislation , figuring he could sell it better than anyone else . In the end , enough of his own members rejected the proposal to bring it down .
After being forced to pull the bill , Ryan deployed many of the same lines he 's been using for months to explain away failures or setbacks . Republicans are suffering the `` growing pains '' of going from being the opposition party to the majority , he said . `` Doing big things is hard , '' the speaker said , adding that Republicans want `` to improve people 's lives , and we will . ''
Yet there was also a somber tone . Ryan did n't try to hide from blame , and he warned his own GOP colleagues that they better find a way to compromise .
`` I will not sugarcoat it , this was a disappointing day for us ... This is a setback , no two ways about it , '' Ryan told reporters after pulling the bill from the floor in the face of certain defeat . `` All of us , myself included , will need time to reflect on how we got to this moment , what we could have done to do better . ''
Ryan added : `` But ultimately , this all kind of comes down to a choice . Are all of us willing to give a little to get something done ? Are we willing to say yes to the good , to the very good , even if it 's not the perfect ? Because if we 're willing to do that , there remains an incredible opportunity in front of us . ''
Ryan said he did n't `` want to cast blame '' for who lost health care , but he then went on to blame the Freedom Caucus — which he called `` their team '' — for bringing down his bill .
`` There is a block of 'no ' votes that we had , that is why this did n't pass , '' Ryan said . `` Some of the members of that caucus were voting with us but not enough were . I met with their chairman earlier today , and he made it clear to me that the votes were n't going to be there from their team . That was sufficient to have this bill not pass . ''
Trump , for his part , praised Ryan despite the failure to pass the health care bill , which leaves Obamacare in place as the law of the land .
`` I like Speaker Ryan . He worked very hard , '' Trump told reporters in the White House after the bill was pulled . `` I 'm not going to speak badly about anybody within the Republican Party . Certainly there 's a history , but I really think Paul worked hard . ''
Freedom Caucus members said they do n't blame Ryan for the failure , at least not publicly .
“ Paul Ryan , he ’ a very good man . He ’ s an eloquent speaker . He is an excellent representative of the GOP Conference as a whole , '' said Rep. Mo Brooks ( R-Ala. ) . `` I like the job he ’ s doing and I want him to stay as speaker of the House . And I ‘ ve heard nothing to the contrary . ''
Other rank-and-file members were equally supportive as they left town to lick their wounds .
Sign up here for ███ Huddle A daily play-by-play of congressional news in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
`` If you know of someone who cares more , works harder , who ’ s brighter , who ’ s more committed to lead this institution , give me their name , '' said Rep . Rob Woodall ( R-Ala. ) , a Ryan loyalist . `` We go through leaders like we ’ re changing shirts . I don ’ t think it reflects on the leadership , I think it reflects on us . ”
Yet Ryan faces the prospect for the rest of this Congress — unless he moves decisively to the middle — that members may need to get signoff from the Freedom Caucus and its chairman , Rep. Mark Meadows ( R-N.C. ) , before they move major legislation . Or at least to know that the Freedom Caucus wo n't try to kill their bill . It 's a dynamic that will be a huge challenge for Ryan as he tries to get past the Obamacare reversal .
Both Ryan and Trump emphasized they want to move quickly on to tax reform , although the failure to replace Obamacare leaves them with $ 1 trillion less to use for that fight , as there will be less room to cut taxes without ballooning the deficit .
`` Yes , this does make tax reform more difficult , but it does not in any way make it impossible , '' Ryan acknowledged .
But Ryan , a former chairman of the Ways and Means Committe , said it will be easier to get Republicans to agree on taxes than on health care . `` I do n't think this is prologue for other future things because there are other parts of our agenda that people have even more agreement on what to achieve . ''