The prospect of a government shutdown Oct. 1 grew Wednesday , as the House Republican leadership promised a vote Friday on a bill that would fund government operations beyond Sept. 30 , but also defund President Obama ’ s health-care law .
The maneuver reflects House Speaker John Boehner ’ s acquiescence to conservatives , who are determined to derail Obamacare before the law goes fully into effect . Enrollment of the uninsured in health plans begins Oct. 1 .
“ We 're going to continue to do everything we can to repeal the president 's failed health-care law , ” Speaker Boehner said Wednesday morning .
The bill would also lock in across-the-board spending cuts knows as the “ sequester. ” All together , the measure is a non-starter for Democrats , and if it passes in the Republican-run House , they promise to defeat it in the Senate , where they have the majority .
But Republicans will have another chance to defund the health-care law in mid-October . Then , the federal government ’ s borrowing authority runs out , and Republicans have threatened to defund Obamacare as a condition for raising the debt ceiling .
Mr. Obama , speaking to business leaders Wednesday just a few blocks from the Capitol , reacted with fury to the Republican plan , accusing his opponents of trying to “ extort ” him to achieve their goals .
“ You have never seen in the history of the United States the debt ceiling or the threat of not raising the debt ceiling being used to extort a president or a governing party , ” Obama told the Business Roundtable .
He spoke derisively of a “ faction ” of House Republicans leading the charge to undo health-care reform and in the process , risking a government shutdown or a default on the government ’ s debt .
The president called on the members of the Republican-leaning business group to use their influence to get Congress back to “ regular order ” in how it operates – and not in a way that promises “ apocalypse ” every few months .
On Capitol Hill , House Republican leaders spoke with one voice , having given up in their attempt to keep defunding of Obamacare separate from budget negotiations . Senate Republicans were a different story . Some , like Sen. Marco Rubio ( R ) of Florida , applauded the House leaders and accused Obama and the Democrats of threatening to shut down the government .
“ The American people have made clear they want Washington to keep the government open but also need protection from Obamacare ’ s harmful effects , ” Senator Rubio said . “ Today ’ s announcement would accomplish what the American people have been asking of Congress . ”
Others , like Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R ) of South Carolina , agree that Obamacare has to go , but not at the risk of a government shutdown .
`` I want to defund Obamacare . I just do n't want to cut off Social Security checks and stop paying the military , '' Senator Graham told Huffington Post .
Polls show that if the government does shut down , the public would blame Republicans by a wide margin . Last week , a CNN poll found that 51 percent would blame the GOP and 33 percent would blame Obama . Some Republicans , like Graham , have expressed anxiety about this publicly . In 1995 and 1996 , government shutdowns ended up redounding to the benefit of then-President Clinton .
But Democrats did not react gleefully to Boehner ’ s announcement , at least in public .
As for Obama , even before Boehner ’ s capitulation to the tea party wing of his caucus , efforts to woo the Republicans into a budget deal have born no fruit , and so he has opted for verbal slaps . On Monday , the president took to a White House stage to mark the five-year anniversary of the 2008 financial crisis , and he spewed vitriol at his most ardent opponents – even though a mass shooting had just taken place a few miles from the White House .
`` I can not remember a time when one faction of one party promises economic chaos if it does n't get 100 percent of what it wants , '' Obama said .
At Wednesday ’ s briefing , White House press secretary Jay Carney suggested that the president ’ s past charm offensive with Republicans – including taking some out to dinner at an expensive restaurant ( on his dime ) – hadn ’ t completely failed .
“ What we discovered is that there is a sincere desire by Republican lawmakers , some of them , anyway ... to make budget policy that ... reduces the deficit responsibly , but invests responsibly as well , ” Mr. Carney said .
And , he said , the president will still try “ all manner of ways to get to yes with Republican leaders . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
But one opportunity for bonhomie has already fallen by the wayside . Wednesday night would have been the annual congressional picnic , but a week ago , members of Congress received a blast e-mail from the White House saying the picnic had been canceled . Instead , members would be invited to bring their immediate families to the White House ’ s Congressional Holiday Ball in December . Usually the event is members only .
Word from the White House was that it canceled because it expected to be busy trying to get Congress to authorize airstrikes on Syria . Instead , the Syria situation has shifted to a diplomatic track , and it ’ s Washington that ’ s at war .