Sen. Bill Cassidy of Louisiana said Sunday his chamber plans to outdo a House-passed health bill that would repeal and replace Obamacare but , according to estimates , would result in 23 million fewer people holding insurance a decade from now .
The Congressional Budget Office also said that while healthier Americans will see “ significantly lower premiums ” in states that waive the Affordable Care Act ’ s requirements on insurers , people with preexisting conditions could struggle to find affordable plans in those states , the CBO analysis said .
“ The Senate product , I ’ m hopeful , will be more likely to address their needs , ” the Louisiana Republican told “ Fox News Sunday . ”
Senators have been meeting behind closed doors to hash out a plan , but consensus remains elusive . Staff will begin drafting language over the Memorial Day break to kick-start negotiations when the chamber reconvenes the week of June 5 .
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell can not afford to lose more than two votes from his 52-seat majority and still pass a plan under fast-track budget rules that let the GOP avoid a Democratic filibuster .
President Trump took to Twitter on Sunday to imply that the federal government can make health care better by spending more money . Mr. Trump tweeted that “ I suggest that we add more dollars to Healthcare and make it the best anywhere . ObamaCare is dead — the Republicans will do much better ! ”
However , several senators from states that vastly expanded Medicaid under Obamacare want to rein in federal spending on the program more slowly than the House plan would , while Sen. John Thune of South Dakota is hashing out plans to make the GOP plan ’ s tax credits more generous for older and needy people who buy insurance on their own .
Senate Minority Whip Richard J. Durbin , Illinois Democrat , said his party is willing to negotiate if Republicans take repeal off the table , though he acknowledged that Obamacare isn ’ t perfect , as insurers struggle to make money and either raise their rates or quit the program altogether .
“ I voted for it and it needs to be repaired , ” Mr. Durbin told Fox .
Mr. Cassidy and Sen. Susan M. Collins , Maine Republican , have offered a plan that would let states either keep Obamacare or opt into a more conservative framework . Conservatives have derided the plan , saying they campaigned on promises to scrap the 2010 law , not let it linger in parts of the country .
“ A conservative thinks that power should return to individuals and the states , ” Mr. Cassidy countered Sunday . “ If a blue state wishes to do a blue thing , God bless them . ”
Mr. Durbin said he doesn ’ t like aspects of the Cassidy-Collins plan but that it ’ s a good-faith effort by the two GOP senators .
“ I ’ m sorry the two of them aren ’ t in the room with the 13 apostles that Sen. McConnell has chosen ” to work out a plan , he said , referring to the Senate GOP ’ s working group on health care .