The contractors behind the troubled ObamaCare website are planning to spread the blame around during highly anticipated testimony Thursday morning on Capitol Hill .
While Health Secretary Kathleen Sebelius is skipping the hearing in order to visit an ObamaCare call center in Phoenix , representatives from four contracting companies are expected to testify before the House Energy and Commerce Committee . They are acknowledging problems with the site , but according to prepared testimony also pointing a finger back at the Obama administration .
A top executive with CGI Federal , one of the contractors paid millions to create the ObamaCare website , said the Department of Health and Human Services `` serves the important role of systems integrator or ` quarterback ' on this project and is the ultimate responsible party for the end-to-end performance . ''
Senior Vice President Cheryl Campbell also said in her prepared remarks that “ no amount of testing ” could have prevented the site ’ s problem-plagued start .
The House Energy and Commerce Committee hearing is the first since the site ’ s disastrous Oct. 1 launch -- marked by crashes , slow response times and its inability to let customers make purchases . Contractors will likely face tough questioning from lawmakers on both sides of the aisle , though the witnesses appear to be implicating government officials overseeing the project .
Prepared testimony from contractor Optum/QSSI blamed in part a `` late decision '' to require customers to register before browsing for insurance , which could have helped overwhelm the registration system .
`` This may have driven higher simultaneous usage of the registration system that would n't have occurred if consumers could window-shop anonymously , '' said Andy Slavitt , representing QSSI 's parent company .
In her prepared testimony , Campbell argued that with a system “ this complex with so many concurrent users , it is not unusual to discover problems that need to be addressed once the software goes into a live production environment . ”
“ No amount of testing within reasonable time limits can adequately replicate a live environment of this nature , ” she adds , according to the prepared testimony .
Campbell said issues with HealthCare.gov have continued to improve over the past two weeks , but additional challenges are occurring as more users get past the registration screen and buy insurance -- including “ data assurance issues . ”
She said such problems can be fixed through “ tuning , optimization and application improvements. ” However , Campbell also said that the buck ultimately stops with the Department of Health and Human Services , which she said `` serves the important role of systems integrator or `` quarterback ' on this project and is the ultimate responsible party for the end-to-end performance . ''
The testimony comes as the Obama administration offered new details and explanations on Wednesday . The administration said the system did n't get enough testing , especially at a high user volume . It blamed a compressed time frame for meeting the Oct. 1 deadline to open the insurance markets . Basic `` alpha and user testing '' are now completed , but that 's supposed to happen before a launch , not after .
The Health and Human Services explanation identified some bugs that have gotten little outside attention .
For example , technical problems have surfaced that are making it hard for people to complete the application and plan-shopping functions . That 's a big concern because those stages are further along in the signup process than the initial registration , where many consumers have been getting tripped up . The problems are being analyzed and fixes are planned , the department said .
The explanation , posted online in a department blog and accompanying graphic , identified other broad areas of problems and outlined fixes underway but in most cases incomplete :
-- Unexpectedly high consumer interest that overwhelmed the system in its initial days . Equipment has been added to handle the load and system design has been improved . More fixes are in progress .
-- Lack of a way for consumers to browse their health plan options without first having to set up a user account . A partial fix is in place .
-- Incorrect or duplicate information in enrollments is being delivered to insurance companies . Some software fixes that should help address the issue have been completed , others are underway .
-- Difficulties for consumers trying to create user accounts , including drop-down menus that did n't work . Design changes and software fixes should address the situation .
On Thursday , the House Energy and Commerce Committee will line up contractors , including CGI Federal , the lead developer of the website , and QSSI , which designed a back-room operation known as the federal data services hub . The hub is integral to verifying applicants ' personal information and income details , and the administration says it is working as designed .