An earnest debate about single-payer health care in America has been consuming a certain corner of the internet after the release of and then the backlash to a libertarian think tank ’ s score of Sen. Bernie Sanders ’ s Medicare-for-all bill .
It all started when the libertarian ( and , as some will point out , Koch-funded ) Mercatus Center at George Mason University put out a report showing Medicare-for-all would cost the federal government $ 32 trillion over 10 years — but the United States as a whole could save up to $ 2 trillion , over the same time , under the Sanders bill as currently written .
Those twin findings — and the disagreement over how to frame them — have kept the single-payer debate raging for nearly a month . The Washington Post Fact Checker weighed in ( as have lefty wonks critiquing the fact-checkers ) . New York Times opinion columnist and Nobel laureate Paul Krugman tweetstormed about it . It ’ s been a tempest in the teapot of the Washington policy debate during the August doldrums .
But we ’ ve all lost the plot , to one extent or another . The real lesson of the report isn ’ t the particulars of its projections . It ’ s that moving to a single-payer system forces us to ask real questions about how it might be achieved and what the notable trade-offs would be . Those questions have gotten lost as the debate has devolved into a spat over budget tables and footnotes .
It doesn ’ t matter whether one think tank ’ s score of a particular single-payer bill that will never become law shows $ 50 trillion in new spending or $ 5 trillion in savings .
The pertinent questions for Medicare-for-all are whether the tax increases necessary to fund a single-payer program are politically tenable and how much providers would be paid under this new system . For the proposal ’ s opponents , they have to confront the possibility that a government-run health care system really could , with the right structure , save money while providing more care . The news media needs to grapple with how it would adjudicate what would be a nuanced debate over an unprecedented overhaul of the American social contract and our health care system .
Unfortunately , that isn ’ t the debate we are currently having . The present dialogue has turned into a niche proxy war of the single-payer debate , but we need to think bigger .
The Mercatus study was tailor-made to set off a fight . Here ’ s how we ended up here :
In September 2017 , Bernie Sanders ( I-VT ) unveiled a national single-payer Medicare-for-all bill in the Senate , and Kirsten Gillibrand ( D-NY ) , Kamala Harris ( D-CA ) , and Cory Booker ( D-NJ ) — all of whom are rumored to have an interest in running for president — signed on to it , along with other Democratic senators .
On July 30 , Mercatus released a study with the headline conclusion that the bill , as written , would require $ 32 trillion over 10 years in new federal spending and tax increases .
Media outlets largely ran with the $ 32 trillion figure , which was the finding Mercatus really wanted to emphasize .
Then single-payer proponents , led by the People ’ s Policy Project ’ s Matt Bruenig , pointed out that Mercatus ’ s more optimistic estimates implied a $ 2 trillion reduction in national health expenditures , meaning that we would achieve universal coverage , eliminate copayments and deductibles , and still save money .
Sanders and others embraced the counterspin , running with the ironic line that even the Koch-funded Mercatus Center agreed that single-payer would save the nation $ 2 trillion in health care costs . ( Never mind that it was the lowest estimate that included what the author believed to be unrealistic assumptions . )
Fact-checkers entered the fray and , in deference to Mercatus , which certainly doesn ’ t support the Sanders bill , they largely chided Democrats for “ cherry-picking ” the $ 2 trillion figure .
Then the left pushed back again , fact-checking the fact-checkers for overstating the payment cuts to health care providers to deflect from the finding of savings .
Critically , for all the sound and fury , there is no real disagreement about the facts . Mercatus ’ s own study does find that if you cut provider rates to Medicare levels you could reduce national health expenditures — and there ’ s no denying that even if you reduced national health expenditures , shifting all health spending onto the federal balance sheet would require significant tax increases .
The Sanders bill is of course worthy of study ; in the Democratic wing of the Senate , every major potential presidential candidate has endorsed it , and a record number of congressional candidates are running on a Medicare-for-all platform in the 2018 midterms . A serious single-payer debate could be right around the corner , and we need to start a dialogue about trade-offs and policy particulars .
Why there was a wonk fight over the Mercatus report
The dispute between Mercatus ’ s Charles Blahous ( who had some justifiable problems with how his detailed study had been portrayed by others ) and single-payer supporters would have been relegated to an obscure corner of Twitter until media fact-checkers got involved .
When the Washington Post dinged Sanders and other Democrats for “ cherry-picking ” the $ 2 trillion savings figure , progressive wonks were aghast , and with some good reason . For starters , the fact-checkers seemed to be overly credulous in buying into Mercatus ’ s counterspin : The Post even stated that “ the main point ” of the study was to show the $ 32 trillion in new federal spending and the tax increases that would be necessary to implement Medicare-for-all . ( For my part , I observed single-payer seemed to be “ actually kind of a bargain , ” according to the analysis . )
The fact-checkers also had the gall to chastise Sanders and others for ... stating exactly what the Mercatus report found . Blahous did find that the Sanders bill as currently written could save up to $ 2 trillion for the country as a whole . That is a fact . It wasn ’ t wrong to say so .
Now , “ as written ” might be a hugely important caveat . Sanders includes no financing plan in the legislative language yet . Everything is still subject to change . For now , the Sanders bill would pay health care providers at Medicare rates , which are on average 40 percent lower than private insurance rates . Single-payer critics and some fact-checkers have ( wrongly ) suggested America ’ s doctors would face a 40-percent pay cut .
That isn ’ t true . Some people are covered by Medicaid or are uninsured right now , and therefore doctors are paid even less for those patients than they are by Medicare . Medicare rates would be a pay raise for those patients — not to mention more people would have insurance and more health care would be used . Bruenig worked out the math to determine the real pay cut to be less than 11 percent under the Sanders bill , for what it ’ s worth . Mother Jones ’ s Kevin Drum arrived at about the same number .
But Blahous wanted to make the legitimate point that if you adjust that payment rate , the price tag for Medicare-for-all changes substantially . Increase the payment rate just a bit ( which could happen as legislation is debated and finalized ) and suddenly Medicare-for-all doesn ’ t save any money at all , as he detailed in the report .
But the revised payment rate was a creation of the Mercatus report , not Sanders ’ s legislation , Bruenig and others like the Week ’ s Ryan Cooper have pointed out . It hardly seems fair for the Post or CNN to call single-payer supporters dishonest because they didn ’ t adhere to the report ’ s self-created counterfactual .
This is really a proxy war to avoid the hard debates about single-payer
What ’ s unavoidable : Medicare-for-all would cost the federal government a lot of money . Mercatus ’ s $ 32 trillion finding aligned with the left-leaning Urban Institute ’ s 2016 estimate . New spending means new taxes , and raising taxes usually isn ’ t popular .
The current draft of Sanders ’ s bill doesn ’ t include a financing plan — yet another reason not to take the Mercatus study too literally . This is all still a work-in-progress . But the question of revenue is and will remain a legitimate one .
Single-payer advocates also have to deal with the fact that doctors and hospitals really might face a decline in revenue . For certain clinics or hospitals in disadvantaged areas , any pay cut could put their future in risk . Single-payer proponents need to be prepared with answers to how they would address those and other situations of access and economic security . Conservatives and the media might be overstating the cuts , but they are a real concern .
The right , on the other hand , is trying to jump-start one of its most obvious lines of attack against single-payer — it would involve a dramatic expansion of federal spending and require big tax hikes — while eliding the real possibility that a restructured health care system could actually work better . Getting media fact-checkers to adopt their preferred framing — tax increases ! physician pay cuts ! — is a substantial public relations win for single-payer critics .
The challenges for single-payer are real . Tax hikes and shuttered hospitals are potent political weapons in the hands of its opponents . But the Mercatus report also demonstrates we don ’ t really know yet how the pros and cons shake out . There will be trade-offs , but they could be trade-offs worth making .
We ’ ve seen other reports suggesting any tax hikes might effectively be a replacement of insurance premiums that workers and companies are already paying . If increased volume and efficiency can really help doctors and hospitals mostly maintain their current revenue , then maybe the blow to health care access won ’ t be what critics fear .
That is a not-entirely-implausible reading of the Mercatus report , which is probably why it set off such a storm in the first place . But at this point , the debate over this specific data set probably isn ’ t doing anybody any good .