They also hope vulnerable advisers will simply get the hint and resign .
But political constituencies and loyal supporters are hard to throw overboard .
Donald Trump delights in it on The Apprentice as do the celebrity chefs on Chopped , but breaking the bad news to people that their services are no longer needed is something that most American presidents seek all manner of ways to avoid .
Instead , presidents often try to fob off the dirty work onto a White House underling . Richard Nixon , desperate to get rid of Interior Secretary Walter Hickel in 1970 , called on his hatchet man , Attorney General John Mitchell to wield the ax . But even Mitchell waffled , forcing Nixon to grudgingly do the job himself .
With the exception of presidents such as Harry Truman , who dramatically canned Gen. Douglas MacArthur for insubordination , presidents hope that vulnerable advisers will simply take the hint and resign .
With the calamitous debut of Obamacare , candidates for the chopping block would seem obvious . On Friday , Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , when asked whether she 'd offered her resignation , dodged the question . Perhaps President Obama is waiting for the program to enjoy a period of calm before making subordinates walk the plank . But it may be that he , like some predecessors , realizes that firings are a two-edged sword : They signal decisiveness but send a message of an administration in disarray .
People have come and gone in Obama 's five years in office , but most were urged to jump rather than wait to be pushed . Both generals Stanley McChrystal and David Petraeus knew they were doomed and tendered their resignations . Early in Obama 's first term , Social Secretary Desiree Rogers was urged to resign after two unauthorized guests were admitted to a state dinner , and environment adviser Van Jones stepped aside under pressure when some of his controversial writings surfaced . But not all officials who are under fire agree to face-saving devices .
Bill Clinton left his first Secretary of Defense Les Aspin , who was not well suited for the job , twisting in the wind while he pondered his fate . When a military operation in Mogadishu , Somalia , in 1993 , resulted in 18 U.S. soldiers killed and 73 wounded , a sacrificial lamb was needed and Aspin was the obvious choice . Trouble is Clinton could n't bear to do it , so he delegated the task to National Security Adviser Tony Lake , who was a friend of Aspin 's . But Aspin demanded a face-to-face meeting with Clinton and talked the president out of canning him — at least temporarily .
Sometimes presidents resort to extreme measures to remove a few bad apples from the Cabinet . Both Richard Nixon in 1973 and Jimmy Carter in 1979 demanded letters of resignation from their entire Cabinets . This allowed both to avoid going eyeball-to-eyeball with those members they really did n't want back .
So why is it so tough for the `` most powerful man in the world '' to boot out subordinates ? Some underlings have stood by the president through the long trek to the White House . Others are supported by important constituencies . But perhaps the best explanation is that they 're politicians . And politicians , as columnist Elizabeth Drew once wrote , just want to be loved by everyone . Obama is a politician . Perhaps that 's why so few prominent heads have rolled for the Obamacare breakdowns .
Ross K. Baker , a political science professor at Rutgers University , is a member of ███ 's Board of Contributors .
In addition to its own editorials , ███ publishes diverse opinions from outside writers , including our Board of Contributors . To read more columns like this , go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @ USATopinion or Facebook .