More than a dozen states plan to cancel health care policies not in compliance with ObamaCare in the coming weeks , affecting thousands of people just before the midterm elections .
`` It looks like several hundred thousand people across the country will receive notices in the coming days and weeks , '' said Jim Capretta of the Ethics and Public Policy Center .
The policies are being canceled because states that initially granted a reprieve at the request of President Obama are no longer willing to do so .
In coming weeks , 13 states and the District of Columbia plan to cancel such policies , which generally fall out of compliance with the Affordable Care Act because they don ’ t offer the level of coverage the law requires .
Virginia will be hardest hit , with 250,000 policies expected to be canceled .
And because federal law requires a 60-day notice of any plan changes , voters will be notified no later than November 1 , right before the Nov. 4 midterms .
Many of those forced out of their current plans and into ObamaCare may not be able to keep their doctors . They also could face higher deductibles and out-of-pocket expenses , making ObamaCare an election issue on the eve of voting .
Obama had originally unequivocally promised that underhis health care plan , everyone could keep their doctors and plans .
In 2009 , he told the American Medical Association , `` If you like your doctor , you will be able to keep your doctor . Period.If you like your health care plan , you will be able to keep your health care plan . Period.No one will take it away . No matter what . ''
The president later was forced to admit that any plan without the additional benefits required under ObamaCare faced cancellation .
But that unleashed a nasty political backlash , forcing him to back down and call for states and insurers to extend those policies forthree more years .
Some said he didn ’ t have much choice . `` There were some five or six million people who were at stake here and the federal exchange was in no condition to even process a few hundred thousand people much less millions , '' said Joe Antos of the American Enterprise Institute .
Many states flatly refused to extend and now comes the new round of states that plan to cancel policies .