A top Democratic senator said Sunday that Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius will testify before Congress about the problem-plagued ObamaCare website , amid a growing call for her to accept requests to testify .
“ Ultimately , Secretary Sebelius will testify , ” Sen. Dick Durbin , D-Ill. , the chamber ’ s No . 2 Democrat , told “ ███ Sunday . ”
Sebelius and the entire Obama administration has declined requests to testify on Capitol Hill about the site , which has been plagued by crashes , slow responses and other glitches since it went online Oct. 1 .
The House Energy and Commerce Committee sent a letter directly to Sebelius last week asking her to testify Thursday on the matter .
Sebelius has yet to respond publicly , but reportedly plans to attend a gala the night before in Boston , which has fueled calls for resignation .
Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio said he ’ s “ reluctant ” to call for an immediate dismissal in such situations , but was critical of Sebelius for so far not agreeing to testify .
“ Her refusal to testify and be transparent has undermined her credibility , ” he told ███ , adding her not testifying could lead to her resignation .
House investigators say they want to know whether officials involved in the website “ didn ’ t know or didn ’ t disclose ” problems , after repeatedly saying the site was “ on track ” to launch .
Though the White House said this weekend that 476,000 people have applied online for health insurance , officials have yet to say how many people have bought a policy .
Missouri Republican Sen. Roy Blunt told ███ that Sebelius ’ position appears “ unsustainable . ”
“ She can not sustain it , ” he said . “ She ’ ll have to testify . ”
Commerce committee Chairman Fred Upton began focusing on Secretary Sebelius after she went to Comedy Central ’ s “ The Daily Show with Jon Stewart ” last week to talk about the website .
“ Secretary Sebelius had time for Jon Stewart , and we expect her to have time for Congress , ” the Michigan Republican has repeatedly said .