Chris Van Hollen has called the repeal vote an 'empty political gesture . ' Dems : Health care vote will backfire
Democrats predicted Wednesday the House ’ s 33rd vote to repeal the health care reform law would backfire on the GOP by “ alienating ” independent voters .
Calling the expected vote on Wednesday an “ empty political gesture , ” Rep. Chris Van Hollen , the top Democrat on the House Budget Committee , contrasted the repeated votes on the health care law with the lack of votes on the jobs plan the president pushed last fall . Democrats have criticized the vote , arguing it would do little to create jobs .
The latest vote comes two weeks after the Supreme Court upheld the law as constitutional . None of the previous votes have resulted in Senate action , and President Barack Obama would veto any attempt to roll back his signature domestic achievement .
Rep. Jeb Hensarling , a Texas Republican who chairs the House Republican Conference , said on CNN ’ s “ Starting Point. ” the series of votes on “ the seminal issue of our time ” was justified . Hensarling said previous landmark laws — including major civil rights legislation and welfare reform in the 1990s — faced repeated votes that went nowhere before finally passing .
“ People who have worked on government-controlled health care worked on it for 20 years , ” he said . “ Those of us who want patient-centered health care have had two years to repeal it . It ’ s kind of unreasonable to think we ’ re going to go away . ”
Hensarling also insisted the health care bill was a major impediment to job growth , citing what small-business owners in his district have told him .
Sen. Jim DeMint ( R-S.C. ) said the vote was a test to see if Democrats would still support the legislation despite new information about its impact .
” We know that millions of Americans are going to lose their health insurance if it ’ s implemented next year , ” he said on “ Starting Point. ” “ We know many states are going to be bankrupted by this whole process . We know it ’ s going to cost a whole lot more than they said it would cost . ”
House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer cited a Kaiser Family Foundation poll showing 56 percent of Americans want the law ’ s opponents to move on from trying to block the bill .
“ I think Republicans are wrong in thinking the American people want to retreat , ” Hoyer said on “ Fox and Friends. ” “ What the American people want the Congress to be doing is focusing on the economy . ”
Van Hollen , another Marylander , also insisted the law was becoming more popular two years after its passage , citing provisions allowing children to stay on their parents ’ health insurance until age 26 and preventing insurance companies from denying coverage because of pre-existing conditions .
“ I think the polls show there ’ s growing support for the health care law as more and more people realize what ’ s in it and benefit from it , ” he said on “ Starting Point. ” “ I think the American people are beginning to set aside all of the demagoguery and beginning to focus on what the bill actually does . ”