Sharon Wilson , an office manager in Iowa , figured she would lock in a good deal on health care coverage for her five-person biofuels company by renewing its policy before Obamacare kicked in for 2014 . But she balked when her agent came back with a 81 percent rate hike , anyway .
Her company , Prairie City-based Midwest Renewable Biofuels , had experienced rate hikes during her career , Ms. Wilson said , but not like this . Plus , the previous jumps were accompanied by explanations for why premiums were rising .
This time , she was left guessing about her insurer and the role of President Obama ’ s signature health care law .
“ I really think there was fear on their part of the unknown , ” she said .
While most of the early Obamacare rollout problems have focused on the uninsured and those who get their policies through the individual market exchanges , more than 150 million Americans who get coverage through their employers are likely to feel the fallout as well .
“ The more fundamental question is , ‘ What does this do to the commercial market ? ’ ” said Dan Mendelson , CEO of Avalere Health , a Washington-based consultancy .
Already reeling from criticism over his flawed promise that people who like their health care plans will be able to keep them , Mr. Obama risks further erosion of his credibility if people believe his health care law is cutting into job-based plans they figured were safe .
The Department of Health and Human Services insists that the Affordable Care Act as it rolls out is cutting costs and will help businesses in the long run , but an Associated Press-GfK poll said that nearly half of Americans with job-based coverage or other forms of insurance report that their policies are changing in the coming year — mostly for the worse — and that four out of five of them will blame Obamacare for it .
“ No doubt , premiums have been rising consistently for some time , ” said Cynthia Magnuson , a spokeswoman for the National Federation of Independent Business , the advocacy group that fought Obamacare up to the Supreme Court . “ However , the health care law has not addressed costs and in many cases has caused them to rise more sharply and rapidly than they would have otherwise , particularly when one considers the added cost of new regulations , etc . ”
Assessing the impact of Obamacare on the employer-based market is tricky given the myriad factors that affect annual premium changes .
But given the political climate and the early problems with HealthCare.gov and the individual market , many critics are poised to blame any premium increases on the law .
“ Any change is going to be attributed to the Affordable Care Act , ” said Timothy Jost , a health care policy analyst at Washington and Lee University School of Law .
According to the Census Bureau , less than 55 percent of Americans had employment-based health care plans this year , down from nearly 63 percent over the past decade . Medicare and Medicaid provide health care for the elderly and the poor .
Analysts said smaller employers face the biggest consequences because they are less able to handle adverse changes to the balance of sick and healthy employees than larger firms can . It is a pressing concern because the law prohibits insurers from rejecting people with pre-existing conditions and from charging older consumers more than young people by more than a 3-1 ratio .
Additionally , the health care overhaul includes numerous taxes and fees .
Levies include a “ reinsurance fee ” of $ 63 per employee from health insurance issuers and third-party administrators on behalf of self-insured plans . The revenue will be used to stabilize the individual market from 2014 to 2016 , when sicker consumers enter risk pools under Obamacare .
Other costs include a $ 2-per-person tax this year through 2019 to promote medical research , and a more significant tax on health insurers — phased in by 2018 — that is imposed relative to health premiums collected that year .
“ Those are also going to increase the cost of insurance for all employer plans , ” because the costs are passed along to firms and their employees , said Michael F. Cannon , a health care policy director at the Cato Institute .
Mr. Mendelson said the commercial insurance market is starting to notice the low-premium model that companies are using to attract people to the Obamacare exchanges . Employers are drawn to plans with low upfront costs — they seem like good deals to their employees — even though those workers find themselves saddled with higher deductibles and co-pays .
“ I think we ’ re going to start to see this in 2014 , all these things , ” Mr. Mendelson said .
The Obama administration says the early evidence is that the health care law has worked to keep prices lower .
“ Since the Affordable Care Act became law , health care costs have been slowing and premiums are increasing by the lowest rates in years , ” HHS spokeswoman Joanne Peters said . “ The law is making it easier for businesses to offer coverage , just like it did in Massachusetts when employer coverage increased after reform passed . ”
The agency also pointed to the small-business feature of the Obamacare exchanges , known as “ SHOPs , ” which will provide tax credits and more bargaining power to small firms .
But some states have struggled to set up their SHOP exchanges , and the federal exchange system that serves 36 states will not provide online services on its SHOP until 2015 .
Ms. Wilson , the office manager , said she wasted a lot of time trying to get onto the federal small-business exchange online before an insurance agent helped her get through SHOP ’ s paper-based process . Like many other small-business executives , she said she is working quickly to lock in coverage by January that is comparable to what the company had this past year .