Donald Trump is indeed serious about repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act . And to show just how serious he is , on Tuesday he chose conservative Rep. Tom Price to lead the Department of Health and Human Services .
Representative Price , a Republican doctor from Georgia , stridently opposes Obamacare . He has also put forward legislation to replace it in every Congress since the bill was passed in 2010 .
If putting Price in charge of HHS is like “ asking the fox to guard the hen house , ” as Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D ) of New York puts it , that ’ s fine with Republicans .
At last , under unified GOP control in Washington , Republicans have an opportunity to act on their vision of healthcare for America – a vision that greatly reduces the role of the federal government in health decisions .
“ The Republican approach is designed to focus on the individual , the patient – not on a government program , ” says G. William Hoagland , senior vice president of the Bipartisan Policy Center . “ It ’ s a very private-sector oriented approach to healthcare . ”
If the Senate confirms Price as secretary of HHS , he will oversee a $ 1 trillion budget , about 80,000 employees , and nearly a dozen divisions – from Medicare and Medicaid to the Food and Drug Administration .
Price firmly supports House Speaker Paul Ryan ’ s effort to partly privatize Medicare , healthcare for seniors . He also wants to strip Planned Parenthood of federal funding .
`` There is much work to be done to ensure we have a health care system that works for patients , families , and doctors ; that leads the world in the cure and prevention of illness ; and that is based on sensible rules to protect the well-being of the country while embracing its innovative spirit , '' said Price in a statement about his appointment .
As an orthopedic surgeon with more than 20 years of experience and the chairman of the House Budget Committee since 2015 , he will bring a high level of practical knowledge – both medical and fiscal – to his new post in the executive branch .
“ This is the absolute perfect choice , ” said Speaker Ryan in a statement .
Republicans are expected to attempt to repeal the ACA early next year , through a budgetary process that requires only a majority vote in both houses for approval . They used the same process in 2015 , gutting much of the law . President Obama vetoed it .
But the bigger challenge has always been to agree on a replacement . Republicans have circulated various proposals for replacing the ACA over the years , but they have not come to a consensus .
In the House , at least , they now seem to have generally settled on a series of points outlined in a document called “ A Better Way , ” which Price supports .
In the document , Republicans would keep popular provisions of the ACA , such as having pre-existing conditions covered and allowing young people to stay on their parents ’ insurance .
But they would drop the federal and state “ marketplace exchanges ” set up under the ACA . As individuals and families begin 2018 enrollment in the exchanges , many of them are facing skyrocketing premiums and far less choice among plans – though they do get federal subsidies to help bear the cost increases .
The Better Way outline would instead help people purchase insurance on the open market with the help of refundable tax credits . Price , Ryan , and President-elect Trump also all favor health insurance that is available across state lines . And they would provide greater incentives for people to put away pre-tax dollars in health savings accounts .
For those who are priced out of these policies , the House Republican plan calls for federally subsidized “ high-risk pools ” and for Medicaid ( healthcare for the poor ) to be devolved to the states in the form of block grants or based on a state ’ s population .
Here , President-elect Trump ’ s other healthcare nominee , Seema Verma , would play a particularly important role . Ms. Verma was nominated Tuesday to head the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , a division of HHS .
Increasing the income threshold to qualify for Medicaid has been the ACA ’ s main tool to get more poor people health coverage . The Supreme Court made that expansion of Medicaid optional for states , and many red states have decided against Medicaid expansion .
But some went ahead , on their own terms . Verma worked with Vice President-elect Mike Pence when he was governor of Indiana to design a Medicaid expansion in keeping with his Republican principles . To some , her appointment signaled pragmatism .
“ To me , the Verma announcement was reassuring . It ’ s not just ‘ let ’ s throw a couple hundred thousand people off Medicaid rolls and let them fend for themselves , ’ ” says Daniel Derksen , director of the Center for Rural Health at the University of Arizona in Tucson .
Dr. Derksen , who once practiced medicine as a family physician , says that Medicaid expansion has greatly helped to cover more people and directly eased the bottom line of hospitals that treat uninsured patients – “ charity ” cases . States have been able to somewhat customize the expansion and that has helped it gain acceptance in some Republican states such as his own .
He says he appreciates the “ personal responsibility ” aspect of Indiana ’ s program , where residents have to contribute to the cost of their coverage . Those above a certain income level who fail to make their payments are dropped and not allowed back for six months .
Critics – and not just Democrats – point to weaknesses in the Better Way plan . Medicaid grants to the states run the risk of failing as a safety net during times of recession , for instance . States are required to balance their budgets , yet the number of poor people who would need Medicaid increases during hard times .
Also , high-risk pools were tried before the ACA fully took effect , and didn ’ t work particularly well , says Derksen , who is a Republican . “ It ’ s hard to make insurance work when you ’ re only covering sick people , ” he says .
He also worries about insurers and Big Pharma having too much sway if the marketplace exchanges are eliminated . He prefers to see the exchanges modeled along the lines of Tricare , the military plan that goes out to bid among insurers .
Then there 's the question of whether the GOP promise to retain the popular aspects of the ACA is doable without the various mandates to purchase or offer insurance , a point that Senator Schumer raises .
Such criticisms will make it far more difficult to replace the ACA than to repeal it .
That ’ s why House Republican majority leader Kevin McCarthy of California told reporters on Tuesday that the plan is to repeal first , then set a transition period in which the law would still be in effect while lawmakers would hash out a replacement .
The replacement would have to be bipartisan if it is to get past the 60-vote threshold in the Senate that ’ s now required for most legislation , Rep. McCarthy said . A slew of Democratic senators from red states who face reelection in 2018 may well feel pressure to compromise with the GOP on a replacement .
At the same time , not all Republicans in the Senate may agree with their House colleagues .
Based on Democrat reactions on Tuesday , the bigger fight is likely to be over changes to Medicare – which Price sees as a cost-cutting priority for the next Congress . He and Ryan want to raise the eligibility age to 67 and transition it to a “ premium support ” program where seniors are provided vouchers to help them buy health insurance .
On the campaign trail , Donald Trump promised not to touch Medicare . Now his transition website says it will “ modernize Medicare ” to preserve it for future generations .
“ We are going to fight tooth and nail any attempt to privatize , voucherize , or any other ‘ ize ’ you can think of when it comes to Medicare , ” said Senator Schumer , in remarks to reporters on Tuesday .
In 2012 , when Ryan was Mitt Romney ’ s vice presidential running mate , Democrats ran a memorable ad based on Ryan ’ s plan to turn Medicare into a partial voucher system . The “ granny ” ad , which depicted a Ryan look-alike pushing an elderly woman in a wheelchair over a cliff , was politically devastating for Republicans .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ Voters are largely insured . So talking about the ACA is one thing . But messing with Medicare is another , ” says Democratic pollster Celinda Lake in an email .
There is a reason Trump had to say otherwise on the campaign trail , says Ms. Lake . “ Medicare 's favorability is 65-66 percent – significantly higher than most of the politicians who want to cut or do away with it . ”