Senate Republican leaders unveiled what they called a `` discussion draft '' of their long-awaited health care bill , a part of the party 's ongoing efforts to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act .
Interested in Health Care Overhaul ? Add Health Care Overhaul as an interest to stay up to date on the latest Health Care Overhaul news , video , and analysis from ███ . Add Interest
Five Republican senators have already come out in opposition to the Senate bill , the Better Care Reconciliation Act , jeopardizing its passage .
Critics on both sides of the aisle said the bill , which was drafted behind closed doors by a small group of Senate leaders and committee staffers , has been shrouded in secrecy .
Trump told reporters Thursday that there will be `` a little negotiation , but it 's going to be very good . ''
GOP Sens . Ted Cruz of Texas , Ron Johnson of Wisconsin , Mike Lee of Utah and Rand Paul of Kentucky released a joint statement saying , `` Currently , for a variety of reasons , we are not ready to vote for this bill , but we are open to negotiation and obtaining more information before it is brought to the floor . ''
They added , `` There are provisions in this draft that represent an improvement to our current health care system , but it does not appear this draft as written will accomplish the most important promise that we made to Americans : to repeal Obamacare and lower their health care costs . ''
In a separate statement , Paul said he 'll oppose the bill `` in its current form , but I remain open to negotiations . ''
`` The current bill does not repeal Obamacare . It does not keep our promises to the American people , '' he said .
On Friday , Sen. Dean Heller , R-Nev. , joined the group , saying at a press conference that `` this bill is not the answer , it 's simply not the answer . ''
`` In this form , I will not support it , '' said Heller .
Sen. Susan Collins , R-Maine , told reporters Thursday she has `` not yet had the opportunity to read the text of the bill , and the details really matter . ''
`` I see some positive features of this bill that are improvements over the House , and I see some negative features based on my first analysis , '' she said . `` I do n't like the provision that eliminates federal funding for Planned Parenthood . It makes no sense to single out Planned Parenthood from all the Medicaid providers . There 's already a ban against using federal funds for abortions , so there 's absolutely no need for that . ''
A vote from Collins , who has been willing to break from her party , would be key to ensuring the bill 's passage .
Senate Republicans can afford to lose only two of their members to pass the bill , assuming Democrats remain united in their opposition .
As members left a meeting about the bill , many said they were encouraged by their first impressions of the text but were hesitant to say if it would clear the 50 vote threshold for passage .
`` There 's a lot to digest . It 's very complicated , '' Sen. Pat Toomey , R-Pa. , said as he left the gathering .
Some Republicans said they liked how the Senate bill calculates the value of tax credits to help individuals pay for insurance .
While the House bill linked the tax credits to age only , the Senate bill considers age , income and geographical area .
`` A person making about $ 12,000 a year will have more access and a lower cost of health insurance . And that 's a really good thing , '' said Sen. Tim Scott , R-S.C .
But Sen. John Thune , R-S.D. , a member of Senate leadership , acknowledged that the draft would not pass in its current form .
`` Right now the challenge is , how do we get to 50 ? '' he said .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell indicated that he wants to get a vote before the July 4 legislative recess .
The bill 's release was met with significant opposition from Democrats and other supporters of the Affordable Care Act .
Under current law , all insurance plans have to include , at a minimum , specified essential health benefits , including ambulance service , hospitalization , maternity care and prescription drug coverage . Under the Senate bill , states would be allowed to apply for waivers from those regulations and essentially scrap them to write their own rules .
As the bill was being unveiled , a large demonstration formed outside McConnell 's office , with people in wheelchairs staging a die-in and protesters chanting that no changes be made to Medicaid . Demonstrators were physically removed by Capitol Police officers .
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer slammed the Senate bill as `` every bit as bad '' as the American Health Care Act passed in the House .
`` The president said the Senate bill needed heart . The way this bill cuts health care is heartless , '' Schumer said Thursday . `` The president said the house bill was mean . The Senate bill may be meaner . ''
He continued , `` The Senate Republican health care bill is a wolf in sheep 's clothing , only this wolf has even sharper teeth than the House bill . ''
During her weekly press conference , House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said it 's important to stop the legislation , which she called `` a tax bill disguised as a health care bill . ''
Top medical organizations call on the Senate to reject the bill
So far , the Senate health care bill has not gotten any backing from top health or medical organizations . The American Public Health Association , the American Psychiatric Association and the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology released statements urging the Senate to reject the Better Care Reconciliation Act and expressed concerns over the closed-door negotiation process .
`` The Senate proposal represents a significant move in the wrong direction , resulting in fewer people having access to insurance , fewer patient protections and less coverage for essential behavioral health care , '' American Psychiatric Association 's CEO and medical director , Saul Levin , said in a statement .
The American Public Health Association attacked the bill 's closed-door shaping as `` legislative malpractice . ''
The American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology said , `` Despite numerous efforts to collaborate and provide input throughout this process , women 's health expertise was rejected . It is reckless for legislation that will have such an immense impact on Americans ' lives and the economy to proceed without opportunity for public hearings or any external commentary . ''
███ ' John Parkinson , Mariam Khan and MaryAlice Parks contributed to this story .