WHEN Karen Pineman of Manhattan received notice that her longtime health insurance policy didn ’ t comply with the Affordable Care Act ’ s requirements , she gamely set about shopping for a new policy through the public marketplace . After all , she ’ d supported President Obama and the act as a matter of principle . Ms. Pineman , who is self-employed , accepted that she ’ d have to pay higher premiums for a plan with a narrower provider network and no out-of-network coverage . She accepted that she ’ d have to pay out of pocket to see her primary care physician , who didn ’ t participate . She even accepted having co-pays of nearly $ 1,800 to have a cast put on her ankle in an emergency room after she broke it while playing tennis . But her frustration bubbled over when she tried to arrange a follow-up visit with an orthopedist in her Empire Blue Cross/Blue Shield network : The nearest doctor available who treated ankle problems was in Stamford , Conn . When she called to protest , her insurer said that Stamford was 14 miles from her home and 15 was considered a reasonable travel distance . “ It was ridiculous — didn ’ t they notice it was in another state ? ” said Ms. Pineman , 46 , who was on crutches . She instead paid $ 350 to see a nearby orthopedist and bought a boot on Amazon as he suggested . She has since forked over hundreds of dollars more for a physical therapist that insurance didn ’ t cover , even though that provider was in-network .
The Affordable Care Act has ushered in an era of complex new health insurance products featuring legions of out-of-pocket coinsurance fees , high deductibles and narrow provider networks . Though commercial insurers had already begun to shift toward such policies , the health care law gave them added legitimacy and has vastly accelerated the trend , experts say ... For some , like Ms. Pineman , narrow networks can necessitate footing bills privately . For others , the constant changes in policy guidelines — annual shifts in what ’ s covered and what ’ s not , monthly shifts in which doctors are in and out of network — can produce surprise bills for services they assumed would be covered . For still others , the new fees are so confusing and unsupportable that they just avoid seeing doctors ... by endorsing and expanding the complex new policies promoted by the health care industry , the law may in some ways be undermining its signature promise : health care that is accessible and affordable for all .
“ I ’ m always curious when I read this ‘ good news ’ that health costs are moderating , because my health care costs go up significantly each year , and I think that ’ s a common experience , ” said Mark Rukavina , president of Community Health Advisors in Massachusetts . While much of the focus in the past has been on keeping premiums manageable , “ premiums now tell only a part of the story , ” Mr. Rukavina said , adding : “ A big part of the way they ’ ve kept premiums down is to shift costs to patients in the form of co-pays and deductibles and other types of out-of-pocket expenses . And that can leave patients very vulnerable . ”
Yes , it 's time once again for yet another post illustrating a core criticism of Obamacare , and various forms of government-run or -micromanaged healthcare more generally ; namely , the fact that `` coverage '' or `` insurance '' does not equal . Various media outlets have been reporting on this phenomenon for months , including the New York Times , which published another cautionary piece this week : Here is a staunch Obama supporter who 's so ideologically loyal that she refused to become upset when her existing healthcare plan was deemed non-compliant and canceled under Obamacare . She made her peace with paying higher premiums and higher out-of-pocket expenses . She was even willing to live with her pared-down network of doctors and healthcare facilities . Being personally betrayed by multiple , major presidential promises was n't enough to shake her commitment to the president or his signature law . But the long drives to see an in-network provider and the hundreds of extra out-of-pocket dollars flying out of her bank account finally led to `` frustration bubbl [ ing ] over . '' She 's now a poster child of discontentment with Obamacare , featured in the nation 's most prominent left-leaning newspaper . The story goes on Higher costs , `` constant changes , '' surprise bills , outright confusion , and the avoidance of seeking care . Devatasting stuff from the Times , which quotes a healthcare industry professional who rejects the happy talk emanating from the administration and its supporters ( by the way , I dealt with and debunked virtually every major point attempted in that Newsweek piece ) : True . And the premiums are still increasing -- by double-digit percentages for some consumers -- across the board , and are likely to push higher over the coming years . Of course , we were told Obamacare would significantly slash rates . And the `` coverage '' those rates are paying for does n't kick in until deductibles are exhausted -- if you can find an in-network provider nearby , of course . This is the `` Affordable '' Care Act at work . And as millions more Americans lose their employer-based coverage over time ( again underscoring a major Obamacare deception ) , they 'll encounter the privilege of navigating the cost and access landmines inherent in the individual market plans offered on the exchanges . Nevertheless , President Obama again declared the law a success in an interview with Buzzfeed , citing `` high satisfaction '' ( not among the general public , not among those impacted by the law , not among the uninsured ) and low premiums ( see above ) . He also slammed office supply retailer Staples for its policy of strictly capping part-time employee hours at 25 percent to avoid compliance with the expensive employer mandate and its 30-hour rule . ( This guideline has been in place for years , Staples says , although the new law seems to have added to the urgency its enforcement ) . `` Shame on them , '' Obama said of Staples : Ed Morrissey breaks down the folly of the president 's answer in detail , including Obama 's bizarre assertion that Staples is somehow blocking their employees from getting Obamacare . The opposite is true : By not blowing expenses through the roof by providing healthcare to a large new group of employees ( jeopardizing jobs , profits and shareholders ) , Staples management is actually encouraging employees to seek coverage through the exchanges . The only trouble is that the company 's part-time employees will be working fewer hours and making less money with which to purchase coverage ... which should n't be a costly endeavor at all , according to the president . If Obama wanted low-wage workers like these to take home more pay , he could stop threatening to veto Republican attempts to restore a 40-hour work week as the employer mandate threshold . Obama is lashing out at companies for noticing and adjusting to the consequences of his policies . If they protect their interests and fiduciary responsibilities by fulfilling critics ' predictions about the law , then shame on reality , he scolds . Do n't blame him or his policies for the inevitable fallout for working people . Finally , were n't Democrats just celebrating the `` liberation '' of workers from `` job lock , '' thanks to Obamacare ? That was their spin in the face of CBO findings that Obamacare is reducing the full-time workforce by the equivalent of millions of workers . Was n't it a good thing that people would have more free time to pursue their hopes and dreams without the shackles of full-time work ?