Although some of the `` fiscal cliff '' taxes can be avoided through a deal made in Congress , new ObamaCare taxes are guaranteed to kick in on January 1 , amounting to $ 268 billion tax hike . From Americans for Tax Reform :
The Obamacare Medical Device Tax – a $ 20 billion tax increase : Medical device manufacturers employ 409,000 people in 12,000 plants across the country . Obamacare imposes a new 2.3 percent excise tax on gross sales – even if the company does not earn a profit in a given year . In addition to killing small business jobs and impacting research and development budgets , this will increase the cost of your health care – making everything from pacemakers to prosthetics more expensive .
The Obamacare “ Special Needs Kids Tax ” – a $ 13 billion tax increase : The 30-35 million Americans who use a Flexible Spending Account ( FSA ) at work to pay for their family ’ s basic medical needs will face a new government cap of $ 2,500 ( currently the accounts are unlimited under federal law , though employers are allowed to set a cap ) .
There is one group of FSA owners for whom this new cap will be particularly cruel and onerous : parents of special needs children . There are several million families with special needs children in the United States , and many of them use FSAs to pay for special needs education . Tuition rates at one leading school that teaches special needs children in Washington , D.C. ( National Child Research Center ) can easily exceed $ 14,000 per year . Under tax rules , FSA dollars can be used to pay for this type of special needs education . This Obamacare tax provision will limit the options available to these families .
The Obamacare Surtax on Investment Income – a $ 123 billion tax increase : This is a new , 3.8 percentage point surtax on investment income earned in households making at least $ 250,000 ( $ 200,000 single ) . This would result in the following top tax rates on investment income : The table above also incorporates the scheduled hike in the capital gains rate from 15 to 20 percent , and the scheduled hike in dividends rate from 15 to 39.6 percent .
The Obamacare “ Haircut ” for Medical Itemized Deductions – a $ 15.2 billion tax increase : Currently , those Americans facing high medical expenses are allowed a deduction to the extent that those expenses exceed 7.5 percent of adjusted gross income ( AGI ) . This tax increase imposes a threshold of 10 percent of AGI . By limiting this deduction , Obamacare widens the net of taxable income for the sickest Americans . This tax provision will most harm near retirees and those with modest incomes but high medical bills .
The Obamacare Medicare Payroll Tax Hike -- an $ 86.8 billion tax increase : The Medicare payroll tax is currently 2.9 percent on all wages and self-employment profits . Under this tax hike , wages and profits exceeding $ 200,000 ( $ 250,000 in the case of married couples ) will face a 3.8 percent rate instead . This is a direct marginal income tax hike on small business owners , who are liable for self-employment tax in most cases . The table below compares current law vs. the Obamacare Medicare Payroll Tax Hike :
Not only will these taxes hit people in the wallet , but they will also have a negative long term effect on employment and the medical device industry .
Not only does this tax increase costs on companies , it also increases costs on hospitals , doctors and people in need of medical treatment that requires medical devices to be used . As a consequence of this , biomedical or medical device engineering firms are already laying off workers who develop crucial medical products due to the `` unforeseen '' costs , or in other words , the costs of ObamaCare . Not to mention , the more money these companies pay to the government , the less money they have to invest in research and development .
With this new medical device tax , students who pay large sums of money to get degrees in the field of biomedical engineering , just like doctors , will no longer see the benefits of going into the field and therefore , we will have a shortage of engineers developing new medical device technology . The medical device tax is a death sentence for American medical innovation .
This is only the beginning , the entire ObamaCare legislation kicks on by 2014 with many more tax hikes to come .