Nearly five years after President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law , federal budget scorekeepers have sharply revised down the projected costs of the signature bill .
In the latest projection , published by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office on Monday , the major provisions of the law will cost the government 11 % less than they forecast six weeks ago , or $ 142 billion over the coming decade .
Overall , the health-care law will now cost 29 % less for the 2015-19 period than was first forecast by the CBO when the law was signed in March 2010 . Back then , the CBO and the congressional Joint Committee on Taxation estimated that for the last five years of their 10-year projection , Obamacare would cost $ 710 billion . Now , they expect it will cost $ 506 billion for the same period .
In 2019 , for example , the agencies project Obamacare will cost $ 116 billion , which is down 33 % from the initial forecast for the same year made in 2010 .
Monday ’ s report illustrates two dynamics at play . First , health-care costs are rising more slowly than previous forecasts assumed . And slightly fewer people than anticipated are signing up for health insurance through federal exchanges .
The CBO estimates the government will spend 20 % less on subsidies provided to individuals who purchase health insurance through the federal health exchange , or around $ 209 billion in lower-than-projected costs over the coming 10 years .
The government won ’ t see all of that savings , however , because the CBO also estimates that the government will collect less money from taxes on certain high-premium insurance plans . The latest forecast now projects taxes on those so-called “ Cadillac ” plans will bring in 41 % less money , or $ 62 billion in reduced revenues . The CBO forecast shows that in 2022 , the tax will bring 71 % less than projected in 2012 .
The decrease in government spending on the health-exchange subsidies is linked in part to projections of slower growth in health-care spending . The growth in private health insurance spending per enrollee over the 2006-13 period averaged 1.8 % per year , compared with an average rate of 5 % per year during the 1998-2005 period , according to the report .
In the past , the CBO had assumed that the recent slowdown in health-care inflation was temporary and would quickly reverse . The latest projections assume that health-care inflation will rise more modestly .
The slower growth in health-care spending is attributed in part to the slow economic recovery and more insurance cost-sharing requirements like deductibles , which have prompted consumers to rein in their own spending on medical care . Medicare spending growth has also slowed .
The CBO report also decreased its estimate of the number of people who will be without health insurance to around 25 million , from its prior forecast of 27 million .
The report also reflects lower-than-expected enrollment in federal and state exchanges set up under the Affordable Care Act . The Obama administration said about 11.4 million people signed up for private insurance through the health law ’ s exchanges so far this year .
The CBO earlier estimated that 13 million people would enroll in private health plans in 2015 but has since lowered that projection .