The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office on Tuesday released its annual budget report . Depending on your politics , it was either a vindication of ObamaCare , or a blistering case against it .
The report finds that ObamaCare will result in 2 million fewer American jobs by 2017 , three times higher than the CBO 's previous projection . That figure is projected to increase to 2.5 million by 2024 .
Broadly speaking , that affirms what Republicans have claimed all along about ObamaCare costing the economy jobs . Speaker of the House John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) said in a statement that the `` middle class is getting squeezed in this economy , and this CBO report confirms that ObamaCare is making it worse . ''
With ObamaCare sure to factor prominently in the 2014 midterms , that translates into an easy way for the GOP to attack Democrats who support the health-care law .
`` That 's why I 'm proud of my vote to ensure people work less & the American economy is cost jobs . '' - 2014 Democrat Campaign Talking Points . — Brad Dayspring ( @ BDayspring ) February 4 , 2014
However , the report does n't exactly paint ObamaCare as a `` job killer , '' the GOP 's strongest accusation against it . Rather , the CBO estimates the law will shrink the labor supply — resulting in fewer net jobs per the agency 's scoring — as more people use ObamaCare 's perks to retire earlier or work fewer hours .
Before ObamaCare , Americans typically got insurance through their employers . But the availability of new subsidies under the law will make it easier to obtain coverage solo . Hence , the CBO says the projected job reduction `` stems almost entirely from a net decline in the amount of labor that workers choose to supply , rather than from a net drop in businesses ' demand for labor . ''
So it 's not that ObamaCare is so burdensome that it will kill millions of jobs ; people will just quit or work less .
Here 's the Washington Post 's Sarah Kliff with more on that :
This is the flip side of reducing what health wonks call `` job lock : '' when people stick around in their jobs solely because they need the health insurance that the employer provides . The health-care law takes off that lock in really significant ways , by ending pre-existing conditions and subsidizing low-income buyers on the individual market . When workers have that crucial link between employment and coverage broken , the CBO thinks they 're going to work significantly less . [ The Washington Post ]
That , proponents say , is a good thing . White House Press Secretary Jay Carney pushed back on the `` job-killing '' claim , saying that `` CBO 's findings are not driven by an assumption that [ the Affordable Care Act ] will lead employers to eliminate jobs or reduce hours . ''
`` Americans would no longer be trapped in a job just to provide coverage for their families , '' he added .
The full picture is a little more complicated , as Business Insider 's Josh Barro explains in great detail here . But the general idea on the jobs picture is still the same : the CBO believes ObamaCare will trim the labor supply , but in ways the law 's supporters think are actually beneficial .
Elsewhere , the report estimates that 6 million people will enroll in the health-care exchanges , while 8 million will sign up for Medicaid ; each estimate is 1 million below the administration 's old projections . Again , this could be spun as either a sign of failure or success .
To critics , the news means ObamaCare will fall short of its own goals . However , that 's not too big of a miss , and given the federal exchange 's horrible debut — which the CBO blames for the shortfall — it 's better than anyone would have expected a few months ago . Plus , the state and federal exchanges are finally humming along , and the CBO estimates enrollments will eventually catch up .
Then there 's the risk-adjustments pieces of ObamaCare , which Republicans claim are a secret government bailout of the insurance industry . The report disagrees in an an unequivocal bit of good news for Democrats , finding that insurance companies will receive about $ 8 billion — but then pay back double , or $ 16 billion .
But the spin that matters most will be what resonates with voters . And on that front , Republicans probably have the much easier argument : `` ObamaCare means 2 million fewer jobs , according to the nonpartisan CBO '' versus `` ObamaCare 2 million fewer jobs we do n't need , because economics is complicated . ''