It was precisely eight o'clock Tuesday night and the Senate chamber was nearly empty when Texas Republican Senator Ted Cruz started reading `` Green Eggs and Ham , '' aloud .
Sure , it was a filibuster , sort of . And the Princeton and Harvard Law School graduate had been talking for five hours , with many more promised as part of an effort to block funding for President Barack Obama 's Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , known as Obamacare .
But it was his kids ' bedtime , Cruz explained . They were watching him on TV and needed their bedtime story .
Hopefully , they were n't counting on it too much . Less than two stanzas into the famed Dr. Seuss rhyme - just about where `` Sam I am '' declares `` I do not like green eggs and ham '' - Cruz changed the subject to Obamacare .
`` Green eggs and ham , '' Cruz explained , `` has some applicability to the Obamacare bill . ''
Just how it applied to Obamacare was never made very clear .
But clarity fades in a filibuster , and the talker has to keep on talking or reading .
Strom Thurmond , the late Senator from South Carolina , had read the Declaration of Independence , the Bill of Rights and President George Washington 's Farewell address during his fabled 1957 filibuster to block civil rights legislation . That one lasted 24 hours and 18 minutes , still the record .
Alfonse D'Amato , then Senator from New York , resorted to the phone book during his filibuster , an attempt to delay a 1986 military spending bill .
Filibusters are experiencing a revival . Rand Paul of Kentucky staged one earlier this year . Wendy Davis filibustered in the Texas State Senate for 11 hours to block an abortion bill .
Technically , the Cruz talkathon was not a filibuster . While the legislation at issue was a Republican measure to keep the government open and Obamacare closed , the Senate was actually adjourned and the members had already decided not to let Cruz or anyone else block a vote .
His talking would have no impact on the outcome of the debate and would not go down in history as a filibuster .
Three potential 2016 Republican presidential contenders assisted in the talkathon , Senators Marco Rubio of Florida , Paul of Kentucky and Cruz .
`` Senators do n't always ask for advice , '' said Paul . `` I thought I 'd come down and make sure you have comfortable shoes on . ''
Paul and Rubio played crucial roles , asking Cruz lengthy questions , which under Senate rules allowed him to take short breaks without `` yielding the floor '' that would end the filibuster .
Thanks to Paul and Rubio and a few other colleagues , Cruz was briefly free to move about the Senate , with his hands in his pockets , sometimes with his arms folded at his chest .
Cruz may also be unpopular among his colleagues in the Senate , a distinction he acknowledged repeatedly Tuesday night , with references to the `` withering criticisms '' he had received from members of his own party , and to `` mean '' things said about him by `` Senate staffers running to newspapers .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
`` A little bit of grief for breaking party discipline , '' Cruz said , was a `` small price '' to pay .
( Additional reporting by Patricia Zengerle , Richard Cowan and David Lawder ; Editing by Ken Wills )