A NOTE ABOUT OUR PHOTOGRAPHS So many images you see in articles about obesity strip fat people of their strength and personality . According to a recent study , only 11 percent of large people depicted in news reports were wearing professional clothing . Nearly 60 percent were headless torsos . So , we asked our interview subjects to take full creative control of the photos in this piece . This is how they want to present themselves to the world . “ As a kid , I thought that fat people were just lonely and sad—almost like these pathetic lost causes . So I want to show that we get to experience love , too . I ’ m not some 'fat friend ' or some dude 's chubby chasing dream . I 'm genuinely happy . I just wish I 'd known how possible that was when I was a kiddo. ” — CORISSA ENNEKING
This is Corissa Enneking at her lightest : She wakes up , showers and smokes a cigarette to keep her appetite down . She drives to her job at a furniture store , she stands in four-inch heels all day , she eats a cup of yogurt alone in her car on her lunch break . After work , lightheaded , her feet throbbing , she counts out three Ritz crackers , eats them at her kitchen counter and writes down the calories in her food journal .
Or not . Some days she comes home and goes straight to bed , exhausted and dizzy from hunger , shivering in the Kansas heat . She rouses herself around dinnertime and drinks some orange juice or eats half a granola bar . Occasionally she ’ ll just sleep through the night , waking up the next day to start all over again .
More Stories on Highline MILLENIALS ARE SCREWED Why they ’ re facing the scariest financial future of any generation since the Great Depression . TOGETHER ALONE The epidemic of gay loneliness .
The last time she lived like this , a few years ago , her mother marched her to the hospital . “ My daughter is sick , ” she told the doctor . “ She 's not eating. ” He looked Enneking up and down . Despite six months of starvation , she was still wearing plus sizes , still couldn ’ t shop at J . Crew , still got unsolicited diet advice from colleagues and customers .
Enneking told the doctor that she used to be larger , that she ’ d lost some weight the same way she had lost it three or four times before—seeing how far she could get through the day without eating , trading solids for liquids , food for sleep . She was hungry all the time , but she was learning to like it . When she did eat , she got panic attacks . Her boss was starting to notice her erratic behavior .
“ Well , whatever you 're doing now , ” the doctor said , “ it 's working. ” He urged her to keep it up and assured her that once she got small enough , her body would start to process food differently . She could add a few hundred calories to her diet . Her period would come back . She would stay small , but without as much effort .
“ If you looked at anything other than my weight , ” Enneking says now , “ I had an eating disorder . And my doctor was congratulating me . ”
Ask almost any fat person about her interactions with the health care system and you will hear a story , sometimes three , the same as Enneking ’ s : rolled eyes , skeptical questions , treatments denied or delayed or revoked . Doctors are supposed to be trusted authorities , a patient ’ s primary gateway to healing . But for fat people , they are a source of unique and persistent trauma . No matter what you go in for or how much you ’ re hurting , the first thing you will be told is that it would all get better if you could just put down the Cheetos .
Emily went to a gynecological surgeon to have an ovarian cyst removed . The physician pointed out her body fat on the MRI , then said , “ Look at that skinny woman in there trying to get out . ”
This phenomenon is not merely anecdotal . Doctors have shorter appointments with fat patients and show less emotional rapport in the minutes they do have . Negative words— “ noncompliant , ” “ overindulgent , ” “ weak willed ” —pop up in their medical histories with higher frequency . In one study , researchers presented doctors with case histories of patients suffering from migraines . With everything else being equal , the doctors reported that the patients who were also classified as fat had a worse attitude and were less likely to follow their advice . And that ’ s when they see fat patients at all : In 2011 , the Sun-Sentinel polled OB-GYNs in South Florida and discovered that 14 percent had barred all new patients weighing more than 200 pounds .
Some of these doctors are simply applying the same presumptions as the society around them . An anesthesiologist on the West Coast tells me that as soon as a larger patient goes under , the surgeons start trading “ high school insults ” about her body over the operating table . Janice O ’ Keefe , a former nurse in Boston , tells me a doctor once looked at her , paused , then asked , “ How could you do this to yourself ? ” Emily , a counselor in Eastern Washington , went to a gynecological surgeon to have an ovarian cyst removed . The physician pointed out her body fat on the MRI , then said , “ Look at that skinny woman in there trying to get out . ”
“ I was worried I had cancer , ” Emily says , “ and she was turning it into a teachable moment about my weight . ”
Other physicians sincerely believe that shaming fat people is the best way to motivate them to lose weight . “ It ’ s the last area of medicine where we prescribe tough love , ” says Mayo Clinic researcher Sean Phelan .
In a 2013 journal article , bioethicist Daniel Callahan argued for more stigma against fat people . “ People don ’ t realize that they are obese or if they do realize it , it ’ s not enough to stir them to do anything about it , ” he tells me . Shame helped him kick his cigarette habit , he argues , so it should work for obesity too .
This belief is cartoonishly out of step with a generation of research into obesity and human behavior . As one of the ( many ) stigma researchers who responded to Callahan ’ s article pointed out , shaming smokers and drug users with D.A.R.E.-style “ just say no ” messages may have actually increased substance abuse by making addicts less likely to bring up their habit with their doctors and family members .
Plus , rather obviously , smoking is a behavior ; being fat is not . Jody Dushay , an endocrinologist and obesity specialist at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston , says most of her patients have tried dozens of diets and have lost and regained hundreds of pounds before they come to her . Telling them to try again , but in harsher terms , only sets them up to fail and then blame themselves .
89 % of obese adults have been bullied by their romantic partners Source : University of Connecticut , 2017
Not all physicians set out to denigrate their fat patients , of course ; some of them do damage because of subtler , more unconscious biases . Most doctors , for example , are fit— “ If you go to an obesity conference , good luck trying to get a treadmill at 5 a.m. , ” Dushay says—and have spent more than a decade of their lives in the high-stakes , high-stress bubble of medical schools . According to several studies , thin doctors are more confident in their recommendations , expect their patients to lose more weight and are more likely to think dieting is easy . Sarah ( not her real name ) , a tech CEO in New England , once told her doctor that she was having trouble eating less throughout the day . “ Look at me , ” her doctor said . “ I had one egg for breakfast and I feel fine . ”
Then there are the glaring cultural differences . Kenneth Resnicow , a consultant who trains physicians to build rapport with their patients , says white , wealthy , skinny doctors will often try to bond with their low-income patients by telling them , “ I know what it ’ s like not to have time to cook. ” Their patients , who might be single mothers with three kids and two jobs , immediately think “ No , you don ’ t , ” and the relationship is irretrievably soured .
When Joy Cox , an academic in New Jersey , was 16 , she went to the hospital with stomach pains . The doctor didn ’ t diagnose her dangerously inflamed bile duct , but he did , out of nowhere , suggest that she ’ d get better if she stopped eating so much fried chicken . “ He managed to denigrate my fatness and my blackness in the same sentence , ” she says .
“ There is so much agency taken from marginalized groups to mute their voices and mask their existence . Being depicted as a female CEO—one who is also black and fat—means so much to me . It is a representation of the reclamation of power in the boardroom , classroom and living room of my body . I own all of this. ” — JOY COX
Many of the financial and administrative structures doctors work within help reinforce this bad behavior . The problem starts in medical school , where , according to a 2015 survey , students receive an average of just 19 hours of nutrition education over four years of instruction—five hours fewer than they got in 2006 . Then the trouble compounds once doctors get into daily practice . Primary care physicians only get 15 minutes for each appointment , barely enough time to ask patients what they ate today , much less during all the years leading up to it . And a more empathic approach to treatment simply doesn ’ t pay : While procedures like blood tests and CT scans command reimbursement rates from hundreds to thousands of dollars , doctors receive as little as $ 24 to provide a session of diet and nutrition counseling .
Lesley Williams , a family medicine doctor in Phoenix , tells me she gets an alert from her electronic health records software every time she ’ s about to see a patient who is above the “ overweight ” threshold . The reason for this is that physicians are often required , in writing , to prove to hospital administrators and insurance providers that they have brought up their patient ’ s weight and formulated a plan to bring it down—regardless of whether that patient came in with arthritis or a broken arm or a bad sunburn . Failing to do that could result in poor performance reviews , low ratings from insurance companies or being denied reimbursement if they refer patients to specialized care .
Another issue , says Kimberly Gudzune , an obesity specialist at Johns Hopkins , is that many doctors , no matter their specialty , think weight falls under their authority . Gudzune often spends months working with patients to set realistic goals—playing with their grandkids longer , going off a cholesterol medication—only to have other doctors threaten it all . One of her patients was making significant progress until she went to a cardiologist who told her to lose 100 pounds . “ All of a sudden she goes back to feeling like a failure and we have to start over , ” Gudzune says . “ Or maybe she just never comes back at all . ”
60 % of the calories Americans consume come from “ ultra-processed foods ” Source : British Medical Journal , 2016
And so , working within a system that neither trains nor encourages them to meaningfully engage with their higher-weight patients , doctors fall back on recommending fad diets and delivering bland motivational platitudes . Ron Kirk , an electrician in Boston , says that for years , his doctor 's first resort was to put him on some diet he could n't maintain for more than a few weeks . “ They told me lettuce was a ‘ free ’ food , ” he says—and he ’ d find himself carving up a head of romaine for dinner .
In a study that recorded 461 interactions with doctors , only 13 percent of patients got any specific plan for diet or exercise and only 5 percent got help arranging a follow-up visit . “ It can be stressful when [ patients ] start asking a lot of specific questions ” about diet and weight loss , one doctor told researchers in 2012 . “ I don ’ t feel like I have the time to sit there and give them private counseling on basics . I say , ‘ Here ’ s some websites , look at this. ’ ” A 2016 survey found that nearly twice as many higher-weight Americans have tried meal-replacement diets—the kind most likely to fail—than have ever received counseling from a dietician .
“ It borders on medical malpractice , ” says Andrew ( not his real name ) , a consultant and musician who has been large his whole life . A few years ago , on a routine visit , Andrew ’ s doctor weighed him , announced that he was “ dangerously overweight ” and told him to diet and exercise , offering no further specifics . Should he go on a low-fat diet ? Low-carb ? Become a vegetarian ? Should he do Crossfit ? Yoga ? Should he buy a fucking ThighMaster ?
“ She did n't even ask me what I was already doing for exercise , ” he says . “ At the time , I was training for serious winter mountaineering trips , hiking every weekend and going to the gym four times a week . Instead of a conversation , I got a sound bite . It felt like shaming me was the entire purpose . ”
All of this makes higher-weight patients more likely to avoid doctors . Three separate studies have found that fat women are more likely to die from breast and cervical cancers than non-fat women , a result partially attributed to their reluctance to see doctors and get screenings . Erin Harrop , a researcher at the University of Washington , studies higher-weight women with anorexia , who , contrary to the size-zero stereotype of most media depictions , are twice as likely to report vomiting , using laxatives and abusing diet pills . Thin women , Harrop discovered , take around three years to get into treatment , while her participants spent an average of 13 and a half years waiting for their disorders to be addressed .
“ A lot of my job is helping people heal from the trauma of interacting with the medical system , ” says Ginette Lenham , a counselor who specializes in obesity . The rest of it , she says , is helping them heal from the trauma of interacting with everyone else .