Since being signed into law by President Obama in 2010 , the Affordable Care Act , better known as Obamacare , has been stripped , changed and full of devastating consequences for the American economy and American families . It 's clear by now that the White House and Democrats who voted for Obamacare , lied to millions of Americans when they said , `` If you like your healthcare plan , you can keep it . Period . '' We not only saw President Obama admit during a healthcare summit in early 2010 ( before signing Obamacare ) `` that between eight million and nine million people may very well lose the coverage that they have , because of this ... And I don ’ t think that you can answer the question , in the positive , to say that people will be able to maintain their coverage , people will be able to see the doctors they want in the kind of bill that you ’ re proposing . ''
Then in September of 2010 , every single Senate Democrat voted against a resolution that would allow people to keep their healthcare plans .
In September 2010 , Senate Republicans brought a resolution to the floor to block implementation of the grandfather rule , warning that it would result in canceled policies and violate President Barack Obama ’ s promise that people could keep their insurance if they liked it .
Three years later in November 2013 , we saw Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius admit under oath in front of Congress that end-to-end security testing was not done on Healthcare.gov before it was launched on October 1 , putting the personal information of Americans at risk and making them vulnerable to fraud and identity theft .
As a result of all of this and the trashing of the U.S. constitution in the process , Associate Professor of Economics at St. John ’ s University , New York . M. Northrop Buechner is practically making the case for President Obama 's impeachment in Forbes :
The Constitution authorizes the President to propose and veto legislation . It does not authorize him to change existing laws . The changes Mr. Obama ordered in Obamacare , therefore , are unconstitutional . This means that he does not accept some of the limitations that the Constitution places on his actions . We can not know at this point what limitations , if any , he does accept .
By changing the law based solely on his wish , Mr. Obama acted on the principle that the President can rewrite laws and—since this is a principle—not just this law , but any law . After the crash of Obamacare , many Congressmen have implored the President to change the individual mandate the same way he had changed the employer mandate , that is , to violate the Constitution again .
The main responsibility the Constitution assigns to the President is to faithfully execute the Laws . If the President rejects this job , if instead he decides he can change or ignore laws he does not like , then what ?
The time will come when Congress passes a law and the President ignores it . Or he may choose to enforce some parts and ignore others ( as Mr. Obama is doing now ) . Or he may not wait for Congress and issue a decree ( something Mr. Obama has done and has threatened to do again ) .
The most important point is that Mr. Obama does not consider himself bound by the Constitution . He could not have made that more clear . He has drawn a line in the concrete and we can not ignore it .
Impeachment is n't going to happen with a divided Congress , but that does n't mean there is n't a solid case for it .