A pending court decision could force the Trump administration to pump billions of dollars into Obamacare insurers , even as the president threatens to let the health care law “ implode . ”
Health insurers have filed nearly two dozen lawsuits claiming the government owes them payments from a program meant to blunt their losses in the Obamacare marketplaces . That raises the prospect that the Trump administration will have to bankroll a program the GOP has pilloried as an insurer bailout .
Insurers are owed more than $ 8 billion in payments , and the tab is likely to grow . Insurers say spending restrictions Republicans forced on the “ risk corridors ” program during the Obama administration , aside from being illegal , are partly to blame for severe turbulence in some Obamacare marketplaces .
“ [ The Obama administration ] repeatedly assured us it was there and it would be a clear obligation of the government , ” said Tom Policelli , CEO of Minuteman Health , which is among the insurers suing the government over the shortfall . “ Even the federal government is subject to the rules . ”
The fiscal hit to the feds could be huge if the insurers win . And it would be one more embarrassing setback for Republicans , who likely saw their best shot at dismantling Obamacare slip away in the Senate ’ s failed repeal vote early Friday morning . President Donald Trump , meanwhile , has threatened to pull billions in funding from a separate Obamacare subsidy program he 's labeled a `` bailout '' for insurers .
The courts have so far split on whether the government must pay risk corridor funding since the first lawsuits were filed last year . In November , Land of Lincoln Health , a now-defunct nonprofit startup in Illinois , lost its case in the Court of Federal Claims seeking more than $ 70 million . But in April , Oregon-based Moda Health was awarded more than $ 200 million .
███ Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
Both cases have been appealed and will be considered together by the same three-judge panel in Washington . Legal briefs in the combined cases are expected to be finished in September , but it ’ s not clear when a decision will come .
The decision could set a precedent that other judges will rely on when deciding similar lawsuits still winding through the system .
“ The legal issue that all of them would be raising would be identical , ” said Nicholas Bagley , a professor at the University of Michigan Law School who has written extensively about the lawsuits . “ Has a promise been made , and has the federal government reneged on that promise ? ”
If insurers do prevail , more are expected to seek federal payments through the courts . They would likely file similar lawsuits or join a class action brought by Health Republic Insurance of Oregon , a now-shuttered nonprofit that said federal underpayments contributed to its collapse in 2015 . The issue could ultimately wind up before the Supreme Court , which has already twice saved Obamacare from potentially fatal legal challenges .
“ The one thing I know you don ’ t do is leave money on the table , ” Bagley said . “ It ’ s a question of how , not whether . ”
The risk corridor program was one of three established by Obamacare to protect insurers entering the fledgling marketplaces under new rules requiring them to accept patients regardless of medical condition . Insurers making more money than expected in the markets were required to pay into the program , while those with big losses would receive payments .
Many companies badly underestimated the cost of these new customers , who turned out to be sicker than expected . They racked up at least $ 10 billion in losses in the first two years , according to McKinsey . That meant far fewer insurers paid into the risk corridors program than qualified for payments . In 2014 , the first year of the Obamacare marketplaces , insurers received just 12.9 percent of the nearly $ 3 billion they sought from the program .
The insurers say the federal government has an obligation to use taxpayer dollars to provide payments they ’ re owed . But Republican lawmakers , who contend such payments would amount to a bailout , have blocked the federal government from filling the shortfall .
“ We ’ re going to follow the law , and the law says you ’ re not supposed to spend taxpayer money to bail out these companies , ” Sen. Marco Rubio , who led GOP opposition to risk corridors funding , said during a Facebook Live event last month .
The Obama administration fought the lawsuits but also discussed potential settlements with insurers , a prospect that made Republican lawmakers irate . Any talk of settlements ceased when Trump took office , meaning the courts will almost certainly settle the dispute .
The program ’ s funding restraints forced many insurers to raise premiums higher than expected in the Obamacare marketplaces . The shortfall has been especially tough on small insurers and Obamacare co-ops , nonprofit health insurers seeded with federal loans to compete with legacy providers . Many were counting on the risk corridor funding and didn ’ t have the resources to absorb the financial blow when the money didn ’ t come through . About two-thirds of the 23 Obamacare co-ops have shut down .
“ The whole system was to attract insurers like my client , Land of Lincoln , to participate in the first place , ” said Daniel Albers , an attorney representing the failed co-op . “ The Republicans want to say it ’ s a bailout . It ’ s not a bailout . ”
Legal experts who support Obamacare say the health care law doesn ’ t explicitly prevent the government from making payments to insurers . Instead , they say the statute only provides the formula for determining which insurers pay into the program and which ones get paid .
“ Nowhere does it say they have to balance out , ” said Tim Jost , emeritus professor at the Washington and Lee University School of Law .
At least one observer is betting that insurers will ultimately receive risk corridor payments they ’ re owed . Juris Capital this month agreed to pay $ 10.5 million to the estate of HealthyCT , a defunct nonprofit insurer . In return , it will receive up to $ 31 million if HealthyCT wins its lawsuit .