In 2008 , Oregon expanded its Medicaid program , but because the state could not cover everybody , lawmakers opened up a lottery that randomly drew 30,000 names from a waiting list of almost 90,000 and allowed them to apply for the program . This created a unique opportunity for health researchers , ultimately allowing them to compare the health outcomes of 6,387 low-income adults who were able to enroll in the program with 5,842 who were not selected . Contrary to liberal assumptions , researchers found that those who enrolled in Medicaid spent a lot more on medical care than those who weren ’ t able to enroll , but didn ’ t significantly improve their health outcomes .
Specifically , researchers found that those who received Medicaid increased their annual health care spending by $ 1,172 , or 35 percent more than those who did not receive Medicaid . Those with Medicaid were more likely to be screened for diabetes and use diabetes medication and to make use of other preventive care measures . The study also examined health metrics including blood pressure and cholesterol . Ultimately , the authors concluded that , “ This randomized , controlled study showed that Medicaid coverage generated no significant improvements in measured health outcomes in the first two years ...
Righty wonks are treating this like a bombshell insofar as it might halt Democratic efforts to expand Medicaid under ObamaCare , but I don ’ t know . It might give confidence to Republicans in purple states , but the blue states will plow ahead . If they did ten more studies confirming this result , those would all be spun away too . This is an “ identity ” issue for Democrats — they ’ ll fight to protect the welfare state , whether it works or not , whether we can afford it or not — and as with abortion ( or guns on the right ) , they won ’ t cede an inch on “ slippery slope ” grounds . Even if they were convinced that Medicaid isn ’ t worth the expense , they won ’ t relinquish a key political bludgeon against the right . Celebrate the result as a win for truth , but not because policy ’ s likely to shift dramatically .
Where to begin ? First , notice how these problems are never , ever the fault of the disastrous law itself . No , it 's always the Republicans ' fault -- or the public 's , for not properly understanding how great the new program really is . President Obama effectively advanced the latter argument at his Tuesday press conference Thus , now we 're back to Democrats lamenting their inability to `` tell better stories `` or whatever , even though they 've had the presidential bully pulpit for five years , and a generally pliant media running interference for them . We 're informed that a law whose price tag has already doubled -- and is likely to rise even further -- requires additional taxpayer dollars to finance yet another PR campaign for itself . But were n't Obamacare 's provisions going to convince us all , just as soon as it was fully implemented ? Lower premiums ! Reduced deficits ! Cost curve down ! Keep your plan ! Plenty of doctors ! None of that is actually happening , though , so the only conceivable solution is to appropriate more money to temporarily prop up public perceptions for awhile. `` Re-education '' funds , as Kathleen Sebelius might call them . Nevertheless , no amount of slick advertising can erase what even elected Democrats and mainstream journalists can see with their own two eyes . ( Part-time worker ? Sorry , bud ) . Empirical results are almost irrelevant to the party of `` science . '' Case in point : A hot-off-the-presses landmark study on Medicaid , the results of which are devastating to government healthcare cheerleaders : In a sane political world populated by quasi-rational actors , this research would be a true game-changer . Here we have solid , methodologically-sound evidence that an enormously expensive government program -- Medicaid -- is failing to improve health outcomes for low income Americans , compared to being uninsured . Which is the entire point of the program . It turns out that Medicaid recipients also are n't cutting down on hospital and emergency room visits , another favored talking point for universal coverage . The primary difference between beneficiaries and their uninsured counterparts is that the former group uses healthcare services more , thus raising expenditures . One of this study 's co-authors just happens to be a key designer of Obamacare ( MIT 's Jon Gruber ) , so this ca n't be written off some right-wing hatchet job , either . The new program Gruber helped create calls for the massive expansion ( by 11 million people ) of an old program that Gruber has now determined does n't work.Liberal activists and journalists , meanwhile , are feverishly churning out copy to distort the results and salvage what they can from this catastrophic blow . Be sure to check out Avik Roy 's must-read piece that methodically rebuts apologists ' straw-grasping . But will this data earthquake impact actual policy one wit ? I 'm afraid Allahpundit may be right Ultimately , the `` party of ideas '' is about one idea : Statism . The inefficacy of government programs -- no matter how thoroughly demonstrated -- simply is n't enough to pull the plug ( eg : Head Start , the unkillable federal Helium Project , etc ) . Which is why it 'll be full speed ahead on Medicaid expansion in blue ( and some red ) states , amidst calls to spend millions more on applying lipstick to the Obamacare pig . It 's for our own good , you see ; we just don'twell enough yet .