The federal government could sue for refunds or withhold payment to contractors . Next up after glitches : Lawsuits
If the Obamacare enrollment website seems like a tangled mess , just wait for the lawsuits .
The potential for a morass of litigation over who ’ s responsible for the problems that have plagued the rollout of President Barack Obama ’ s signature health care law is significant , government procurement experts say .
With scores of federal employees and 55 contractors reportedly involved in setting up the Obamacare federal exchanges , it may take years to sort out exactly what happened — let alone for the feds to recover any of the hundreds of millions of dollars already paid out on the project . The debacle could lead to years of claims and counterclaims over a law that has already had its day at the Supreme Court .
( Understanding Obamacare : ███ 's guide to the Affordable Care Act )
“ The government , to recover damages , will have to prove which contractor or contractors are responsible for any defects , ” said Harv Lester , who litigated numerous contracting disputes during a 20-year career in the Justice Department ’ s Civil Division . “ If problems arose because the government wasn ’ t able to coordinate its contractors ’ work properly , the burden is the government ’ s to bear — the government has to pay for it . ”
At the moment , the administration is avoiding talking in public about the potential for lawsuits or attempts to seek refunds from the contractors .
White House press secretary Jay Carney referred all questions about the contracts for and costs of the project to the Department of Health and Human Services . An HHS spokeswoman , in turn , referred the questions to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services . A spokeswoman there had no answers Tuesday about the costs of the project , the terms of the contracts or any efforts to limit payments for design of nonfunctioning parts of the website .
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius ducked a question about it last week , telling The Wall Street Journal she is currently focused on trying to get the website working correctly and would address the possibility of refunds down the road .
Ironically , some of the same contractors that may be blamed for HealthCare.gov “ glitches ” are also needed to fix the site . The normal inclination would be to slow the flow of funds to such companies , but lawyers say the need to keep those contractors working puts Sebelius and other officials in a tough spot .
“ The first thing they do is stop or slow down current payments , ” said Pam Marple , a former Civil Division attorney now with New York-based law firm Chadbourne & Parke . “ They need them to keep working , but don ’ t want to be criticized for making payments when things go wrong . ”
The federal government could sue for refunds or withhold payment to contractors . Contractors who believe they ’ ve been shorted could sue , or countersue . Companies could also sue one another or point fingers at other contractors or even other entities like state governments or private insurance companies for causing some of the problems .
“ With the whole web of contractors and subcontractors , there are going to be a lot of opportunities for finger-pointing about who ’ s to blame and to say , ‘ I was really responsible for this piece rather than that piece , ’ ” said a former Justice Department official , who helped defend and bring such lawsuits on behalf of the federal government .
Congress will also play a role in any finger-pointing . House Republicans have promised investigations into the website problems , and witnesses from four firms who hold Obamacare-related contracts are scheduled to appear at a House Energy & Commerce Committee hearing Thursday . No witness from HHS is expected , although Sebelius will likely testify at another hearing next week .
The absence of a government witness at the Thursday hearing could allow those present to push blame toward the government — a tactic that is typical when contractors and the feds end up in a fight over failed or delayed work .
Sebelius may have been trying to head off that possibility when she mentioned lead website contractor CGI Federal Inc. on Tuesday without leveling any criticism .
” We have secured additional staff and commitments from our contractors , including CGI , the lead firm responsible for the federally facilitated marketplace technology , ” she said in a blog post . “ They are providing and directing the additional resources needed for this project within the provisions of their existing contract . ”
“ We have asked all of our contractors to look at their teams on the ground and bring in their absolute A-team and I am confident that is happening , ” Sebelius added in an interview Tuesday with CNN . “ We had hoped that they had their A-Team on the table , but I am talking to CEOs and urging them to make sure that we have the [ best ] talent that they have available . … We want new eyes and ears . ”
Terms in the Obamacare website contracts — the text of which is not currently public but has been requested by congressional committees and the media — could complicate any government effort to withhold payment from contractors or demand repayment for allegedly botched work , warned Lester .
“ There might be a ‘ best efforts ’ clause in the contract , where the contractor doesn ’ t actually guarantee that whatever new technology is being developed is going to work , ” said Lester , now with the Chicago-based law firm Vedder Price . “ In other contracts , the government and the contractor might share the risk of a possible failure , or otherwise apportion it between themselves somehow . The assignment of risk is going to be a huge factor if there are cost claims or damages claims . ”