Under the revised bill , it appears that a state could allow insurers to set higher premiums based on a person ’ s health status , though not on the basis of sex or genetic information . In applying for federal grants , state officials would have to describe how they would “ maintain access to adequate and affordable health insurance coverage for individuals with pre-existing conditions . ”
All of this might be too late . Changes to the bill ’ s funding formula to win over Ms. Murkowski might cost it support with conservatives . And the hasty revisions could only strengthen concern that Congress would be moving forward on a bill that has not been properly vetted . The Congressional Budget Office is set to release a partial analysis of its impact as soon as Monday , but that report may not include the latest changes .
Speaking to reporters in New Jersey on Sunday , Mr. Trump seemed to be looking ahead to the next big legislative goal for Republicans — overhauling the tax code — even as he talked up the Graham-Cassidy bill and applied pressure to resistant senators .
“ Eventually , we will win on that , ” he said of repealing the health law . “ My primary focus , I must tell you — and has been from the beginning , as you can imagine — is taxes . ”
But the architects of the latest repeal plan , Mr. Graham and Mr. Cassidy , were not giving up .
“ We ’ re moving forward , and we ’ ll see what happens next week , ” Mr. Graham said on ABC ’ s “ This Week. ” “ I ’ m very excited about it . We finally found an alternative to Obamacare that makes sense . ”
Marc Short , the White House director of legislative affairs , said on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” that a Senate vote was planned for this week . But a spokesman for Mr. McConnell declined to affirm that timeline on Sunday .
The Graham-Cassidy bill is the latest attempt to develop a repeal proposal that can win the support of 50 of the Senate ’ s 52 Republicans — a goal that has proved elusive . It would repeal the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act , as well as the tax credits that are provided to help people buy insurance on the individual market . In their place , it would provide block grants to the states to use for health care .