Congress took its first swipes at Obamacare on Thursday with the House approving a bill to cancel the law ’ s 30-hour workweek provision , though only a dozen Democrats bucked President Obama on the vote .
Republicans set the showdown as an initial test of how many Democrats would be willing to defect against a lame-duck president and after the GOP relentlessly attacked Obamacare in November ’ s election campaigns , riding those attacks to big gains .
The legislation would repeal the provision that defines the 30-hour-per-week work threshold that determines when businesses have to face the health insurance coverage mandate . Critics say it scraps the traditional 40-hour workweek and takes pay out of Americans ’ pockets because some employers are cutting hours to below 30 a week to get around the law .
“ It ’ s the fantasyland of Obamacare , ” said Rep. Paul Ryan , Wisconsin Republican and chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee .
The bill cleared on a 252-172 vote , with more than enough opposition from Democrats to sustain a presidential veto . Senate Democrats are vowing opposition and could muster support to filibuster it .
“ If members of Congress want to start the year off right , they should support American workers , not play political games that jeopardize their hard-earned health care benefits , ” said Sen. Christopher Murphy , Connecticut Democrat and a vocal champion for Obamacare .
The bill would push up to 1 million people out of employer-sponsored insurance , and many of them would end up on Medicaid or on subsidized insurance plans on the health care exchanges . The Congressional Budget Office said that would cost taxpayers an additional $ 53 billion over the next decade .
The White House and congressional Democrats said an even larger pool of workers — those who put in 40 hours per week — would have their hours cut to 39 or less if the bill becomes law .
Democrats criticized Republicans for scheduling the health care vote so early in the congressional session . They said the legislation was a continuation of the dozens of Obamacare repeals and tweaks that Republicans pushed through the House in the previous Congress , only to have them stall in the Senate .
This year , the Senate is controlled by Republicans , but it ’ s not clear that the bill will succeed .
Just two Senate Democrats , Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Joe Manchin III of West Virginia , have signed on as co-sponsors .
Republican leaders are expected to follow up their 40-hour mandate with votes to repeal a contentious excise tax on medical devices . That legislation has the support of at least two dozen House Democrats .
Most lawmakers agree that scrapping the law is a quixotic dream so long as Mr. Obama wields a veto pen , and even House Democrats who voted for the 40-hour bill described it as a fix , not an attack on the Affordable Care Act .
“ I have not and I do not support the repeal of the [ health care law ] , but some common-sense changes need to be made , ” Rep. Daniel Lipinski , Illinois Democrat , said Thursday .
He was one of 18 Democrats to vote for a similar bill last spring .
The lower total of Democrats this year was chiefly the result of losses in November elections , which cost some of the more conservative Democrats their seats .
Rep. Sanford D. Bishop Jr. of Georgia was the only Democrat to switch positions and vote “ no ” this year . A spokesman could not be reached late Thursday for an explanation .
Restaurant associations and other business lobbies that have pushed hard for a 40-hour definition cheered the House ’ s move and urged the Senate to follow suit .
“ There ’ s bipartisan agreement in the House and in the Senate that the 30-hour workweek provision of the law was an unfortunate mistake , ” said Dan Danner , president and CEO of the National Federation of Independent Business .
Republicans said the bill aligned with Mr. Obama ’ s vow to consider bipartisan improvements and that Democrats will be guilty of “ empty rhetoric ” if they ignore fixes .
Democrats , though , said Republicans are feigning concern for struggling Americans .