On three separate occasions this July , staffers for Sen. Bernie Sanders ( I-VT ) began preparing for the rollout of his new single-payer health care bill .
But every time they started to do so , Senate Republicans would improbably revive their push to repeal Obamacare — and Sanders ’ s team would postpone the launch of their “ Medicare-for-all ” campaign , according to aides to the Vermont senator .
“ Bernie has repeated to us over and over and over again , ‘ Our top priority is doing everything in our power to make sure 20 million people don ’ t lose their health care , ’ ” said Ari Rabin-Havt , a senior adviser to Sanders .
This was something of a relief to some Democrats . Just last year , the party warily eyed Sanders as a potential liability as much as a potential ally . After all , he has repeatedly insisted that Obamacare was , at best , a way station on the road to single-payer .
“ Obamacare was a small victory for the uninsured , but it is time to take the fight against inadequate coverage even further , ” he said .
After the election , some feared the Vermont independent would continue to torch Obamacare ’ s inadequacies , while turning his passionate followers against the Democratic Party .
But at least during the Obamacare repeal fight in Congress , Sanders was a team player . He brought crowds to dozens of rallies with Senate Democrats who had once opposed him . He shut a Republican attempt to expose Democrats ’ divisions , despite the interest of some of his team . And , perhaps most importantly , he marshaled his resources and newfound star power in defense of Democrats ’ top priority : showing what it might look like for his movement to be incorporated into the party apparatus , rather than having it try to knock down its gates .
“ Our job today is to defend the Affordable Care Act , ” Sanders said at several of his rallies this year . `` Our job tomorrow is to create a Medicare-for-all single-payer system . ”
Sanders ’ s rallies with Democrats kick off a campaign to save Obamacare
The Vermont senator ’ s defense of the law didn ’ t come out of nowhere . In the early evening hours of December 9 , 2016 , roughly a dozen Sanders staffers crowded around a conference table in room 332 of the Dirksen Senate Office Building .
It was one of their first strategy meetings since the election . Sanders told them that they were being tasked with getting “ out in front ” of Republicans ’ health care agenda , according to aides who attended the meeting . At that point , nobody knew what Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell would propose — or if he ’ d propose anything at all . Sanders said he wanted the assembled aides , including his chief of staff and senior aides , to preemptively plan on holding health care rallies in states across the country focused on defending the Affordable Care Act .
Sanders ’ s team left the meeting baffled by the request . One wondered how they were expected to draw crowds to rallies over an unknown bill . “ We walked out of it and said , ‘ How are we going to do this ? This is crazy , ’ ” one recalled .
They started in the freezing cold . On January 15 , as temperatures hit the low teens , Sanders joined Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( NY ) and Michigan Sens . Debbie Stabenow and Gary Peters onstage at Macomb County Community College . Eight thousand people showed up .
“ Sanders knew he had a unique megaphone in American politics , and he used it to shout it at the top of his lungs at a time when few were paying attention to the health care fight , ” said Ben Wikler , Washington director of MoveOn.org .
He kept shouting . In Portland , Maine , long before Sen. Susan Collins ( R-ME ) proved a crucial health care “ no ” vote , about 1,000 people watched Sanders decry the bill . After his favored candidate lost the contentious race to lead the Democratic National Committee , Sanders led an eight-state , 6,000-mile tour with new DNC Chair Tom Perez to kill “ Trumpcare. ” For two days in June , his team and its gray van traveled 348 miles in Appalachia to build public opposition to the Republican health bill .
Activists say that proved a crucial step in showing Democratic lawmakers that the public would join them in fighting for the ACA .
“ There were thousands of people at these rallies — in state after state after state after state . It was transformative for Democratic senators to see , ” said Wikler . “ They learned that people will show up , even in the bitter cold , to fight for the Affordable Care Act — which had once been written off as an unpopular and potentially doomed chunk of the Obama legacy . ”
As the debate over the Senate Republican bill stretched from one month to four , and then from four months to seven , Sanders resisted the temptation to make his whirlwind tour across the country primarily about single-payer health care .
“ Throughout this whole thing , there was always the temptation to pivot to make a stronger case for Medicare-for-all , rather than keeping the ACA at the center of our focus , ” one aide recalled . “ Bernie always insisted to us : ‘ No , no , no . ’ ”
In March , Sanders was already promising to “ soon ” announce his single-payer bill . It still hasn ’ t been released .
Republicans even tried to force the single-payer out of him . On July 26 , Sen. Steve Daines ( R-MT ) announced he would introduce a single-payer amendment in an upcoming vote-a-rama that he himself opposed . Daines ’ s amendment was an attempt to splinter the Democratic caucus , thereby exposing the minority party ’ s divisions on how to reform the health care system .
At least some members of Sanders ’ s team saw it as a golden opportunity .
“ There were definitely people — both inside and outside our office — who were saying , ‘ This is it ! This is what we 've been waiting for ! ’ ” one Sanders aide said .
After speaking with Schumer , Sanders himself shut down the idea , telling his staffers that they would not be going along with Daines ’ s gambit . Sanders and all but five Democratic senators abstained from the vote , and the story was quickly buried . “ Bernie ’ s instinct immediately was to say , ‘ We 're not going to engage on this , ’ ” according to the aide .
As Sanders barnstormed across the country to defend Obamacare , his rallies looked like a new fusion in the party — partly the Sanders faithful , but they were complemented by organizations and voters who had been faithful to Hillary Clinton too .
About 10 minutes after Sanders concluded one speech in downtown Pittsburgh in late June , Jared McCray and his sister remained behind the crowd . They looked out at the empty stage where Sanders had just stood .
“ This is about people ’ s lives , ” said McCray , echoing a line from Sanders ’ s speech .
Both had refused to support Clinton in the general election . “ We have no regrets ” about sitting out the election , said McCray , 24 , a touch defensively .
A few feet away from them stood Dean Ofran , 54 . A lifelong Pittsburgh resident , Ofran had voted for Clinton in the primary , though he said he harbored no animus toward the Vermont senator .
“ Of course I support single-payer — the primary wasn ’ t about that , ” Ofran said . “ I just didn ’ t think he could beat Trump . I still don ’ t think he could . ”
It was a similar story in West Virginia . In the crowd in Charleston , two young men — Sean McAllister , 18 , and Sean Hill , 17 — said they both cast write-in ballots for Sanders in the general election . Though they wouldn ’ t vote for Hillary Clinton , they had showed up to a rally to defend Obamacare , in part because they feared the impacts of the Republican bill ’ s Medicaid cuts . The “ Bernie or Bust ” voters who wouldn ’ t defend President Barack Obama ’ s legacy against Trump last November now , suddenly , were .
“ I ’ ve been trying to persuade my mom that she was misled by Trump and that Bernie wouldn ’ t betray her like this , ” Hill said .
The work behind the scenes also reflected how Sanders ’ s tour for Obamacare patched up the old party divisions , at least temporarily .
On the ground , Sanders ’ s campaign helped endear him to local Democrats who once implacably opposed his candidacy . “ There were a significant number of Clinton people who were there , ” said Joe Meyer , the mayor of Covington , in an interview about a Sanders rally in his city . “ They certainly didn ’ t stay home — and I think that tells you something . It shows the appeal of the message and the substance of the issue . ”
In late February , Sanders spoke at a dinner of the Kansas Democratic Party . He appeared onstage not just with Schumer and Stabenow , both of whom endorsed Clinton , but with Tom Perez and other Clinton backers such as Sens . Chris Van Hollen ( MD ) , Kamala Harris ( CA ) , Kirsten Gillibrand ( NY ) , and Chris Murphy ( CT ) .
Planned Parenthood endorsed Clinton in the primary , leading to an ugly public rift with Sanders in January 2016 . But during the Obamacare fight , the two were closely allied . Planned Parenthood president Cecile Richards appeared with Sanders and Perez at a rally in Nevada , and Planned Parenthood volunteers stood alongside Sanders ’ s supporters at events around the country . In last Thursday ’ s rally outside the Capitol , Sanders returned the favor and specifically thanked Richards and Planned Parenthood — another sign that the party ’ s internal grievances had been patched up , at least as long as Senate Republicans ’ bill hung overhead .
As ███ ’ s Matt Yglesias noted , Sanders is doing everything you ’ d expect him to do in order to run in 2020 . He ’ s beefed up his Washington staff , is working to build a national organization called Our Revolution , and has held rallies across the country that still draw thousands of people .
Perhaps most importantly , he ’ s shifted some of his policy positions to the center , while also retaining what separates him from most national Democrats .
“ Sanders has deeply engaged his base using Medicare-for-all while reconfiguring other elements of his platform into something more moderate than the one he actually ran on and for which a much stronger electability argument can be made , ” Yglesias wrote . “ In subtle ways he ’ s shifted his policy commitments to the center , making himself a more broadly acceptable figure in the party . ”
But even as he reaches a detente with national Democrats , Sanders continues to try to revive the movement beyond Washington that fueled his primary campaign . As ███ ’ s Ezra Klein noted , Sanders ran for office believing that President Obama ’ s core failure was in surrendering the “ outside game ” — that Democrats had to learn to take their message far beyond Capitol Hill for it to impact Washington .
`` The major political , strategic difference I have with Obama , '' Sanders told ███ 's Andrew Prokop way back in 2014 , `` is it ’ s too late to do anything inside the Beltway . You got ta take your case to the American people , mobilize them , and organize them at the grassroots level in a way that we have never done before . ''
Sanders is now determined to transform his movement campaign to save Obamacare into one to pressure Democrats to embrace Medicare-for-all . On Wednesday , the Guardian ’ s Lauren Gambino reported that Sanders had started a six-figure digital advertising campaign on Facebook and Google to generate public “ co-sponsors ” of his single-payer bill . He ’ s sent a message to supporters asking for ideas about the plan , and is expected to soon hold rallies to push explicitly for Medicare-for-all .
Privately , Senate Democratic staffers were thankful that Sanders brought the “ outside game ” to Obamacare ’ s defense . But when he does so this September , it may not be as much to national Democrats ’ liking .
“ What you saw was a rising up of the American people , ” Sanders told Chris Hayes after Republicans failed to pass their bill . “ That ’ s why it was a victory . ”