Drudge broke out the huge type to call Kathleen Sebelius “ The Most Hated Woman in America , ” which seems ridiculous .
Sebelius was certainly the most televised woman in America yesterday as the cable networks went wall-to-wall with her House grilling . And the Health and Human Services secretary came prepared with a sorry strategy .
“ You deserve better . I apologize . I ’ m accountable to you for fixing these problems and I ’ m committed to earning your confidence back by fixing the site , ” Sebelius said .
That approach , in contrast to the grudging admissions by many officials during the ObamaCare rollout fiasco , seemed to defuse the hearing . It ’ s harder to beat up on someone who admits fault , and the session seemed to lack the kind of fireworks that television loves . The Republicans may have cast her as the Wicked Witch of the West on Halloween eve , but they never knocked her off the broomstick .
Sebelius was bureaucratic at times as the hearing got into the policy weeds , but her buck-stops-here style guaranteed that the apology would be the lead—and deflect some of the heat from President Obama .
In fact , when Republican Rep. Greg Harper kept pressing about whether Obama was responsible for the debacle , Sebelius replied “ whatever. ” This immediately became a thing on the web .
Another angle that was hot online : GOP Rep. Joe Barton invoking “ The Wizard of Oz ” in telling the former Kansas governor : “ We ’ re not in Kansas anymore . ”
In an exchange with another Republican , Cory Gardner , the congressman asked why Sebelius wasn ’ t in ObamaCare : “ You could decide to drop your coverage of your employer . You have the choice . ”
Said Sebelius : “ That is not true , sir . If I have affordable coverage in my workplace , I am not eligible to go into the workplace . ”
Rush Limbaugh , for one , found the hearing “ very frustrating. ” Sebelius was “ the punching bag , ” he said , but “ I don ’ t know that the Republicans did much damage . It ’ s like they ’ re afraid to . It ’ s like there ’ s still a fear of going after Obama. ” Perhaps , he wondered , they were told to “ not be mean . ”
Most people don ’ t sit around watching congressional hearings for hours , so the takeaway—the featured sound bites and web headlines—will be the apology . Perhaps that ’ s why Sebelius kept circling back to the we ’ re-also-unhappy tactic “ I am as frustrated and angry as anyone with the flawed launch of HealthCare.gov . ”
Even Karl Rove said afterward that she had handled herself well , in part through the use of “ mini-filibusters . ”
To be sure , Sebelius is going to remain the face of a botched program that is not going to be fixed anytime soon . The question now is whether the coverage of Sebelius starts to soften . Could her poised appearance change the “ Saturday Night Live ” parody image of her ? Will there be fewer stories about whether Sebelius will be forced to resign ?
“ Chalk part of it up to the hands-off approach Obama takes when it comes to his Cabinet and a self-preserving one favored by Sebelius 's . Throw in a mutual affection that 's just strong enough to keep them bound together , mix in their shared love of basketball , and it 's a formula for survival…
“ The president has been impressed both by Sebelius 's persistence and her loyalty and , hard as it is to imagine now , her political smarts as another Midwesterner who 's won statewide . It 's easy to forget that the road to Obamacare 's passage was brutal and there was no more enthusiastic cheerleader than Sebelius—whose moderate Kansas credentials helped sell the plan . Before that , she stepped into the HHS slot without fuss when Senator Tom Daschle 's nomination faltered before it began . ”
Sebelius ’ s insistence that she ’ s not eligible for ObamaCare ran into some online fact-checking , including from Washington Post blogger Ezra Klein :
“ I dropped a note to Tim Jost , a law professor at Washington & Lee University , and arguably the one human being on this entire planet who knows the Affordable Care Act the very best . He 's pretty convinced that , if she wanted to , Sebelius could sign up for marketplace coverage . It would be a pretty crummy financial deal — she would forgo robust employer and Medicare coverage to pay her own way — but it would be legal .
“ ‘ She could purchase a plan on an exchange since she is lawfully present in the U.S. and not incarcerated , ’ Jost e-mailed . ‘ She could not get premium tax credits both because she has employer coverage and because she is Medicare eligible . ’ ”
It ’ s now apparent that Obama ’ s oft-repeated pledge that “ If you like your health plan , you can keep your health plan ” is being treated as the new “ Read my lips—no new taxes . ”
The Washington Post ’ s fact-checker , Glenn Kessler , examines the arguments and awards the president Four Pinocchios :
“ The president ’ s statements were sweeping and unequivocal — and made both before and after the bill became law . The White House now cites technicalities to avoid admitting that he went too far in his repeated pledge , which , after all , is one of the most famous statements of his presidency . ”
The public appears split on the program , based on the latest Wall Street Journal/NBC poll :
“ Thirty-seven percent of respondents say that the website woes are a short-term technical problem that can be fixed , while 31 percent believe they point to a longer-term issue with the law ’ s design that can ’ t be corrected .
“ Not surprisingly , this divide breaks along party lines : 60 percent of Democrats agree that this is a short-term problem , versus 54 percent of Republicans who argue it ’ s a longer-term issue . ”
CNN , meanwhile , reports that the White House is intimidating insurance companies not to publicly criticize Obamacare :
`` What is going on is , behind the scenes attempt by the White House to at least keep insurerers from publicly criticizing what is happening on this Affordable Care Act rollout . Basically , if you speak out , if you are quoted , you 're going to get a call from the White House , pressure to be quiet . ''