Washington ( CNN ) - Do Americans support or oppose the health care law ?
As the clock ticks towards a federal government shutdown over Republican attempts to weaken or eliminate the Affordable Care Act , that question is front and center in the standoff .
Democrats and Republicans say they have public opinion on their side when it comes to the measure - also known as Obamacare - and a new CNN national poll seems to give both sides some ammunition .
According to a CNN/ORC International survey released Monday morning , 57 % of Americans say they oppose the law , up three percentage points from a CNN survey in May , with 38 % saying they favor the measure , down five points from May .
`` It is time for the Senate to listen to the American people just as the House has listened to the American people and to pass a one year delay of Obamacare and a permanent repeal of the medical device tax , '' said House Speaker John Boehner Monday morning .
Supporters of the law will point to a second number in the survey : 39 % of all Americans oppose the health care law because it 's too liberal , with 11 % of the public saying they oppose the measure because it is n't liberal enough . Add that 11 % to the 38 % who say they favor the law and that means that about half the public supports the law or do n't think it goes far enough .
`` It 's sometimes difficult to remember , but at the start of the health care debate in 2009 , many Democrats wanted nothing less than a single-payer system and were extremely disappointed when that approach was not part of the new law . That disappointment seems to have persisted among some groups , '' says CNN Polling Director Keating Holland .
CNN/ORC has been asking the `` support/oppose '' question and the `` too liberal/not liberal enough '' breakdown since March 2010 , before the bill was passed by a then Democrat controlled Congress and signed into law by Obama .
The poll was conducted for CNN by ORC International September 27-29 , with 803 adults nationwide questioned by telephone . The survey 's overall sampling error is plus or minus 3.5 percentage points .