While some Republicans fantasize about a bipartisan solution to undoing the elements of the law , Representative Tom Price of Georgia , a physician who is the Republican leadership ’ s point man on health care , said Friday that a health and human services secretary under a Romney administration would dismantle other parts of the law through fiat .
That would no doubt attract lawsuits and might leave haters of the law unsatisfied .
For their part , Democrats have largely dismissed the biggest blow dealt to the law by the Supreme Court , which said the federal government could not require states to expand their Medicaid programs . Supporters of the law argue that the federal government offers too rich a cash incentive for any state to actually pass it up .
But while Democrats remain publicly confident that states will still choose to take the federal matching funds and expand Medicaid , Republican governors who have made undoing the law one of their main goals will be hard pressed to take up that optional expansion , especially since the federal dollars meant to help them would decrease over time .
Either way , whether Republicans lawmakers pull apart some of the law on their own , or if a large number of states opt out of expanding Medicaid , it will spell trouble for the health care industry . It is counting on the expansion of the market through the individual mandate , fees and the newly insured to cover the cost of greater benefits and regulations .
“ It ’ s problematic to only take down the pieces with budgetary impact and leave the market reforms , ” said Catherine Finley , a health care specialist at Thorn Run Partners , a Washington lobbying and government relations firm . “ Doing so would seriously disrupt the functioning of the market . ”
Both Republicans and Democrats agree in theory that part of the law should be changed , and President Obama has suggested he is open to improvements .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
But bipartisanship around health care seems unlikely , no matter who runs Washington .
The central difficulty is the seemingly irreconcilable differences between the goal of most Democrats , which is to expand health care coverage to as many Americans as possible , and that of Republicans , which is to push down government spending on health care . With costs rising sharply every year , those basic conflicts will remain , and policy solutions inevitably will require a bias toward one of those goals .
Further , the partisan bitterness that began long before the Affordable Care Act was even a notion has only deepened during two years of divided government .
For example , in 2009 Republicans who supported the expansion of the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program felt betrayed when Democrats , taking their lead from the new Obama administration , unilaterally dropped several important features that Republicans had managed to win in an earlier bill at some political risk . Democrats opted for a more partisan bill that covered various groups that Republicans had resisted .
“ I ’ m a little bitter , ” said Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah . “ I worked my butt off ” on the measure , he said , only to end up voting against it . “ It set the tone . ”
Democrats feel equally angry that , in spite of packing the health care bill with many ideas , including the individual mandate , that originated with Republicans years ago , they could get no Republican cooperation in the end .
Many Republicans also say that they would like to preserve many aspects of the law , including the provisions for dependent coverage for adult children and for lifting annual and lifetime spending caps .
However , “ it might be difficult for the Romney administration to come back and say , ‘ Oh we really like some parts of A.C.A. , we are not going to repeal them , ’ ” said James Brasfield , a professor of management and political science at Webster University in St. Louis .
It is possible that governors and legislatures may do some of the Congressional Republicans ’ s work for them by opting out of the Medicaid expansion . But that expansion was going to put 16 million to 21 million additional people into the system .
Insurance companies had or were developing plans to cover these new Medicaid enrollees , also anticipating millions of new customers who were going to buy insurance through new federally subsidized purchasing exchanges . That would be endangered if Republicans legislate away the subsidies , and possibly harm the party ’ s friendly relationship with the companies .
“ That population presents great opportunities for health plans , ” Ms. Finley said . “ Now we have to see how the states play this out . If they opt out of the expansion , it certainly would decrease the availability of new markets . ”