Since most of the data in post-election polling has offered little beyond a parade of ugly news , here 's a glimmer of hope from Gallup :
For the first time in Gallup trends since 2000 , a majority of Americans say it is not the federal government 's responsibility to make sure all Americans have healthcare coverage . Prior to 2009 , a majority always felt the government should ensure healthcare coverage for all , though Americans ' views have become more divided in recent years ... Republicans , including Republican-leaning independents , are mostly responsible for the drop since 2007 in Americans ' support for government ensuring universal health coverage . In 2007 , 38 % of Republicans thought the government should do so ; now , 12 % do . Among Democrats and Democratic leaners there has been a much smaller drop , from 81 % saying the government should make sure all Americans are covered in 2007 to 71 % now .
Americans also remain overwhelmingly opposed to the imposition of a government-run , single-payer healthcare system , which very much remains leftists ' endgame :
One thing that has not changed is that Americans still widely prefer a system based on private insurance to one run by the government . Currently , 57 % prefer a private system and 36 % a government-run system , essentially the same as in 2010 and 2011 . Prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 , the percentage of Americans in favor of a government-run system ranged from 32 % to 41 % .
A few final notes : ( 1 ) Though Gallup 's final likely voter poll prior to the election was off by four points , their registered voters numbers were pretty much spot on . In other words , their LV screen was too restrictive , but their overall data was sound . ( 2 ) Despite a heavily Democratic electorate on election day , a substantial plurality still supported Obamacare repeal , a result that mirrors stable polling trends . ( 3 ) For an idea of what a mind-blowing cluster Obamacare has already become , read this piece by Mary Katharine Ham . Deadlines keep getting pushed farther and farther back , and the administration has finally issued coverage rules for the state exchanges that are supposed to be up and running in a matter of months . These rules took 32 months to produce . An unmitigated mess .