Congressional Republicans returned this weekend to their districts to get another earful about ObamaCare , while giving mixed statements about how close they are to replacing the health care law and suggesting that avoiding a looming government shutdown is now the priority .
California GOP Rep. Tom McClintock again held a town hall event in which residents expressed concerns about the GOP-led Congress repealing and replacing ObamaCare with more expensive and less comprehensive coverage .
“ Are you aware that you don ’ t answer questions ? ” one town hall attendee asked McClintock at the event outside Sacramento .
Another attendee suggested McClintock was a “ crappy ” representative and that Republicans could vote with Democrats to replace him .
“ That ’ s what elections are for , ” responded McClintock , who in February faced such a rowdy town hall crowd that he exited with a police escort .
An ObamaCare replacement bill from House Republican leaders and backed by President Trump failed last month to even get a vote in the lower chamber , amid strong opposition from its most conservative members .
Trump and the leaders at first appeared ready to move ahead to tax reform and other big-ticket policy initiatives .
House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , said Thursday before leaving Washington for a two-week break that members have “ come together ” on a new amendment that would lower premiums and provide broad access to care .
However , Pennsylvania GOP Rep. Charlie Dent downplayed Ryan ’ s remarks and said the more immediate concern is passing a budget before the end of the month , when the federal government technically runs out of money and largely shutters .
“ I don ’ t believe we are as close as many would say , ” Dent told ███ , while arguing the House still has nearly a dozen appropriations bills to pass to avoid a politically damaging shutdown .
“ We ’ ll be applying all of our time in April making sure we complete our work , ” he said .
In Kentucky , several dozen people -- including doctors and patients -- staged a town-hall style event on a sidewalk outside of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ’ s Louisville office .
Among those who attended was Kentucky Democratic Rep. John Yarmuth , who said lawmakers have “ no alternative ” to ObamaCare , in which consumers can pick from private insurers , except the so-called “ single-payer option ” in which they pay state governments for health insurance .
“ We need to talk to this man right here , ” said Yarmuth , pointing to McConnell ’ s district office .