D-day arrived for ObamaCare Saturday , and began with an 11 hour shutdown of HealthCare.gov—the problem plagued website intended to provide easy access to affordable insurance for millions of Americans .
The contraption is functioning better but is still terribly inadequate . It can only handle 50,000 users at a time , well short of the volume needed to assist the millions of Americans who must purchase health insurance by year end or face fines .
Those eligible for subsidies must use the system , but often the system can ’ t verify eligibility for aid . Many are in limbo -- applications already initiated are stalled , lost or otherwise can ’ t be completed . Healthcare.gov software to get insurance companies paid subsidies is not functioning effectively , and the small business site that was to offer group coverage has been postponed one year .
Eventually Jeffrey Zients , the White House ’ s website repair czar , will have this monster fulfilling all its functions , but likely it will be a balky , frustrating website , much like other federal websites or those run by private firms enjoying monopoly power .
Health insurance will be right up there with dealing with tax filing .
Bureaucrats will have easy access to sensitive personal data , which Obama administration political moles can use to target , harass and sometimes destroy critics , and simply occupy millions of hours of citizens ’ time that could be used more productively .
Welcome to statism -- the ants of capitalism herded into a bureaucratic hell to serve the masters of a grander design .
All this aside , let ’ s look at the list of promises that will remain unkept when the website is fully repaired , no matter how well it may run :
1 . If you like your insurance , you can keep it .
2 . If you like your doctor , you can keep him .
3 . If you need help finding the coverage you need , we will make it easy .
4 . And , by organizing the health care market under the guiding hand of the omnipotent state , we will make insurance cheaper .
The first two promises are forever broken . Insurance companies can ’ t bring back most policies the Affordable Health Care Act declared illegal , a presidential edict notwithstanding .
And insurance companies are slashing doctors and hospitals from their networks to meet arbitrary ObamaCare mandates .
Folks who had perfectly adequate policies , which were delivering hundreds of thousands of dollars in life saving benefits from specialized physicians for cancer treatment and other complex illnesses , have lost those benefits and been offered replacement policies cluttered with unneeded services . For example , pediatric vision care for childless couples in their 50s and birth control benefits for nuns .
Many Americans will literally face death when old policies lapse and can no longer pay for the care they need . But as a Washington lawyer and ardent support of the president insisted , some sacrifice is needed by a few for the progress of the many .
To me , this stunning assurance had echoes of Joseph Stalin , who killed thousands building the Moscow subway ! -- Some must simply be lost in the name of progress and serving the state .
Overall , premium costs are skyrocketing for many Americans , not because their old coverage was inadequate or because new coverage is better , but because they are in markets now served by fewer providers and less competition than before .
Businesses are forced to jettison full time positions in favor or part-time workers to avoid paying health benefits they can no longer afford and avoid penalties that will be imposed beginning in 2015 .
Americans are burdened with about 20 new taxes and fees and higher premiums and co-pays for insurance policies that work about the same or worse for most middle-class families -- the folks the president and his fellow Democrats say they want to help .
It took a triumph of hubris for the president to believe he could sign a single law that would replace markets in a U.S. health care sector as large as the economy of France .
Only God can make a tree , and in his creation , only the invisible hand can make a market .
When the government tries to replace free markets , it plays God ... and does so very badly .