Rates Up 22 Percent For Obamacare Plans , But Subsidies Rise , Too
The cost of health insurance under the Affordable Care Act is expected to rise an average of 22 percent in 2017 , according to information released by the Obama administration Monday afternoon .
Still , federal subsidies will also rise , meaning that few people are likely to have to pay the full cost after the rate increases to get insurance coverage .
`` We think they will ultimately be surprised by the affordability of the premiums , because the tax credits track with the increases in premiums , '' said Kevin Griffis , assistant secretary for public affairs at the Department of Health and Human Services .
The 22 percent rise reflects the average for all insurance marketplaces , both federal and state-based exchanges for which data are available . For insurance purchased through the federal HealthCare.gov exchange the rise will average 25 percent .
During a media briefing Monday , Griffis said the 2017 rates are roughly at the level the Congressional Budget Office forecast when the law was proposed . `` The initial marketplace rates came in below costs , '' he said . `` Many companies set prices that turned out to be too low . ''
Enrollment opens Nov. 1 . For coverage effective Jan. 1 , people need to pick a plan by Dec. 15 . With a few exceptions , the last day to sign up for Obamacare is Jan. 31 , 2017 . Plans are available on HealthCare.gov and state-run exchanges .
While the average premiums on the benchmark health plans are increasing , the government says more than 70 percent of people buying insurance on the marketplaces created by the law could get a health plan for less than $ 75 a month for 2017 . To get the best deal , people would have to pick a low-cost plan with limited benefits and take advantage of all the subsidies available .
People who already have coverage through the exchanges can often save money by switching plans , the administration said . More than three-quarters of people could save money by switching to the lowest-cost plan within the level of coverage , such as bronze or silver , that they 've previously selected .
The Obamacare insurance exchanges are under strain after three major insurers pulled back from offering coverage in markets across the U.S . The administration says about 1 in 5 people buying insurance through the marketplaces will have only one company offering coverage .
It 's in places like that where consumers will feel the most pain . `` Where it really matters is where a big insurance company has exited and where that 's going to leave just one company remaining , '' said Cynthia Cox , associate director of health reform and private insurance at the Kaiser Family Foundation . `` For those people who live in that area , many people may have to switch plans . And they wo n't have much choice if they want to receive financial assistance and purchase through the exchanges . ''