Why A Court Once Ordered Kids Vaccinated Against Their Parents ' Will
A highly contagious disease was sweeping across the United States . Thousands of children were sick and some were dying . In the midst of this outbreak , health officials did something that experts say had never been done before and has n't been done since : They forced parents to vaccinate their children .
It sounds like something that would have happened 100 years ago . But this was 1991 — and the disease was measles .
Dr. Robert Ross was deputy health commissioner of the hardest-hit city , Philadelphia , where the outbreak was centered in the Faith Tabernacle Congregation in the northern part of town .
`` This church community did not believe in either immunizations or medical care , '' says Ross , who is now the president of the California Endowment , a private health foundation .
The church ran a school with about 1,000 kids . Ross says that none had been vaccinated . One day , his office got a phone call from a grandparent , saying that a lot of children at the school were sick . They had developed rashes from head to toe and fevers — telltale signs of measles .
Ross and his colleagues approached the church and pleaded with the pastor to allow health officials to examine and immunize the children . But the pastor refused . So Ross and his colleagues went door to door , to church members ' homes .
He says that most of the parents were pleasant and cooperative and allowed health officials to enter their homes . Many of the children they saw had measles . Ross says the majority were doing fine , but some were very sick , including an 8-year-old girl .
`` [ She ] was lying on the couch in front of the television , ashen and pale , and with a very rapid respiratory rate . I felt that she may die within hours if we did n't get her to treatment , '' Ross says .
He went to the family 's living room to call a judge , who was on call and ready to issue a court order , requiring any gravely ill children to be taken to a hospital . But as Ross held the phone , the girl 's grandmother grabbed his arm and tried to prevent him from dialing .
`` She began lecturing me about believing in the power of the Lord , '' Ross says . `` It was a viscerally disturbing episode that left me quite shaken . ''
Ross eventually reached the judge , and the girl was taken to a local hospital . She survived .
But across the city , hundreds more were sick . So Ross and his colleagues did something unprecedented : They got a court order to force parents at Faith Tabernacle to have their children vaccinated .
Ross says it was the right thing to do , because it was in the best interest of the children . But it was deeply traumatizing to the parents .
`` I recall we lined the children up and gave the immunizations , and many of the parents were actually weeping , '' he says .
The court order had taken a few weeks . By the time the vaccines were administered , the measles outbreak was subsiding in Philadelphia . Only nine children from the church were ultimately vaccinated , and Ross says the intervention probably did n't affect the spread of the disease .
In the end , nine kids across Philadelphia died , including six from Faith Tabernacle . The church is still operating the school today but declined to comment .
Some experts say it 's rather surprising that the parents were forced to have their children vaccinated .
`` There was a law that protected these church members ' right to refuse vaccination on religious ground , '' says Dr. Paul Offit , director of the Vaccine Education Center at Children 's Hospital of Philadelphia .
Health Paul Offit On The Anti-Vaccine Movement Paul Offit On The Anti-Vaccine Movement Listen · 17:43 17:43
But the U.S. Supreme Court had ruled years earlier that parents can not deny lifesaving medical treatments to their children for religious reasons . That ruling set a precedent that made it difficult for Faith Tabernacle to find legal representation .
`` Even the American Civil Liberties Union , which was perfectly willing to represent an unpopular cause , declined to take the case , because they felt that it was not [ the parents ' ] right to martyr their children to their beliefs , '' Offit says .
So the question now is this : If there were a similar outbreak today , could the courts force parents to vaccinate their children ?
Offit says it 's possible . `` Were things ever to get as bad , even approaching as bad as things were in Philadelphia in 1991 , yes , there are certainly legal remedies to make sure that we can compel parents to protect their children , '' he says .
Ross , who led the fight against measles in Philadelphia , says health officials must go to great lengths to educate parents about the importance of vaccines . He believes courts should only intervene when parents are clearly putting their children 's lives at risk .
`` It should be 'break glass in case of emergency , ' `` he says .