Andre DiMino has been running medical device company ADM Tronics since his father , who founded the decades-old firm , died in 2001 . He 's never laid off anybody .
The boss might not be able to hold out much longer . Come Jan. 1 , an ObamaCare-tied tax specific to his industry is expected to go into effect . Though the Obama administration has downplayed the impact , DiMino calls it `` devastating . ''
`` I think after all of these decades of not laying people off , I think we may have to face that , '' DiMino told FoxNews.com . He predicted he might have to immediately lay off three people in his manufacturing division and possibly more after that .
DiMino , whose Bergen County , N.J. , business currently employs 20 workers , is one of hundreds of CEOs across the country clamoring for Washington 's attention , urging lawmakers to kill the tax before it kills jobs .
In just the last few days , the intense lobbying push elicited some measure of response . On Monday , 18 Democratic senators and senators-elect asked Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid to delay the tax , citing the business impact . They noted the industry employs more than 400,000 people , and is dealing with `` significant uncertainty and confusion . ''
Many in the industry , though , have been clear-eyed about what the tax means -- preemptive layoffs and significant cutbacks in research and development .
While DiMino is waiting for next year to see if he 'll need to fire workers , over at Uresil , LLC , in Skokie , Ill. , the layoffs have already started . The company laid off six people from its 52-person workforce this year , `` primarily related '' to the tax , President Lev Melinyshyn said .
`` We had never laid off anybody , '' he told FoxNews.com . `` We bought the company in 2004 , never had a layoff . In fact , even during the recession , we added jobs . ... It was n't until this tax hit us that we had to do it . ''
Melinyshyn , whose company makes specialized catheters , said he thinks that at current staffing levels , his 46-person company can handle the tax -- however , he 's expecting to cut back sharply on product development , which hurts in the long run .
`` A lot of patients , I think , are not going to benefit from new technologies , '' he said . `` We 've literally put all of our new product development on hold ... so we can afford to pay the stupid tax . ''
The Affordable Care Act imposed the 2.3 percent tax on medical devices with the goal of raising nearly $ 30 billion over the next decade . Manufacturers say the impact of the tax is far greater than meets the eye -- the 2.3 percent tax is on gross sales , meaning it 's a much greater percentage of net income .
Melinyshyn , for instance , said his total tax burden on profits will rise from 43 percent to 65 percent next year .
Another Illinois-based CEO -- Greg Huck of Vitalcor , Inc. -- suggested lawmakers should at least carve out an exemption for small companies and start-ups .
Michigan-based Stryker Corporation , a company of 20,000 people , last year announced it was laying off 1,000 workers in anticipation of the tax -- and a $ 100 million bill in the first year . The company remains concerned about the tax .
`` We would rather put this money towards jobs , innovation , clinical research and priorities that will create value-added medical technology for patients while helping us partner with hospitals to deliver cost effective solutions , '' CEO Kevin A. Lobo said in a statement .
The Advanced Medical Technology Association estimates that the tax ultimately could cost up to 43,000 jobs .
It 's unclear , though , whether any attempt to delay or quash it could be made as part of negotiations over the looming fiscal crisis . Far more attention has been paid to the expiration of the Bush-era tax rates -- and the battle over whether to allow rates to rise exclusively for the top 2 percent .
The IRS recently provided some relief to worried medical device executives , announcing that penalties would not be imposed for failing to pay the tax for the first three quarters of 2013 .
The Obama administration earlier this year defended the medical device tax , saying companies actually stand to benefit from the law . Though the 2.3 percent tax hits the industry , the department argues that the millions of new health care customers insured as a result of the law will increase the demand in hospitals to order more equipment -- in turn boosting medical device companies ' profits .
The White House earlier this year threatened to veto a House bill that would have repealed the tax , citing concerns that the House proposal would offset the lost revenue from the tax by cutting down on subsidies for some families .
This , the White House said , would effectively `` raise taxes on middle-class and low-income families . ''
The industry , though , argues Congress could always negotiate a different way to pay for the repeal .
DiMino said some of the damage has already been felt , not just from layoffs , but from investors `` running away '' from the industry .