President Obama said Friday that major parts of Obamacare will go into effect next week no matter what happens with the debate in Congress over stopgap spending , saying that should undercut Republicans ’ fight .
Mr. Obama , speaking at the White House , said the health exchanges will begin running on Tuesday , making health plans available to 40 million Americans , and said there is nothing in the current spending fight that can stop that .
Mr. Obama began his brief remarks by saying he ’ d just opened up historic negotiations with Iranian President Hassan Rouhani over that nation ’ s nuclear program , but said he would not enter into negotiations with congressional Republicans over either the spending bills or the looming debt fight .
“ We are not going to do it , ” Mr. Obama said . “ We ’ ve got to break this cycle . My message to Congress is this : do not shut down the government . Do not shut down the economy . Pass a budget on time . Pay our bills on time . ”
Government funding for most basic operations expires at midnight Monday , and unless Congress and Mr. Obama agree to an extension , some operations such as national parks or federal museums will shutter .
Hours before Mr. Obama spoke , the Senate passed a bill that funds the government through Nov. 15 and continues full funding for the Affordable Care Act . That bill now goes back to the House , where Republicans have insisted that the health law be canceled or delayed as part of the spending fight or , barring that , as part of the looming debt debate .
Mr. Obama told House Republicans that a government shutdown will leave some of their own staffers out of work temporarily , will hurt federal employees in their districts back home , and will damage an economy still struggling to recover five years after the Wall Street collapse and four and a half years into his tenure in the White House .
Mr. Obama said he is “ willing to work with anybody who wants to have a serious conversation about our fiscal future ” but said he won ’ t do it while in the middle of basic spending or debt debates .
Many Americans believe that a government shutdown would , in fact , cancel Obamacare . But Mr. Obama disputed that , and a Congressional Research Service report this summer backs him up .
According to CRS , Mr. Obama retains wide latitude on what to continue even in the midst of a government shutdown .
CRS specifically said the health exchanges , the individual mandate that Americans obtain health coverage , the cuts to Medicare , and the IRS ’ s ability to collect Obamacare taxes would all continue .