The fates of the president and the insurance companies have become intertwined . Why Obama is n't attacking 'villains '
President Barack Obama spent years casting insurance companies as the most evil of actors in the health care system .
But with insurance cancellation notices hitting millions of consumers , Obama has launched none of the broadsides that became standard during the legislative fight over health care reform .
This time around , Obama needs the industry to make Obamacare work .
His restrained response over the past week shows just how much the dynamic between Obama and the insurance companies has shifted since the law passed — and how their fates have become intertwined . The health care law expands coverage to millions of Americans by sending them into the private insurance market armed with tax subsidies , forcing the president and his former nemeses into an uneasy partnership that ’ s only beginning to face strains .
“ Their interests are aligned with our interests in terms of wanting to enroll targeted populations , ” a senior White House official said Wednesday . “ It is not that we will agree with everything now either , but I would say for some time now there has been a collaboration because of that mutual interest . ”
The approach hasn ’ t sat well with some Democratic allies , who are publicly and privately urging the White House to ramp up its attacks on insurers , arguing that the the tactic shored up support as they struggled to push the bill through Congress . A group of Democratic strategists pressed senior administration officials during a conference call last week .
They ’ d like a repeat of 2009-10 , when then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) called insurers “ the villains , ” Obama blasted their willingness to “ bend the truth or break it , ” and Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius accused them of banking excessive profits .
“ When Obamacare got into trouble , we juxtaposed our message against the insurance companies , which are very unpopular , ” said Celinda Lake , a Democratic pollster who has advised her 2014 clients , including Alaska Sen. Mark Begich , to go after insurers . “ We should be messaging against the insurance companies this time as well . This is not good faith . If there is a snowstorm , the insurance companies are blaming it on Obamacare . ”
The White House isn ’ t prepared to go there — not yet .
Senior administration officials said they ’ re working through a lot of problems with Obamacare and launching a frontal assault on the insurance industry isn ’ t going to fix them any quicker . And after all of the bad publicity from its own missteps , the White House doesn ’ t think a blame campaign will earn points with voters , the officials said .
But they also acknowledge that an industry that was the Democratic Party ’ s default bogeyman for decades is now its collaborator . The administration is spending billions of dollars to convince Americans to buy private health plans through the insurance marketplaces , so it serves no purpose to frighten consumers , the officials said .
That ’ s not to say it ’ s been smooth going since word of the policy cancellations began spreading over the last week .
Senior White House adviser Valerie Jarrett angered insurers when she posted on Twitter that it was a “ fact ” that “ nothing in Obamacare forces people out of their health plans . ”
White House press secretary Jay Carney has been critical of insurance companies during his daily briefings , calling the individual market an under-regulated “ Wild West. ” But he ’ s tried to strike a balance , casting insurers as engaged in bad practices before the new health care law brought them into line .
Obama did the same during a health care speech Friday in Boston .
“ Remember , before the Affordable Care Act , these bad apple insurers had free rein every single year to limit the care that you received or used minor pre-existing conditions to jack up your premiums or bill you into bankruptcy , ” Obama said .
The nuance , if not lost on the industry , isn ’ t welcomed either .
White House chief of staff Denis McDonough has stepped up his direct outreach to the industry since the rocky launch Oct. 1 , inviting insurance executives to the White House last week and attending a board meeting Tuesday of the industry ’ s lobbying arm , America ’ s Health Insurance Plans .