One year ago , the Supreme Court upheld a law that radically transforms our health care system in a way that continues to frighten and beleaguer most Americans .
Friday is the one-year anniversary of the Supreme Court ’ s ruling upholding the Affordable Care Act , popularly known as Obamacare . The 5-4 decision declared that the federal government could force Americans to buy health insurance — not just any insurance , but insurance covering procedures dictated by the federal government . Obamacare established a labyrinth of red tape and bureaucracy , colossal even by Washington standards , and most important — penalizes the uninsured through the individual mandate .
Writing the majority opinion , Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. declared that the individual mandate could be considered a tax and that the power to tax was also the power to enforce the law . Dissenting Justices Antonin Scalia , Anthony M. Kennedy , Clarence Thomas and Samuel Anthony Alito Jr. vehemently disagreed , writing in their dissent : “ [ W ] e can not rewrite the statute to be what it is not . [ W ] e have never — never — treated as a tax an exaction which faces up to the critical difference between a tax and a penalty , and explicitly denominates the exaction a ‘ penalty . ’ ”
I think that Obamacare is still unconstitutional . I still think that Justices Scalia , Kennedy , Thomas and Alito got it right .
One year later , the federal health care law is even more concerning . In addition to potentially causing upward of 20 million Americans to lose their private health insurance policies , it could destroy an estimated 800,000 jobs .
The particular jobs that Obamacare creates are perhaps the most troubling .
Obamacare authorizes 16,000 more jobs at the Internal Revenue Service . The IRS also is given the authority to enforce and police compliance with Obamacare . The same agency that admittedly targeted groups with “ tea party ” or “ patriot ” in their names now is given the responsibility of making sure our individual health care plans fall under the guidelines and restrictions imposed by this administration .
In June , many considered Obamacare a nightmare . Surveying the ramifications of this law a year later , it looks even worse . Even Sen. Max Baucus , Montana Democrat , calls it a “ huge train wreck . ”
After the IRS scandal became public , President Obama declared his “ outrage ” and vowed that those responsible would be held “ fully accountable. ” Yet nothing has been done .
Instead , we are using taxpayer dollars to reward IRS agents with $ 70 million in bonuses . So the IRS gets millions in bonuses and thousands of new jobs . Meanwhile , they and the other Washington bureaucrats implementing Obamacare , along with the Supreme Court and the law ’ s namesake , are exempt from key parts of the Obamacare mandates .
Americans are not enthusiastic about the so-called Affordable Care Act , to say the least . Gallup reported this week : “ Americans are more negative than positive about the health care law ’ s future impact on their family and on the U.S. in general . Forty-two percent say that in the long run , the law will make their family ’ s health care situation worse ; 22 percent say it will make it better . And almost half believe the law will make the health care situation in the U.S. worse . ”
A Fox News poll this week showed that “ 58 percent of voters favor repealing all or some of President Obama ’ s signature legislative achievement . ”
Faith in Obamacare seems to correlate with the public ’ s increasing overall distrust in government . Americans have no reason to trust an administration that admittedly engaged in targeting individuals based on their personal beliefs and views . They also have good reason to fear what the government may do to wreck everyone ’ s health care .
It is more than a little worrisome that the IRS is charged with the enforcement of Obamacare . The IRS union gave more than $ 1 million to Democrats over the past two election cycles . Conservatives are justified in worrying about the IRS being in charge of their health care .
A year after the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Obamacare , its full , disastrous impact still looms ahead .
Sen. ███ , Kentucky Republican , is a member of the Senate Foreign Relations and Homeland Security committees .