As the president hosts a White House youth summit , a new poll from his alma mater shows a majority of young people are n't interested in signing up for his signature health care plan .
The Harvard `` Millennials '' poll found only 22 percent of young Americans -- defined in the survey as between 18 and 29 years old -- plan to sign up for ObamaCare . Even more troubling for the administration , fewer than a third -- only 29 percent -- of people who currently do not have health insurance plan to enroll .
`` Actuarially , the [ Affordable Care Act ] depends upon these young Americans signing up , '' Trey Greyson , director of Harvard 's Institute Of Politics , said . `` Our survey shows that the administration has a lot of work to do to get them on board . ''
Indeed , the Affordable Care Act relies on a large pool of young , healthy enrollees to pay for older , sicker Americans . Without their premium support , the entire system is at risk of collapse .
The new data comes as Obama launches a fresh push to engage young people on the law . He was dispatching dozens of youth leaders on Wednesday to help promote the law to the public , as the president himself launches a fresh campaign to sell the benefits of the law amid criticism in Congress .
Political affiliation and race are strongly correlated in the poll to younger Americans ' attitudes toward ObamaCare . There was 68 percent approval for the program among African-Americans . Forty-eight percent of Hispanics approved , while only 28 percent of white people in the poll said they liked it .
Younger Democrats overwhelmingly supported ObamaCare , with 68 percent approval , while only 26 percent of independents and 5 percent of Republicans supported it . Language also affected the numbers , particularly among Democrats and independents . When asked if they supported the `` Affordable Care Act , '' as opposed to `` ObamaCare , '' 81 percent of Democrats approved , while 34 percent of independents and 7 percent of Republicans said they were in favor .
The poll also found the president 's approval rating is at a historic low among 18-29 year olds . A year ago , they were crucial to his re-election . Today , only 41 percent of Millennials approve of the president 's performance . That is an 11-point drop since Harvard 's last survey in April .
`` This is sea change among a key demographic , '' Greyson said . `` The president 's double-digit decline in his job performance -- to the lowest level since he took office -- and the lack of support for the ACA have to be concerning to him and his administration . ''
One reason younger Americans are so skeptical of ObamaCare is that they believe it will result in higher costs and a lower quality of care . Fully 51 percent of respondents said they expect the cost of care will increase under the Affordable Care Act . By a 2-1 margin , 44 percent said they expect the quality of care will decline .
According to the poll , Millennials are pessimistic about the future of the country . Only 14 percent believe the country is heading in the right direction . Forty-nine percent believe it is on the wrong track .
But the president is not alone in his disapproval . His historically low numbers are positively glowing compared with those for members of Congress .
Among 18-49 year olds , Democrats receive only 35 percent support , while Republicans have only 19 percent approval .
A majority of young people reported that if they could , they would recall all members of Congress and start fresh .
The poll of 2,089 people was conducted Oct. 29-Nov. 1 .