President Trump Donald John TrumpDem lawmaker says Nunes threatened to sue him over criticism Parnas : U.S. ambassador to Ukraine removed to clear path for investigations into Bidens Five takeaways from Parnas 's Maddow interview MORE on Wednesday attacked Democrats over their embrace of `` Medicare for all , '' writing in an op-ed for USA Today that the plan would threaten seniors and likening the single-payer plan to radical socialism .
`` The Democrats ' plan means that after a life of hard work and sacrifice , seniors would no longer be able to depend on the benefits they were promised , '' Trump wrote . `` In practice , the Democratic Party ’ s so-called Medicare for All would really be Medicare for None . Under the Democrats ' plan , today ’ s Medicare would be forced to die . ''
Democrats have promised that the Medicare for all plan would improve health-care benefits for seniors and other U.S. citizens . The plan would also expand Medicare to cover almost everyone , Democrats have said .
But Trump wrote that Democrats ' preference for the single-payer health-care system shows that the `` centrist Democratic Party is dead . ''
`` The new Democrats are radical socialists who want to model America ’ s economy after Venezuela , '' he wrote .
The op-ed comes about a month ahead of November 's midterm elections , when health care will likely be an important issue for voters .
`` If Democrats win control of Congress this November , we will come dangerously closer to socialism in America , '' Trump wrote . `` Government-run health care is just the beginning . Democrats are also pushing massive government control of education , private-sector businesses and other major sectors of the U.S . economy . ''
`` Every single citizen will be harmed by such a radical shift in American culture and life . Virtually everywhere it has been tried , socialism has brought suffering , misery and decay , '' the president added .
The op-ed also comes after Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanEsper 's chief of staff to depart at end of January Latinos say they did n't benefit from Trump tax cuts — here 's why Conservative commentator rips Trump 's signature tax overhaul : 'It was a big mistake ' MORE ( R-Wis. ) made similar criticisms on Tuesday of Medicare for all , saying that it shows that the Democratic Party has “ gone off the rails . ''