To much fanfare last year , President Donald Trump ordered his administration to declare a public health emergency over the opioid epidemic . “ As Americans , we can not allow this to continue , ” Trump said at the time . “ It is time to liberate our communities from this scourge of drug addiction . ”
A new report from the Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) looked at the results of that emergency declaration . The report found little came out of the declaration .
According to the GAO audit obtained exclusively by ███ , the declaration enabled the Trump administration to make use of three new authorities — clearing paperwork requirements for a survey of health care providers about addiction treatment , allowing two states to move forward faster with programs to address the opioid crisis , and expediting support for research about opioid addiction and overdoses .
None of this is bad , but it ’ s certainly not groundbreaking — particularly for an overdose crisis that ’ s broken records for overdose deaths year over year , reaching an estimated 72,000 drug overdose deaths in 2017 .
Sens . Patty Murray ( D-WA ) and Elizabeth Warren ( D-MA ) , who along with other Democrats requested the GAO audit , criticized the Trump administration for what they see as inaction .
“ Communities are desperately in need of more help to address the opioid epidemic . President Trump , as this report shows , has broken his promises to do his part , ” Warren said in a statement . “ I ’ ve asked this administration time and time again to show what actions they are taking to meaningfully address this crisis . No response . To me , it looks like empty words and broken promises . Hand-waving about faster paperwork and speeding up a few grants is not enough — the Trump Administration needs to do far more to stop the opioid epidemic . ”
The White House did not respond to a request for comment prior to publication .
The Trump administration told the GAO that it is doing what it can with the emergency authorities unlocked by the declaration . The administration has also pointed to other steps it has taken in response to the opioid crisis . This year , for example , Congress , with Trump ’ s support , enacted more funding for addiction treatment as part of the federal budget .
But Trump ’ s emergency declaration is emblematic of the federal response to the opioid crisis so far : Despite a lot of promises and self-congratulating by the federal government on what it ’ s done , experts say that the White House and Congress need to go much further than they have so far — particularly when it comes to new dollars for addiction treatment .
The public health emergency declaration came upon the request of an opioid commission set up by Trump . As part of its preliminary report , the commission asked the administration to declare an emergency to remove regulatory barriers and unlock more resources to try to open up access to addiction treatment .
Trump followed through with the request in October 2017 , with his typical flair .
But experts warned from the start that the impact of such a declaration would be fairly limited . They said it could mostly get some programs and research out faster . And it could unlock some funding — although , as the GAO noted , the Public Health Emergency Fund only has about $ 57,000 in it , and the Trump administration has not requested more funding for it .
As I wrote at the time , it was a limited move , but it would help jump-start some action in the opioid epidemic .
That seems to be what happened . A survey asking doctors about buprenorphine , a highly effective addiction treatment for opioid use disorder , got out faster — which will help shape federal policy regarding buprenorphine and addiction treatment in the future . Two states ’ programs managed to skip some regulatory hurdles . Research was expedited .
But in total , the Trump administration has only used three of 17 authorities that the GAO found in connection to the emergency declaration . The Trump administration argued that many of these other authorities aren ’ t relevant to the opioid crisis ; given that these kinds of authorities were traditionally formed to deal with more conventional public health crises ( like , say , an Ebola or flu outbreak or natural disaster ) , they just aren ’ t fit to deal with a drug overdose epidemic .
For example , the declaration allowed the use of National Dislocated Worker Grants to “ provide funding to create temporary employment opportunities to assist with clean-up and recovery efforts , among other things , ” the GAO reported . But administration officials pointed out that “ another grant option is available — the National Health Emergency Dislocated Worker Demonstration Grants — which was established to help communities address the economic and workforce-related impacts of the opioid crisis. ” So the National Dislocated Worker Grants may be unnecessary , and , as a result , no eligible entities have applied for them .
There are some emergency authorities that Murray and Warren ’ s offices argue the Trump administration could be making a greater use of , such as in telemedicine . Advocates have pushed for relaxing rules around telemedicine so it can be done more easily for addiction treatment . But the Trump administration refused to use available emergency authorities to ease access to telemedicine , telling the GAO that “ federal law provides for other circumstances under which these restrictions do not apply , thereby allowing the use of telemedicine ” — as if the action taken so far by the administration on this issue was enough .
The reality , though , is a public health emergency declaration was never going to be enough to , as Trump suggested , “ liberate our communities from this scourge of drug addiction. ” It was always far too limited .
But this is a problem you consistently see with Trump and the opioid crisis . You could imagine a world where he declares an emergency , acknowledges the limits , and calls for specific further steps that could be taken — maybe some of the dozens of other proposals put forward by his opioid commission . Instead , we got a flashy press conference with bold but vague promises . It ’ s a Trump-y preference for presentation instead of substance .
The failings of the emergency declaration are representative of the federal response to the opioid crisis in general : well-intentioned , even good , ideas that are ultimately not enough .
The federal government needs to do more on the opioid crisis
It ’ s not that the Trump administration or Congress have done nothing in the face of the opioid epidemic . Beyond the public health emergency , the Trump administration has taken some regulatory steps — such as pulling back restrictions on Medicaid funding for addiction treatment — that will help expedite state policy responses .
Congress also recently passed and Trump is soon expected to sign the Support for Patients and Communities Act , which takes largely regulatory steps to expand access to addiction treatment and research regarding opioid addiction and pain . And Congress has allocated funding for the opioid crisis , including $ 500 million a year in the Cures Act ( which has so far been renewed ) and $ 3.3 billion in the fiscal year 2018 budget .
When I ’ ve asked experts about these approaches , it ’ s not that any of them are bad . It ’ s that they fall short . For instance , Leana Wen , the former health commissioner of Baltimore ( and soon-to-be president of Planned Parenthood ) , said that the Support for Patients and Communities Act “ is simply tinkering around the edges . ”
The funding numbers are one such example . While Congress ’ s extra billion dollars here and there are good , experts estimate that potentially tens of billions more are needed each year . ( For reference , a 2016 study put the total economic burden of prescription opioid overdose , misuse , and addiction at $ 78.5 billion in 2013 . )
That much money is necessary in large part because the state of addiction treatment in America is abysmal . Federal data suggests that only one in 10 people with any substance use disorder and one in five people with an opioid use disorder seek specialty treatment .
Even when an addiction treatment clinic is available , fewer than half of facilities offer opioid addiction medications like methadone and buprenorphine — which are considered the gold standard of care — as an option . Treatment is inaccessible enough that most people who need it don ’ t get it , and even when treatment is available , it doesn ’ t meet the best standards of care .
So experts say something more systemic and encompassing , like Vermont ’ s hub and spoke system or Virginia ’ s Medicaid reforms , are needed in this area .
Trump , of course , could push for a bolder approach that attempts to get more resources and bigger reforms , or at least try to get his fellow Republicans to make a push in Congress .
But in talking to people involved with the legislation so far , they ’ ve told me that it ’ s Democrats who have consistently asked for more — including more significant funding for the crisis — and Republicans who have resisted , citing concerns about the role and size of government and general reluctance toward more spending .
To this end , Warren proposed the Care Act with Rep. Elijah Cummings ( D-MD ) , which would increase federal spending to address the opioid crisis by $ 100 billion over 10 years . The bill , however , hasn ’ t budged in the Republican-controlled House or Senate .
As Keith Humphreys , a drug policy expert at Stanford who helped with the Support for Patients and Communities Act , told me , “ This reflects a fundamental disagreement between the parties over whether the government should appropriate the large sums a massive response would require . Lacking that , Congress did the next best thing — which is to find agreement on as many second-tier issues as they could . ”
The end result is similar to the emergency declaration : There are some genuinely positive steps , but in terms of addressing an overdose crisis killing tens of thousands of Americans each year , it ’ s simply not enough .