* * Want ███ First in your inbox every day ? Sign up here . * *
• The law firm of Skidmark , Jail Tat and Roadrash
THAT ’ S A MIGHTY BIG ‘ IF ’ MR. PRESIDENT - President Obama now says he never promised voters they could keep their health insurance plans , “ period. ” Talking to top backers of his permanent campaign arm , Organizing for Action , at a Washington meeting Monday night , the president made a new claim : “ What we said was , ‘ You could keep it if it hasn ’ t changed since the law was passed. ’ ” The president gave voice to an excuse that had so far only been offered by spokesmen : That the “ if you like it ” claim was trumped by a less-publicized promise to ban barebones insurance policies . “ If we had allowed these old plans [ to continue ] … then we would have broken an even more important promise — making sure that Americans gain access to health care that doesn ’ t leave them one illness away from financial ruin. ” Obama ’ s promise priorities are expected to result in the cancellation of some 3.5 million Americans ’ policies . ███ has more .
[ “ …You know , the president already has a Nobel Prize for peace ; I think he ’ s shooting for one in fiction. ” Rep. Trey Gowdy , R-S.C. , on “ The Kelly File. ” Watch here . ]
OBAMACARE STUCK IN THE SWAMP - Sen. Mary Landrieu , D-La. , is solidifying her place as the leading Democratic voice against ObamaCare provisions that banned millions of existing health insurance policies . She took to the Senate floor Monday blasting the president and the cancellations that have occurred as a result of his new entitlement program . Landrieu read a constituent ’ s cancellation notice from the floor charging , “ This letter should never have gone out. ” Landrieu has offered legislation requiring insurers to sell coverage that would otherwise be banned , so individuals will not lose their current policies .
[ Daily Caller points out Obama was recorded making his “ if you like it ” pledge 29 times . ]
Sen. Joe Manchin , D-W.Va. , meanwhile is working on a coalition for a broader fix to the troubled law . As Democrats grow weary of apologizing for the technical problems and unmet promises of ObamaCare , Manchin ’ s leverage with the administration will grow . But is the White House willing to take a seat at Manchin ’ s table given fears that a fix could turn into a nix ?
[ Watch Fox : Sen. David Vitter , R-La. , appears in the 9 a.m . ET hour ]
Look over here ! - President Obama would like to talk about something else . How about immigration ? He will meet with business leaders on the topic today at the White House . Later this week , though , he ’ s back on the campaign trail trying to prop up his law , heading to Texas Wednesday and to New Orleans , the home city of Sen. Mary Landrieu , D-La. , on Friday .
[ Noonan : “ … [ T ] he program debuts and it ’ s a resounding , famous , fantastical flop . The first weeks of the news coverage are about how the websites don ’ t work , can you believe we paid for this , do you believe they had more than three years and produced this public joke of a program , this embarrassment ? ” ]
MASSIVE MEDICIAD ABUSE IN ILLINOIS - An audit of Illinois ’ Medicaid program shows rampant fraud and abuse . Out of a sample of 712,000 enrollees in the government health insurance program more than half were not eligible . The probe only looked at a quarter of those in the program . The finding has been enough to send Democrats in the budget-busted state scrambling to crack down . KMOV has the story .
ObamaCare unveiled - David ’ s Bridal is the latest company to slash employee ’ s hours to skirt ObamaCare ’ s employer mandate , Daily Caller reports .
[ New Today on ███ Opinion : Juan Williams Insurance cancelled ? Do n't blame Obama or the ACA , blame America 's insurance companies ]
Softball shortage - Marilyn Tavenner , the official in charge of healthcare.gov , can expect friendlier treatment today from the Senate Health , Education , Labor , and Pensions Committee than she got last week in the House… but not much . The ongoing technical problems for the site , deepening worries about data security and new revelations about pleas from the tech team to delay the launch will make her trip to the Democratic-controlled panel more hostile than she might have hoped . Correspondent Peter Doocy has the latest on the ObamaCare crash .
[ Watch Fox : Sen. John Thune , R-S.D. , appears in the 9 a.m . ET hour ]
OBAMACARE UPENDS VIRGINIA RACE - It ’ s Election Day in the Old Dominion and political pros are watching like hawks . This is the warm-up for 2014 : A purple state , no all-star candidates and plenty of national attention . Republican Ken Cuccinelli had been written off two weeks ago , trailing by double digits , woefully outspent and shackled with an unpopular government shutdown . But as Democrat Terry McAuliffe was brushing up his victory speech , the ObamaCare crash slammed right into his poll numbers . McAuliffe went from prohibitive favorite to flailing frontrunner last week , and closes with a lead down to 6 points in the Real Clear Politics average .
Cuccinelli ’ s bumpy road - It ’ s never been easy for Ken Cuccinelli . A split that began with the decision by the state Republican Party to hold a nominating convention rather than a primary left Cuccinelli in a lurch . Moderate Republican Lt. Gov . Bill Bolling , who was expected to win if the primary had been held , nearly launched a third-party candidacy in protest . Meanwhile , scandals swirling around Gov . Bob McDonnell denied Cuccinelli the chance to run as successor to the formerly popular social conservative . While dealing with divisions and scandals , Cuccinelli was unable to pounce on the many ethical woes of Democrat Terry McAuliffe . By the time the brutal and costly contest of personal attacks had begun , Cuccinelli was already behind . Democrats and moderate Republicans were preemptively gloating about the demise of the social-issue crusader ’ s candidacy… and then came ObamaCare . The disastrous rollout of the president ’ s unpopular health law , against which Cuccinelli had long led the charge , has provided a late-game opportunity for the attorney general . If the race is a low-turnout affair and motivated Republicans can deliver , Cuccinelli could still author what would be a spectacular comeback .
McAuliffe the showman - Democrat Terry McAuliffe whose portfolio consists mainly of his career as the top moneyman for the Clinton political machine , came to the race already branded a carpetbagger . ( He did once publicly consider a run for governor of his native New York . ) Backed by megabuck financing and with the help of the Clinton team , McAuliffe set out to defeat his demons : namely scandals connected to his failed stimulus-backed GreenTech car venture and its links to a federal investigation into allegations that the company was running a visa mill . The strategy that proved effective until ObamaCare flopped : massive spending ( a 3-to-1 advantage ) to paint Ken Cuccinelli as a zealot and finance an Obamaesque focus on minorities , youth and women . McAuliffe no doubt hopes the Old Dominion will reverse its long held trend of electing a governor from the opposite party of the current president .
Campaign Carl Cameron ’ s scorecard - Can Ken Cuccinelli pull off a stunning upset ? He needs to do at least two of these three things : 1 ) Blow away turnout models . 2 ) Get enough bounce from appearances by Rand and Ron Paul to undercut Republican-turned-Libertarian , third-party potential spoiler Robert Sarvis . 3 ) Get the equivalent of a referendum vote on ObamaCare , and not the referendum on Tea Party shutdown and women ’ s health issues that Dems counter with .
Misleading robocalls in VA ? - Republican State Delegate Scott Lingamfelter tells the Washington Free Beacon he received a call Sunday night , reportedly from the Democratic Party of Virginia , stating Republican Ken Cuccinelli supported ObamaCare and tax-payer funded abortions . Cuccinelli is an ardent foe of ObamaCare and a champion of pro-life causes .
[ Watch Fox : Virginia polls close at 7 p.m . ET ███ will have the results and all of the latest political angles . Tune in tonight for coverage . ]
FUHGEDDABOUDIT ! - Gov . Chris Christie , R-N.J. , is expected to win a landslide victory over Democratic state Sen. Barbra Buono . Christie ’ s backers say widespread bipartisan support for the tough-talking , moderate governor shows the way forward for the GOP and should bolster an expected 2016 presidential bid by Christie , who recently told supporters , “ We need to show the Republican Party in America that we can win again. ” Polls close tonight at 8 p.m. in the Garden State . Deeper dive : RealClearPolitics looks at the national implications of a Christie win .
REEFER-ENDA : BALLOT ROUNDUP - Polls in six states will put over 30 ballot initiatives out to voters . Voters in Colorado ’ s Eagle and Englewood counties will weigh in on whether to allow medical marijuana retail stores , with several other precincts deciding on how pot will be taxed . Voters in 11 counties in rural , eastern Colorado will get to decide whether they want to secede from the increasingly urban , increasingly liberal state . It ’ s a long shot , but reflective of the divide in purple Colorado . Fracking restrictions will be up for a vote in Boulder , Broomfield , Fort Collins , and Lafayette counties . In New York , voters will decide on a state-backed plan to open casinos . In New Jersey , voters look poised to enshrine a state minimum wage , indexed to the cost of living , in their constitution . Washington state voters will consider the required labeling of genetically modified foods , a measure Californians voted down last year . A small Mormon community in Utah will decide whether or not it will legalize alcohol . In Houston , voters will consider the fate of the shuttered Astrodome .
NYC POISED TO ELECT FIRST DEM MAYOR SINCE 1993 - New York City Advocate Bill de Blasio , a Democratic populist who has crusaded against income inequality and denounced the city ’ s tough-on-crime stances of recent years , is expected to crush Republican former deputy mayor Joe Lhota . Polls close tonight at 9 p.m ..
WITH YOUR SECOND CUP OF COFFEE ... New Yorker ’ s John Cassidy considers how Democrat Bill de Blasio ’ s expected win in New York City ’ s mayoral race presents a test case for a new wave of liberal candidates for the post-Obama Democratic Party . Can the candidate who rode the Occupy Wall Street wave on the left become a mayor who does business with Wall Street ?
Obama Job Approval : Approve – 43.5 percent//Disapprove – 51.9 percent
Direction of Country : Right Direction – 22.2 percent//Wrong Track – 70.9 percent
A LITTLE DOUBLE DOWN ’ LL DO YA - A couple of excerpts for your morning read from Mark Halperin and John Heilemann ’ s recently released book and Washington ’ s current scandal sheet , “ Double Down ”
Code name “ d -- -- -bag ” - “ Hillary Clinton had concluded the 2008 Democratic nomination fight with $ 20 million of debt . Over time , she had paid down most of it , but a stubborn $ 263,000 remained . Now Bill Clinton ’ s gatekeeper , Doug Band , issued an ultimatum to the Obamans : the price of WJC ’ s involvement in the campaign was the retirement of HRC ’ s balance due. ” The first reaction of [ Jim ] Messina and [ David ] Plouffe was : F [ -- - ] this . The second was to wonder whether Bill and Hillary were aware that the extortionate demand was being made , or if Band , whom the Obamans code-named “ [ D -- -- - ] bag , ” was acting unilaterally .
He was right about that - “ Obama celebrated with his staff on the Truman Balcony of the White House…tipping his glass and cocking his eyebrow , Obama said , ‘ You know , they ’ re gon na kick our asses over this . ’ ”
YOU HAVE A SEAT ON THE PANEL - President Obama is facing a trust gap with the American people . That was the consensus among viewers of “ Special Report with Bret Baier , ” as tracked by Bing Pulse . Republicans , Democrats , independents , men and women all agreed when AP ’ s Julie Pace said President Obama has endangered the trust of the American people . Pace also found wide agreement across the political spectrum when she said the administrations shifting position on the security of ObamaCare ’ s Web site is suspect . Daily Caller ’ s Tucker Carlson found high agreement when he stated , “ I think what he said was , ‘ if we like your health insurance , you can keep it . ’ ’ ’
Monday ’ s panel saw 227,000 viewer votes . Viewer intensity surged to 31,000 viewer votes per minute when Pace said ObamaCare could fall apart because the “ right mix of people , ” especially young health ones , are not signing up . Go deeper in the data here . And don ’ t forget to make sure your voice is heard .
[ New today at ███ Opinion : Sen. Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , on why he supports legislative prayer ]
ABBOTT TAKES EARLY LEAD IN TEXAS POLL - A new University of Texas/Texas Tribune poll shows Democratic gubernatorial frontrunner , state Sen. Wendy Davis , who rose to fame with her filibuster defense of late-term abortion , trailing Republican Attorney General Greg Abbott in a hypothetical 2014 matchup.Abbott leads Davis 40 percent to 34 percent with nearly 25 percent of voters undecided .
[ Roll Call shares its list of the 10 most vulnerable House members . ]
READY FOR HILLARY ? MAYBE NOT - Liberal columnist Frank Bruni questions former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ’ s inevitability in 2016 for NYT in Hillary 2016 ? Not So Fast : “ Voters are souring on familiar political operators , especially those in , or associated with , Washington . That ’ s why Clinton has fallen . She ’ s lumped together with President Obama , with congressional leaders , with the whole reviled lot of them… The ascent of Bill de Blasio and the cult fervor for Elizabeth Warren demonstrate an appetite right now for liberal firebrands . ”
THE GREATEST APPLICATION - The Trust for the National Mall , the nonprofit group that preserves and maintains America ’ s front lawn , has a new app for visitors to the World War II Memorial that tells the tales of some of those memorialized there . Get it here .
THE LAW FIRM OF SKIDMARK , JAIL TAT AND ROADRASH - When you think about the lawyers for Hells Angels you think criminal defense , not civil litigation , but times have changed . The scourges of Altamont and terrors of the Western highways are suing the Dillard ’ s department store chain over a line of shirts and hats bearing a logo that is too similar to the motorcycle club ’ s “ Death Head ” emblem , a winged skull . Also named in the suit is rapper Young Jeezy ’ s clothing line , 8732 Apparel , which designed the skull-logo gear . Read it all via American University ’ s patent law blog .
Chris Stirewalt is digital politics editor for ███ . Want ███ First in your inbox every day ? Sign up here . To catch Chris live online daily at 11:30 a.m . ET , click here .