Retail giant Target Corp. has decided to drop its health care plan for part-time workers , citing low participation and saying its workers will be better off applying for coverage under the Obamacare insurance exchanges .
In a blog post Tuesday , the Minneapolis-based retailer said it will ease the transition by doling out a $ 500 cash payment to each employee who loses coverage .
Target pitched the change as common sense , yet did not say how much the move could save the company . The company also suggested it was doing employees a favor by getting out of the way of health care options under the Affordable Care Act .
“ The launch of health insurance marketplaces provides new options for health care coverage that we believe our part-time team members may prefer , ” the company said in the posting , which featured its top human resources official . “ In fact , by offering them insurance , we could actually disqualify many of them from being eligible for newly available subsidies that could reduce their overall health insurance expense . ”
The company said less than 10 percent of its employees participate in the company ’ s health care plan for part-timers , but the move raises questions about how the Affordable Care Act might influence employer-based coverage , where a large majority of Americans get their coverage . Analysts say employers may be inclined to move health care coverage into the individual market and state-based exchanges , where people may be eligible for government subsidies based on income .
Target is not the first company to announce changes to its health care plan as Obamacare rolls out in earnest .
In August , UPS said it would drop health care coverage for about 15,000 employees ’ spouses who are eligible for coverage from their own workplaces . The company said the move was its best option to keep health care costs in check , given Obamacare ’ s fees and mininum-coverage requirements .
Assessing the impact of Obamacare on the employer-based market is tricky , given the myriad factors that affect annual premium changes .
But given the political climate and the early problems with HealthCare.gov and the individual market , many critics are poised to blame any premium increases on the law .
Analysts have said smaller employers face the biggest consequences because they are less able to handle adverse changes to the balance of sick and healthy employees than larger firms can . It is a pressing concern because the law prohibits insurers from rejecting people with pre-existing conditions and from charging older consumers more than young people by more than a 3-1 ratio .
Additionally , the health care overhaul includes numerous taxes and fees that may be passed along to consumers in the employer-based insurance market .
Target said employees who work 20 to 31 hours still may qualify for vacation , dental , disability , life insurance and 401 ( k ) benefits . Also , the company said it had no plans to cut hours as part of the move .
“ At any time , our team members can talk to their manager about their interest and availability to work more hours , ” the company said . “ In fact , during the holiday season we offered our year-round part-time and full-time [ employees ] the opportunity to take on additional hours or cross-train to work in other areas — at their request . ”
Hoping to drum up support for an Obamacare Web privacy law , House Republicans cited the millions of Target customers who had to monitor their bank accounts after hackers stole their credit card numbers .
With the help of 67 Democrats , the House passed the bill , which requires the federal government to notify consumers within two days if their personal data has been breached on online-based insurance markets tied to the health care overhaul .