WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell said on Sunday he was willing to bring healthcare legislation up for a vote but was waiting for the go-ahead from President Donald Trump , who sent mixed signals last week about a bipartisan bill that would shore up insurance markets .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell waits to speak to reporters following a policy luncheon on Capitol Hill in Washington , U.S. October 17 , 2017 . ███/Eric Thayer
The Republican president said on Oct. 12 that his administration would stop paying billions of dollars in subsidies that help insurers give discounts to low-income households under the Affordable Care Act , or Obamacare . Last week , he praised and then dismissed a bipartisan bill to reinstate the subsidies for two years , until a broader replacement to Obamacare can be negotiated .
That legislation , introduced by Republican Senator Lamar Alexander and Democratic Senator Patty Murray , has drawn support from several Republican senators .
Asked if he would put it up for a vote this week , McConnell , the Senate majority leader , punted to Trump .
“ What I ’ m waiting for is to hear from President Trump what kind of healthcare bill he might sign , ” McConnell said on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union . ”
“ If there ’ s a need for some kind of interim step here to stabilize the market , we need a bill the president will actually sign , ” he said . “ I ’ m not certain yet what the president is looking for here , but I ’ ll be happy to bring a bill to the floor if I know President Trump would sign it . ”
McConnell said he believed Trump had not made up his mind about short-term legislation that would fall short of his promise for a full repeal and replacement of Obamacare .
Trump promised during his presidential campaign to get rid of Obamacare , the signature healthcare law of his predecessor , Democrat Barack Obama . However , his fellow Republicans , who control Congress , have failed to do so because of deep party divisions .
House of Representatives Speaker Paul Ryan , the top Republican in Congress , opposes the Alexander-Murray bill . With Trump waffling , its chances appeared to dim .
Democrats , meanwhile , pushed McConnell to bring the bill to the floor , saying the legislation would prevent insurance premiums from rising sharply .
“ The president holds the key to preventing premiums from going up . Now that Leader McConnell has made it clear he will put the Murray-Alexander bill on the floor as soon as the president supports it , the president should say that he does , ” Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer said in a statement .
Schumer told NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” all 48 Democrats in the Senate back the bill .