The House voted Wednesday to repeal all of President Obama ’ s health care law , acting where the Supreme Court declined to , in a vote that both sides said is doomed to fail in the Senate but was designed to lay the groundwork for voters to have a final say in November ’ s elections .
The vote forced some Democrats to choose between their support for Mr. Obama and a lingering opposition to the law in their home districts , and five Democrats joined the GOP in the 244-185 vote in favor of a repeal .
It marks the 33rd time that the House has tried a full or partial repeal of the sweeping law , which Democrats powered through Congress in 2010 without a single GOP vote , and which has become both the defining domestic achievement of Mr. Obama ’ s tenure and the political rallying cry for his opponents .
“ [ Americans ] certainly didn ’ t ask for this government takeover of their health care system , ” said House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican . “ We ’ re giving our colleagues in the Senate another chance to heed the will of the American people . ”
The Senate has blocked nearly every one of the previous repeal efforts , with only a few tweaks to the law ’ s financing having made it through in the two years since the law was adopted .
“ We know job creation is the most important thing right now and that ’ s why we ’ re very concerned about the waste of time on the floor of the House on something that ’ s never going to happen , but just is a manifestation of the fact that Republicans are the handmaiden of the health insurance industry , ” said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat .
The Supreme Court upheld most of the Affordable Care Act in a 5-4 decision last month , ruling that Congress ’ taxing powers were broad enough to grant it authority to require all Americans to obtain insurance .
House Republicans immediately promised to try a repeal again , while Democrats said it was a distraction . Both parties tailored their arguments to the top issue that voters say they care about : jobs and the economy .
White House spokesman Jay Carney accused the GOP of engaging in “ a quixotic effort to try and score political points . ”
“ We do not need to refight the battles of two years ago , three years ago , ” Mr. Carney said . “ We need to help the American economy now . ”
The full law doesn ’ t go into effect until 2014 , and the court ’ s decision has left some holes in it . A number of states where Republicans are in control have said they will opt out of expanding Medicaid coverage - an option the high court opened up in its ruling . Some states also said they would forgo setting up insurance exchanges .
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said Wednesday that a dozen states , representing nearly a third of all Americans , have sent letters officially saying that they would create exchanges .
Wednesday ’ s repeal vote was a test for Democrats from conservative-leaning districts .
As lawmakers milled around the House floor Wednesday afternoon , seated shoulder to shoulder in a row near the back were Reps. Collin C. Peterson of Minnesota , Larry Kissell and Heath Shuler of North Carolina , Jason Altmire of Pennsylvania , Dan Boren of Oklahoma and Ben Chandler of Kentucky - all lawmakers who originally voted against enacting the law .
When it came time for them to vote , Mr. Boren and Mr. Kissell bucked their party again , along with Reps. Mike McIntyre of North Carolina , Dennis Ross of Florida and Jim Matheson , who voted against the law initially . Mr. Boren , Mr. McIntyre and Mr. Ross also had voted for repeal .
Mr. Shuler said he can ’ t stomach taking away benefits already flowing to millions of Americans .
“ It ’ s true that I did not support the Affordable Care Act , but my strong pro-life philosophy can not reconcile or justify how we pull the rug out from beneath these individuals now , ” he said .
Just before the vote , Democrats held a news conference and showcased five Americans who described how the law has helped them .
Senior Bill Cea said he didn ’ t have to pay for a wellness visit to his doctor now that Medicare offers the benefit once a year .
Christine Haight Farley , a mother whose son has cystic fibrosis , and Emily Schlichting , a young adult with a rare autoimmune disease , said they don ’ t have to worry about finding insurance because children can stay on parental plans until age 26 and insurers can ’ t discriminate against them after that .
Jamal Lee , owner of a small audio production company , said he is able to provide insurance coverage for his employees with help from the law ’ s small-business tax credits .
Aracely Rodriguez , who works for Planned Parenthood in San Diego , said the law ’ s provisions to expand health coverage are crucial to Hispanic women , who lack insurance more than any other female group in the country .
Mrs. Pelosi said their stories should send a message to Republicans - and to voters in November .
“ Really , we just want people to know what they have and what will be taken away , and they ’ ll make their political judgment about that , ” she said .