Obama Makes A Last-Ditch Effort For His Signature Health Care Law
President Obama meets with Democrats on Capitol Hill today , looking for ways to preserve his signature health care law in the face of stiff Republican opposition .
Senate Republicans have already taken the first step toward repealing Obamacare . On Tuesday , they introduced a budget resolution that would ultimately allow Republicans to unravel large parts of the Affordable Care Act with a simple majority vote .
Democrats still hope to defend the law , which has extended health insurance to some 20 million Americans . Repealing the law would very likely strip protection from many of those people . So far , Republicans have not reached agreement on how to replace Obamacare . And the outgoing administration mocks the idea of repeal now and replace later .
`` That ultimately is nothing more than just bait and switch , '' said White House spokesman Josh Earnest .
The American Medical Association issued a similar note of caution in an open letter to lawmakers . The association , which supported the Affordable Care Act when it passed seven years ago , acknowledged that the law is imperfect , but said any effort to cut costs or increase choice should at least preserve the existing level of coverage .
`` Before any action is taken through reconciliation or other means that would potentially alter coverage , policymakers should lay out for the American people , in reasonable detail , what will replace current policies , '' wrote the association 's CEO , James L. Madara . `` Patients and other stakeholders should be able to clearly compare current policy to new proposals so they can make informed decisions about whether it represents a step forward in the ongoing process of health reform . ''
Reconciliation is a procedural tactic that would allow Senate Republicans to unwind large parts of the Affordable Care Act without the threat of a Democratic filibuster .
Some Republican senators are wary of stripping health insurance from people without a plan to take its place . And conservative health care scholars Joseph Antos and James Capretta of the American Enterprise Institute warn that repeal without simultaneous replacement `` carries too much risk of unnecessary disruption to the existing insurance arrangements upon which many people are now relying to finance their health services . ''
Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan is undeterred , calling the budget resolution `` the first step towards relief for Americans struggling under Obamacare . '' In a statement , Ryan said his goal is `` to ensure that patients will be in control of their health care and have greater access to quality , affordable coverage . ''
President-elect Donald Trump weighed in via Twitter , writing , `` People must remember that ObamaCare just does n't work , and it is not affordable . ''
He pointed to a 116 percent increase in premiums for people buying insurance on the government-run exchange in Arizona this year . Premium increases for exchange customers nationwide averaged 25 percent . Most customers shopping on the exchanges receive a government subsidy that helps to defray some or all of the increase .
Even with the higher prices and uncertainty surrounding Obamacare , the administration says customers have been signing up for coverage on the exchanges at a record pace .