WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. senators unveiled two opposing visions of a healthcare system in the United States on Wednesday - leading liberals advocating government insurance for all and several Republicans proposing an eleventh-hour repeal of Obamacare to replace it with programs run by the states .
Senator Bernie Sanders ( I-VT ) speaks during an event to introduce the `` Medicare for All Act of 2017 '' on Capitol Hill in Washington , U.S. , September 13 , 2017 . ███/Yuri Gripas
Neither plan was thought likely to succeed in a Congress exhausted with fighting over the issue , raising questions over whether lawmakers would instead prop up the health benefits offered under former President Barack Obama ’ s healthcare law .
Independent Senator Bernie Sanders , a 2016 Democratic Party presidential candidate , held a campaign-style gathering at which enthusiasts applauded as he proposed extending the federal Medicare health insurance program for seniors to include everyone .
“ The American people want to know what we are going to do to fix a dysfunctional healthcare system which costs us twice as much per person as any other country and yet leaves 28 million people uninsured , and even more underinsured , ” Sanders declared .
Senator Elizabeth Warren , one of 16 Democratic co-sponsors for Sanders ’ proposal , told the gathering it was time to go a step beyond Obamacare , the 2010 law officially called the Affordable Care Act that expanded health coverage to 20 million Americans .
“ We will say that in this country everyone gets a basic right to healthcare , ” Warren said .
But in an office building nearby , Republican senators announced they were offering a “ last chance ” to repeal Obamacare , before a parliamentary procedure allowing them to pass it with a simple majority , instead of a three-fifths majority like most Senate legislation , expires at the end of September .
They proposed replacing the law with a program that would give states money in the form of block grants to run their own healthcare programs .
Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina , one of the plan ’ s authors , said he was not ready to give up the long-held Republican goal of repealing Obamacare despite a stunning failure to muster enough votes within the party this summer to kill the law .
“ The idea that the Republican party has done its best to repeal and replace Obamacare is a joke , ” said Graham , who was joined by fellow Republican Bill Cassidy in the effort .
A system of U.S. government-run healthcare for all is anathema to many Republicans , who think the hybrid Obamacare system in which government subsidizes private health insurance already was a step too far .
Republicans ’ last attempt in July to overturn Obamacare fell one vote short in the Senate in a humiliating defeat for President Donald Trump and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell .
In addition to the Sanders and Graham-Cassidy proposals , a bipartisan effort is under way in the Senate health committee to repair Obamacare without repealing it , by protecting subsidies that are paid to insurance companies to help offset discounts under the program .
McConnell this week declined to comment on either the Cassidy-Graham bill or the bipartisan health committee effort , saying the way forward was not clear . The Republican leader is not expected to bring Sanders ’ proposal to the Senate floor for a vote .
Trump applauded Graham and Cassidy , saying he hoped the senators “ have found a way to address the Obamacare crisis . ”
Trump has frequently complained that Obamacare is in crisis . Democrats dispute this but many admit there is room for improvement . A greater than expected mixture of sick and healthy customers hampered Obamacare from the start , leading to large premium increases and many counties have just one insurer .