Lawmakers from both sides of the aisle cast doubt on the IRS ‘ ability to administer Obamacare , saying Wednesday that the agency will have a tough time trying to shepherd confused taxpayers through the tortuous process .
Republicans said the shaky rollout of the health exchanges last year combined with the Internal Revenue Service ’ s dented reputation in the wake of the tea party targeting scandal have created a trust gap . For their part Democrats doubted Americans understand their obligations .
“ I suspect that most folks , after they sign up for health care , aren ’ t going back to review the website — they ’ ve figured that they ’ ve done that , and they ’ re getting on with the other things in their life , ” said Rep. Mike Thompson , California Democrat .
Americans will confront the issue early next year , when for the first time they will have to certify whether they hold insurance when they file their returns .
Many will simply check a box , but those who received tax credits to help them pay premiums to purchase insurance on the health exchanges will have to reconcile their subsidy payments , which were based on expected income , with what they actually earned .
“ We ’ ve been trying to continually remind people to make that adjustment , ” IRS Commissioner John Koskinen told the House Ways and Means Committee ’ s panel on health .
SEE ALSO : Technology problems at IRS go far beyond loss of Lois Lerner ’ s email
The IRS is also charged with enforcing the law ’ s individual mandate — the provision that requires Americans to hold health insurance unless they have a specific exemption .
Mr. Koskinen said his agency will handle the workload even though Congress hasn ’ t given the IRS additional money .
House Republicans , though , questioned whether the IRS will be fair in its scrutiny , particularly in light of revelations that top officials in the tea party targeting scandal appeared to have a bias against Republicans .
“ What are the things that are happening proactively to prevent the next Lois Lerner — Lois Lerner 2.0 — from looking out over a landscape with a high level of discretion to be able to say , ‘ You know what ? We ’ re going to make inquires here , and we ’ re going to make inquires there , and we ’ re not to make inquires over here , ’ and you see where I ’ m going , ” demanded Rep. Peter Roskam , Illinois Republican .
Ms. Lerner , the former director of the IRS ’ s Office of Exempt Organizations , became the face of the scandal last year when she admitted her division used inappropriate criteria to scrutinize political groups seeking tax-exempt status .
Since then the IRS has said it lost a set of Ms. Lerner ’ s emails that could be relevant to the investigation . To Mr. Roskam , that raised questions about the tech folks who will administer Obamacare ’ s provisions next year .
“ Are these the same IT people that can ’ t find Lois Lerner ’ s emails and can ’ t deal with hard drives ? ” the congressman asked .
Mr. Koskinen said the IRS ’ s auditing system prevents any one employee from singling out a specific taxpayer .
But the commissioner may have undermined lawmakers ’ confidence in the agency when , responding to questions about how subsidy overpayments would be collected , he remarked : “ Wherever we can , we follow the law . ”
“ I encourage you to follow the law in all instances , ” said panel Chairman Kevin Brady , Texas Republican .
The commissioner said if Congress wanted to , it could help his agency carry out its new duties by ponying up an extra $ 430 million during the budget process , including $ 300 million needed to build systems that would let the IRS administer its share of Obamacare .
Rep. William J. Pascrell Jr. , New Jersey Democrat , said House Republicans are holding back funding as part of an uphill effort to dismantle Obamacare .
“ If you can ’ t shoot the dog , starve it , ” he said . “ That ’ s what this is all about . ”