House Speaker Paul D. Ryan insisted Thursday the GOP is making “ real progress ” in rallying around an Obamacare replacement plan , citing a proposed change that would subsidize the costs of sicker consumers so that insurers can drive down costs for healthier ones .
Mr. Ryan , Wisconsin Republican , said the amendment will be added to the existing GOP health plan in the House Rules Committee later on Thursday .
“ It will help us build momentum for delivering on our promise to the country , ” Mr. Ryan said at his weekly press conference , surrounded by members from conservative and centrist wings of the GOP .
The speaker exuded optimism even though Congress is leaving town for an Easter recess without fulfilling their urgent mission to repeal and replace Obamacare .
Leaders insist they are inching toward consensus , even though conservative and centrist factions spent much of the week pointing fingers at each other for the flagging effort , after the House GOP ’ s initial bill failed before it hit the floor .
“ While we have work to do to get all the way there , we have made real progress this week , ” Mr. Ryan said .
Lawmakers casting votes early Thursday said they ’ d be willing to cut their recess short and return to work on the plan .
“ If we get white smoke , we ’ ll all be advised of that and act accordingly , ” Rep. Morgan Griffith , Virginia Republican , said . “ I don ’ t know that it ’ s a probability , but it ’ s always a possibility . ”
Earlier this week , the White House dispatched Vice President Mike Pence and high-level staff to Capitol Hill to so that Republicans didn ’ t appear to be stuck in neutral on health care before facing voters back home .
Mr. Ryan said the proposal to subsidize high-risk consumers had buy-in from across the party and “ brings us closer to the final agreement that we all want to achieve . ”
Rep. Gary Palmer , Alabama Republican , and Rep. David Schweikert , Arizona Republican , sponsored the amendment , which sets up a Federal Invisible Risk Sharing Program modeled after a similar one in Maine .
The four-page amendment gives the Health and Human Services Department wide latitude over how to disperse $ 15 billion to insurers over the coming decade , including which patients would be covered .
The federal government will oversee the program for three years before it is handed off to the states .
Rep. Mark Meadows , North Carolina Republican , says risk funding is a key ingredient in the conservative House Freedom Caucus ’ s push to deregulate the individual insurance market and drive down costs for healthier consumers .
Mr. Meadows , who leads the Freedom Caucus , said many members would vote for a bill if GOP leaders pair the new funding with provisions that let states seek waivers from Obamacare regulations that require health insurers to cover a minimum set of benefits , charge the same amount to both sick and healthy customers in a given geographic area and issue policies to customers regardless of their health status .
“ Just to be frank , we will make news here this morning . If those offers that were made over the last couple days actually appear in the legislation , the majority if not almost all of the Freedom Caucus will vote for this bill , ” Mr. Meadows said during a Politico Playbook interview Thursday .
The House GOP already promised not to charge sicker customers more than others — it ’ s a popular protection built into Obamacare — so Republicans will have to demonstrate that they are taking steps to care for sicker customers who will be priced out of a deregulated market .
Whether the GOP is injecting enough money into its program will be a matter of debate , however .
“ It in fact could be very helpful to reducing insurance premiums and keeping insurers in the game , if it were adequately funded . It isn ’ t at this level , ” said Timothy Jost , a law professor at Washington and Lee University who closely tracks the health care debate .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said the latest GOP move “ is a band-aid on the deep damage that the GOP bill has done , ” citing less generous tax-assistance in the bill , provisions that would allow insurers to charge older Americans more than younger ones .
Democrats also say the general uncertainty of the repeal-and-replace effort could cause insurers to flee the marketplace ahead of critical rate-setting deadlines .