WASHINGTON — After losing in Congress , President Donald Trump is counting on the courts to kill off “ Obamacare. ” But some cases are going against him , and time is not on his side as he tries to score a big win for his re-election campaign .
Two federal judges in Washington , D.C. , this past week blocked parts of Trump ’ s health care agenda : work requirements for some low-income people on Medicaid , and new small business health plans that don ’ t have to provide full benefits required by the Affordable Care Act .
But in the biggest case , a federal judge in Texas ruled last December that the ACA is unconstitutional and should be struck down in its entirety . That ruling is now on appeal . At the urging of the White House , the Justice Department said this past week it will support the Texas judge ’ s position and argue that all of “ Obamacare ” must go .
A problem for Trump is that the litigation could take months to resolve - or longer - and there ’ s no guarantee he ’ ll get the outcomes he wants before the 2020 election .
“ Was this a good week for the Trump administration ? No , ” said economist Gail Wilensky , who headed up Medicare under former Republican President George H.W . Bush . “ But this is the beginning of a series of judicial challenges . ”
It ’ s early innings in the court cases , and “ the clock is going to run out , ” said Timothy Jost , a retired law professor who has followed the Obama health law since its inception .
“ By the time these cases get through the courts there simply isn ’ t going to be time for the administration to straighten out any messes that get created , much less get a comprehensive plan through Congress , ” added Jost , who supports the ACA .
If former President Barack Obama ’ s health law is struck down entirely , Congress would face an impossible task : pass a comprehensive health overhaul to replace it that both Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Trump can agree to . The failed attempt to repeal “ Obamacare ” in 2017 proved to be toxic for congressional Republicans in last year ’ s midterm elections and they are in no mood to repeat it .
“ The ACA now is nine years old and it would be incredibly disruptive to uproot the whole thing , ” said Thomas Barker , an attorney with the law firm Foley Hoag , who served as a top lawyer at the federal Health and Human Services department under former Republican President George W. Bush . “ It seems to me that you can resolve this issue more narrowly than by striking down the ACA . ”
“ Right now , it ’ s losing in court , ” he asserted Friday , referring to the Texas case against “ Obamacare . ”
The case “ probably ends up in the Supreme Court , ” Trump continued . “ But we ’ re doing something that is going to be much less expensive than Obamacare for the people … and we ’ re going to have ( protections for ) pre-existing conditions and will have a much lower deductible . So , and I ’ ve been saying that , the Republicans are going to end up being the party of health care . ”
There ’ s no sign that his administration has a comprehensive health care plan , and there doesn ’ t seem to be a consensus among Republicans in Congress .
A common thread in the various health care cases is that they involve lower-court rulings for now , and there ’ s no telling how they may ultimately be decided . Here ’ s a status check on major lawsuits :
U.S. District Court Judge Reed O ’ Connor in Fort Worth , Texas , ruled that when Congress repealed the ACA ’ s fines for being uninsured , it knocked the constitutional foundation out from under the entire law . His ruling is being appealed by attorneys general from Democratic-led states to the 5th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans .
The challenge to the ACA was filed by officials from Texas and other GOP-led states . It ’ s now fully supported by the Trump administration , which earlier had argued that only the law ’ s protections for people with pre-existing conditions and its limits on how much insurers could charge older , sicker customers were constitutionally tainted . All sides expect the case to go to the Supreme Court , which has twice before upheld the ACA .
U.S. District Court Judge James E. Boasberg in Washington , D.C. , last week blocked Medicaid work requirements in Kentucky and Arkansas approved by the Trump administration . The judge questioned whether the requirements were compatible with Medicaid ’ s central purpose of providing “ medical assistance ” to low-income people . He found that administration officials failed to account for coverage losses and other potential harm , and sent the Health and Human Services Department back to the drawing board .
The Trump administration says it will continue to approve state requests for work requirements , but has not indicated if it will appeal .
U.S. District Court Judge John D. Bates last week struck down the administration ’ s health plans for small business and sole proprietors , which allowed less generous benefits than required by the ACA . Bates found that administration regulations creating the plans were “ clearly an end-run ” around the Obama health law and also ran afoul of other federal laws governing employee benefits .
The administration said it disagrees but hasn ’ t formally announced an appeal .
Also facing challenges in courts around the country are an administration regulation that bars federally funded family planning clinics from referring women for abortions and a rule that allows employers with religious and moral objections to opt out of offering free birth control to women workers as a preventive care service .