The battle-lines were drawn Wednesday on Capitol Hill in the high-stakes fight over ObamaCare , as President Obama and Vice President-elect Mike Pence huddled with their respective congressional allies to talk strategy for Republicans ' repeal push .
While Obama urged Democrats to `` fight '' for the Affordable Care Act 's survival , Pence assured Republicans that the Donald Trump administration will make the law 's demise its `` first order of business . ''
“ It was a promise made on the campaign trail , ” Pence said at a press conference after meeting with House Republicans . “ The first order of business is to repeal and replace ObamaCare . … People voted for a better health care system , and we owe them that . ”
The VP-elect sought to reassure supporters jittery about reports that party leaders could delay repeal efforts and that they have no replacement plan .
He also said the repeal process would be a “ two-track approach , ” with incoming GOP President Donald Trump using his executive powers , as leaders of the Republican-controlled Congress draft and pass the requisite legislation .
“ It will be a legislative and executive action agenda to assure an orderly transition to something better , ” said Pence , who with Trump takes office on Jan. 20 .
He also said the incoming White House team is “ already working on a series of executive actions . ”
Sources also told ███ on Wednesday that Pence said in the meeting that Republicans hope to have a repeal bill on Trump 's desk by Feb. 20 , one month after the inauguration .
Though Pence boasted Wednesday that Trump could start taking executive action with minutes or hours of being sworn in , he and House Republican leaders were peppered with questions about when the repeal process would be complete and why they don ’ t have an alternative health care plan .
“ We have plenty of plans , ” said House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. “ We don ’ t want to pull the rug out on people . We do n't want people to be caught with nothing . ”
Ending ObamaCare without a substitute plan could result in as many as 20 million Americans losing their health insurance , which would be political disaster for Republicans .
Obama exited his 90-minute , closed-door meeting without comment but reportedly urged fellow Democrats not to `` rescue '' Republicans on what he suggested be called `` Trumpcare . ''
New Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said afterward that Obama and fellow Democrats had a “ very inspiring ” meeting in which they discussed a strategy to save ObamaCare , then blasted Republicans for their repeal-replace agenda .
“ It would make America sick again , lead to chaos instead of affordable care , ” the New York Democrat said . “ They have no idea what to put in place of [ ObamaCare ] . They talked about repeal , but for five years they have nothing to put in its place . ”
The visits come on the second day of the new , GOP-led Congress .
Trump replacing Obama at the White House in 16 days puts the GOP ’ s longtime goal of annulling much of the 2010 health care overhaul within reach .
Trump , despite his campaign vows to repeal the law , warned his colleagues on Wednesday not to let Democrats off the hook for a program he called a `` disaster , ” while warning them to be careful in their methods .
Those who voted for Trump and other ObamaCare detractors are already concerned about congressional Republican leaders saying after the election that they ’ ll need two to four years to implement a replacement plan .
ObamaCare was created as a way to drive down overall insurance costs by reducing emergency-care visits and other uninsured medical expenses .
However , lower-than-projected enrollment among younger , healthy Americans as well as doctors and insurance companies dropping out of the program have contributed to significantly increasing premium costs .
On Tuesday , as the 115th Congress opened , Senate Republicans took the first step toward repealing ObamaCare .
Sen. Mike Enzi , R-Wyo. , introduced a resolution that begins the process for repeal legislation and calls for two House and two Senate committees to send over a legislative plan by Jan. 27 .
“ Today , we take the first steps to repair the nation ’ s broken health care system , ” said Enzi , chairman of the Senate Budget Committee .
He and other leaders of the Republican-controlled Congress are relying on a parliamentary maneuver known as “ budget reconciliation ” to dismantle the law because it avoids a Senate Democrat filibuster and requires only a 51-vote majority for passage in the chamber , not the 60-vote majority .
Republicans have a 52-to-48 member majority in the Senate and a 241-to-194 majority in the House , which requires only a simple majority for passage .
Trump has provided few specifics about how he would revamp the nation 's $ 3 trillion-a-year health care system . Steps he and congressional Republicans have mentioned include greater reliance on tax credits to help people afford coverage .
And he has talked about keeping such provisions as allowing young adults to stay on their parents ’ plan and providing access to coverage for Americans with pre-existing medical conditions .