WASHINGTON — A federal judge ’ s ruling that the Obama health law is unconstitutional has landed like a stink bomb among Republicans , who ’ ve seen the politics of health care flip as Americans increasingly value the overhaul ’ s core parts , including protections for pre-existing medical conditions and Medicaid for more low-income people .
While the decision by the Republican-appointed judge in Texas was sweeping , it has little immediate practical impact because the Affordable Care Act remains in place while the legal battle continues , possibly to the Supreme Court .
HealthCare.gov , the government ’ s site for signing up , was taking applications Saturday , the deadline in most states for enrolling for coverage next year , and those benefits will take effect as scheduled Jan. 1 . Medicaid expansion will proceed in Virginia , one of the latest states to accept that option . Employers will still be required to cover the young adult children of workers , and Medicare recipients will still get discounted prescription drugs .
But Republicans , still stinging from their loss of the House in the midterm elections , are facing a fresh political quandary after U.S. District Judge Reed O ’ Connor said the entire 2010 health law was invalid .
Warnings about the Texas lawsuit were part of the political narrative behind Democrats ’ electoral gains . Health care was the top issue for about one-fourth of voters in the November election , ahead of immigration and jobs and the economy , according to VoteCast , a nationwide survey for The Associated Press . Those most concerned with health care supported Democrats overwhelmingly .
In his ruling , O ’ Connor reasoned that the body of the law could not be surgically separated from its now-meaningless requirement for people to have health insurance .
“ On the assumption that the Supreme Court upholds , we will get great , great health care for our people , ” President Donald Trump told reporters during a visit Saturday to Arlington National Cemetery . “ We ’ ll have to sit down with the Democrats to do it , but I ’ m sure they want to do it also . ”
Economist Gail Wilensky , who oversaw the Medicare program for President George H.W . Bush , said the state attorneys general from GOP strongholds who filed the lawsuit really weren ’ t very considerate of their fellow Republicans .
“ The fact that they could cause their fellow Republicans harm did not seem to bother them , ” said Wilensky , a critic of President Barack Obama ’ s signature domestic achievement .
“ The people who raised it are a bunch of guys who don ’ t have serious election issues , mostly from states where saber-rattling against the ACA is fine , ” she added . “ How many elections do you have to get battered before you find another issue ? ”
Douglas Holtz-Eakin , top policy adviser to Republican John McCain ’ s 2008 presidential campaign , said he was struck by the relative silence from top Republicans after the ruling issued .
A prominent example : “ The House was not party to this suit , and we are reviewing the ruling and its impact , ” said AshLee Strong , spokeswoman for House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis .
Republicans are “ going to have to figure out what to do , ” Holtz-Eakin said . “ If it ’ s invalidated by the courts , it ’ s not … ‘ We ’ re going to do it our way. ’ They ’ re going to have to get together with the Democrats in the House . ”
The GOP ’ s failed effort last year to repeal the law showed there ’ s no consensus within the party itself .
Trump tweeted Friday night that “ Congress must pass a STRONG law that provides GREAT healthcare and protects pre-existing conditions . ”
“ Get it done ! ” he told Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , and Rep. Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , who is expected to be speaker in January . But Trump had no plan of his own to offer in the 2017 “ repeal and replace ” debate .
Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy of California said “ Obamacare is a broken law , ” but added , “ I am committed to working with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle to make sure America ’ s healthcare system works for all Americans . ”
The third-ranking GOP leader , Louisiana Rep. Steve Scalise , praised the judge ’ s ruling and made no mention of working with Democrats , whom he accused of “ running a fear-mongering campaign ” to win control of the House last month .
The chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee , Rep. Kevin Brady , R-Texas , said that if the law is ultimately overturned , then members of Congress from both parties should start over , working together . He urged maintaining provisions such as protections for pre-existing medical conditions , no lifetime dollar limits on insurance coverage , and allowing young adults to stay on parental coverage until age 26 .
Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer of New York said voters will remember . “ What will stand is Republican ownership of such a harmful and disastrous lawsuit , ” Schumer tweeted .
The next chapter in the legal case could take months to play out .
A coalition of Democratic state officials led by California Attorney General Xavier Becerra will appeal O ’ Connor ’ s decision , most likely to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit in New Orleans .
“ The legal merits of the case are frivolous , ” said University of Michigan law professor Nicholas Bagley . “ The notion that the unconstitutionality of an unenforceable mandate somehow requires toppling the entire ACA is bonkers. ” Bagley supports the law generally , but has been critical of how it has been put into effect .