For more than three years , Republicans have engaged each other in a heated debate over whether the proper response to the passage of the Affordable Care Act is to repeal it and replace it with something else , or to just repeal it and return to the pre-Obamacare status quo .
In effect , their actual position is the latter . They 've voted to repeal the law over and over again , but have never reached a consensus on a single plan to replace it . And at times during the long lead-up to Obamacare 's big launch , that failure has been a liability for them . It 's damaged their credibility as healthcare reform critics with the press and the public alike . The old system sucked ! Why should we go back to it ?
Given how troubled the Obamacare rollout has been , you might think that Republicans are kicking themselves particularly hard right now for not settling on a `` GOP healthcare plan . '' What better time to argue for repeal than under circumstances like these ?
But you 'd be wrong . If anything , they 're incredibly relieved . Because a `` replace '' plan would neutralize what has proved to be one of their best , and relatedly most disingenuous , lines of attack against the law since it passed in 2010 .
We know the outrage Republicans are expressing on behalf of people receiving cancellation notices from their individual market insurance plans is phony because it 's obviously phony . They do n't have any particular interest in ameliorating this phenomenon short of repealing or destroying the rest of the law . And its effectiveness as a talking point hinges on never acknowledging that Obamacare has helped anybody .
But the most revealing tell , identified here by the New Republic 's Jonathan Cohn , is that all of the healthcare reform plans Republicans support would disrupt the insurance market much more dramatically than the Affordable Care Act does . Republicans ca n't achieve consensus on a plan to replace Obamacare , but they all basically agree that very few people should be allowed to keep the insurance plans they have right now .
Jonathan explains how almost all GOP plans would kick millions of people off of Medicaid , and inflict adverse selection on the employer-sponsored insurance market by creating a huge incentive for healthy workers to abandon their group plans for individual ones . The ensuing death spiral would result in more cancellation notices and `` rate shock '' than we 're seeing now by an order of magnitude , but without the safety net of the Affordable Care Act 's exchanges to catch people .
The National Review 's Ramesh Ponnuru 's solution to this problem is to rip the band-aid off slowly . Whereas Obamacare creates an immediate disruption for a relatively small group of individual policyholders , Republicans should create a slow , steady disruption for tens of millions more .
Other smart conservatives -- which is to say , policy wonks without much cachet on Capitol Hill -- would replace all insurance with subsidized catastrophic coverage and tax-preferred health savings accounts . Nobody with private insurance or Medicaid would get to keep what they have , no matter how much they like it .
I 'd add another . Nearly all Republicans support eliminating traditional Medicare for future retirees , and replacing it with a plan that looks ( ironically ) a lot like Obamacare . The sales pitch version of the plan is that Republicans want to keep the promise the country made to current retirees and people nearing retirement , but radically overhaul it for the young and middle-aged . Over time , single-payer Medicare would be phased out .
But as nearly every healthcare expert will tell you , the phase-out would be massively disruptive . As the program 's beneficiaries aged and dwindled in number , it would become unsustainable very quickly . Without scale , the government would lose its purchasing power , and would either have to fork over tons of money to motivate providers to care for beneficiaries -- a bailout -- or watch providers abandon the program en masse , leaving the country 's oldest , sickest people little choice but to enter the private insurance market .
Republicans are treating Obama 's `` if you like your plan you can keep it '' pitch as the noble lie from which all of the apocalyptic consequences of the Affordable Care Act will ultimately spring . The original swindle . But the focus-grouped deception they hope to perpetrate against seniors is far more egregious .
If a consensus GOP plan existed today , Republicans would have to square their outpouring of sympathy for beleaguered young policyholders with the radical intent of their own vision . I imagine they -- like Obama ! -- would n't be forthright about the consequences . The truth is , that plan would fail on the floor of the House either way . Precisely because it 's so radical , I strongly doubt there will ever be a political constituency for it . Even if Republicans someday control the government again . ( Remember the last time they controlled the government and ruptured the healthcare system ? Me neither . ) But if someday they do , and charge ahead with a plan that contains elements like these , the consequences and the political fallout will make the great cancellation row of 2013 look like a website glitch .