Aetna ’ s announcement this week that it is pulling out of “ Obamacare ” market exchanges in 11 states adds to the impression that the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) is imploding .
“ When people talk about the ACA , they focus on the exchanges , but a lot of other pieces are working , ” says Chris Sloan , senior manager at Avalere Health , a healthcare consulting company in Washington .
True , premiums are set to rise more quickly next year than in the past – by 9 percent instead of 2 percent . But they are still , on average , less expensive than what the government had originally forecast . About 20 million Americans now have health insurance who did not have it before . And projections for the total cost of healthcare in America have fallen – by $ 2.6 trillion – compared to the government forecast in 2010 , when the law was signed .
At the same time , Aetna ’ s move highlights an aspect of the new system that ’ s problematic in some parts of the country , particularly rural areas : the “ exchange ” markets where people choose their insurer under Obamacare . The problem is that key insurers are losing hundreds of millions of dollars in these exchanges and pulling out of some of them , leaving consumers with only one insurer – i.e. , no choice .
Mr. Sloan ’ s firm , Avalere Health , on Friday released a troubling forecast : A third of the country ’ s exchange regions may offer only one insurer in 2017 . That analysis reflects publicly announced pullbacks from exchanges by insurer giants Aetna , Humana , and UnitedHealthcare and by some co-ops for 2017 . The marketplace exchanges , which cover about 11 million people in total , enable people to get subsidized healthcare .
The consulting firm lists seven states – Alaska , Alabama , Kansas , North Carolina , Oklahoma , South Carolina , and Wyoming – where Obamacare consumers can expect to be offered only one insurer in each market-exchange region in the state . The analysis does not account for insurers that may still be planning to enter these markets , which is a distinct possibility .
Others argue that pullouts by insurer heavyweights from some of the exchange markets do not necessarily spell doomsday . Some of these markets are serviced by smaller insurers – and the big companies simply couldn ’ t compete .
“ When some insurers are coming in with narrower networks , at a lower price , that ’ s what you want , ” says Linda Blumberg , an expert on the exchanges at the Urban Institute . That ’ s healthy competition , she says , “ not necessarily a cause for panic . ”
Still , policy experts such as Ms. Blumberg and Mr. Sloan offer several suggestions on how to address the lack of competition in some parts of the country – with some fixes requiring action by Congress . That ’ s not even a remote possibility before the election , though it may be possible afterward , depending on the outcome , analysts say .
Here are some of the commonly suggested “ fixes ” to the exchanges :
Expand the pool of healthy enrollees . A big problem is that there aren ’ t enough young , healthy enrollees in some of the exchange markets to balance out the costs of older participants whose care is more expensive .
More of an outreach effort could be made to attract these healthier people , Blumberg notes , but others say that 's not enough .
The penalty for not having insurance – determined at annual tax filing time – is neither immediate enough nor severe enough to get enough younger folks to enroll . Rather than pour on more vinegar , try a sweetener : Offer plans that young people perceive as desirable and affordable , says Joseph Antos , at the American Enterprise Institute .
That would mean changing the government requirements for the plans , he says .
“ The solution is to change the rules so insurers can change products that people might be willing to buy at a price people might be willing to pay , ” he says .
Increase federal financial support in troubled markets . It ’ s not just that rural areas , where the problem is most prevalent , have an imbalance between older , sicker people and younger , healthier ones . It can be more expensive to offer healthcare in remote regions – and sometimes there ’ s just one provider , one hospital , that doesn ’ t want price competition from multiple insurers .
That argues for the government stepping in with its own subsidized plan – the so-called “ public option ” – say Democrats , from President Obama to presidential candidate Hillary Clinton . She also wants to allow people 55 and older to buy Medicare coverage , reducing the pool of older people relying on Obamacare .
Republicans – many of whom want to repeal Obamacare altogether – are likely to stiffly challenge such ideas , arguing they shift costs to taxpayers without solving the underlying problem . Another idea is to renew federal support that helps insurers absorb costs related to imbalanced exchange markets . Such temporary programs expire this year and are one reason behind expected increases in premiums .
Let states take the lead . That ’ s the conclusion of a December report by the Bipartisan Policy Center .
“ If Washington can ’ t figure it out , and Aetna can ’ t figure it out , let the states and smaller carriers in that local market design the plan to serve that population , ” says G. William Hoagland , senior vice president for the Bipartisan Policy Center .
One possibility is to encourage states to expand their markets by allowing competition between exchange-market regions within and between states . Inter-state exchanges would require a compact between states , Mr. Hoagland says .
Whether Congress and the next administration will work toward some of these fixes depends entirely on the makeup of the next Congress and who wins the White House , say Hoagland and others .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Experts of all stripes interviewed for this story said that that Clinton would be more likely to reach a deal with Congress than would Donald Trump – who has repeated the GOP mantra to repeal Obamacare – though they did n't rule out an effort by the billionaire dealmaker .
However , outright repeal is unlikely , they said , given the blocking power of Democrats in the Senate and the loud cry that would arise from taking away a benefit , even one with problems .