The head of the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office delivered a damning assessment Wednesday of the Affordable Care Act , telling lawmakers that ObamaCare creates a `` disincentive for people to work , '' adding fuel to Republican arguments that the law will hurt the economy .
The testimony from CBO Director Douglas Elmendorf comes after his office released a highly controversial report that detailed how millions of workers could cut back their hours or opt out of the job market entirely because of benefits under the health law .
The White House and its Democratic allies accused Republicans , and the media , of mischaracterizing the findings . But Elmendorf backed Republicans ' central argument -- fewer people will work because of the law 's subsidies .
`` The act creates a disincentive for people to work , '' Elmendorf said , under questioning from House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan , R-Wis .
Ryan clarified that the CBO report found not that employers would lay people off , but that more individuals would choose not to work .
`` As a result ... that [ lower ] labor supply lowers economic growth , '' Ryan said .
Ryan fumed that this would mean fewer people would be `` joining the middle class . ''
`` It 's adding insult to injury , '' he said . `` As the welfare state expands , the incentive to work declines -- meaning grow the government , you shrink the economy . ''
Elmendorf , who was addressing the House Budget Committee , did say that the subsidies provided under the Affordable Care Act would make lower-income people `` better off . ''
And Rep. Chris Van Hollen , D-Md. , top Democrat on the committee , argued that the CBO findings were still being misinterpreted . He pointed to more positive findings in the report , including that health care premiums would go down .
The CBO report on Tuesday effectively found that more people would opt to keep their income low to stay eligible for federal health care subsidies or Medicaid . The workforce changes would mean nationwide losses equal to 2.3 million full-time jobs by 2021 , the report said .
Republican lawmakers seized on the report as major new evidence of what they consider the failures of Obama 's overhaul , the huge change in U.S. health coverage that they 're trying to overturn and planning to use as a main argument against Democrats in November 's midterm elections .
It 's the latest indication that `` the president 's health care law is destroying full-time jobs , '' said Republican Rep. John Kline of Minnesota , chairman of the House Education and the Workforce Committee . `` This fatally flawed health care scheme is wreaking havoc on working families nationwide , '' he said .
But the White House said the possible reduction would be due to voluntary steps by workers rather than businesses cutting jobs -- people having the freedom to retire early or spend more time as stay-at-home parents because they no longer had to depend only on their employers for health insurance .
The law means people `` will be empowered to make choices about their own lives and livelihoods , '' said White House Press Secretary Jay Carney on Tuesday .
It was n't all bad news for the Obama administration . The CBO 's wide-ranging report predicted that the federal budget deficit will fall to $ 514 billion this year , down from last year 's $ 680 billion and the lowest by far since Obama took office five years ago .
The new estimates also say that the health care law will , in the short run , benefit the economy by boosting demand for goods and services because the lower-income people it helps will have more purchasing power . The report noted that the 2014 premiums that people pay for exchange coverage are coming in about 15 percent lower than projected , and the health care law , on balance , still is expected to reduce the federal deficit .
However , the budget experts see the long-term federal deficit picture worsening by about $ 100 billion a year through the end of the decade because of slower growth in the economy than they had previously predicted .