Christian Assembly Church in Eagle Rock , California , will be giving struggling families the greatest gift this Christmas : Canceling over $ 5.3 million in medical debt .
According to Good Morning America , Christian Assembly partnered with the non-profit RIP Medical Debt to bring $ 5.3 million in aid to families crushed by the weight of medical bills .
“ This morning , one church is creating their own Christmas miracle , ” the report said . “ Helping thousands of people pay off millions of dollars worth of medical debt . ”
In a video released online , co-pastor Tom Hughes said the gift will have “ no strings attached , ” noting that 75 % of people struggling with medical debt went bankrupt despite having health insurance .
“ For many people in our communities , medical debt is a crushing weight during a most challenging time in their life , ” said Tom Hughes . “ Medical debt is one of the leading causes of personal bankruptcy and contributes significantly to the likelihood of a person experiencing homelessness . ”
“ For some people , it simply becomes too much of a weight and a burden for them to carry , ” he added .
With the generosity of their donors , Christian Assembly chose the poorest families in 28 Los Angeles neighborhoods that were most impacted by medical debt .
“ We mapped out all of the active households that call Christian Assembly Church home , and we chose the top 28 neighborhoods . This gift is really impacting the poor in the 28 neighborhoods where we live , ” said Hughes . “ Because of the generosity of the people of Christian Assembly Church , we are able to make this gift possible . All of this is being done in Jesus ’ name because of the generosity of our God and the compassion and mercy He has shown us . ”
In a press release , Christian Assembly reported that 5,555 households will be impacted by this generous Christmas gift :
The 5,555 impacted households will receive a letter letting them know that Christian Assembly Church has paid their unpaid medical debt as a way to love our neighbors well — no strings attached . Households that will be impacted by the medical debt payoff gift are located in the City of Los Angeles ( including Eagle Rock ) , Glendale , Pasadena , Burbank , La Crescenta , Altadena , South Pasadena , Arcadia , La Canada , Alhambra , Monrovia , Sunland , San Gabriel , Tujunga , North Hollywood , Montrose , Sierra Madre , Glendora , Sylmar , Duarte , Azusa , Temple City , Van Nuys , Granada Hills , Sun Valley , Montebello , and Hollywood .
“ Many years ago , we asked ourselves , ‘ If Christian Assembly disappeared , would anyone who does not already attend our church notice ? ’ ” said Hughes . “ People matter to God and so we are always working to ensure that we make life better for others both locally and internationally . ”
Founded in 2014 by two former debt collections executives , Craig Antico and Jerry Ashton , the non-profit RIP Medical Debt has worked to cancel $ 1,020,232,792 billion in medical debt while “ providing financial relief for over 520,000 individuals and families , ” according to the organization ’ s website .
“ Medical debt destroys the financial stability of large segments of America ’ s most vulnerable communities : the sick , the elderly , the poor , and veterans , ” says the organization . “ It also targets the middle class , driving many families who are barely getting along into poverty . Medical debt isn ’ t the result of bad decisions . It ’ s a debt of necessity . ”