CLOSE The latest GOP effort to repeal and replace 'Obamacare ' was fatally wounded in the Senate Monday night when two more Republican senators announced their opposition to legislation strongly backed by President Donald Trump . Time
WASHINGTON — The morning after Republican efforts to overhaul health care collapsed on Capitol Hill – threatening his ambitious economic agenda along with it – President Trump said Tuesday he now wants to see the current Obamacare law `` fail '' so that Americans will demand a change .
`` We 're not going to own it – I 'm not going to own it – I can tell you the Republicans are not going to own it , '' Trump told reporters at the White House . `` We 'll let Obamacare fail and then the Democrats are going to come to us . ''
Congressional Democrats said Trump and Republicans will indeed be held responsible for what happens if they repeal the 2010 health care plan without a good plan to replace it . They said that step would , like the proposed Republican alternatives , drive up health care costs and leave millions without insurance .
In calling for bipartisan negotiations , Senate Democratic leader Charles Schumer of New York said , `` it ’ s like if our healthcare system was a patient who came in and needed some medicine . The Republicans proposed a surgery . That operation was a failure . Now , Republicans are proposing a second surgery that will surely kill the patient . ''
Yet Trump appeared undeterred , standing by his earlier tweet Tuesday : `` As I have always said , let ObamaCare fail and then come together and do a great healthcare plan . Stay tuned ! ''
As I have always said , let ObamaCare fail and then come together and do a great healthcare plan . Stay tuned ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) July 18 , 2017
Yet in seeking a way forward on health care – as well as an agenda that includes tax reform and infrastructure – Trump has not `` always '' endorsed a repeal-only strategy and has instead backed a variety of ways to address the issue .
Just before he took office , Trump said in January he was nearing completion of a plan to replace Obamacare with the goal of `` insurance for everybody '' and backed a variety of `` repeal and replace '' proposals in recent months . And as late as Monday night , Trump endorsed a simple repeal of the law President Obama signed in 2010 .
Trump 's call for a straight repeal of the Affordable Care Act came after Republican senators Mike Lee of Utah and Jerry Moran of Kansas said they would oppose a Trump-backed plan to repeal and replace the law , leaving the party well short of majority support . Shortly after , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell on Monday announced he was pulling the plan .
The decision appeared to take the White House by surprise . As McConnell made his announcement , Trump was wrapping up a dinner at the White House with a group of Republican senators to discuss health care strategy .
During his morning tweetstorm , Trump generally blamed the other party : `` We were let down by all of the Democrats and a few Republicans . Most Republicans were loyal , terrific & worked really hard . We will return ! ''
We were let down by all of the Democrats and a few Republicans . Most Republicans were loyal , terrific & worked really hard . We will return ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) July 18 , 2017
Over the course of the debate , some Republicans said Trump himself sent mixed messages . He backed a House health care plan over intense opposition in March , and even staged a high-profile celebration of its passage in the White House Rose Garden . Weeks later , however , Trump described the House bill as `` too mean '' in a meeting with Senate Republicans , and he urged them to make changes .
Trump also , at times , suggested letting the existing law stay in place , predicting it would `` collapse '' and generate demand for change — a tactic he readopted after McConnell pulled the Republican bill late Monday night .
`` Republicans should just REPEAL failing ObamaCare now & work on a new Healthcare Plan that will start from a clean slate . Dems will join in ! '' he said .
Republicans should just REPEAL failing ObamaCare now & work on a new Healthcare Plan that will start from a clean slate . Dems will join in ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) July 18 , 2017
Taking questions from reporters after a White House meeting on Afghanistan , Trump appeared to criticize Congress in general . The president said he has been hearing about `` repeal and replace '' of Obamacare for seven years , but `` when we finally get a chance to repeal and replace , they don ’ t take advantage of it . ''
Asked if he blamed McConnell in particular , Trump said simply : `` No . ''
Democrats and estimates from the Congressional Budget Office said alternative Republican plans would have cut off millions from health insurance because of higher costs . They also said the GOP efforts to repeal Obamacare essentially sabotaged the legislation by creating uncertainty among insurers .
The collapse of health care puts Trump 's entire legislative agenda at risk . Trump and aides have repeatedly said that their hopes for tax reform hinged on a new health care law because it included changes to the tax code .
Plans for an infrastructure bill , a budget plan , and raising the debt ceiling may also be in doubt because of bruised feelings left over from the health care fight .
Stan Collender , a federal budget analyst , said Trump 's revamped agenda may be little more than whatever the Republican Congress can pass . And that , he said , may be `` nothing more than nuts and bolts , '' from post office namings to a new spending plan that will be needed to replace that one that expires at the end of September .
`` I think the Trump 'agenda ' – and put quote marks around agenda – is anything the Congress passes , '' said Collender , an executive vice president at Qorvis MSLGROUP , a public affairs firm . `` But the real Trump agenda – the one he promised everybody – is definitely in trouble . ''
The fate of health care will also affect next year 's congressional elections , and Trump sought to rally Republicans politically with another pair of morning tweets .
`` With only a very small majority , the Republicans in the House & Senate need more victories next year since Dems totally obstruct , no votes ! '' the president said in one post Tuesday morning .
While Schumer and other Democrats said voters would punish Republicans next year for their health care ventures , Trump told reporters the issue would help the GOP . `` We have to go out and get more people elected that are Republicans , '' he said .
Throughout the year , Trump has said that health care legislation has proven to be more difficult than he initially thought .
Just hours before Senate Republican leadership pulled the bill , Trump told supporters Monday at the White House that `` the Republican senators are great people , but they have a lot of different states . Some states need this , some states need that . But we 're getting it together and it 's going to happen . ''