Rising stars in the Republican Party pushed Congress on Thursday to strip all funding from President Obama ’ s health care law , even as Senate Democrats struck down piecemeal efforts to kill the law ’ s most controversial mandates .
Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas introduced a bill with nine GOP co-sponsors to defund implementation of the Affordable Care Act , calling the 2010 law “ a colossal mistake ” just hours after fellow Republican Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida said Congress shouldn ’ t even pass any short-term stopgap spending bills unless they cancel funding for “ Obamacare . ”
Both first-term senators rode a wave of tea party sentiment against big government to election . Mr. Cruz , who took office in January , has been an outspoken freshman who ’ s pulled no punches in his criticism of Mr. Obama , while Mr. Rubio seems to be burnishing his conservative credentials after taking heat from the right for guiding comprehensive immigration reform through the Senate .
Now , they ’ re vocal parts of the fight against Mr. Obama ’ s law , jumping on the White House ’ s sudden decision to delay until 2015 the employer mandate , which requires businesses with more than 50 full-time workers to provide health insurance or pay fines .
Republicans have cheered the delay afforded to businesses but said they want to see average Americans get a break , too .
“ Although the delay is good news , it does raise questions about the viability of the law , ” said Sen. Richard C. Shelby , Alabama Republican and vice chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee .
Sen. Jerry Moran , Kansas Republican , tried to force the debate on Thursday , offering amendments to defund both the employer and individual mandates as part of the Appropriations Committee ’ s health spending bill . Both measures were defeated on party-line votes , 16-14 .
Democrats accuse Republicans of trying to obstruct the law at every turn , which they said was why Mr. Obama had to delay the employer mandate .
Sen. Tom Harkin , Iowa Democrat and an author of the health care law , said as long as he is chairman of the health spending subcommittee , he will make sure the funding continues to flow to keep the law intact .
To do so , though , he ’ ll have to grapple with House Republicans who after last week ’ s employer mandate delay have stiffened their resolve to try to cancel the entire law .
“ I think it ’ s unfair and indefensible , ” House Speaker John A. Boehner said Thursday . “ If you ’ re a software company making billions of dollars in profits you ’ re exempt from ‘ Obamacare ’ next year , but if you ’ re a 28-year old struggling to pay off your student loans , you ’ re not . ”
He said the House will hold votes next week on whether to delay both the employer mandate and the individual mandate , forcing Democrats to defend the embattled law or distance themselves from the reforms and the White House ’ s decision-making .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat and staunch supporter of the health care law , rejected talk of delaying the individual mandate after a reporter asked whether there was any “ virtue ” in the Republicans ’ proposal .
“ No , absolutely not , ” she said . “ I don ’ t think it ’ s virtuous at all . ”