Bill Clinton tried to fix America 's health care problems and was shot down by Congress . Barack Obama got his solution enacted only to find most people did n't like it . Republicans who voted repeatedly to repeal Obamacare and replace it with something far better have found it fiendishly hard to agree on how .
It could be that our health care problems do n't get solved because of partisanship , incompetence , corruption or dishonesty among our elected officials . Or it could be because those problems are not soluble .
Oh , some of them can be solved , for sure . But not all at once , and not within the constraints of our political environment . We have trouble accepting that . So we muddle along with a system that is riddled with flaws and causes a lot of dissatisfaction .
The changing perceptions of the Affordable Care Act are a marvel to behold . It was so controversial that it barely got through Congress in 2010 . Long before it was fully implemented , it was unpopular , and it mostly remained so .
Republicans ran against it with great success in the congressional elections in 2010 and 2014 , and Donald Trump won last year after calling it a `` disaster '' that he would repeal and replace with something `` much better and much less expensive . '' As one of Ernest Hemingway 's characters said , `` Is n't it pretty to think so ? ''
But something shocking happened on the path to the repeal of Obamacare : It began to look better . In the latest poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation , 49 percent of Americans said they liked it , the highest figure since 2010 , and just 44 percent did n't , down from 53 percent in 2014 .
What accounts for the shift in sentiment ? One factor is that when it comes to their health care , Americans nurse a deep distrust of change . They may not be satisfied with what they have , but they assume anything different will be worse .
Another is that a lot of them really did n't know what the ACA did but disliked it because they associated it with a president they opposed . Given that Obama 's approval rating hovered around 50 percent for most of his second term , it 's not surprising that his signature initiative evoked widespread disdain , particularly among Republicans .
Stubborn ignorance also plays a role . An NPR/Ipsos poll in January found that more than half of Americans did n't realize that the number of people with health insurance rose under Obamacare . One in three mistakenly thought it put restrictions on end-of-life care—remember the `` death panels '' ?
The ACA also clashed with intractable preferences . It forced individuals to purchase insurance . It meant more government interference in private markets . It expanded a major entitlement , Medicaid . It required new taxes . It did n't reduce total health care expenses for most people . All of these features grated .
And Americans are not slaves to logic or consistency . Opposition to this massive federal program has been particularly high among seniors—most of whom are covered by that massive federal program known as Medicare . The implicit attitude : Big government for me , but not for thee .
Only lately has it occurred to many detractors that ACA also has elements that they would rather not surrender—such as allowing young adults to stay on their parents ' policies until age 26 , barring exclusions for pre-existing conditions , mandating free preventive care , giving subsidies to moderate- and low-income people and expanding eligibility for Medicaid .
Trump has led voters to believe they can have all the stuff they want and none of the stuff they resent . But neither he nor anyone else has found a plausible way to accomplish that .
The mournful realities are inescapable . If you remove the individual mandate , you allow younger and healthier people to opt out , which would mean higher premiums for older and sicker ones . If you cut the cost of Medicaid , you leave a lot of poorer Americans without coverage , forced to rely on expensive emergency room care . If you eliminate the taxes , you raise the federal deficit .
You ca n't have it all . Our aversion to this simple truism has yielded a dubious achievement : Compared with other Western nations , we have more people without insurance , spend far more of our national income on health care and are less happy with our system . That 's what you get when you resist fundamental tradeoffs .
Americans who want a solution that has no downside do n't really want a solution . Not to worry : They wo n't get one .