The United States has a complex health-care delivery system composed of private and government-funded insurance plans . Half of all Americans receive their health insurance from their employer or their spouse ’ s employer . Over 40 percent of Americans receive their health insurance from the government . The remainder are either uninsured or obtain health insurance through the private individual market . The current political debate concerns how large a role the government should play in our health-care delivery system .
The United States spends far more money per person on health care than other industrialized countries . Last year , overall medical spending in the U.S. totaled $ 3.5 trillion or 18 percent of the national gross domestic product .
Because other countries spend less on health care , they are often used as models for the U.S . Looking to other countries to solve our health care delivery system problems , however , may not be reasonable . Other countries are smaller than the U.S. and have more homogenous populations . What the people of one country favor may not be applicable or acceptable to people living in a different society .
According to a Forbes survey , the U.S. accounts for 38 percent of life-saving and life-extending medical innovations , compared to an average of 15 percent in other countries . The U.S. also leads the world in the research and development of pharmaceuticals .
In all other industrialized countries , the demand for health care is much greater than the money budgeted for it . The results of this supply/demand mismatch are chronic shortages followed by strict rationing of health care . The rationing can take many forms — from long waits , to denying the elderly access to certain procedures , to allowing individuals with political influence to receive priority attention from providers .
Canada has a truly single-payer , nationalized system that is totally funded by taxpayers . In 2018 , wait times for specialty care averaged 20 weeks . In practice , Canada has a two-tiered system in the sense that officials allow their citizens to travel to the U.S. for privately funded health care .
Great Britain established a comprehensive government health-care system in 1948 that gives every citizen cradle-to-grave coverage . About 10 percent of the population has private insurance , and many physicians combine government entitlement work with private practice . Over the past year , 250,000 citizens have waited more than six months for planned treatments within the National Health Service , while 36,000 people have waited nine months or more .
Switzerland has a comparatively large private health-care sector , and patients are responsible for 30 percent of their own health-care costs . Consequently , a certain degree of health-care consumerism exists in Switzerland , and the country has been fairly successful in holding down costs . Unfortunately , as officials increase the number of benefit mandates required in insurance plans , health-care costs are rising .
Singapore has a multi-tiered system with different levels of care depending on the patient ’ s ability and willingness to pay more . This is similar to the system in the U.S. before the passage of Medicare and Medicaid : private hospitals and doctors treated paying patients and charity hospitals and residents-in-training cared for low-income patients .
Is there some combination of measures from other countries that the U.S. can use in reforming our health-care delivery system ? Although the overall systems vary , the common factor for all other countries is government-mandated health insurance . Even those countries that have a component of “ private ” health care continue to mandate that every citizen have government-approved health insurance .
While universal health insurance coverage is a worthy goal , the critical point is using the best mechanism to allow the greatest number of Americans access to health care . Simply having health insurance in no way guarantees timely access to health care . The American experience with the Veterans Administration hospital system , a comprehensive , government-controlled , single-payer health-care program , reveals unacceptable wait times and huge inefficiencies .
The United States distinguishes itself from other countries by a broader use of free markets . Just like all other economic activities , the free market offers the best solution to provide the greatest access to health care and to control costs .
Instead of looking to other countries , health-care reform in the U.S. should allow Americans to freely make their own health-care decisions and use their own health-care dollars . This would give Americans the best chance to use their right to access health care . Eliminating third-party payers , greater use of health savings accounts , price transparency , and health insurance reform would put patients , rather than the government , in charge of their own health care .
Dr. Stark is the Health Care Policy Analyst for Washington Policy Center .