There 's a lot to like about the Better Care Reconciliation Act , the health-care bill unveiled last week by Senate Republicans . As drafted , the proposal preserves the most worthy features of the Affordable Care Act while addressing some of its key flaws .
Many critics on the right ( like Rand Paul and Americans for Prosperity ) decry the plan as some watered-down ObamaCare lite . Many liberals , meanwhile , have reflexively tarred Better Care as an unmitigated evil being foisted upon America by heartless Republicans .
Both sides are wrong . The Better Care act is better than you think .
The Senate health-care bill is obviously more thoughtful than the House 's version , and not nearly as malign as many Democrats have summarily declared it to be . At first glance , it struck me as the kind of market-based plan conservative policy wonk Avik Roy , who once worked for Mitt Romney , would come up with if asked to replace ObamaCare . And on closer inspection , it is his plan , in key respects . That makes sense , given that Roy is the Republican Party 's go-to expert on health-care policy . And considering the context , his influence on the bill is reassuring ; when someone 's expertise is undisputed , some degree of humanity can be safely inferred .
Many on the left would dispute that , at least in this case . `` No tweaks by amendment can fix this monstrosity , '' tweeted Chris Murphy , the Democratic senator from Connecticut . `` If you vote for this evil , intellectually bankrupt bill , it will ruin millions of lives . '' The bill 's passage would , to be certain , have sweeping implications . But Republicans could make exactly the same normative claims about ObamaCare itself . They should n't , in my view ; it 's bad form to denounce people based on assumptions about their intent .
But if we 're going down this path , let 's at least be consistent about it : While the Affordable Care Act has surely helped millions of Americans , it has also still left millions of Americans uninsured , and many more with higher premiums and deductibles than they had in 2009 , when Democrats promised that their plan would deliver precisely the opposite , among other things .
Even now , many Democrats are reluctant to acknowledge that ObamaCare 's conservative critics were correct in predicting such problems , and that in some cases , at least , their objections were rooted in concern for the Americans who would be disproportionately affected by them , if so .
The left 's default position is that ObamaCare 's shortcomings are due to Republican obstructionism prior to its passage , and Republicans ' subsequent refusal to cooperate . `` I was careful to say again and again that while the Affordable Care Act represented a significant step forward for America , it was not perfect , nor could it be the end of our efforts , '' noted former President Obama in a statement criticizing the Senate health-care bill . He would , he added , be happy to support Republicans if they could just put together a plan demonstrably better than his , `` that covers as many people at less cost . ''
So , single-payer , right ? Nice . This is a discussion that Americans should have , at some point ; I 'm not convinced that it makes sense to think of health care as a market good in the first place . As it stands , however , that is how many Americans tend to think of it . And the Affordable Care Act , which passed in Congress without a single Republican vote , affirms the premise that we should think about health care this way : ObamaCare 's key provisions are about the government 's role in regulating , stabilizing , and expanding access to the market we already have , not in replacing it altogether .
The same is true of the Senate health-care bill , of course , and this brings us to a critical difference between the Better Care Reconciliation Act and the Affordable Care Act : The GOP 's plan genuinely accepts the premise that Obama and the Democrats merely conceded , and seemingly resent . This would explain why Rand Paul and Co. are grousing that the proposal amounts to `` ObamaCare lite '' — a revision that would leave the Affordable Care Act 's architecture and key regulations in place rather than smashing the law to rubble and lighting it on fire — and Democrats see it as a crime against humanity .
This also explains why there 's a lot to like about the Better Care Reconciliation Act . It 's a market-oriented plan that 's serious about the trade-offs involved in such an approach . If you want to remove some bureaucratic hurdles and government largesse from the health-care market , as many conservatives do , then some people will lose coverage , and others will see an increase in their out-of-pocket costs . That 's how markets work , even if the architects of ObamaCare refused to believe it .
And it 's worth noting that Better Care is realistic , not nihlistic . Like ObamaCare , it recognizes that the government can and should play a role in situations where the market , if left to its own devices , has merciless implications . Most significantly , it largely preserves the protections the 2009 law established for Americans with pre-existing conditions , and provides reinsurance for the insurers who might have balked at doing so . That was a humane and worthwhile achievement which Democrats deserve credit for , even if they are heartless monsters who left millions of Americans uninsured .
It seems possible , as it stands , that none of this matters . On Monday , the Congressional Budget Office released its score of the bill , which found , among other things , that passage of the legislation would result in an additional 22 million Americans being uninsured in 2026 , compared to projections based on the current law . The logic underlying this projection was debatable , but its political implications are clear cut . The Democrats who touted ObamaCare as a plan that would make comprehensive health insurance affordable to the average American are out of power , at the time being . But perhaps they will regain control of Congress in 2018 . And if so , we can all look forward to seeing them unveil their secret plan .