Republicans who have tried to repeal Obamacare for nearly a decade believe the Trump administration is reviving a politically risky battle with a court filing that could eliminate one of the most popular parts of the law : protections for people with pre-existing conditions .
The administration wants a federal court to strike the protections , providing fresh fodder to Democrats who argue that the GOP can not be trusted to protect Americans ’ health insurance months ahead of a midterm election in which health care was already a top issue . It also threatens to shift attention away from the GOP 's message on tax cuts , refocusing it on an Obamacare fight most Republicans wanted to put behind them .
The administration late Thursday asked a U.S. District Court in Texas to do something congressional Republicans weren ’ t willing to take on themselves during last year ’ s repeal effort : Strike the most popular part of Obamacare .
Few congressional Republicans rushed to defend the administration 's move Friday , instead emphasizing their support for preserving pre-existing condition protections .
“ I ’ m not going to have to defend anything I don ’ t agree with — regardless of who says it , ” said Rep. Phil Roe of Tennessee when asked if he would defend the administration ’ s request on the campaign trail this fall . He added that rising premiums for Obamacare coverage will force lawmakers to address health care policy next year .
███ Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
Sen. Susan Collins of Maine — one of three GOP senators who blocked the Obamacare repeal effort last year — also pushed back , warning the administration 's new bid “ exacerbates our current challenges ” and could undermine key patient protections .
Other lawmakers pointed to past support for policies to prevent insurance companies from denying or dropping people with pre-existing conditions .
In 2017 , “ I introduced [ an amendment that ] would guarantee coverage for pre-existing conditions . I think that ’ s a pretty essential pact with the American people , ” said Rep. Tom MacArthur ( R-N.J. ) . “ We need to let them go forward and see if it goes anywhere . Right now they ’ ve simply made an appeal to the court . ”
And several Republicans dodged questions on the subject , saying they were unfamiliar with the legal request .
“ I want to think about it before I respond , ” said Rep. Fred Upton ( R-Mich. ) .
Senate Democrats , who this week promised to force votes on health care during August , said the court filing proves their warnings that Republicans remain intent on repealing Obamacare through any means available .
“ I ’ ve decided not to be surprised about anything this administration does , ” said Sen. Chris Murphy ( D-Conn. ) . “ It ’ s our job to make sure everybody knows who ’ s responsible for that , so that they can hold Republicans responsible at the polls this November . ”
Within hours of the news , Democrats pounced on the Senate Republicans up for reelection this fall . The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee blasted releases questioning whether those Republicans — such as North Dakota hopeful Rep. Kevin Cramer — back the Trump administration ’ s decision .
Murphy dismissed Republicans ' efforts to distance themselves from the administration ’ s legal position , arguing that it was the GOP that fueled the case by repealing Obamacare ’ s individual mandate .
“ Republicans and the Trump administration are working hand in hand , ” he said .
During last year 's repeal debate , Republicans decided to leave pre-existing conditions protections in place after they repeatedly became the subject of sometimes fiery town hall meetings with constituents .
The legal move Thursday threatens to revive those tensions and overshadow positive messages about Republican policies such as tax cuts .
“ It just blows me away how dumb it is , ” said GOP consultant Rick Wilson . “ They really wanted to spend this summer saying the tax bill ’ s great , the economy ’ s great . But they go off the rails at every opportunity , and it just slays me . ”
Texas and several Republican-led states brought the Obamacare challenge , arguing that the elimination of individual mandate penalties — which the Supreme Court ruled in 2012 were valid under Congress ’ s taxing power — invalidated the constitutionality of all of Obamacare . The Trump administration said it agreed that the mandate was unconstitutional and that the consumer protections should be wiped out , but most of the rest of the law should remain in place .
Some Republicans privately worried about having to defend the move in their districts if the court rules in favor of the administration before the November election . But others said the government needs to get out of the health insurance business — even if the only way is to go through the courts .
“ It isn ’ t [ hard ] for me because I ’ ve long held the position that the federal government should get completely out of the health insurance business , ” said Rep. Steve King ( R-Iowa ) . “ The last time the health insurance business worked right was before the federal government got involved . So I don ’ t have any problem going home to defend that . ”
Establishment Republicans trying to move beyond the Obamacare repeal failure remain at odds with conservatives intent on pressing on , arguing that the 2019 premium hikes should force the GOP to act .
“ It ’ s a campaign promise . You ’ ve got to deliver on it in whatever way you can , ” said Jason Pye , vice president of legislative affairs for FreedomWorks . “ They ’ re going to have an Obamacare debate whether they like it or not , because the new premiums are going to come out in September and October . ”
He added that while tax cuts and the economy are winning issues for Republicans , they ’ re not nearly enough to fire up conservative voters disillusioned by the party ’ s unwillingness to follow through on their pledge to eliminate Obamacare “ root and branch . ”
“ This is better than nothing , and it ’ s certainly better than some of the replacement plans that we ’ ve seen , ” Pye said of the administration ’ s legal move .
It is unclear how soon the U.S. District Court judge may respond to the administration 's request . If the courts strike the provision , the ruling would all but certainly be appealed — likely by a group of Democratic-led states that have weighed in on the case in the courts .
Rep. Michael Burgess ( R-Texas ) said Republicans would be ready to act if the courts strike the protections .
“ Maybe the silver lining to all of this is that if that all comes to pass , then something will have to happen , ” he said . “ It will require us to work together . ”
Insurance companies have already requested double-digit premium increases for 2019 in several states . The industry has blamed Trump administration decisions to undermine the health law , such as cutting off a key subsidy program to help low-income people pay their out-of-pocket health expenses .
The insurance industry trade group America ’ s Health Insurance Plans swiftly broke with the Trump administration Friday , warning that eliminating Obamacare ’ s major protections would be “ destabilizing ” to the market and drive premiums even higher . AHIP signaled it will file an amicus brief in the case , officially siding with the blue states that have stepped in to defend the law ’ s constitutionality .
“ Removing those provisions will result in renewed uncertainty in the individual market , create a patchwork of requirements in the states , cause rates to go even higher for older Americans and sicker patients , and make it challenging to introduce products and rates for 2019 , ” the group said in a statement .