House Republicans postponed taking up the American Health Care Act after it became clear that it did not have the votes to pass .
BREAKING : AP Source : House GOP leaders delay vote on health care repeal bill , in setback for President Trump and Speaker Ryan . — The Associated Press ( @ AP ) March 23 , 2017
# BREAKING : House leaders have canceled a planned Thursday night vote on a GOP plan to repeal and replace Obamacare https : //t.co/Yg9p34KSPT pic.twitter.com/jq8NdJAtrB — POLITICO ( @ politico ) March 23 , 2017
Fox News ' Shepard Smith said that a closed door meeting is going to be held around 7 P.M. EST .
The bill had a rocky start from the beginning , with Medicaid expansion being left intact in the Obamacare replacement legislation . That seemed to poison the well with House conservatives . Yet , go too far on tweaking Medicaid , and then the moderate Republican lawmakers would bolt . When the Congressional Budget Office gave the bill a less than stellar report card , moderates began to break away . Fox News ’ Chad Pergram elaborated on this seesaw balancing act between the House Republican leadership , members of the moderate Tuesday Group , which number around 50 members , and the conservative House Freedom Caucus . In short , the votes were not there today . The House GOP could only afford to lose 21 members . By Thursday afternoon , 30-40 members were in the “ no ” column ( via WaPo ) :
As of midafternoon Thursday , 37 House Republicans — mainly Freedom Caucus members — had announced their opposition to the bill , known as the American Health Care Act . Trump will also meet Thursday with members of the moderate “ Tuesday Group , ” Spicer said . On Wednesday , four Republican moderates — Reps. Charlie Dent ( Pa. ) , Frank A. LoBiondo ( N.J. ) , Daniel Donovan ( N.Y. ) and David Young ( Iowa ) — announced their opposition , increasing pressure on leaders to win over conservatives . GOP leaders appeared to be making some headway in bringing the measure to the floor for a vote Thursday . The price for doing so , however , may be striking popular provisions in former president Barack Obama ’ s Affordable Care Act that could make it even more difficult to pass legislation in the Senate . This high-wire balancing act , in which Republicans are catering to conservatives in the House with the knowledge that they still must woo moderates to get legislation to Trump ’ s desk , could not only reshape the nation ’ s health-care system but could also have uncertain electoral repercussions for the new majority .
Yet , even with these House obstacles to the bill . The Senate has signaled that the support to pass it isn ’ t there . Sen. Tom Cotton ( R-AR ) said this , warning his House colleagues to not support a bill that doesn ’ t have a chance in the Senate . As Guy mentioned before , asking for more time is not really an option since Republicans have had several years to get their replacement plan together . The base would not tolerate a delay on an issue of this magnitude .
Rep. Mark Meadows : “ We have not gotten enough of our members to get to yes at this point ” on the health care bill https : //t.co/g93RHXQhX9 — CNN Politics ( @ CNNPolitics ) March 23 , 2017
Outside of his office , chair of the House Freedom Caucus Rep. Mark Meadows ( R-NC ) said that progress was being made , especially on the issue of reducing premiums from coast to coast . He did confirm that there is engagement with president on this bill , and that he ’ s had discussions with his Senate colleagues . Meadows is optimistic that common ground can be found for 51 or 52 senators to get behind this legislation .
The congressman did not get into specifics . What he did say was that this whole legislative debate is not about what he wants , but what our constituents back home have demanded for the past several years concerning health care reform .
“ We ’ re going to get to the finish line , ” he said confidently . Meadows also said that he would welcome Democratic support , but we 're not there yet . He also said that Speaker Paul Ryan is working hard to get this done , noting that there are a number of negotiations going on as we speak . The goal is to find a consensus and try to get the 30-40 “ no ” votes into the “ yes ” column . Right now , Mr. Meadows is still a `` no '' vote .
Rep. Mark Meadows : “ I am still a no at this time . I am desperately trying to get to yes ” https : //t.co/cQi0OGdJGY — CNN Politics ( @ CNNPolitics ) March 23 , 2017
Hse GOPers advised to be ready for votes tomorrow . GOP Conference tonight at 7 pm et — Chad Pergram ( @ ChadPergram ) March 23 , 2017
Meadows says they are working at getting `` another 30 or 40 '' members to vote yes on health care bill . Could only lose 21 votes — Chad Pergram ( @ ChadPergram ) March 23 , 2017