Two big problems hit the Obama White House on Oct. 1 : the government shutdown , which saw hundreds of thousands of federal workers furloughed , national parks closed , and other disruptions . And the launch of the Affordable Care Act , which was always going to be tricky .
The first problem was solved – temporarily , at least – when Republicans and Democrats worked out a stopgap spending deal , also heading off ( for now ) a government default on its debts . By most accounts , the White House came out the winner , although President Obama was careful not to beat his chest too much about it .
The second problem – the president ’ s signature achievement so far , known as “ Obamacare ” – has only gotten worse .
The White House reported this weekend that about 19 million people have visited HealthCare.gov and 476,000 individuals have applied online for health insurance .
But officials have yet to say how many people have actually bought a policy . In any case , it 's a long way from the 7 million people the administration wants to see enrolled for health insurance through online exchanges during the six-month sign-up period .
Computer “ glitches ” seem massive . USA Today reports that `` the federal health care exchange was built using 10-year-old technology that may require constant fixes and updates for the next six months and the eventual overhaul of the entire system . ''
Mr. Obama , presumably , has been asking sharp questions of his staff .
`` I think that there 's no one more frustrated than the president at the difficulty in the website , '' Treasury Secretary Jack Lew said on NBC 's “ Meet the Press ” Sunday .
The coming week should see significant political activity surrounding Obamacare .
Obama is scheduled to speak about it at a health-care event Monday .
House Republicans , who had predicted for months that Obamacare implementation would be a “ train wreck , ” have scheduled the first hearings into the severe flaws in the computer system for this coming week , Politico.com reports . So far Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius has declined to testify before the House Energy and Commerce Committee .
“ As the news continues to get worse , it ’ s time for Secretary Sebelius to provide answers to Congress , ” the committee said in a statement Friday . Republican lawmakers are particularly miffed that Secretary Sebelius went on Jon Stewart ’ s “ The Daily Show ” but so far has declined to appear before Congress .
“ Ultimately , Secretary Sebelius will testify , ” Sen. Dick Durbin ( D ) of Illinois told “ Fox News Sunday , ” although he did not say if “ ultimately ” might include this Thursday ’ s scheduled hearing in the House .
Democrats like Senator Durbin and other party leaders in Congress are in an embarrassing spot – having to publicly support a program that not all favored .
“ What has happened is unacceptable , ” House minority leader Nancy Pelosi said Sunday on ABC 's `` This Week . '' “ There is much that needs to be done to correct the situation . ''
`` This has to be fixed but what does n't have to be fixed is the fact that tens of millions more people will have access to affordable quality health care , '' she added .
The answer , Sen. John McCain said on CNN Sunday , is to “ send Air Force One out to Silicon Valley , load it up with some smart people , bring them back to Washington , and fix this problem . ”
Apparently , that ’ s sort of what the administration has in mind .
In a blog post Sunday , the Department of Health and Human Services said this :
“ Our team is bringing in some of the best and brightest from both inside and outside government to scrub in with the team and help improve HealthCare.gov .
“ We ’ re also putting in place tools and processes to aggressively monitor and identify parts of HealthCare.gov where individuals are encountering errors or having difficulty using the site , so we can prioritize and fix them .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ We are also defining new test processes to prevent new issues from cropping up as we improve the overall service and deploying fixes to the site during off-peak hours on a regular basis . ”
“ The initial consumer experience of HealthCare.gov has not lived up to the expectations of the American people , ” HHS said – an acknowledgment with which there is universal agreement .