South Bend , Indiana , Mayor Pete Buttigieg has released his first detailed health care plan on Thursday , designed to expand coverage , lower costs and offer Medicare “ for all who want it ” while stopping short of the single-payer Medicare-for-all overhaul preferred by Bernie Sanders .
In this presidential primary , center-left candidates like Buttigieg have been obliged to explain how they would expand US health care if they aren ’ t willing to endorse the Medicare-for-all plan supported by Sanders and Elizabeth Warren , which would set up a single government insurance plan to cover every American .
Buttigieg ’ s agenda shares some of the same ideas that former Vice President Joe Biden supports . He aims to achieve universal coverage through the introduction of a public option and more subsidies for private insurance , building off the existing system instead of razing it to the ground as a single-payer plan would .
Buttigieg is emphasizing choice — thus “ Medicare for all who want it , ” his spin on Sanders ’ s “ Medicare for all ” slogan — in laying out an agenda that allows employer-sponsored and individual private insurance to remain but gives all Americans the option of joining a government health program .
“ The problem , Senator Sanders , with that damn bill that you wrote , and that Senator Warren backs is that it doesn ’ t trust the American people , ” Buttigieg said at last week ’ s debate . “ I trust you to choose what makes the most sense for you , not my way or the highway . ”
Buttigieg would create an optional government insurance plan into which uninsured people would be automatically enrolled and people with employer-sponsored insurance would be permitted to join . He also wants to expand federal subsidies for private insurance purchased on the Obamacare marketplaces , making them more generous and lifting the income eligibility cap that currently leaves many middle-class families cut off from federal assistance . He covers other ground as well , proposing a fix for surprise medical bills and an out-of-pocket spending cap for Medicare beneficiaries .
The plan is more modest than what the most progressive candidates and voters support , which would be a single-payer system similar to Canada and Taiwan . For many people , their health care would still look the same ( for good and ill ) , but they would now have the choice of joining a Medicare-like plan if they wanted to .
The Buttigieg plan is still ambitious and it very much reflects the leftward shift of the Democratic mainstream : The more moderate candidates aren ’ t willing to scrap private coverage entirely , but they are still pushing for a much larger government role in providing health care to Americans .
The Buttigieg plan tries to achieve universal coverage — through automatic enrollment , the establishment of a public health insurance plan , and the expansion of federal assistance for people to purchase health insurance — while maintaining a market where private insurers and the government would compete for consumers ’ business .
The creation of a public health insurance plan . The “ Medicare for all who want it ” part of the mayor ’ s plan is a public health insurance program . The uninsured would be automatically enrolled in the public plan , starting with people who should be eligible for Medicaid expansion but lives in states that refused to expand eligibility under Obamacare . People with employer-sponsored insurance , about half of Americans , would have the option to buy into the government plan . The government plan would cover the same essential health benefits as private plans sold under Obamacare , though the details are left vague on what patients would pay out of pocket .
The “ Medicare for all who want it ” part of the mayor ’ s plan is a public health insurance program . The uninsured would be automatically enrolled in the public plan , starting with people who should be eligible for Medicaid expansion but lives in states that refused to expand eligibility under Obamacare . People with employer-sponsored insurance , about half of Americans , would have the option to buy into the government plan . The government plan would cover the same essential health benefits as private plans sold under Obamacare , though the details are left vague on what patients would pay out of pocket . The expansion of federal insurance subsidies . Right now , people whose income is above 400 percent of the federal poverty level are ineligible for any public assistance to buy health insurance on their own . Enrollment has been falling for this group because premiums for individual plans increased significantly in Obamacare ’ s first few years ( though it has flattened out more recently ) . Under Buttigieg ’ s plan , anyone would be eligible for tax credits for premiums and nobody would pay more than 8.5 percent of their income for an insurance plan , public or private .
Buttigieg extends his scope beyond expanding coverage for the under-65 population with a handful of other notable provisions aimed at lowering costs for consumers . His plan :
Places a limit on out-of-pocket costs for the traditional Medicare program . No such cap currently exists , leaving some seniors on the hook for thousands of dollars to cover their medical care . The campaign is not saying for now what the out-of-pocket limit would be .
Stops surprise billing by introducing a new requirement that all services received at an in-network facility be billed at the in-network rates . That prevents the possibility that a patient who goes to an in-network hospital could be treated by an out-of-network doctor and wind up with a large bill .
Caps the price providers can charge insurers for out-of-network care at twice Medicare rates , which the Buttigieg campaign says should lower premiums .
Some Democrats are trying to find a balance between the center and the left
There are essentially three health care positions for the Democrats running for president in 2020 : 1 ) the ones who want to blow up the whole system for universal single-payer , 2 ) the ones who worry about the disruption of a single-payer system and its ensuing political fallout , and 3 ) those who try to split the difference , speaking instead to values like universal coverage . Buttigieg falls in the last camp .
Sanders and Warren firmly state their support for Medicare-for-all , a single-payer system that would put every American on a government insurance plan . The more moderate Democrats have warned of the potential for political backlash if private health insurance is phased out and taxes are raised to cover a substantial increase in government spending . Buttigieg in particular has picked up the “ Medicare for all who want it ” slogan .
The idea , first exemplified in the Medicare for America bill and now reflected in Buttigieg ’ s agenda , is that any American would be allowed to buy into a government-run insurance plan . Biden , currently leading the polls , has also backed a public option anyone can buy into . ( One important distinction among them : Medicare for America allows employers to choose to send their workers to the public plan ; Biden and Buttigieg ’ s plans do not allow an employer buy-in . )
The employer-sponsored insurance that currently covers half of Americans , which would be eliminated under the Sanders Medicare-for-all bill , would remain if the employers and employees so choose . But it would now face competition from the government plan .
Buttigieg has framed his plan as a pathway to true Medicare-for-all . He has expressed a hope that Americans would choose the government plan over the “ corporate ” option — but he keeps emphasizing the need for a choice .
“ We don ’ t have to stand up here speculating about whether the public option will be better or Medicare-for-all will be better than corporate options . We ’ ll put it to the test , ” he said . “ That ’ s the concept of Medicare for all that want it . If people like me are right , then the public alternative is going to be not only more comprehensive but more affordable than corporate options around there . We ’ ll see Americans walk away from the corporate options into that Medicare option and it will become Medicare-for-all . ”
Polling indicates most of the American people are generally happy with their current coverage . But they are also frustrated with out-of-pocket costs , which have been steadily rising . The moderate plans would seek to reduce what people pay out of pocket for health care ; Sanders ’ s single-payer plan almost eliminates them entirely .
For single-payer supporters , any halfway point still leaves for-profit insurance companies operating and doesn ’ t offer the same level of financial security ( because there would still be out-of-pocket payments ) that their plan , proposing medical care free at the point of service , does .
Buttigieg clearly views Medicare-for-all as a step too far , but he still wants to propose a substantial change for a system that the Democratic Party views as fundamentally broken .