Obamacare may not be fixed when promised . That ’ s the implication of a bombshell story in The Washington Post Wednesday , which says stubborn software problems are likely to hobble the federal online health insurance marketplace into early December and perhaps beyond .
Right now the troubled HealthCare.gov site can ’ t handle more than 20,000 to 30,000 users at a time , according to Post reporters Amy Goldstein , Juliet Eilperin , and Lena H. Sun . That ’ s about half its intended capacity .
According to an unnamed official quoted in the story , technical experts have concluded that this situation isn ’ t getting better soon . This official says that those trying to fix the problems now believe that “ the only way for large numbers of Americans to enroll in the health-care plans soon is by using other means so that the online system isn ’ t overburdened . ”
President Obama likely winced when he saw this piece in his morning news feed . Back in October , Jeff Zients , the management expert brought in by the White House to rescue the troubled HealthCare.gov , told reporters that the site would be working smoothly for the vast majority of users “ by the end of November . ”
Perhaps that ’ s a red line Mr. Zients should not have drawn . Now the administration faces the prospect of missing a deadline it imposed on itself .
Or does it ? On the record , White House spokesfolks are pushing back against this report Wednesday morning . Administration communications official Jennifer Palmieri insisted to New York Magazine that fixing the site by the end of November is still a “ go . ”
“ The website will be working well for a majority of users by Nov. 30 , ” Palmieri told the magazine ’ s Jonathan Chait .
So what ’ s going on here ? Is this a big deal , or a tempest in a tea cup ( green loose leaf , hold the milk and sugar ) ?
We ’ d say its importantish . Missing the deadline could cause big political problems for the White House .
If nothing else , the administration is positioning for a coming fight on what constitutes “ success ” in the next few weeks . In that context , the website ’ s capacity becomes a crucial piece of information .
The Post apparently has the techie viewpoint : It ’ s still broken . But the administration may argue that things are much better than they were ( true ) and that therefore it ’ s OK to make the somewhat arbitrary judgment that the website is “ fixed . ”
As to the political situation , many Democrats are urging the Obama team to figure out a Plan B , and fast . Notable among them is ex-president Bill Clinton , who said in an interview released Tuesday that the administration should ensure Americans can retain their current health policies if they wish “ even if it takes a change to the law . ”
Some Democratic lawmakers are forging ahead by themselves . Sen. Mary Landrieu ( D ) of Louisiana has introduced legislation that would mandate insurance companies keep people on current plans if they want .
Republicans , meanwhile , are seizing on this internal Democratic dissent as evidence that they ’ ve been right all along about the nature of the Affordable Care Act .
Clinton ’ s comments “ signify a growing recognition that Americans were misled when they were promised that they could keep their coverage under President Obama ’ s health care law , ” said Speaker of the House John Boehner ( R ) of Ohio .
What the administration really does not want to happen here is for congressional Democrats to break and agree to some temporary fix , perhaps even a delay in the individual mandate , which could make it harder to implement Obamacare down the road .
Politics aside , the Nov. 30 deadline and continued website glitches may not be crucial in terms of the rate of ACA enrollment . That ’ s because previous experience indicates that most Americans may wait until close to the deadline before signing up for new or expanded social programs .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
When Medicare ’ s Part D prescription drug plan rolled out in the Bush presidency , two-thirds of those who enrolled did so after coverage actually began on Jan. 1 , 2006 , according to figures from market analysis firm Avalere Health .
“ People are slow to purchase coverage when new programs begin , and if past programs are any guide , we expect most exchange participants will wait until after January 2014 to enroll , ” said Avalere vice president Caroline Pearson in late October .