Almost no one really knows what ’ s in the Senate health care bill , but Philip Klein doesn ’ t like it .
A conservative columnist who favors a pure market-based system , he ’ s published multiple pieces against it . His latest column for the Washington Examiner argues that Republicans have “ already given up on repealing and replacing Obamacare ” and are inching toward a cluster of half-measures that will be politically damaging and practically counterproductive .
His primary concern is that Republicans are being disingenuous about what their bill can do , and will pay a steep price when it fails .
These are , of course , very different from liberal concerns about the bill . Most liberals reject market-based solutions for health care and believe we should go the way of nearly every other industrialized nation and embrace a single-payer system .
But I wanted to understand why conservatives might object to the bill that their own party is promoting . So I talked to Klein about what kind of political strategy he would adopt to pass a conservative bill that he might like but most Americans won ’ t — and why his advice to Republicans is “ go big or go home ” .
First , tell me what don ’ t you like about the AHCA ?
I do n't think it gets us any closer to a free market system . The problem is that it 's governed by ideological incoherence . Republicans want to claim that they ’ re guaranteeing coverage or access for everyone and at the same they ’ re promising to cover everyone ’ s preexisting conditions . The whole thing is an exercise in bluffing ; they want to shield themselves from the left while claiming that they ’ ve repealed and replaced Obamacare .
So it 's really an exercise in getting something done and passed . It won ’ t satisfy the left and it won ’ t get us anything resembling a free market for health care .
So when you claim that Republicans have already given up on fulfilling their promise to repeal and replace , you mean two things : They ’ re not offering a purely market-based solution and they won ’ t dispense with the idea that everyone ought to be covered ?
Yeah , I think that 's mainly fair . Full repeal would mean that every aspect of Obamacare no longer exists . We 're replacing everything . But very few people thought that Republicans were ever going to literally repeal all of Obamacare . So there is a bit of a semantic game about what could you sort of plausibly claim as repeal , and there ’ s a lot of gray area here . No one would argue about whether it was a full repeal if they managed to repeal 90 percent of Obamacare .
But if you have a bill that is keeping its core regulations mostly intact at the national level , and it 's keeping a lot of spending and will likely have to keep a lot of the taxes and will delay the substantial parts of repeal for several years until another Congress is sworn in , I think that it 's problematic to call it repeal .
You can say it 's a partial repeal , that it repeals elements of Obamacare or that it puts several portions of Obamacare on a pathway to repeal . But I just think that it would be inaccurate to say that what they 're doing and what they 're talking about at this point is really repeal .
But Republicans do want to leave some level of tax credit as well as regulations to protect people with preexisting conditions , and this plan will drastically reduce the number of people with health care in this country , so in effect this is a rollback of Obamacare , no ?
Yes , that ’ s true . My whole issue is that Republicans have made so many nods to Obamacare . Rhetorically , they 're talking about how we have to cover people with preexisting conditions and we have to cover everybody . So they 've accepted all of the left 's metrics for what would be named a successful health care bill . And with all their nods to the left , they still end up with a bill that the CBO says would result in 23 million fewer people with coverage and that that polls at 17 percent .
What does your ideal conservative health care system look like ?
I ’ d want to see a health care system that is able to take advantage of the benefits of a free market in terms of using the mechanisms of choice , competition , and price signals to bring down costs and improve care . In most every other area of technology , over time , prices go down and quality improves .
Granted , it ’ s true , there is a certain inelastic nature to demand in health care , an element that makes it harder for consumers to evaluate choices and make decisions . Nobody would argue that a man on his way to the hospital who is having a heart attack is in a position to haggle with paramedics tending to him in the ambulance about the costs of his treatment .
But it ’ s also true that emergencies only make up a small percentage of our overall health care spending , and that much of our spending involves more routine and less time sensitive situations , and I think that ’ s an area in which free market mechanisms can make a real difference .
Liberals and conservatives both agree that much of the nation ’ s health care spending comes from treating conditions that are either caused by or exacerbated by behavioral decisions such as smoking , eating poorly , and not exercising . Market incentives could be used to encourage people to lead healthier lives in the areas that they actually have control over , ( just as with car insurance , there are discounts for people who demonstrate a safe driving record ) .
There ’ s a lot to disagree with there , but I want to circle back to the health care bill that ’ s actually on the table now . What is the political strategy for selling a bill like this that some conservatives will describe as good health care but which most Americans will not ?
Well , my argument is basically that there isn ’ t a good one . All of the charges that you could level against a pure free market alternative are already being leveled effectively against this , and it ’ s not actually a free market solution .
Republicans are making a mistake . They have n't gained any of the offsetting , advantageous arguments that a truly free market plan would deliver them in terms of really bringing you down premiums , giving a lot more choices and arguments they can be making about innovation and transparency and all sort of things that you could argue if you had a free market plan . So they 're eliminating all of those arguments . And yet they 're still being attacked for them .
Bottom line : I think that they 're going to have a very difficult sell .
Well that raises the question : What the hell are they doing ? Why are they plowing ahead with an incredibly unpopular bill that ’ s being written in the dark and won ’ t deliver on most of the promises they ’ re making ?
Look , we just came through an election in which the Republican nominee who eventually became president was widely panned by the conservative commentariat and the entire expert class . So they might be thinking , “ We can sell this to conservatives even if the pundits and the conservative wonks hate it. ” They might believe that they can say repeal and replace without actually repealing or replacing , or without actually improving the system .
Perhaps they think President Donald Trump will just go on stage and say , “ We did it . We repealed and replaced Obamacare just like we said we would , ” and that that will be enough .
You might be right , but that ’ s awfully cynical . And eventually people will notice that it ’ s bad policy , right ? When premiums don ’ t fall , when millions of people lose their coverage , the rhetoric will fall flat , right ?
It ’ s worth pointing out that it ’ s not as though 23 million people will suddenly lose their insurance if this bill passes than otherwise would if Obamacare stayed on the books for the next decade . We have n't seen enough analysis to say definitively how many people will lose their insurance in 2018 if this bill is signed into law . The CBO does n't tell us that . We don ’ t know how many people will quickly lose their coverage or how many people will voluntarily withdraw from the market after they were forced via the Obamacare mandate to purchase insurance .
So it 's not as simple as 23 million people suddenly being kicked off of coverage . My understanding is that they ’ re going to try to throw money at the market to try to stabilize it as much as possible , and I wouldn ’ t be surprised to see the Senate bill pump even more money into the market during the transition years to ease the effects .
Still , they ’ re setting themselves up for a political disaster here , no ? Health care will be worse , not better , after this , and they ’ ll have to own that .
I think the Republicans are making a big mistake because their promises are just through the roof . I mean , President Trump promised at various times that he was going to cover everybody . It 's going to be more comprehensive insurance , that the deductibles will be lower , that there 's going to be less spending and lower taxes , and not all of these things can be possible simultaneously .
So whatever happens , it ’ s not going to live up to the promises made by Trump , and Democrats are going to run ads for years calling out Trump ’ s hypocrisy . You ’ re going to hear his famous line , “ Everybody ’ s going to be covered and it ’ s going to be amazing ” over and over and over again .
███ ’ s Ezra Klein argued last week that Republicans could paradoxically be paving the way to a single-payer health care system if they pass this bill . If they do pass it and if it is as bad most people think it will be , do you think that ’ s a real possibility ?
I think that ’ s a real danger , particularly if the way in which they ’ re passing it comes into play . The complaint that free-marketers like myself always make is that Republicans don ’ t actually produce free market solutions but they pass terrible bills and then the failures get blamed on the free market . When that happens , the response is : We need to expand government more to fix everything .
When this fails , Democrats are going to point and say , “ See , this is what the free market got us . This is why we need a single-payer system . ”
Do you think they ’ ll pay a price for the process here ? For passing such a monumental bill in secret , without public hearings or a debate about the substance ?
I do think that it 's problematic and it 's already kind of blowing up in their face . When you 're in power and you 're trying to put out a bill , it 's understandable that at some point you want a certain amount of back and forth to happen behind closed doors because of the fact that if everything were in public then people might be afraid of floating a given idea . So there are defensible reasons why some of the bargaining and brainstorming has to happen behind the scenes . Not everything can or should be negotiated in the media .
But this is bad politics and they won ’ t be able to avoid the charges of hypocrisy . The reason why Republicans were able to take over the House in 2010 , and the reason why they were able to win something like the 2010 special election in Massachusetts , a state that Obama won by 26 points a year earlier , is that they had a non-ideological way of arguing that Democrats were cutting all these behind-closed-door deals like the Cornhusker Kickback , that they were rushing this bill out . They were rewriting one-sixth of the economy by ramming through this piece of legislation , and those were very strong attacks .
And now Republicans are conducting this process much more clandestinely than Democrats did with Obamacare , after they spent years decrying that process .
What you ’ re describing is a perfect storm of bad strategy . This bill is politically disastrous , ideologically incoherent , and the ultimate consequence might be to bring about an outcome that is completely at odds with what Republicans claim to want : a single-payer system .
But the problem for Republicans is , what ’ s the alternative ? If they don ’ t repeal and replace Obamacare , it will be the biggest broken promise in political history . And it won ’ t be a broken promise from an individual politician but a broken promise from an entire political party — that too would be a disaster for the Republicans . I mean , repealing and replacing Obamacare has been the central promise of virtually every Republican running for office since 2010 . So they ’ ve backed themselves into a corner here .
Last question : If you smuggled your way into that chamber with Senate Republicans , what would you say ? What would you tell them to do ?
Go big or go home . Either you have a plan that 's defensible , that 's coherent both ideologically and in policy terms , or you don ’ t . And if you don ’ t , don ’ t bother . That would be my advice .