The Trump administration announced late Thursday that it has concluded it can no longer legally make critical Obamacare “ cost-sharing ” payments and will cut them off , dealing another blow to the struggling 2010 health law .
The payments had specifically been denied by Congress but President Obama had made them anyway , drawing a rebuke from a court who said he was overstepping his powers . The case has raged for months , and both the Obama and Trump administrations had continued making payments — until now .
White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders , in a statement , said the Justice Department has concluded the judge ’ s ruling is correct , and there is no valid legal ability to make the payments .
“ The bailout of insurance companies through these unlawful payments is yet another example of how the previous administration abused taxpayer dollars and skirted the law to prop up a broken system , ” Mrs. Sanders said . “ Congress needs to repeal and replace the disastrous Obamacare law and provide real relief to the American people . ”
The White House statement doesn ’ t explicitly say Mr. Trump won ’ t make the payments anymore , but a Justice Department statement said the agencies responsible for them “ have decided not to spend money to fund those payments . ”
The cost-sharing payments go to insurance companies to pay for reimbursements for low-income customers ’ out-of-pocket costs .
SEE ALSO : Rep. Jim Jordan approves of Trump ’ s decision to halt CSR payments
Without the payments , insurers have said they would jack up premiums , which would further upend the already shaky economic underpinning the Affordable Care Act .
The move comes just hours after Mr. Trump signed an executive order pushing his administration to allow association health plans , which would allow individuals and small businesses to join up and purchase insurance on the group market across state lines .
Association plans are a boon for those struggling with high-cost plans , though analysts say it could sap those customers — and their high premiums — from existing markets , leaving the sick and elderly to pay more because their costs are no longer subsidized by the healthy .
Combined , the association health plans and the renunciation of cost-sharing payments amount to Mr. Trump ripping the band-aid off Obamacare , forcing Congress to confront the program with all the warts it ’ s sprouted over the years .
Mr. Obama had managed to patch over many of those using executive actions , and the cost-sharing payments were one part of that . Though envisioned by the original Obamacare law , the payments were left up to the annual appropriations process .
The president asked for the money but Congress zeroed it out . Mr. Obama made the payments anyway , drawing a lawsuit from the GOP-controlled House .
A GOP-appointed federal judge in Washington , D.C. , ruled against Mr. Obama , and the case now sits with an appeals court — though the lower-court judge allowed the payments to be made while the appeal is ongoing .
The payments cost about $ 7 billion a year , according to the latest accounting .
Mr. Trump ’ s decision Thursday means he ’ s accepting the original judge ’ s legal finding . It ’ s similar to the move he made last month on DACA , the Obama-era deportation amnesty , where the administration concluded it would likely be unable to defend the program in court , so it instead announced a phaseout .
“ This administration is committed to the rule of law , and a fundamental premise is that Congress holds the power of the purse . We will not usurp its authority , ” said Justice Department spokeswoman Sarah Isgur Flores .
Democrats said the president will take the blame for rising health care premiums in the wake of his moves Thursday .
“ It is a spiteful act of vast , pointless sabotage leveled at working families and the middle class in every corner of America , ” said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer .
The White House said exposing Obamacare ’ s flaws should put pressure on Congress to come up with a better system .
House Republicans have passed a repeal-and-replace bill through their chamber , but Senate Republicans have struggled to find a consensus on their own bill . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has tried three separate versions , twice having to pull back and once facing an embarrassing floor defeat .