In the end , the math was impossible—and so were the politics .
There was no health care bill that could pass the Senate , in part because President Trump insisted on a more moderate version that the most conservative Republicans wanted . And any tweaks that made the ill-fated measure more acceptable to the right risked hemorrhaging moderate support .
Some in the media are blaming Trump for not being more fully engaged—for instance , giving speeches devoted to health care . But he was certainly involved in persuasion—in fact , he had a group of GOP senators over for dinner Monday night as two others were about to defect—even if not at LBJ levels .
Some are blaming Mitch McConnell for doing the negotiating in secret and not allowing a single committee hearing .
Some commentators are blaming the Republican Party itself for vowing and voting to repeal ObamaCare for seven years , only to have no workable plan when it really counted .
And some are blaming the Democrats for their unbroken wall of opposition , though the GOP did nothing do include them in the process—just as their party stiffed the Republicans in ramming through Barack Obama ’ s legislation .
But whatever tactical missteps were made , it came down to that old Washington adage : it ’ s extremely difficult to take away federal entitlements once they ’ ve been established .
ObamaCare remained highly unpopular until the threat of abolishing it became real . Many Republican lawmakers were worried that if they did pass the bill and millions lost insurance coverage , they would pay a heavy price in next year ’ s midterms .
In a Washington Post/ABC poll the other day , 50 percent preferred the existing law , while 24 percent favored the Senate bill .
The bill ’ s goals—smaller government , kill Obama taxes , abolish the mandate , slow Medicaid expansion , yet make sure 20 million-plus people don ’ t lose coverage—could never be reconciled .
Now McConnell wants to move to a repeal now/replace later vote , which turned out to be the president ’ s fallback position : “ Republicans should just REPEAL failing ObamaCare now & work on a new Healthcare Plan that will start from a clean slate . Dems will join in ! ”
But it ’ s hard to see that going anywhere . If he couldn ’ t get 50 votes for the compromise bill , why would the holdouts want to do a straight repeal with the prospect of an ephemeral fix in the future ?
The reaction on the right hasn ’ t been sympathetic to Republicans , who have been promising to kill the Obama law for seven years . National Review ’ s Rich Lowry , noting the previous repeal votes , accused the party of political bad faith :
“ Winston Churchill said that nothing is so exhilarating as getting shot at without consequence . For Republicans , nothing was as exhilarating as repealing Obamacare without consequence . ”
Townhall said the health care failure is “ Giving Conservatives a Good Reason Never to Vote Republican Again ” :
“ Right now , the ship is taking on heavy water and the GOP seems incapable of getting this done without also getting bloodied , bruised , and beaten from their side of the aisle . It ’ s becoming increasingly more embarrassing by the day . ”
Even Breitbart acknowledged the magnitude of the mistake : “ Republicans in Congress wasted nearly seven months of the Trump administration–Thursday will mark seven months exactly since Trump ’ s inauguration–fiddling around with repeal and replace at the same time . ”
And Drudge put it more succinctly : “ MOST UNPRODUCTIVE CONGRESS IN 164 YEARS . ”
The president also tweeted : “ As I have always said , let ObamaCare fail and then come together and do a great healthcare plan . Stay tuned ! ” But is that really an option ?
Politics , of course , never stands still . What seems like a calamity now could be a faded memory a year from now . If Trump and the Republicans can cut taxes and get an infrastructure bill , and the economy continues to improve , their standing could be much higher than it is now .
The question facing the president ’ s party is whether to work with Chuck Schumer ’ s party , with all the compromises that entails , or try again to govern using muscle alone .