One of the struggles that the Obamacare Healthcare.gov website has had is what 's called the 834 error problem , in which insurance companies are not receiving completed insurance documents from customers . What this means is that some customers are being left without insurance . The worst problem is that no one - not the government , not the insurance companies - can tell which Americans are being left without insurance . It 's a completely broken process where people are just left in the cold .
The only way to confirm insurance status is to contact the insurance companies . That means that every single person who has signed up for Obamacare insurance - all 300,000 , or possibly more - should go through a separate confirmation process just to make sure they 've go the insurance they think they have :
But unless the 1 million Americans who have so far enrolled for coverage via the new marketplaces make sure their applications have arrived at their new insurance companies without errors , some may find they 're still uninsured when they try to refill a prescription or make a doctor 's appointment . `` The enrollment files have been getting better and more accurate , but there is still work that needs to be done , '' said Robert Zirkelbach , a spokesman for America 's Health Insurance Plans , a trade group that represents the private insurance industry . `` The health plans are still having to go back and fix some of data errors coming through in these files . '' If everything went smoothly , consumers can expect to see a welcome packet arrive in the mail from their insurance company , Zirkelbach said . If not , a phone call to the insurer might clear things up .
The last we heard of the 834 error problem , the Obama Administrations aid that it was down to 10 % of total enrollments . That means that as many as 10 % of people who have signed up for Obamacare are not actually enrolled in any health plan , and could find themselves out of luck when they actually have to go to the doctor .
The broken health care website has actual consequences . There 's a broad swathe of Americans who , come January 1 , will be living as if they have health insurance and who will only find out when they go to the emergency room that a broken website has left them without coverage .