Nancy Pelosi claimed Thursday she didn ’ t know who ObamaCare architect Jonathan Gruber is , after several tapes surfaced showing him gloating about how the law was written to take advantage of the stupidity of the American voter .
Problem is , Gruber ’ s analysis of the law was cited extensively by her office back in 2009 .
Pelosi , the House Democratic leader , tried to downplay Gruber ’ s role during a press conference on Thursday .
She claimed she doesn ’ t know who he is , and that he didn ’ t help write the law . “ Let ’ s put him aside , ” she said .
However , Gruber was involved in the process – as his newly surfaced remarks make clear – and his analysis indeed was cited by Pelosi ’ s office when she was House speaker in late 2009 .
At the time , her office put out a “ health insurance reform mythbuster ” press release pointing to the work of “ noted MIT health care economist Jonathan Gruber ” in examining the House bill ’ s impact on premiums . They noted that Gruber found it “ would result in lower premiums than under current law for the millions of Americans using the newly-established Health Insurance Exchange . ”
Pelosi also mentioned Gruber during a press conference at the time .
Still , when the press release was brought to Pelosi ’ s office ’ s attention on Thursday , aides indicated she does not know him – as she does not know everyone they have cited on their website .
And her spokesman claimed Gruber was not technically a bill author . `` We 've cited the work of dozens upon dozens of economists over the years . As the Leader said today , Mr. Gruber played no role in drafting our bill , '' Pelosi spokesman Drew Hammill said .
Democrats have been putting some distance between themselves and Gruber after a series of recordings – mostly from 2012 and 2013 – have surfaced showing him bad-mouthing American voters .
The latest shows him speaking at the University of Rhode Island in 2012 about the law ’ s so-called `` Cadillac tax. ” The “ Cadillac tax ” mandates that insurance companies be taxed rather than policy holders . He said that taxing individuals would have been “ politically impossible , ” but taxing the companies worked because Americans did n't understand the difference .
“ So basically it 's the same thing , ” he said . “ We just tax the insurance companies , they pass on higher prices that offsets the tax break we get , it ends up being the same thing . It 's a very clever , you know , basic exploitation of the lack of economic understanding of the American voter . ”
The new video follows another showing him speaking on a similar topic at an October 2013 event at Washington University in St. Louis . Referring to the `` Cadillac tax , ” he said : `` They proposed it and that passed , because the American people are too stupid to understand the difference . '' He also has said a lack of transparency helped the law pass .
White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest , traveling with President Obama in Burma , said he disagrees with Gruber 's comments .
Earnest claimed the bill was written in a transparent way and that it 's Republicans who are n't transparent about how they would replace it .