Tom Price slammed Obamacare as a “ system that works for government or insurance ” but not the American people . | AP Photo Price on Obamacare replacement : ‘ Nobody will be worse off financially ’
Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price said Sunday that “ nobody will be worse off financially ” after Republicans in Congress repeal and replace Obamacare .
“ I firmly believe that nobody will be worse off financially in the process that we ’ re going through , understanding that they ’ ll have choices that they can select the kind of coverage that they want for themselves and for their family , not [ that ] the government forces them to buy , ” Price told host Chuck Todd on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” in an interview that aired Sunday . “ So there ’ s cost that needs to come down , and we believe we ’ re going to be able to do that through this system . There 's coverage that ’ s going to go up . ”
House Republicans unveiled their legislation to repeal and replace former President Barack Obama ’ s Affordable Care Act last week . Their plan , however , was met with opposition from a mixture of moderate and far-right lawmakers , as well as powerful outside conservative groups .
The plan , formally called the American Health Care Act , has been marked up and advanced through key committees . Congressional Republicans and the White House hope to have their replacement plan signed into law before Congress recesses for Easter .
In Sunday ’ s interview , Price slammed Obamacare as a “ system that works for government or insurance ” but not the American people .
“ We need a system that works for people , ” the former Georgia congressman added . “ I believe , and the president believes firmly , that if you create a system that ’ s accessible for everybody and you provide the financial feasibility for everybody to get coverage , that we have a great opportunity to increase coverage over where we are right now , as opposed to where the line is going right now where people are losing coverage and we ’ re going to have fewer individuals covered than we do currently . ”