The administration will tiptoe to avoid declaring victory on the site too soon . | REUTERS Obama 's goal : Avoid 'Mission Accomplished ' moment
Here ’ s the scenario the Obama administration wants to avoid at all costs on Saturday : It declares the Obamacare website fixed , a bunch of cable news network anchors try to log on again on live TV , and they get more error messages .
And suddenly , everyone ’ s showing that clip of George W. Bush standing on the USS Abraham Lincoln in front of the “ Mission Accomplished ” banner .
But Democrats on Capitol Hill have their own nightmare scenario , too : The White House gives them nothing to brag about , no evidence that the site is actually better — just as some of the most vulnerable Democrats are getting ready to blast the administration if they ’ re not convinced it ’ s fixed .
That leaves the administration with two jobs ahead of the deadline Saturday when the federal Obamacare enrollment website is supposed to be fixed — or at least useable for most Americans . They ’ ll tiptoe to avoid declaring victory on the site too soon , but still give those vulnerable Democrats something to seize .
There ’ s no way the administration could declare victory anyway , since it just suffered the embarrassment of another “ what now ? ” announcement the day before Thanksgiving — the one-year delay of online enrollment for small businesses in federally run health insurance exchanges . Instead , it will just have to make the most of whatever improvements it can show in the enrollment website for individuals .
And yet , some Democrats aren ’ t even waiting for whatever scraps of progress the administration can give them — because as long as the website has been sputtering , they say they haven ’ t been able to brag about the Affordable Care Care benefits that are actually working , like better Medicare prescription drug coverage for seniors .
“ The website should have been working for all consumers and small businesses on October 1 . The fact that that didn ’ t happen is inexcusable , ” said Rep. Carol Shea-Porter of New Hampshire , who ’ s expected to face one of the toughest House re-election races next year .
So what can President Barack Obama and other administration officials give those Democrats , especially the ones in close reelection races next year , while still stepping carefully around the “ Mission Accomplished ” trap ? Expect to hear a few technical metrics of speed and lower error rates over and over again , plus one fuzzy broad theme : It ’ s better than it was .
“ The website ’ s working continually better , so check it out , ” Obama said Tuesday in a speech at DreamWorks Animation in California .
That ’ s probably the best the White House can do in public , Democratic strategists say — but beyond that , there ’ s not much the administration can say to Democratic candidates that will give them confidence the site is really better .
The one thing that will give them that confidence would be reports from their constituents that they ’ re actually able to use the website , from beginning to end .
“ I don ’ t think there are any assurances they can take from the administration that will be that helpful , ” said one Democratic pollster who ’ s working on some of the top Senate races . “ It needs to get better . It ’ s all about the results . There ’ s nothing that messaging or assurances can do at this point . ”
The end-of-the-month goal for the site ’ s rebirth has always been a little vague , but Obama and top administration officials are now lowering the bar even more . And really , they don ’ t have to go back to the Bush administration for an example of a disastrous PR campaign . The administration itself launched a “ Recovery Summer ” campaign in summer 2010 to highlight the stimulus — only to give the Republicans fodder when the economy remained as sluggish as ever .
So there will be no victory celebration , no announcement that could even sound like it . Jeff Zients , the leader of the administration ’ s tech surge , insists the website will work smoothly for “ the vast majority of Americans ” by the end of November — but most of the promises aren ’ t even that specific anymore .
These days , they ’ re just saying the website is “ getting better , ” working “ pretty well , ” better than it was in October — anything that doesn ’ t suggest it ’ s all fixed .
“ It ’ s actually starting to work pretty well now , and it ’ s going to be working even better in the coming weeks , ” Obama said at a Democratic fundraiser in California on Monday .
HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told state and local leaders in a conference call Tuesday that the site is “ currently working much better ” and that “ we are definitely on track to have a significantly different user experience by the end of this month . ”
Julie Bataille , a spokeswoman for CMS , even declared this week that Saturday is “ not a magical date . ”
Want specifics ? Administration officials say they ’ ve been giving Hill Democrats , and Republicans , the same metrics in briefings that they ’ ve been giving to the rest of the public . By Saturday , they say the site should be able to handle 50,000 users at the same time — the number it was supposed to handle when it launched .
They ’ re also focusing on loading times and errors rates . The loading time for each web page , they say , is now less than a second — it was as high as eight seconds on Oct. 1 . And the error rates are now down to less than 1 percent per page , down from 6 percent per page at launch .