A conservative group is launching a radio ad challenging Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell to oppose any money for President Barack Obama 's health care law even if it means triggering a government shutdown .
The Senate Conservatives Fund is spending nearly $ 50,000 on the 60-second commercial that will begin airing on Tuesday in Kentucky , where McConnell is locked in a tough race for a sixth term . The GOP leader faces both a primary rival , businessman Matt Bevin , and a Democratic foe , Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes .
`` Republicans in Congress can stop Obamacare by refusing to fund it , but Senator Mitch McConnell refuses to lead the fight , '' says the ad , which also makes a reference to a recent campaign embarrassment for McConnell .
`` The Obamacare bill stinks , and holding your nose wo n't make it any better , '' the commercial says .
Earlier this month , audio of a Jan. 9 telephone conversation revealed that Jesse Benton , McConnell 's campaign manager , said he was `` holding my nose '' while working for the candidate . Benton later said in a statement that he believes in McConnell and is 100 percent committed to his re-election .
The Associated Press obtained a text of the conservative group 's ad in advance .
The Senate Conservatives Fund , which was founded by former South Carolina Republican Sen. Jim DeMint , is spending close to $ 200,000 on radio ads in six other states calling on GOP senators to refuse to fund the health care law . The group 's targets are North Carolina 's Richard Burr , South Carolina 's Lindsey Graham , Lamar Alexander of Tennessee , Johnny Isakson of Georgia , Mississippi 's Thad Cochran , and Arizona 's Jeff Flake .
The issue has divided Republicans , with House and Senate GOP leaders wary of the political impact of any government shutdown but tea party conservatives determined to undermine the health care law .
The federal 2013 fiscal year ends Sept. 30 . New money must be appropriated by then to avoid a shutdown of countless government offices and agencies .
The radio ad comes as another conservative group , the Madison Project , launched a radio spot on Monday critical of McConnell , labeling him a `` career Washington politician '' who claims to be a conservative . The Madison Project is supporting Bevin 's candidacy .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
The Senate Conservatives Fund has not endorsed in the Kentucky GOP primary , but in a statement in July , executive director Matt Hoskins said the group was open to backing Bevin . Hoskins said McConnell could lose the Senate race and cost the GOP its shot at the Senate majority .
The group said it was `` waiting to see if the grassroots in Kentucky unite '' behind Bevin .