U.S. Health Care Expenditures in 2019 Under current law , the government estimates that the U.S. will spend about one-sixth of G.D.P . on health care this year , with those costs divided between the federal government , individuals , employers and state governments . This estimate , from an economist close to the Bernie Sanders 2016 campaign , estimates the largest savings from converting to Medicare for all . This estimate assumes that Medicare for all will pay all medical providers the same amounts Medicare pays now . That decision means it would lower total health spending , but its author thinks the real system would have to pay higher prices . This estimate assumes that Medicare for all would need to pay all medical providers higher rates than Medicare pays them now . The Urban Institute estimate includes a limit on how many more doctors ’ visits people will be able to make . Even so , it projects a substantial increase in spending under Medicare for all . Even without including all the costs for long-term care , which some Medicare for all proposals include , this estimate still finds that Medicare for all would cost substantially more than the current system .
How much would a “ Medicare for all ” plan , like the kind endorsed by the Democratic presidential candidates Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren , change health spending in the United States ?
Some advocates have said costs would actually be lower because of gains in efficiency and scale , while critics have predicted huge increases .
We asked a handful of economists and think tanks with a range of perspectives to estimate total American health care expenditures in 2019 under such a plan . The chart at the top of this page shows the estimates , both in composition and in total cost .
In all of these estimates , patients and private insurers would spend far less , and the federal government would pay far more . But the overall changes are also important , and they ’ re larger than they may look . Even the difference between the most expensive estimate and the second-most expensive estimate was larger than the budget of most federal agencies .
Estimates of U.S. health care expenditures under Medicare for all in 2019 , as a share of G.D.P .
The big differences in the estimates of experts reflect the challenge of forecasting a change of this magnitude ; it would be the largest domestic policy change in a generation .
The proposals themselves are vague on crucial points . More broadly , any Medicare for all system would be influenced by the decisions and actions of parties concerned — patients , health care providers and political actors — in complex , hard-to-predict ways . But seeing the range of responses , and the things that all the experts agree on , can give us some ideas about what Medicare for all could mean for the country ’ s budget and economy .
Gerald Friedman , a professor of economics at the University of Massachusetts , Amherst , whose estimates were frequently cited by the Bernie Sanders presidential campaign in 2016 .
Charles Blahous , a senior research strategist at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University , and a former trustee of Medicare and Social Security .
Analysts at the RAND Corporation , a global policy research group that has estimated the effects of several single-payer health care proposals .
Kenneth E. Thorpe , the chairman of the health policy department at Emory University , who helped Vermont estimate the costs of a single-payer proposal there in 2006 .
Analysts at the Urban Institute , a Washington policy research group that frequently estimates the effects of health policy changes .
Right now , individuals and employers pay insurance premiums ; people pay cash co-payments for drugs ; and state governments pay a share of Medicaid costs . In a system like one introduced as a bill by Mr. Sanders or another from Representative Pramila Jayapal and the Congressional Progressive Caucus , nearly all of that would be replaced by federal spending . That ’ s why some experts describe such a system as single-payer . ( Other Democrats who are supporting coverage expansion through Medicare have offered more modest proposals that would preserve some out-of-pocket spending and a role for private insurance . )
The economists made their calculations using different assumptions and methods , and you can read more about those methods at the bottom of this article .
These two estimates , for example , from the Mercatus Center and the Urban Institute , differ by about $ 730 billion per year , roughly 3 percent of G.D.P . The two groups don ’ t often agree on public policy — Mercatus tends to be more right-leaning and Urban more left-leaning .
Estimates of U.S. health care expenditures in 2019 under a Medicare for all system
The biggest difference between the Mercatus estimate and the Urban one is related to how much the new system would pay doctors , hospitals and other medical providers for health services . Mr. Friedman ’ s estimate , the least expensive of the group , assumed that the government could achieve the largest cost savings on both prescription drugs and administrative spending .
How much would doctors and hospitals and other providers be paid ?
Pay too little , and you risk hospital closings and unhappy health care providers . Pay too much , and the system will become far more expensive . Small differences add up . Estimated increase in Medicare payment rates paid to medical providers friedman blahous thorpe urban rand 6 % 0 % 5 % 7 % 9 %
In our current system , doctors , hospitals and other health care providers are paid by a number of insurers , and those insurers all pay them slightly different prices . In general , private insurance pays medical providers more than Medicare does . Under a Medicare for all system , Medicare would pick up all the bills . Paying the same prices that Medicare pays now would mean an effective pay cut for medical providers who currently see a lot of patients with private insurance .
For a Medicare for all system to save money , it needs to reduce the health care industry ’ s income somewhat . But if rates are too low , hospitals already facing financial difficulties could be put out of business .
Neither Mr. Sanders ’ s legislation nor the Jayapal House bill specify what the Medicare for all system would pay , but they say that Medicare would establish budgets and payment rates . So our estimators offered their best guess of what they thought such a plan might do .
Mr. Thorpe said he picked a number higher than current Medicare prices for hospitals , because he thought anything lower would be unsustainable . Mr. Blahous said he constructed his starting estimate at precisely Medicare rates , though he thought the real number would most likely be higher . He also reran his calculations with a more generous assumption : At 111 percent of Medicare , around the average amount all health insurers pay medical providers now , the total shot up by hundreds of billions of dollars , about an additional 1.5 percent of G.D.P .
By negotiating directly on behalf of all Americans , instead of having individual insurance companies and plans bargain separately , the government should be able to pay lower drug prices . Estimated reduction in drug spending friedman blahous thorpe urban rand 31 % 12 % 4 % 20 % 11 %
Patients in the United States pay the highest prices in the world for prescription drugs . That ’ s partly a result of a fractured system in which different payers negotiate separately for drug benefits . But it also reflects national preferences : An effective negotiator needs to be able to say no , and American patients tend to want access to the widest array of cutting-edge drugs , even if it means paying more .
A Medicare for all system would have more leverage with the drug industry because it could bargain for the whole country ’ s drug supply at once . But politics would still be a constraint . A system willing to pay for fewer drugs could probably get bigger discounts than one that wanted to preserve the current set of choices . That would mean , though , that some patients would be denied the medications they want .
All of our economists thought a Medicare for all system could negotiate lower prices than the current ones . But they differed in their assessments of how cutthroat a negotiator Medicare would be . Mr. Friedman thought Medicare for all could reduce drug spending by nearly a third . The Urban team said the savings would be at least 20 percent . The other researchers imagined more modest reductions .
How much more would people use the health care system ?
By expanding coverage to the uninsured , adding new benefits and wiping out cost sharing , Medicare for all would encourage more Americans to seek health care services . Estimated increase in use of health care friedman blahous thorpe urban rand 7 % 11 % 15 % — 8 %
Medicare for all would give insurance to around 28 million Americans who don ’ t have it now . And evidence shows that people use more health services when they ’ re insured . That change alone would increase the bill for the program .
Other changes to Medicare for all would also tend to increase health care spending . Some proposals would eliminate nearly all co-payments and deductibles . Evidence shows that people tend to go to the doctor more when there ’ s no such cost sharing . The proposed plans would also add medical benefits not typically covered by health insurance , such as dental care , hearing aids and optometry services , which would increase their use .
The economists differ somewhat in how much they think people would increase their use of medical services . ( Because of the way the Urban Institute team ’ s estimate was calculated , it couldn ’ t easily provide a number for this question . )
Right now , the health care system is complicated , with lots of different payers and ways to negotiate prices and bill for services . A single payment system could save some money by simplifying all that . Estimated administrative costs as a share of all spending friedman blahous thorpe urban rand 2 % — 6 % 6 % 5 %
The complexity of the American system means that administrative costs can often be high . Insurance companies spend on negotiations , claims review , marketing and sometimes shareholder returns . One key possible advantage of a Medicare for all system would be to strip away some of those overhead costs .
But estimating possible savings in management and administration is not easy . Medicare currently has a much lower administrative cost share than other forms of insurance , but it also covers sicker people , distorting such comparisons . Certain administrative functions , like fraud detection , can have a substantial return on investment .
The economists all said administrative costs would be lower under Medicare for all , but they differed on how much . Those differences amount to percentage points on top of the differing estimates of medical spending . On this question , there was rough agreement among our estimators that administrative costs would be no higher than 6 percent of medical costs , a number similar to the administrative costs that large employers spend on their health plans . Mr. Blahous said a 6 percent estimate would probably apply to populations currently covered under private insurance , but did not calculate an overall rate .
All of these estimates looked at the potential health care bill under a Sanders-style Medicare for all plan . In some estimates , the country would not pay more for health care , but there would still be a drastic shift in who is doing the paying . Individuals and their employers now pay nearly half of the total cost of medical care , but that percentage would fall close to zero , and the percentage paid by the federal government would rise to compensate . Even under Mr. Blahous ’ s lower estimate , which assumes a reduction in overall health care spending , federal spending on health care would still increase by 10 percent of G.D.P. , or more than triple what the government spends on the military .
How that transfer takes place is one of the least well explained parts of the reform proposals . Taxation is the most obvious way to collect that extra revenue , but so far none of the current Medicare for all proposals have included a detailed tax plan . Even if total medical spending stayed flat over all , some taxpayers could come out ahead and pay less ; others could find themselves paying more .
Raising revenue would require broad tax increases that are likely to be partly borne by the middle class , potentially impeding passage . Advocates , including Mr. Sanders , tend to favor funding the program with payroll taxes .
For some people , any increase in federal taxes might be more than offset by reductions in their spending on premiums , co-payments , deductibles and state taxes . There is evidence to suggest that premium savings by employers would also be returned to workers in the form of higher salaries . But , depending on the details , other groups could end up paying more in tax increases than they save in those reductions .
After Mr. Sanders ’ s presidential campaign released a tax proposal in 2016 , the Urban Institute tried to calculate the effects on different groups . But it found that the proposed taxes would pay for only about half of the increased federal bill . That means that a real financing proposal would probably need to raise a lot more in taxes . How those are spread across the population would change who would be better or worse off under Medicare for all .