President Obama ’ s infamous Obamacare lie that “ you can keep your doctor , period ” is clearly not the exception — it ’ s the rule . The pattern is especially worrisome with respect to his practice of what amounts to serial national-security fraud .
Consider , for example , the latest on the Iran nuclear-weapons front . Mr. Obama insists that his interim deal “ freezes ” the mullahs ’ nuclear program for six months . He may be the only one who believes that whopper . Certainly , the Iranian regime does not , and neither should we .
Yet the president insisted at a Brookings Institution symposium on Saturday that , “ There ’ s nothing in this agreement or document that grants Iran a right to enrich. ” In fact , as the Iranians have noted , the United States and the other so-called “ P5+1 ” members ( Russia , China , France and United Kingdom , plus Germany ) clearly accepted in two different places in the so-called interim accord that Iran would continue the enrichment of uranium .
Whether we call this arrangement an acknowledgment of an Iranian “ right ” or not is beside the point . What matters is that the long lead-time item in Iran ’ s scheme to acquire sufficient nuclear weapons-grade uranium has been legitimated by Mr. Obama ’ s treacherous diplomacy .
The magnitude of the treachery being exhibited by a man who continues to profess that he will not let Iran get the bomb is evident in another comment made in the course of his remarks at Brookings . Mr. Obama floated for the first time the idea that the final agreement , which supposedly will be fashioned in the next six months , will allow Iran to enrich uranium in perpetuity : “ It is my strong belief that we can envision an end state that gives us an assurance that , even if they have some modest enrichment capability , it is so constrained and the inspections are so intrusive that they , as a practical matter , do not have [ a ] breakout capability . ”
Forget about the weasel-word caveats and the president ’ s empty platitudes about “ the military option ” remaining on the table . He has thus cleared the way for Iran to have a nuclear weapon , probably on his watch . Just as his health care fraud is properly known as Obamacare , the fruit of the mullah ’ s nuclear-weapons program he has just green-lighted should be known as “ Obamabomb . ”
It seems that the real purpose of the interim deal was less to “ freeze ” Iran ’ s burgeoning nuclear capability than it was to block the one military option that may actually remain viable : Israel ’ s .
There is no small irony to the fact that Mr. Obama chose as the venue for his latest lies about his commitment to the security of the Jewish state — which he described as “ sacrosanct ” — the Brookings event sponsored by Israeli billionaire Haim Saban . In response to questions posed by Mr. Saban , the president insisted , for example : “ Our support of Israel ’ s security has never been stronger . And that ’ s not just my opinion ; I think that ’ s something that can be verified . ”
Actually , it can be readily verified that no president has done more to jeopardize Israel ’ s security . The bill of particulars may start , but does not end , with Mr. Obama clearing the way for Iran to have the capability to act on its threats to “ wipe Israel off the map. ” Even before the interim deal , his administration had acted to impede , if not foreclose , Israeli options to prevent that existential danger . For instance , it compromised , and thereby ended , a secret bilateral arrangement with Azerbaijan to provide post-strike recovery airfields for Israel ’ s jets .
Insult was added to injury when the president lied to Israel ’ s Mr. Saban : “ Prime Minister [ Benjamin ] Netanyahu and I have had constant consultations on these issues throughout the last five years. ” The truth is that Mr. Obama completely blindsided Mr. Netanyahu about his secret negotiations with Iran over the past year .
Throughout his presidency , Mr. Obama has also bludgeoned Israel into making concessions to the Palestinians that would be perilous for the Jewish state . He declared that Israel must withdraw to earlier , indefensible boundaries correctly described as the “ Auschwitz borders. ” He has publicly demeaned and humiliated Mr. Netanyahu . Secretary of State John Kerry has encouraged European boycotts of Israel and threatened “ a third intifada ” ( or Palestinian terrorist war ) .
Most recently , Team Obama has let it be known that the United States would “ impose ” a solution on Israel next year if the Jewish state does not make the concessions necessary to satisfy the Palestinians . Mr. Obama nonetheless lied to Mr. Saban : “ What I ’ ve consistently said is that the only way this is going to be resolved is if the people of Israel and the Palestinian people make a determination that their futures and the futures of their children and grandchildren will be better off with peace than with conflict . ”
The people of the United States , and the futures of their children and grandchildren , are being imperiled by a president whose disastrous national-security policies are being exacerbated by his lies about them . These constitute high crimes , and should be treated as such by the Congress .
Frank J. Gaffney Jr. was an assistant secretary of defense under President Reagan . He is president of the Center for Security Policy ( SecureFreedom.org ) , a columnist for The ███ and host of the nationally syndicated program Secure Freedom Radio .