ObamaCare has survived dozens of Republican attempts to repeal and undermine it , but a new wave of Democratic complaints -- led most recently by former President Bill Clinton -- about the cost crush facing consumers is posing a fresh challenge .
Bill Clinton , on the campaign trail for Hillary Clinton , told voters in Michigan on Monday that the legislation has created a “ crazy system ” where millions more people have health care but those unable to qualify for subsidies are getting “ killed . ”
“ The people … out there busting it , sometimes 60 hours a week , wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half , ” Clinton said . “ It ’ s the craziest thing in the world . ”
The comments come as Republican and Democratic administrations at the state level all grapple with fresh complications from the law , as insurers threaten to leave the ObamaCare exchanges amid financial concerns and customers face the prospect of rising premiums for the plans available .
Asked Tuesday about the Clinton comments , White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said President Obama has “ continued strong confidence ” in the benefits provided under the health law .
“ Twenty million Americans have access to quality affordable health insurance today that didn ’ t have it ” before , he said . At the same time , Earnest said Obama acknowledges more can be done to “ further strengthen the law ” – and noted Hillary Clinton has signaled interest in doing so .
Amid the fallout from the ex-president ’ s remarks , Clinton spokesman Angel Urena clarified he was trying to speak about the “ good it has done ” in expanding coverage while addressing room for improvement .
“ And while he was slightly short-handed , it 's clear to everyone , including President Obama , that improvements are needed . That ’ s why Secretary Clinton has proposed measures including tax relief to cover excessive out-of-pocket costs , a public option and Medicare buy-in for those over 55 , ” Urena said .
In his remarks , Clinton also railed against the “ insurance model ” as a whole .
Clinton ’ s comments in Michigan follow officials in nearby Minnesota recently agreeing to huge price hikes in order to convince insurers to stay . Commerce Commissioner Mike Rothman announced Friday that individual market plans could raise rates as high as 67 percent next year . The jump in cost follows this year ’ s hike of 14 percent to 49 percent .
In a written statement , Rothman , who serves in a Democratic administration , said middle-class residents are getting “ crushed ” and called for urgent reforms in the state ’ s individual market .
“ This year the need for reform is now without any doubt even more serious and urgent , ” Rothman said . He called the soaring rates “ unsustainable and unfair , ” while saying the steps they took were necessary to “ avert a collapse this year ” – after the state ’ s largest health insurer , Blue Cross Blue Shield of Minnesota , announced it would stop selling health plans to individuals and families in 2017 and other insurers had threatened to follow .
# Obamacare Sticker Shock : A look at some of the largest approved premium hikes on individual market plans for 2017 pic.twitter.com/MGpynFTLMR — ███ Research ( @ FoxNewsResearch ) October 4 , 2016
The insurance giant said extraordinary financial losses drove its decision . The company said it was “ projecting a total loss of more than $ 500 million in the individual [ health plan ] segment over three years . ”
“ Employer markets are fairly stable , but the individual insurance market does not feel stable at all , ” Janet S. Trautwein , chief executive of the National Association of Health Underwriters , told The New York Times . “ In many states , the individual market is in shambles . ”
Democrats , who once enthusiastically supported President Obama ’ s landmark legislation , are feeling the heat and looking for ways to cut consumer costs .
Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton , multiple members of Congress and even Obama himself are floating it as a cure for the growing crisis .
A public option -- or insurance plan offered by the government -- had been written into early versions of the bill but failed to make the final cut in the law signed by Obama in March 2010 .
Thirty-three Democrats signed a non-binding Senate resolution last month to add the public option to ObamaCare .
Obama wrote recently in the Journal of the American Medical Association that “ Congress should revisit a public plan to compete alongside private insurers in areas of the country where competition is limited . ”
Oregon Democratic Sen. Jeff Merkley ’ s resolution isn ’ t likely to pass – since Republicans have a majority and generally oppose the idea as a way to fix ObamaCare .
Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump and several GOP lawmakers , including Sen. John McCain , of Arizona , argue the public option isn ’ t an option at all .
Arizona in particular is bracing for double-digit premium hikes next year . McCain , who has been a vocal opponent of ObamaCare from the start , maintains “ the whole thing is collapsing like a house of cards . ”
“ Now that the law is unraveling , it ’ s no surprise that Democrats are clamoring for a so-called ‘ public option , ’ ” McCain recently told FoxNews.com in a statement . “ If anything is clear about this failed law , it ’ s that more government intervention is the wrong solution to fixing our health care system . ”
Cato Institute scholar Jeffrey Singer believes the public option is nothing more than a sleight of hand and “ would eliminate competition , not increase it . ”
“ Few things are more frightening for the future of American health care , ” he wrote . “ ObamaCare ’ s critics were right to predict that it would enter a death spiral ; Arizonans are now experiencing it firsthand . Now we must ensure that its death spiral doesn ’ t take us down an even darker road . ”
Asked Tuesday about what might have been driving Bill Clinton ’ s critical comments , Donald Trump backer and ex-GOP primary rival Mike Huckabee said the former president is “ telling it like it is . ”
“ The breaking news here is a Clinton is telling the truth , ” Huckabee told ███ . “ And it ’ s kind of refreshing . ”