President Obama completed an ambitious fundraising schedule for Democrats in November , but many of the congressional candidates he is trying to help are finding their election prospects next year imperiled by the president ’ s faulty health care law .
Several polls in the past week have shown congressional Republicans pulling even or slightly ahead of Democrats in generic balloting for the midterm elections , a swing of at least 10 percentage points in less than a month . Pollsters attribute the seismic shift to the series of glaring flaws in Obamacare , most of which came to the public ’ s attention after the program ’ s rollout Oct. 1 .
Among the Democrats hurt by Obamacare woes are Sen. Mary L. Landrieu of Louisiana , polling at 41 percent against Republican opponents ; Sen. Mark L. Pryor of Arkansas , polling at 33 percent , a drop of 18 points in a year ; Sen. Mark Udall of Colorado , now tied in a race that looked like his to win ; and Sen. Kay R. Hagan of North Carolina , whose disapproval rating has soared in recent months .
While Mr. Obama ’ s credibility has suffered from his broken pledge on health care that “ if you like your plan , you can keep it , ” Republican pollster David Winston said the level of danger for Democratic candidates “ depends on how much they were using that same line . ”
The midterm prospects for candidates of the president ’ s party can be affected by his popularity , and Mr. Obama ’ s job approval rating has been dropping steadily . Mr. Winston likened Mr. Obama ’ s predicament to that of President George H.W . Bush , who broke his “ read my lips ” promise that he wouldn ’ t raise taxes .
“ This president now will have that same problem , ” Mr. Winston said . “ Once you ’ ve broken a core promise like that , it ’ s hard to get that back . ”
Republicans say they will campaign aggressively on Obamacare and will remind voters about Democrats who supported the initiative . The House Republicans ’ campaign arm has launched an email blitz against 46 Democratic House candidates titled “ So you ’ re running on Obamacare . ”
“ Democrats have repeatedly said they ’ re looking forward to running on the disaster that is Obamacare in 2014 , ” said Andrea Bozek , spokeswoman of the National Republican Campaign Committee . “ If Alex Sink [ a Democratic candidate in Florida ] thinks that canceled plans and rising premiums are something to be proud of , then we look forward to seeing her on the campaign trail . ”
Republicans are being aided by groups such as Americans for Prosperity , funded by the billionaire Koch brothers , which is spending $ 4 million on TV ads aimed at congressional Democrats who are tied to Obamacare .
Republican strategist Karl Rove has said Obamacare is likely to be a “ bigger , more obvious and equally deadly issue ” for Democrats next year than it was in 2010 , when Republicans took back the House amid widespread anger over passage of the legislation .
Democrats are fighting back by reminding voters about the consequences of repealing the law and revoking established benefits as Republicans have proposed .
The House Democrats ’ campaign arm has sent an email citing a government report showing that seniors have saved an average of $ 1,200 per person on prescription drug costs under Obamacare , and targeting Rep. Frank A. LoBiondo , New Jersey Republican , for voting to repeal the law .
“ This new analysis is another painful reminder that Congressman LoBiondo would raise prescription drug costs for New Jersey seniors because he is obsessed with repeal , ” said Emily Bittner of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee . “ Seniors shouldn ’ t have to go back to choosing between buying food or medicine , but that ’ s exactly what Congressman LoBiondo ’ s obsessive repeal effort would force them to do . ”
Democratic National Committee Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz of Florida said she believes voters will have largely forgotten about Obamacare ’ s problems by the midterm elections as glitches are resolved and other issues take priority .
Obama pollster Joel Benenson has suggested to congressional Democrats that the party will deflect the issue of Obamacare by trying to focus instead on the economy . It could be a narrow hole for candidates to thread because increases in many families ’ health care premiums are affecting their household budgets .
“ Our guiding light needs to be our focus on creating a more secure economy for hard-working American families , with smart investments now and for the next generation , ” Mr. Benenson said . “ Even amid a cascade of news cycles focused on the Affordable Care Act , Syria , the government shutdown and the NSA , voters ’ primary focus has never shifted from their economic well-being and financial security . ”
He added , “ We need to align Democrats with a future-oriented agenda that focuses on the issues that matter to families across the country — strengthening the economy , creating jobs , investing in education , promoting a living wage — and not getting caught up in inside-the-Beltway political dramas that have little bearing on their immediate well-being . ”
Although some Republicans say they can make Obamacare the top campaign issue , Mr. Winston has said the party needs to offer an alternative for improving the health care system .
House Republicans have offered several bills designed to make health insurance more affordable , most of them by using the tax code to put more money into pockets with the requirement that it be spent on health care .
A proposal from the conservative Republican Study Committee with 100 co-sponsors , would give a $ 7,500 deduction to individuals and a $ 20,000 deduction to families .
A proposal by Rep. Tom Price , Georgia Republican , offers a maximum tax credit of $ 5,000 for families making up to 200 percent of the federal poverty level , or about $ 47,000 a year .