WASHINGTON — In one online ad , Democratic House candidate Angie Craig of Minnesota blasts GOP Rep. Jason Lewis for voting “ to dramatically increase the cost of insurance and kick millions off health care . ”
Rep. Jacky Rosen , a Democratic Senate candidate from Nevada , in another ad , highlights Sen. Dean Heller ’ s pledge to oppose a Republican attempt to repeal the Affordable Care Act , before ultimately backing the effort under pressure from President Trump .
And Democratic House candidate Antonio Delgado of New York has an ad that points to GOP Rep. John Faso ’ s vote for repealing the ACA , known as Obamacare , after promising a woman with a brain tumor on video that he would not take away her health care .
Friday marks the year anniversary of House Republicans ’ vote to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act . It was the first vote of a months-long effort from congressional Republicans to get rid of the law . It ultimately failed in the Senate , but it left many Republicans on record voting to remove millions of Americans from the rolls of the insured — and Democrats are hammering them for it .
After years of playing defense on health care , Democratic candidates have made it a top issue this election cycle . They are pledging to fix the flaws in Obamacare while targeting Republican attempts to “ sabotage ” it and take coverage away . And grassroots organizations that protested Republican efforts are keeping up the pressure with events planned around the anniversary .
“ This is going to be a continuing conversation throughout the election , ” said Sen. Chris Van Hollen , of Maryland , chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee . “ I ’ m seeing this as an issue in every state . ”
Rep. Ben Ray Lujan , of New Mexico , chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee , told reporters recently , “ Republicans are going to have one heck of a time having to explain themselves . ”
Last spring , Democrats warned the repeal vote would have negative political consequences for the GOP . Grassroots groups staged rallies and protests across the country , in support of preserving Obamcare . When the House vote closed on May 4 , 2017 — it passed by a single vote — some Democrats began chanting `` Na na na na , hey hey , hey , goodbye ! ''
Democrats know what it ’ s like to be on the losing side of this issue . During the run-up to the 2010 elections , constituents ’ rage — partly over health care — drove many Democrats to skip in-person town hall meetings . The party lost 63 House seats and majority control in what President Obama described as a “ shellacking. ” Republicans spent years promising to repeal the law .
Now , views on the topic have shifted . Because of Obamacare , roughly 20 million people who were previously uninsured got access to health care . At the height of the repeal debate in the Senate last summer , 60 % of Americans said the federal government is responsible for ensuring health care coverage for all Americans , the highest number in nearly a decade , according to a Pew Research poll .
“ It isn ’ t that people fell in love with the ACA — with the exchanges and mandates and controlled benefits and everything — they didn ’ t , ” said Robert J. Blendon , a professor of health policy and political analysis at Harvard University . “ They just couldn ’ t imagine taking some coverage away from those people . ''
Had the Republican repeal effort passed both chambers , it would have unraveled many of the law ’ s popular consumer protections and overhauled the insurance market . A report from the Congressional Budget Office said that the House-passed bill would lead to 23 million fewer people having health insurance , although the CBO estimated other drafts of the bill went as high as 24 million .
`` The Democrats don ’ t have to run on how well the ACA works … all they have to say is we ’ re not going to let them take the 24 million people off , ” Blendon said .
Recent polls show voters trust Democrats more than Republicans on health care .
“ I can ’ t think of a campaign , from the reddest of districts to the bluest of districts , that isn ’ t talking about health care repeal and what the administration ’ s sabotage would mean to the health care system , ” said Jesse Ferguson , a Democratic strategist now working on health care policy who worked at the DCCC in 2010 .
Democrats ' strategy is to acknowledge flaws with Obamacare . Rather than repealing it , many are campaigning on the need to repair it by lowering drug costs and premiums and continuing to expand health care coverage .
“ I ’ m acknowledging that things need to be fixed , ” said Craig , who is running in Minnesota ’ s 2nd Congressional District . “ ( Republicans ) didn ’ t get it done with control of the House , the Senate and the White House . ”
In New Jersey , Democratic House candidate Mikie Sherrill is campaigning for an open seat now held by a Republican . She said she hasn ’ t found anyone in her district who disagrees with the goal of providing quality and affordable health care for everyone .
“ I say that in the progressive parts of the district , the red parts of the district , and I never hear anyone say , ‘ No we don ’ t , ’ ” she said .
In North Dakota , Sen. Heidi Heitkamp is campaigning for re-election against GOP Rep. Kevin Cramer in a state Trump won by 36 points . Cramer is proud of his vote to repeal Obamacare . Still , Heitkamp said she ’ ll defend her vote to oppose the “ horrible ” repeal and replace legislation “ any day . ”
“ Many , many of the changes that were recommended by the Republicans would have dramatically affected both affordability and accessibility ” of health care in North Dakota , Heitkamp said .
Republicans may have failed to fully dismantle the law but they have taken other steps to try and blunt it . They used tax reform legislation — which did pass — to strike Obamacare ’ s “ individual mandate , ” requiring that everyone buy insurance or face a tax penalty . On Tuesday , Trump 's former Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price said that decision would drive up costs .
And Trump halted subsidies to insurers that helped bring down out-of-pocket costs for consumers . Congress so far has been unable to reach a compromise to reinstate the subsidies and block premiums from rising in the fall .
Conservatives worry health care could dampen their 2018 prospects , but only because they haven ’ t gone far enough in repealing it . Republicans will be on “ the losing end of the debate unless they take proactive steps to deliver on the campaign promise that ’ s been years in the making , ” said Dan Holler , a vice president of Heritage Action , the political arm of the conservative Heritage Foundation .
“ There ’ s obviously been a fundamental shift in the politics of health care and Democrats in many ways feel emboldened , ” Holler said . “ They feel emboldened not because Obamacare is working… but Democrats right now are on offense because Republicans haven ’ t delivered a policy outcome . ”
Other Republicans think the party should try to make Democrats look out-of-touch by tying them to a `` single-payer , '' government-run health care system .
In the House , 122 Democrats have signed onto a single-payer bill now led by the Democratic National Committee ’ s deputy chair , Rep. Keith Ellison of Minnesota . Sen. Bernie Sanders , I-Vt. , has 16 Democratic co-sponsors for his version in the Senate .
Support for a single payer system has grown with Democrats , but it is about as popular as “ bee stings and damp socks ” with Republicans — and it can be used to split the Democratic base , said Matt Gorman , a spokesman for the National Republican Congressional Campaign Committee .
“ Democrats favor single-payer , so we ’ re going to talk about the tax increases and spending that would come with it , ” Gorman said .
Moderate Democrats , however , have a different health care message . Rep. Ami Bera , of California , one of two Democrats in Congress who are doctors and a founding member of the bipartisan Problem Solvers Caucus , said he has been advising 25 to 30 candidates about campaigning on health care . He aims to `` move the conversation away from single payer '' coverage to universal coverage that could include both public and private insurance .
He wants candidates to be thinking about this issue now , so that if Democrats find themselves with majority control of the House or the White House , they ’ ll have “ concrete ideas ” on how to get everyone insured .
“ We can ’ t find ourselves in the same situation Republicans did , ” he said .