The stumble-filled debut of the health law is drawing new attention to the other risks . | REUTERS ACA : What can go wrong now ?
Busted website , canceled policies , lousy early enrollment numbers . And that could be just the warmup .
Because the lesson of the last six weeks is that when it comes to the Obamacare rollout , if it can go wrong , it probably will .
The stumble-filled debut of President Barack Obama ’ s health care law is drawing new attention to the other risks that have been on the radar screen of health care wonks for months . Think health insurance plans sinking under the weight of sick customers , newly insured people being stunned that they still have to spend on health care , and possibly another wave of canceled policies — right before the 2014 elections .
They ’ re mostly worst-case scenarios , and an Obamacare recovery in the next few months could still prevent some of the biggest ones from ever happening . But health care experts are taking all of them a lot more seriously now — because at this point , why wouldn ’ t they ?
This was always the worst of the worst-case scenarios : Only sick people enroll in the Obamacare health insurance plans , healthy people stay away , and everyone ’ s premiums rise out of control because there are no healthy people to cover the sick people ’ s costs .
That ’ s the dreaded “ death spiral , ” and it has been a possibility all along . But it was only a remote one — because health care experts have counted on the attraction of Obamacare ’ s subsidies , along with the threat of fines from the individual mandate , to lure enough healthy customers to prevent a meltdown .
But they were also counting on a functioning website . Now that HealthCare.gov has tripped up all but the most committed customers , health care analysts are taking another look at the “ death spiral ” scenario — and some are worried that it ’ s already playing out before their eyes .
“ This is not a political attack — I think we ’ re already there . I really do , ” said Robert Laszewski , a consultant who works with health insurance companies . “ If everyone is hearing that there are all these problems with the website and you have to do all these workarounds , who ’ s going to do the workarounds ? Sick people . ”
The Obama administration says roughly 106,000 people selected health insurance plans in October — and only a quarter if those used the federal website , which serves 36 states . There are a lot more potential customers , since nearly 1.1 million were found to be eligible for Obamacare plans . But they have to get through the website first .
The buggy website would have to be working well by the beginning of December , as the Obama administration has promised , to avoid discouraging healthy people from signing up , Laszewski said — and the chances of a successful fix by then are growing more remote every day .
Others , however , say it ’ s too early to tell if a death spiral is a real danger . The open enrollment period lasts through March , they point out , and healthy people would probably be the last customers to sign up anyway .
“ It ’ s too early to know for sure , ” said Mark McClellan , who ran the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services under President George W. Bush and presided over the launch of the Medicare prescription drug program . “ What ’ s going to matter is not the enrollment numbers over the next few weeks , but what the enrollment looks like come February or March . ”
There ’ s another problem , and it has nothing to do with the website . Insurers and actuaries say the Obama administration ’ s solution to the canceled policies mess could backfire — because by telling insurers they can extend people ’ s individual coverage , they might cause the insurance prices to rise anyway .
That ’ s because the mix of healthy and sick people in the new Obamacare plans would be disrupted . In the worst-case scenario , it would be the healthy people that renew their old , pre-Obamacare insurance , and only the sick people would switch to the new plans — because they ’ d want the new coverage that accepts anyone with pre-existing conditions .
Obama administration officials say they can take care of that problem by using a built-in mechanism in Obamacare that ’ s supposed to help insurers with high-cost patients . The “ risk corridors ” provision gives extra payments to health plans that draw a lot of sick people , and administration officials think they can adjust that mechanism to help insurers that lose too many customers they were expecting .
But even if that works , that could increase the cost of Obamacare — because the federal government would be on the hook for most of those extra expenses . In a letter to lawmakers , the American Academy of Actuaries warned that “ costs to the federal government could increase as higher-than-expected average medical claims are more likely to trigger risk corridor payments . ”
That ’ s the issue Sen. Marco Rubio ( R-Fla. ) is targeting with his proposal to repeal the risk corridors provision to prevent a “ bailout ” of insurance companies . A Rubio aide says there ’ s no exact estimate of how much federal spending would increase , but they ’ re going to ask the Congressional Budget Office to look into it .
If the Obamacare health plans don ’ t get a good mix of healthy and sick people , the rate hikes wouldn ’ t happen right away . The prices are already locked in for 2014 . The bigger political headache for Democrats is that insurance companies would raise their prices for 2015 , and those new rates would be announced in the spring — bringing another round of bad news during election season .
Most likely , the insurance companies would submit their bids in April , and that would be based on only the most preliminary information about final enrollment figures for Obamacare ’ s first year .
“ That should be in the category of things the administration should be thinking about , ” said McClellan .
The big danger of the canceled policies isn ’ t totally off the table . For any individual health plans that don ’ t get extended , customers will have to find new health insurance , either through the Obamacare websites or through workarounds , like the call center or even contacting health insurers directly . If they can ’ t do it by Dec. 15 , they might not have a replacement health insurance plan by Jan. 1 .
If health insurers — and state insurance commissioners — go along with the White House plan and extend people ’ s policies , that won ’ t be a problem . But not all of them will . Insurance commissioners in Washington state , Mississippi , Georgia and Rhode Island have already said no , and others have said they ’ re skeptical about it .
“ It definitely allows insurers to continue policies and avoid any cancellations until 2015 , but it ’ s still up to state regulators and the insurers themselves whether to take the option . So , it ’ ll probably vary from state to state and plan to plan , ” said Larry Levitt of the Kaiser Family Foundation .
CORRECTION : Corrected by : Jessica Huff @ 11/18/2013 10:02 AM CORRECTION : An earlier version of this story contained an inaccurate description of the “ silver ” Obamacare plans .