Earlier this month , a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found that 64 percent of Americans are still feeling some impact from the recession . Those who were polled are acutely aware of the fact that they need to be careful with their spending . For example , if the roof needs a repair , the homeowner would not agree to a contract that stated the repair would happen , no matter what the cost .
Yet that is exactly what the Obama administration has done with the Obamacare website , Healthcare.gov .
A new report from the Department of Health and Human Services ’ Office of the Inspector General found that between January 2009 and January 2014 , the administration issued 60 contracts to build the Healthcare.gov website . As of February 2014 , the administration had paid out nearly $ 500 million for those contracts . To make matters worse , the taxpayers are on the hook for an additional $ 300 million — for a website that is still not working as it should .
The same report states that one-third of the contracts are over budget and seven of the contracts have already cost twice as much as originally planned .
Finally , an additional $ 90 million contract was awarded in January 2014 to another contractor to fix what the original contractors did not build . In other words , the roof is still leaking . and the taxpayers are still paying , with no end in sight
The nonpartisan Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) places the responsibility for the cost overruns with the Obama administration . The GAO reported that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services undertook the development of Healthcare.gov “ without effective planning or oversight practices. ” The report also found that as the Oct. 1 , 2013 deadline approached , the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services identified “ significant performance issues , but took only limited steps to hold the contractor accountable . ”
In my metaphor , the leaking roof is the website , Healthcare.gov . Unfortunately , Healthcare.gov is a metaphor for the entire Obamacare law .
Supporters of Obamacare are not nearly as confident as they have been in the past , and they have good reason not to be . They touted that if we read the bill , we would know what was in it . They promised health care for people who were not currently receiving it . They also promised that annual health insurance premiums for families would decrease by $ 2,500 .
We have read the bill , and because of unilateral decisions made by the president , we still don ’ t know all that is coming .
We were told that more than 8 million people “ signed up ” for Obamacare in the first enrollment period . The Obama administration ’ s own report on May 1 cast doubt on the validity of that number . The report states that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services did not have comprehensive data about the number of individuals who actually enrolled and paid their first month ’ s premium . As I have said many times , having an insurance card is not the same thing as having health care .
The promised health care has not been forthcoming . Constituents continually tell us that Obamacare , even with subsidies , is more expensive than they can afford . We hear that deductibles and coinsurance have gone up , leaving people with higher out-of-pocket expenses . Finally , we have heard that people have been to the doctor and had a test ordered only to find out that the out-of-pocket expense for the test was too high , and they decided not to have the care that the doctor prescribed . Once again , it ’ s an example of having an insurance card is not the same thing as having health care .
We know the insurance companies who are providing Obamacare in Tennessee have asked for insurance rate hikes of 19 percent for 2015 .
The Obamacare roof is not only leaking , it is collapsing .
That is why Republicans have introduced legislation to replace this terrible law . It ’ s legislation that will provide affordable care for patients , return decision-making to the patient and his doctor , and prevent insurance companies from going back to the practices of cancellations and refusing to insure those with pre-existing conditions . These are ideas we can all get behind .
Marsha Blackburn is a Republican member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Tennessee .