Friday night ’ s surprise decision doesn ’ t require all ACA-created projects and health coverage to immediately cease . | Patrick Sison/AP Photo HEALTH CARE Obamacare ruling delivers new shock to health system The decision could scuttle some of Trump 's own reforms .
Expanded Medicaid for millions . Penalties for poorly performing hospitals . Even the Trump administration 's own plans to lower drug prices .
Those and many other initiatives would all be illegal under a federal judge ’ s sweeping decision that the entire Affordable Care Act must be struck down — the latest shock to the nation ’ s health system after a decade of upheavals , including two fights over the ACA that reached the Supreme Court .
Friday night ’ s surprise decision — the Trump administration had asked U.S. District Court Judge Reed O ’ Connor to wait until after the ACA ’ s open enrollment period ended early Sunday morning — doesn ’ t require all ACA-created projects and health coverage to immediately cease . California Attorney General Xavier Becerra already has vowed to appeal , and administration officials say the law will remain in place while the legal challenges play out .
But the case , seemingly bound for the Supreme Court 's new conservative majority , now threatens to complicate a wide array of policies , from state decisions on Medicaid expansion to HHS Secretary Alex Azar ’ s national health agenda .
The decision ’ s timing also throws another wrench into ACA enrollment , a campaign that was showing signs of new strength after former President Barack Obama and others tried to boost flagging sign-up numbers this week . And it raises new uncertainty for the entire U.S. health care system , as hospitals , doctors and patient groups have increasingly reoriented around the numerous provisions buried within the 2010 health law .
`` The judge got it wrong , ” said Chip Kahn , the head of the Federation of American Hospitals . “ This ruling would have a devastating impact on the patients we serve and the nation ’ s health care system as a whole . ”
Friday night ’ s ruling raises a number of decisions for the White House : Will the government appeal , how quickly and will its agencies continue to enforce the law in the meantime ?
It ’ s not clear what the Trump administration will choose to do , given its legal strategy to date . Career Justice Department lawyers this summer were told to drop their defense of the law — a near-unprecedented decision that led three lawyers to remove their names from the government ’ s brief and prompted the senior attorney , Joel McElvain , to resign .
While some senior officials inside the administration have lobbied to preserve elements of the ACA , President Donald Trump ’ s public jubilation over Friday night ’ s ruling may complicate that outcome .
“ As I predicted all along , Obamacare has been struck down as an UNCONSTITUTIONAL disaster ! ” the president tweeted . “ Great news for America ! ” he added .
The Trump administration bears some responsibility for Friday night ’ s decision because it failed to protect the law in court , said Tim Jost , an emeritus professor at Washington and Lee University School of Law . But , he noted , “ the judgment goes far beyond what they asked for ” by invalidating all of the ACA — including parts that the Trump administration has used to achieve its own goals .
Democratic-led states immediately said they will challenge the decision , ensuring that the court fight stays alive — although it ’ s not clear how quickly they will move .
How will higher courts , including the Supreme Court , view the case ?
The lawsuit was brought by the attorneys general of Texas and other conservative-led states , who are expected to continue the legal fight for years .
But if the case is appealed all the way to the Supreme Court , legal scholars — including Jonathan Adler , a law professor who was the architect of a previous challenge to strike down the ACA — say they ’ re deeply skeptical that the arguments will sway Chief Justice John Roberts or Justice Brett Kavanaugh , the court ’ s newest addition .
“ The states would be lucky to get two votes at SCOTUS , and there 's no way Roberts or Kavanaugh goes along , ” Adler told ███ .
Notably , O ’ Connor ruled on Friday night that the entire ACA should be struck down because the health law ’ s mandate was repealed . That verdict takes direct aim at the majority ruling Roberts wrote in 2012 that the law could stand even though Roberts believed that part was unconstitutional — a decision that is unlikely to endear O ’ Connor ’ s decision to the chief justice .
The Trump administration has increasingly oriented its strategy around using the ACA to test new pilot projects .
“ The biggest things we ’ re going to be launching , coming soon , are going to be these demonstrations that Adam Boehler — our head of the Center for Medicare And Medicaid Innovation — has been working on , ” Azar said on Wednesday . Those projects would involve “ testing new models of how we pay in Medicare for services… and then getting out of the way . ”
Those projects — and Boehler ’ s entire center — would be illegal if Friday night ’ s ruling stands .
The Trump administration also has repeatedly pledged to lower the nation ’ s high drug prices , with the president vowing to “ bring soaring drug prices back down to earth. ” Azar has steadily rolled out a multi-part strategy this year , pushing ideas like changing how Medicare pays for some drugs .
But “ Secretary Azar 's most ambitious plans to lower the price of prescription drugs are only possible because of authority conferred on the department by the ACA , ” said Rachel Sachs , a Washington University in St. Louis law professor . “ Without that power , his ability to deliver what he has promised is severely limited . ”
The White House and its key health agencies issued short , vague statements in the wake of Friday night ’ s ruling — largely because health officials were caught flat-footed by the timing , multiple HHS officials told ███ , speaking on condition of anonymity .
“ There are a few dusty plans in a drawer , but we didn ’ t think a ruling was coming down this week , ” said one official .
Administration officials late Friday indicated it would be business as usual , pending legal appeals .
House Democratic leaders already had planned to immediately file to intervene in the case upon taking control of the chamber in January — a largely symbolic move intended as a signal to voters after health care helped carry the party to victory .
But the latest legal threat to the ACA could be a pressure point to do far more on Obamacare , even as fissures emerge over whether Democrats should focus their energies on preserving the law or fight for universal government health care , which many new House members campaigned on this fall .