On Wednesday , the nine justices of the United States Supreme Court will consider the case of King v. Burwell , concerning the constitutionality of Obamacare , determining the limits of President Obama ’ s executive power and the ability of the president to rewrite laws on his own while ignoring the constitutional duties of the legislative branch of government .
The court ’ s ruling would also impact the health care subsidies some citizens receive in Michigan and in 37 other states .
Before the Supreme Court issues an opinion , responsible state and federal leaders should construct a new health care model . A fresh approach to overhaul and remedy inequalities in America ’ s health care system is overdue . The Affordable Care Act , better known as Obamacare , has been an empty suit and did not live up to the president ’ s promises . Many Americans could not keep their health care plan , paid huge increases to stay on a plan , or could not keep their doctor .
Here is a prescription for health care options after Burwell :
First Principles : Any overhaul of health care should be patient-focused , consumer-driven and should favor the free market over a single-payer system or government-run bureaucracy . To paraphrase a popular ad , when companies compete , the consumer wins .
Eighteen-month “ safe harbor ” hold-harmless period : The potential Supreme Court ruling , concerning bedrock provisions of the U.S. Constitution and excessive use of presidential power , could cause stress for many individuals and families who may not be able to purchase insurance without the subsidies . A “ safe harbor ” provision for a 12- to 18-month period to help people who might lose subsidies would provide sufficient time for the president and Congress , as well as state legislatures , to enact a much-improved health care system that provides insurance to many who are uninsured , deals with pre-existing conditions , expands coverage and also lowers costs .
“ You choose ” option — opt-in , opt-out : Give Americans choice , the opportunity to choose their preferred health care plan . If you prefer Obamacare , then opt-in and keep it . But also guarantee Americans the freedom to purchase other health care options , separate from Obamacare . Former Sen. Phil Gramm refers to this as the “ freedom option ” and he is right . Choice is as American as apple pie , and the federal government ought not to be dictating what health insurance plan Americans can not buy .
End Obamacare mandates and regulations : One example should suffice : repeal the medical device tax . Importantly , this is not just a Republican proposal . It enjoys broad , bipartisan support , including support from Democratic Sens . Al Franken , Elizabeth Warren and Amy Klobuchar .
End tax inequality : It is time to end a health care tax inequality that favors employer-provided health insurance while taxing millions who desire to buy insurance on the individual market . Continue to protect the tax treatment of job providers that offer health plans to their workers , and then extend tax credits to those who buy insurance on their own . The credits should be annual , age-adjusted and class-blind , available for a variety of health coverage options to make it easier for the uninsured to afford coverage .
Encourage the use of Health Savings Accounts : By providing access to Health Savings Accounts , consumers would have greater incentives to control costs and would be able to shop for the best health insurance plan that meets their needs . This can be encouraged through the use of one-time tax credits to get consumers started .
Allow interstate health plan purchases : End “ lockout ” provisions , which prevent consumers from purchasing health care insurance no matter where they live . Americans should be free to purchase health insurance anywhere in the nation . Portability of health care will increase competition and lower costs .
States make better decisions : The individual states should have broad opportunity to offer a diversity of health care insurance options to their citizens , including free-market options of premium subsidies , Health Savings Accounts and direct primary care options , as well as high-deductible plans coupled with other options . Medicaid recipients should be allowed to participate in any private market health plan .
Establish high-risk pools : Federally subsidized , state-managed high-risk pools should be used to cover the costs for those with high-cost health care needs .
Require insurers to cover adult children . Maintain the reform enabling adult children to retain coverage under the health insurance plan of their parents up to age 27 .
Insure pre-existing conditions : No individuals should have his insurance canceled because of a pre-existing condition . All consumers should be given a transition period in which to purchase coverage so that no one is excluded because of his health history .
Some Washington elites are predicting gloom and doom should a majority of the U.S. Supreme Court justices rule against the Obama administration in King v. Burwell . In fact , just the opposite is true . The court case provides policymakers with a moment in time to offer real reforms that expand choice and competition , put the patient first and greatly improve options for health care coverage .
The Affordable Care Act violated the very first principle of medicine : Do no harm . This prescription is better for our health care system , and most importantly , for consumers . As with any prescription , if not administered immediately , the ailment only gets worse .