Former Vice President Joe Biden falsely said at a rally Friday that he found Republican votes to pass the Affordable Care Act during his time in the Obama administration .
“ We need someone with a proven ability to bring people together and do the hard work of getting legislation passed , ” Biden said at a rally in Texas . “ I ’ ve done that before … finding Republican votes for the Recovery Act , Obamacare , helping keep us from falling into a Great Depression . ”
The Affordable Care Act , known as Obamacare , passed on a partisan basis in the Senate , 60–39 , in December 2009 . Every Democrat and two independents voted for it , and all Senate Republicans against . ( RELATED : Justice Department Looks To End Obamacare Completely )
The House passed the Senate bill with a 219–212 vote in 2010 , with 34 Democrats and all 178 Republicans voting against the bill , which became a flash point that ultimately made passing future bipartisan legislation nearly impossible .
Biden reportedly called late Sen. John McCain in 2017 asking that he oppose legislation that would have partially repealed former President Barack Obama ’ s signature legislation . Biden reportedly made an emotional plea , reflecting on his son Beau Biden ’ s death to brain cancer .
McCain died in 2018 of the same cancer that took Beau Biden ’ s life .
Joe Biden ’ s flub Friday comes after the former vice president bawled out a voter in Iowa on Dec. 5 who asked him about his son Hunter Biden ’ s work in Ukraine . The man accused Joe Biden of “ selling access ” to the president through his son ’ s business dealings , which Joe Biden vehemently disputed .
“ You ’ re a damn liar , ” Joe Biden told the man . “ That ’ s not true and nobody has ever said that . ”
Joe Biden also continued his defense of his son , who ’ s personal life and business dealings have come under scrutiny since the impeachment proceedings against President Donald Trump . The former vice president ’ s presidential campaign did not immediately respond to ███ News Foundation ’ s request for comment .