Senate Republicans on Thursday revealed the Better Care Reconciliation Act , their plan to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act .
The bill asks low- and middle-income Americans to spend significantly more for less coverage .
The bill would roll back the Affordable Care Act ’ s expansion of the Medicaid program , which currently covers millions of low-income Americans , and include additional cuts to Medicaid . It would rework the individual market so that enrollees get less financial help to purchase less generous health insurance with higher deductibles .
The Senate bill begins to phase out the Medicaid expansion in 2021 — and cuts the rest of the program ’ s budget too . The Senate bill would end the Affordable Care Act ’ s expansion of Medicaid to millions of low-income Americans . This program has provided coverage to more Americans than the private marketplaces
The Senate bill would end the Affordable Care Act ’ s expansion of Medicaid to millions of low-income Americans . This program has provided coverage to more Americans than the private marketplaces It would also cut the rest of the public insurance program . Better Care would also limit government spending on the rest of the Medicaid program , giving states a set amount to spend per person rather than the insurance program ’ s currently open-ended funding commitment .
Better Care would also limit government spending on the rest of the Medicaid program , giving states a set amount to spend per person rather than the insurance program ’ s currently open-ended funding commitment . The Senate bill provides smaller subsidies for less generous health insurance plans with higher deductibles . The Affordable Care Act provides government help to anyone who earns less than 400 percent of the federal poverty line ( $ 47,550 for an individual or $ 97,200 for a family of four ) . The people who earn the least get the most help . The Senate bill would make those subsidies much smaller for many people , and only provide the money to those earning less than 350 percent of the poverty line ( $ 41,580 for individuals and $ 85,050 for a family of four ) . The Senate bill will tether the size of its tax credits to what it takes to purchase a skimpier health insurance plan than the type of plans Affordable Care Act subsidies were meant to buy . Essentially , these tax credits buy less health insurance .
The Affordable Care Act provides government help to anyone who earns less than 400 percent of the federal poverty line ( $ 47,550 for an individual or $ 97,200 for a family of four ) . The people who earn the least get the most help . The Senate bill would make those subsidies much smaller for many people , and only provide the money to those earning less than 350 percent of the poverty line ( $ 41,580 for individuals and $ 85,050 for a family of four ) . The Senate bill will tether the size of its tax credits to what it takes to purchase a skimpier health insurance plan than the type of plans Affordable Care Act subsidies were meant to buy . Essentially , these tax credits buy less health insurance . The Senate bill seems to allow states to opt out of Obamacare ’ s marketplaces and essential health benefits requirement . A new waiver process would allow states to overhaul their insurance markets , including ending the essential health benefit requirement and specific subsidies that benefit low income Americans , so long as those changes do not increase the deficit .
A new waiver process would allow states to overhaul their insurance markets , including ending the essential health benefit requirement and specific subsidies that benefit low income Americans , so long as those changes do not increase the deficit . The Senate bill repeals the individual mandate — and replaces it with a six-month waiting period . The bill gets rid of the Affordable Care Act ’ s unpopular requirement that nearly all Americans carry health coverage or pay a fine . The most recent version of the proposal includes a six-month waiting period for those who want individual coverage but have had more than a two-month break in coverage in the last year .
The bill gets rid of the Affordable Care Act ’ s unpopular requirement that nearly all Americans carry health coverage or pay a fine . The most recent version of the proposal includes a six-month waiting period for those who want individual coverage but have had more than a two-month break in coverage in the last year . The bill would cut taxes for the wealthy . Obamacare included tax increases that hit wealthy Americans hardest in order to pay for its coverage expansion . The AHCA would get rid of those taxes . Obamacare was one of the biggest redistributions of wealth from the rich to the poor ; the AHCA would reverse that .
Obamacare included tax increases that hit wealthy Americans hardest in order to pay for its coverage expansion . The AHCA would get rid of those taxes . Obamacare was ; the AHCA would reverse that . The Senate bill defunds Planned Parenthood for one year . This would mean Medicaid patients could no longer seek treatment at Planned Parenthood clinics . Experts expect this would result in low-income Americans getting less medical care and having more unintended pregnancies , as access to contraceptives would decline .
This would mean Medicaid patients could no longer seek treatment at Planned Parenthood clinics . Experts expect this would result in low-income Americans getting less medical care and having more unintended pregnancies , as access to contraceptives would decline . All in all , the replacement plan benefits people who are healthy and high-income , and disadvantages those who are sicker and lower-income . The replacement plan would make several changes to what health insurers can charge enrollees who purchase insurance on the individual market , as well as changing what benefits their plans must cover . In aggregate , these changes could be advantageous to younger and healthier enrollees who want skimpier ( and cheaper ) benefit packages . But they could be costly for older and sicker Obamacare enrollees who rely on the law ’ s current requirements , and would be asked to pay more for less generous coverage .
The Senate bill will end Medicaid expansion in 2021 — and cut the rest of the program too
One of the main ways Obamacare increased insurance coverage was by expanding the Medicaid program to cover millions more low-income Americans . Prior to the health law , the entitlement was restricted to specific groups of low-income Americans ( pregnant women , for example , and the blind and disabled ) .
Obamacare opened up the program to anyone below 138 percent of the poverty line ( about $ 15,000 for an individual ) in the 31 states ( plus the District of Columbia ) that opted to participate .
The Medicaid expansion gave states generous funding to cover this particular population . Typically , the federal government picks up about half the cost of the Medicaid program and states cover the rest .
For Medicaid expansion , however , the federal government currently pays 95 percent of the costs — an especially good deal for states meant to assuage their budget concerns during the original Obamacare debate .
The Senate bill would begin ratcheting down that Medicaid expansion funding in 2021 . By 2024 , states would get that same match rate they typically get to cover other populations . In 2021 , for example , the match rate would fall to 90 percent , then decline in steps to 75 percent by 2023 .
The Congressional Budget Office has projected in a separate analysis that this policy change would mean no additional states expand Medicaid — and that some current expansion states would drop out of the program , resulting in millions losing coverage .
“ CBO anticipates some states that have already expanded their Medicaid programs would no longer offer that coverage , ” the agency wrote in its analysis of the House bill , which makes a similar change .
The Senate bill would cut the rest of the Medicaid program too
There are significant changes to Medicaid in the Senate bill outside of the expansion too . This bill would convert Medicaid to a “ per capita cap ” system , where states would get a lump sum from the federal government for each enrollee . Or states would have the opportunity of a block grant — a sum of money untethered from the number of people involved .
This is very different from current Medicaid funding . Right now the federal government has an open-ended commitment to paying all of a Medicaid enrollee ’ s bills , regardless of how high they go .
The Senate bill would set different amounts for different groups of people . It envisions , for example , likely higher payments to cover Medicaid enrollees who are disabled ( and tend to have higher costs ) than Medicaid enrollees who are kids ( generally healthy with lower costs ) .
The rate at which these payments grow is also important . The Senate bill would have the funding growth tethered to the Medical Consumer Price Index plus 1 percentage point through 2025 , and then switch to the urban Consumer Price Index . Analysis of this type of proposal suggests this change would amount to funding cuts for Medicaid , as the program ’ s spending typically goes up faster than these growth rates .
We do not know exactly how much this bill would cut the Medicaid program because we are still waiting on an analysis from the CBO , which is expected to be released early next week .
███-mark Sign up for the newsletter VoxCare Email ( required ) Zip Code By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the data transfer policy . For more newsletters , check out our newsletters page Subscribe
The Senate bill would cut the subsidies for people on the individual market
The Affordable Care Act provides financial help to low- and middle-income Americans who purchase their own health coverage . It provides subsidies to people who earn less than 400 percent of the federal poverty line ( $ 47,550 for an individual or $ 97,200 for a family of four ) and gives the most generous help to people who earn the least .
For example : People who earn $ 17,000 are only expected to spend 3 percent of their income on premiums for a midlevel insurance plan — the government will kick in the rest . People who earn $ 40,000 , however , are expected to spend 9.66 percent of their income on those monthly payments .
The Senate bill would overhaul these tax credits . It would make fewer people eligible for the help , limiting the subsidies to people who earn less than 350 percent of the poverty line ( $ 41,580 for individuals and $ 85,050 for a family of four ) .
It would also allow people who earn less than the poverty line to qualify for tax credits ; the Affordable Care Act makes those people ineligible for the subsidies because they were expected to receive coverage through the Medicaid expansion .
This became problematic , however , when the Supreme Court ruled that the Medicaid expansion had to be optional and 19 states decided not to adopt it . So this change would be an improvement for low-income Americans who live in places like Texas and Florida , which did not expand the program . They currently have access to no subsidies under the Affordable Care Act .
It would also change the definition of what counts as “ affordable ” health insurance to amount for a greater chunk of Obamacare enrollees ’ income . Right now the Affordable Care Act counts health insurance as “ affordable ” if it costs less than 9.7 percent of an individual ’ s income ( and a lower amount for lower-income Americans ) . You can see the table here :
The Senate bill would raise the amount individuals are expected to kick into their health plans for people who are low to middle income . A 60-year-old who earns $ 35,640 ( 300 percent of the poverty line ) would be expected to spend 16.2 percent of her income ( $ 5,773 ) before she gets any help from the government . You can see the chart that spells this out here :
Under the Affordable Care Act , she would only be expected to spend $ 3,442 .
The Senate would subsidize less generous insurance . Under the health care law , the size of the tax credit is tethered to how much it costs to buy a midlevel health plan . The Affordable Care Act defines “ midlevel ” as a plan that , on average , covers 70 percent of enrollees ’ costs . In insurance terms , this number is known as the “ actuarial value , ” and it ’ s used to give a sense of how much the typical enrollee pays out of pocket for coverage .
The Senate bill would tether its tax credits to less generous health insurance . Specifically , it would provide subsidies that make a plan with a 58 percent actuarial value ( meaning , on average , it covers 58 percent of enrollees ’ costs ) affordable .
This means that the plans people could afford under the Senate bill would likely have more copays and higher deductibles as a way to bump up the amount enrollees have to chip in for their own coverage . Someone who has earnings right around the poverty line ( about $ 12,000 ) would still be expected to spend 2 percent of her income on premiums . But in return , she ’ d get a health plan that covers less than what she gets under the Affordable Care Act .
The Senate bill would also bar Americans from using their tax credits to purchase a health plan that covers abortion . This requirement would take effect immediately , while other changes would not phase in until 2020 .
The Senate bill allows states to opt-out of big Obamacare provisions , like the requirement to cover essential health benefits , through a re-vamped waiver process
The Senate bill overhauls a section of the Affordable Care Act that allows states to experiment with different ways to provide health insurance coverage . Under current law , states are allowed to propose different ways to deliver health insurance so long as the new plans “ provide coverage that is at least as comprehensive as the coverage ” defined under the ACA ” and “ cover at least a comparable number of residents. ” In other words : as long as states can cover the same number of people with a similar plan , they ’ re allowed to experiment with things such as single-payer health care .
The Senate bill would allow states to seek waiver from key Obamacare requirements , things like the essential health benefits package , which requires health plans to cover key services like maternity care and prescription drugs . But the Senate bill would not require these new plans to cover as many people or provide comparable plans . It eliminates those requirements , and says states can get waivers as long as they don ’ t increase the deficit .
You can see the language that gets removed in this helpful tweet :
So this bill aims to totally gut 1332 coverage protections . pic.twitter.com/jcTgDGoEpH — Adrianna McIntyre ( @ onceuponA ) June 22 , 2017
Under these requirements , a state could ask for a waiver to allow insurers to longer cover things like maternity care or mental health services — two things that individual plans often left out before the Affordable Care Act mandates . They would not be bound by the current Affordable Care Act requirement that coverage under these waivers be just as generous as the standard plans .
The Senate bill eliminates the individual mandate — and replaces it with a six-month waiting period to penalize the uninsured
One of the Affordable Care Act ’ s least popular provisions was the requirement that nearly all Americans carry health insurance coverage or pay a fine . The reason this mandate existed was to convince healthy people to buy health insurance , which would hold down premiums for everyone else .
The Senate would eliminate the individual mandate by setting the penalty for not carrying health insurance to zero dollars . They can ’ t completely wipe it off the books due to the complex rules of the budget reconciliation process , but this would have the same effect .
The Senate bill replaces the individual mandate with a six-month waiting period for those who fail to maintain continuous health insurance coverage . Specifically , this means that those with a break in coverage longer than 63 days would have to wait at least six months from the date they file an application for health coverage to enroll in a plan . This is on top of the health care law ’ s open enrollment periods , which would still exist under the Senate plan .
The six-month waiting period fills a big policy gap in the first draft of the Better Care Reconciliation Act , which required health plans to accept all patients — but didn ’ t require all Americans to purchase coverage , as the Affordable Care Act does . Experts expected that this would cause a death spiral , where only the sickest patients purchase coverage and premiums skyrocket .
The new six-month waiting period aims to fix that problem . It is meant to nudge healthy people into purchasing coverage because they may fear the consequences of getting locked out of the market down the road .
The Senate bill repeals a long list of Obamacare taxes
The Senate bill will eliminate many of the taxes that financed the Affordable Care Act ’ s insurance expansion . It includes the repeal of :
A tax on the wealthy to finance the Medicare program
Many of these tax changes would , as my colleagues have previously written , disproportionately benefit high-income Americans .
“ The typical American , in short , isn ’ t going to see any money from these tax cuts , ” Matt Yglesias has written . “ But when you take all that money out of the system , something has to give . And in the case of the various iterations of Affordable Care Act repeal , the thing that gives is the quality of health insurance provided to Americans with below-average incomes or above-average health needs . ”
Are you an Obamacare enrollee interested in what happens next ? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates .
The Senate health bill : poor people pay more for worse insurance