( CNN ) Republican leadership 's first effort to sell an Obamacare replacement plan has given rise to an unusual consensus in Washington . Officials on both sides of the aisle -- including disparate factions within parties -- and influential outside groups seem to be in agreement : the bill in its current form will never make it to the White House .
President Donald Trump on Tuesday nodded to the long road ahead .
`` Our wonderful new Healthcare Bill is now out for review and negotiation , '' he tweeted , while also calling Obamacare `` a complete and total disaster . ''
Our wonderful new Healthcare Bill is now out for review and negotiation . ObamaCare is a complete and total disaster - is imploding fast !
The early reviews suggest those negotiations might be even more contentious than many expected . That Democrats would be united in their opposition was a given -- and an afterthought . The party is almost completely powerless on Capitol Hill , where much of action will happen through the simple majority budget process . But the GOP rank-and-file and its orbit of donors and think tanks will have their say . And so far , they 're saying the bill is `` dead on arrival . ''
The House Freedom Caucus and Senate allies say it 's Obamacare lite
JUST WATCHED Paul : United in repeal , divided on replacement Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Paul : United in repeal , divided on replacement 02:01
The most vocal opposition to date has come from the tea party and its descendants in the House . Many of them campaigned on promises of `` full repeal . '' But the bill on the table right now is closer to a restructuring , then eliminating Obamacare .
Though it would scrap the current mandate , the new proposal includes an inducement to stay insured , in the form of a 30 % surcharge on a year 's premium , for anyone who allows their coverage to lapse or drops it , then seeks to re-enter the market . Conservatives also view the prospect of a refundable tax credit to help pay for insurance as another `` entitlement , '' or government spending program .
In an interview on Monday , Ohio Rep. Jim Jordan , a former Freedom Caucus chairman told CNN 's Lauren Fox that the new plan is `` in many ways is Obamacare by just a different format . '' Jordan and his colleagues are pushing a separate proposal that does n't figure to get much attention from party leaders .
Michigan Rep. Justin Amash said about the same on Monday night , tweeting that the replacement bill amounted to `` Obamacare 2.0 . ''
Freedom Caucus Chairman Mark Meadows began to share his concerns last week , before the plan went public , tweeting , `` Every tax , every mandate , every regulation of # Obamacare needs to go . ''
On Monday , he published an op-ed with Sen. Rand Paul calling on GOP leadership to `` move forward with a 'clean ' repeal , '' effectively detaching the debate over a replacement bill from a vote to strike down Obamacare .
Paul on Tuesday unleashed a string of complaints , doubling down on his assertion that the plan is not fundamentally different from the current law , but `` Obamacare Lite . ''
`` It keeps Obamacare subsidies , '' he tweeted , `` but renames them 'refundable credits . ' ''
It keeps Obamacare subsidies but renames them `` refundable credits . '' — Senator Rand Paul ( @ RandPaul ) March 7 , 2017
A larger group of House fiscal conservatives , the Republican Study Committee , has similar misgivings . In a staff memo obtained from a GOP source , the RSC cites among its `` major concerns '' the creation of a `` Republican welfare entitlement '' in the form of the proposed refundable tax credits .
`` Writing checks to individuals to purchase insurance is , in principle , Obamacare , '' the memo says
The pressure is not coming exclusively from Democrats and the Republican right . A group of four more moderate Republican senators wrote a letter to Majority Mitch McConnell on Monday expressing their concern over potential cuts to Medicaid , which would be targeted for a broad overhaul .
Obamacare 's expanded federal funding would be phased out and the states would eventually receive a fixed amount of money for each enrollee in the broader program , allotted per recipient . Cost overruns would be footed by the states , which would , experts say , likely be forced to reduce eligibility and benefits .
JUST WATCHED Republicans divided over Obamacare replacement Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Republicans divided over Obamacare replacement 02:14
In their message to McConnell , GOP Sens . Rob Portman , Shelley Moore Capito , Cory Gardner and Lisa Murkowski , expressed worry that the plan would not adequately protect those covered by Medicaid expansion .
`` We are concerned that any poorly implemented or poorly timed change in the current funding structure in Medicaid could result in a reduction in access to life-saving health care services , '' they wrote . `` The Medicaid population includes a wide range of beneficiaries , many of which cycle on and off Medicaid due to frequent changes in income , family situations , and living environments . ''
The letter was noteworthy for another , more pragmatic reason : four Republican votes against the bill , along with a united Democratic opposition , would be more than enough to sink it .
Outside groups and big dollar donors are getting ready to fight on TV
Many of the groups , think tanks and donors that helped bolster the GOP congressional majority are now openly at odds with the leadership .
FreedomWorks , a conservative group that provided early support to the tea party , has called the bill 's `` surcharge '' on people who let their coverage lapse a `` Republican Individual Mandate . ''
They announced on Tuesday evening plans to spend `` well into six figures '' on a `` digital and social media ad campaign to mobilize conservatives in key districts and nationwide to contact their legislators and tell them to oppose ObamaCare Lite . ''
Section 133 of @ HouseCommerce version of leadership 's # ObamaCare bill contains the Republican Individual Mandate . — FreedomWorks ( @ FreedomWorks ) March 6 , 2017
The Koch Brothers-backed Americans for Prosperity tweeted a message for Speaker Paul Ryan : `` Our advice : Take it back to the drawing board . ''
Our advice : take it back to the drawing board . https : //t.co/DaSOkRaQsa — AFP ( @ AFPhq ) March 5 , 2017
In a letter to Ryan , and the architects of the plan , Reps. Kevin Brady and Greg Walden , AFP and Freedom Partners said on Tuesday that `` as the bill stands today , it is Obamacare 2.0 ''
`` We urge you to keep your promise , '' they write , `` reject the House bill , and pass the full Obamacare repeal that Americans deserve . ''
JUST WATCHED McConnell : Americans expect Obamacare repeal Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH McConnell : Americans expect Obamacare repeal 01:10
Also on Tuesday , The Heritage Foundation tweeted that `` the House Republican health care bill falls short of the Obamacare repeal that Republicans have long promised . ''
And in a statement , Heritage Action CEO Michael Needham argued that the plan is so similar to Obamcare that it effectively enshrines its principles .
`` In many ways , the House Republican proposal released last night not only accepts the flawed progressive premises of Obamacare but expands upon them , '' Needham said , then joining the chorus asking to divide the replacement process from the repeal .
`` Rather than accept the flawed premises of Obamacare , '' he continued , `` congressional Republicans should fully repeal the failed law and begin a genuine effort to deliver on longstanding campaign promises that create a free market health care system that empowers patients and doctors . ''
JUST WATCHED Tom Price avoids making Obama-era promises Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Tom Price avoids making Obama-era promises 01:00
Health and Human Services Sec . Tom Price , a former Georgia congressman who has long sought to upend Obamacare , kicked off the White House press briefing on Tuesday by calling the bill `` a work in progress , '' indicating that the administration was open to edits from Capitol Hill .
Press Secretary Sean Spicer passed on a chance to call the plan Trump 's , saying , `` We 're not jamming it down anyone 's throats . ''
And Vice President Mike Pence , who met on Tuesday with Republican senators , told reporters that Trump `` supports '' the bill , describing it as a `` framework for reform . ''
JUST WATCHED Pence : If you like your Obamacare , keep it Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Pence : If you like your Obamacare , keep it 01:19
The White House will be the final hurdle for Republicans , who have spent years agitating to undo Obamacare .
`` We 're going to have insurance for everybody , '' Trump told the Washington Post in January , promising the new product would arrive `` in a much simplified form . Much less expensive and much better . ''
How those pledges mesh -- or do n't -- with the congressional GOP 's final product could decide the fate of Obamacare and the officials dedicated to seeing it torn down .