The dispute has huge practical implications . The Congressional Budget Office predicts that 23 million uninsured people will gain coverage through exchanges and that all but five million of them will qualify for subsidies , averaging more than $ 6,000 a year per person . Subsidies , in the form of tax credits , will be available to people with incomes from the poverty level up to four times that amount ( $ 23,050 to $ 92,200 for a family of four ) .
Some supporters of the law say Congress may have made a mistake in drafting this section . But , they add , the intent of Congress is clear : subsidies should be available in federal as well as state exchanges .
The law says that subsidies will be provided to residents of a state to help defray the cost of health plans offered “ through an exchange established by the state . ”
A rule issued by the Obama administration allows tax credits for insurance bought in either a state or a federal exchange .
Political brawling over health care will continue this week on Capitol Hill . The House plans to vote on a Republican measure to repeal the 2010 health care law , Mr. Obama ’ s most significant legislative achievement . Democrats , who control the Senate , say repeal efforts have no chance of success there .
Representative Phil Roe , Republican of Tennessee , said the rule on premium subsidies “ contradicts the explicit statutory language ” of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act . Mr. Roe and another Tennessee Republican , Scott DesJarlais , have introduced a bill to nullify the rule , issued by the Internal Revenue Service .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
Douglas H. Shulman , the I.R.S . commissioner , defended the rule as consistent with the intent of Congress . “ The statute , ” he said , “ includes language that indicates that individuals are eligible for tax credits whether they are enrolled through a state-based exchange or a federally facilitated exchange . ”
However , Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah , the senior Republican on the Senate Finance Committee , said the Obama administration was usurping the role of Congress and rewriting the law to provide tax credits through federal exchanges .
White House officials have repeatedly underestimated opposition to the health care law . They predicted that public support for the law would grow as people learned more about it . They minimized lawsuits challenging the constitutionality of the requirement for most Americans to carry health insurance . They predicted that states would embrace the opportunity to insure more of their residents by expanding Medicaid and creating insurance exchanges , but a number of states have balked .
James F. Blumstein , a professor of constitutional and health law at Vanderbilt University , said the dispute over subsidies involved a serious legal issue .
“ The language of the statute is explicit , ” Mr. Blumstein said . “ Subsidies accrue to people who obtain coverage through state-run exchanges . The I.R.S . tries to get around that by providing subsidies for all insurance exchanges . That interpretation will almost certainly be challenged by someone . ”
The most likely challenger , Mr. Blumstein said , is an employer penalized because one or more of its employees receive subsidies through a federal exchange . Employers may be subject to financial penalties if they offer no coverage or inadequate coverage and at least one of their full-time employees receives subsidies .
Michael F. Cannon , director of health policy studies at the libertarian Cato Institute , said the link between subsidies and penalties was a crucial part of the law .
“ Those tax credits trigger the penalties against employers , ” Mr. Cannon said . If workers can not receive subsidies in states with a federal exchange , their employers can not be penalized , he said . That , in turn , would hobble federal efforts to get employers to offer coverage in those states , Mr. Cannon said .
Prof. Timothy S. Jost , an expert on health law at Washington and Lee University , said Congress had made “ a drafting error ” that should be obvious to anyone who understands the new health care law .
“ There is no coherent policy reason why Congress would have refused premium tax credits to the citizens of states that end up with a federal exchange , ” said Mr. Jost , who supports the law .