The uninsured rate among low- and middle-income LGBT Americans fell by a quarter last year , from 34 percent in 2013 to 26 percent in 2014 . Declines were biggest among those with the lowest incomes , many of whom qualified for large subsidies to buy private coverage . LGBT communities still have higher uninsured rates than the general population .
The uninsured rate among low- and middle-income LGBT Americans has fallen by a quarter since the Affordable Care Act took effect , a new report from the Center for American Progress shows .
The CAP report relies on two surveys of LGBT Americans who earn less than 400 percent of the poverty line ( about $ 44,000 for an individual ) . This is the cut-off for any financial help buying insurance coverage under Obamacare . And it finds that , between 2013 and 2014 , their uninsured rate fell from 34 to 26 percent .
The decline has been slightly faster than the drop among the general population , where the uninsured rate fell by by about a quarter .
The gains were particularly large among lower income groups , which were eligible for bigger insurance subsidies or the Medicaid expansion . The uninsured rate for LGBT individuals earning between 139 and 200 percent of the poverty line ( about $ 15,000 to $ 22,000 for an individual ) , fell by 18 percentage points .
This is the group that gets the most generous subsidies to buy private insurance . The health care law limits their contribution to monthly premiums to no more than 6 percent of their income .
The CAP survey shows that 26 percent of LGBT Americans under 400 percent of the poverty line are uninsured . Among the general population the number is 20 percent .
LGBT people can face unique obstacles gaining coverage . There 's no federal law , for example , that requires all companies to offer health benefits to their employees ' same-sex partners . And the CAP report argues that some individuals could miss out on coverage , too , as `` anti-LGBT bias in hiring [ may ] push many LGBT people into unemployment or low-wage jobs that do not offer benefits such as health insurance coverage . ''
As a result , only 38 percent of LGBT people under 400 percent of the poverty line have an offer of insurance through either their own or their spouse 's employer . Among the general population , that number stands at 58 percent .
And even within the LGBT community , there 's widespread disparities in coverage rates . Gay and bisexual individuals have higher insured rates than lesbian women . And the uninsured rate among transgender populations is especially high . CAP 's data suggests that it 's come down significantly under the Affordable Care Act , although their report cautions that the 2013 survey only included a smaller number of transgender individuals .
Correction : An initial version of this story misstated the size of the decline of the uninsured rate for LGBT people . It is 24 percent .