The Trump administration is now confronted with the challenge of deciding how to oversee ObamaCare , a law it fiercely opposes but that is still on the books .
With the Senate ’ s failure to repeal the healthcare law last month , the Trump administration now has pressing questions to answer about how it will manage a system that provides insurance to more than 10 million people .
President Trump has threatened to cancel key ObamaCare payments to insurers as part of an effort to make the law “ implode. ” But he is yet to follow through on that threat , leaving insurers in a state of uncertainty .
The next sign-up period for enrolling in ObamaCare begins Nov. 1 . The Obama administration ran advertisements to encourage enrollment , but Trump officials have signaled that promotion effort might come to an end .
Indeed , the Trump administration canceled some ObamaCare ads upon taking office in January , which was the end of the last sign-up period .
Trump officials also have the power to loosen up on enforcement and regulation , particularly on the individual mandate under the healthcare law for people to have coverage .
The difficulty for the White House is that Trump , and by extension congressional Republicans , could be blamed if ObamaCare premiums spike or the marketplaces start to collapse .
The Trump administration has sent mixed signals about whether it will seek to actively undermine ObamaCare .
Trump tweeted after the Senate ’ s failed vote : “ As I said from the beginning , let ObamaCare implode , then deal . Watch ! ”
But Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price Thomas ( Tom ) Edmunds PriceThe Hill 's Campaign Report : Impeachment fight poses risks to both Trump , Dems Overnight Health Care — Presented by Better Medicare Alliance — More than 800 cases of vaping illnesses reported to CDC | House panel asks e-cigarette companies to stop advertising | Senate Dems to force vote on Trump health care rule Price throws name in ring for Georgia Senate appointment MORE , asked about those comments on ABC ’ s “ This Week , ” declined to reiterate the goal of letting the law implode .
Price said Trump ’ s “ implode ” remark simply “ punctuates the concern that he has about getting this moved in the right direction . ”
On NBC , Price added that he had a duty to uphold ObamaCare . “ Our responsibility is to follow the law , ” Price said . “ And again , we take that responsibility seriously and we will continue to do so . But remember that the current law right now is failing the American people . ”
For those involved in providing ObamaCare coverage , the conflicting messages from the administration are a source of frustration .
“ The biggest challenge that we have right now is the unknown , because this is the first enrollment season with the new administration , ” said Shelli Quenga , director of programs at the Palmetto Project in South Carolina , one of the “ navigator ” organizations across the country that help people enroll in ObamaCare coverage .
Quenga said she is worried there will not be advertising from the administration to make people aware of the sign-up period .
Despite the uncertainty , much of the routine work on ObamaCare at the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) is proceeding as normal .
Career officials traveled to a conference of navigators in Baltimore in June to coordinate on strategy for signing people up . And HHS recently issued its yearly online training for navigators , which Quenga said is “ better than it has been in previous years ” because there are now more enrollment periods under the belt .
But there are limits to what career officials can do without the sign-off of the political leadership .
The Obama administration , for example , pushed last year to recruit an insurer to offer coverage in an Arizona county that was at risk of having zero providers operating in it .
This year , the risk of “ bare counties ” with no insurers is spreading to more places , with several states facing the possibility of having rural counties without any ObamaCare options next year .
Washington state averted that risk in June by finding insurers to fill in its empty counties .
But the state insurance commissioner , Mike Kreidler , said that the Trump administration was “ pretty much absent ” from that effort to fill the counties .
Kreidler said career officials at HHS “ help cheer you on , but there ’ s very little they can wind up doing ” without the support of the political appointees opposed to ObamaCare .
Insurers and many healthcare experts say that the biggest source of instability is Trump ’ s threat to end the payments to insurers , known as cost-sharing reductions ( CSRs ) . Those payments reimburse insurers for providing discounted insurance to low-income ObamaCare enrollees .
Insurers would need to spike premiums to make up for the lost money if the payments were canceled , and the uncertainty about receiving the payments has already caused premium increases for 2018 .
Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina , for example , has proposed a 22.9 percent premium increase for next year , but it says it only would have proposed an 8.8 percent increase if it knew the CSR payments would continue .
Price also left the door open to waiving enforcement of the mandate to have coverage , which is another worry for insurers , who fear that only sick people would then remain in the market , causing premium increases .
“ All things are on the table to try to help patients , ” Price told ABC when asked about waiving the mandate .
The conservative group Freedom Partners is pushing Price to make it easier for states to apply for waivers for ObamaCare regulations , though it did not echo calls for letting the law implode .
“ The Secretary has within his abilities to do a bunch of things that ultimately won ’ t get rid of ObamaCare but will start to provide some of the relief that people expect , ” said Nathan Nascimento , the vice president of policy at Freedom Partners .
Yet administrative actions to increase flexibility under ObamaCare would be a significant step down from Congress repealing the law . In fact , some in Congress are now discussing a bipartisan fix to shore up the stability of ObamaCare markets , in part by guaranteeing CSR payments .
Price himself used the word “ fix ” in an appearance on Fox News on Wednesday .
“ Both folks in the House and the Senate , on both sides of the aisle frankly , have said that ObamaCare doesn ’ t work and it needs to be either repealed or fixed , ” he said .