The story of health-care policy this week , this month , and for the last decade ( at least ) has been a tale of partisan folly . But fear not , this isn ’ t another earnest pundit ’ s lament for the vital center to emerge , phoenix-like , to form a governing coalition of moderates in both parties . That ’ s not my bag .
After all , I have always argued that bipartisanship is overrated .
Bipartisan support often means unthinking support ( as the Founders could have told you ) . Partisans may be annoying from time to time , but they also can be relied upon to point out the shortcomings of what the other side is doing . When partisan criticism is missing , it might be a sign that politicians in both parties are helping themselves , not the country . Or , it might mean they ’ re pandering to the passions of the public and press rather than doing the hard work of thinking things through .
So you ’ ll get no warm and fuzzy pleading for moderates to scrub clean the word “ compromise ” so that it ’ s no longer a dirty word in Washington . Others can make the case for that . And besides , that argument misses the essence of this spectacular failure . Honest partisanship isn ’ t the problem , bipartisan dishonesty is .
Both parties have become defined by their lies and their refusal to accept reality . It ’ s a problem bigger than health care , but health care is probably the best illustration of it .
For seven years Republicans campaigned to repeal Obamacare . We now know that for many of those politicians , that pledge was a sales pitch that expired after the sale — i.e. , the election — was final .
But before liberal readers pull a muscle nodding their heads : The Democrats aren ’ t any better . Obamacare itself was lied into passage . “ You can keep your plan ! ” “ You can keep your doctor ! ” “ Your premiums won ’ t go up ! ” These were lies . If those promises were remotely true , Obamacare wouldn ’ t be the mess it is .
But these aren ’ t even the lies I have in mind .
The Republican “ repeal and replace ” bills debated for the last six months did not in fact repeal Obamacare . They kept most of its regulations intact — particularly the popular ones . The GOP did seek to repeal and reform the Medicaid expansion under Obamacare , but that ’ s not the same thing as repealing Obamacare .
Yet Republicans insisted it was a repeal because they wanted to claim that they fulfilled their repeal pledge . Actually fulfilling the substance of the pledge was a low-order priority . Heroically winning the talking point : This was their brass ring .
So , too , for the White House . Donald Trump just wanted a win . He has made it abundantly clear that he would sign anything the Republicans sent him — up to and possibly including the head of Alfredo Garcia if someone had written “ Obamacare : Repealed ” on the poor chap ’ s forehead . Trump has shown zero preference for any specific policy or approach during these debates . He just wants the bragging rights .
And that is the one thing Democrats are most determined to deny him . The Democrats know that Obamacare has been an albatross for their party . They often acknowledge , through gritted teeth , that the law needs a substantial overhaul .
This was all about bogus gasconade and rodomontade for Republicans and insecure rhetorical wagon-circling around Barack Obama ’ s “ legacy ” for Democrats .
More important , they also know that the GOP wasn ’ t pushing an actual repeal . But they couldn ’ t tolerate for a moment the idea that the Republicans would get to claim it was repeal . So the one thing both sides could agree upon was that this was a zero-sum war over repealing Obamacare — when it wasn ’ t .
This was all about bogus gasconade and rodomontade for Republicans and insecure rhetorical wagon-circling around Barack Obama ’ s “ legacy ” for Democrats . If Trump and the GOP agreed to abandon “ repeal , ” as Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer wants , one can only wonder how much replacing of Obamacare Schumer would allow the GOP to get away with .
Likewise , if Democrats could somehow give Republicans the ability to say they repealed Obamacare , many Republican senators — and certainly Trump — would probably be happy to leave the bulk of it intact .
It is this fact that makes the polarized , tribal climate in Washington so frustrating . I like partisan fights when those fights are about something real . The Medicaid fight was at least about something real . But most of this nonsense is a battle of liars trying to protect past lies in the hope of being able to make new lies seem just plausible enough for the liars to keep repeating them .