The warnings about ObamaCare from Big Labor and other critics may be coming true , as more evidence surfaces that President Obama ’ s health care overhaul is causing employers to prepare to push people into part-time work to avoid additional costs tied to the law .
The Affordable Care Act requires mid-sized and large employers to sponsor health insurance for all full-time employees , which it defines as those who work 30 hours a week or more . Big labor unions , which had been in favor of the new law , are now sounding the alarm against it . They argue the sticker shock from the premium hikes is leading businesses to offset the impact by capping hours on employees , despite a recently announced one-year delay in that insurance mandate . If workers don ’ t clock 30 hours a week , the reasoning goes , employers wo n't have to offer health insurance .
This sets a dangerous precedent that could affect millions of families across the United States , analysts say . But so far , the White House has brushed off the concerns , saying there are no hard numbers to back up the claims that there will be collateral damage from ObamaCare .
“ We are seeing no systematic evidence that the Affordable Care Act is having an adverse impact on job growth or the number of hours employees are working , ” Jason Furman , chairman of Obama ’ s Council of Economic Advisers , said .
While there may not be an official accounting of companies that are cutting , United Food and Commercial Workers Union President Joseph Hansen says it ’ s only a matter of time .
“ Wait a year , ” he said in a recent written statement . “ You ’ ll see tremendous impact as workers have their hours reduced and their incomes reduced . The facts are already starting to show up . ”
American Enterprise Institute researcher Christopher Conover argues that a review of the anecdotal evidence available leads to one conclusion . “ ObamaCare is accelerating a disturbing trend towards a nation of part-timers , ” he wrote in an analysis .
Three key groups that will be hit hardest are unions , school workers and local government workers .
Recently , Pennsylvania , North Carolina and Indiana have joined the growing group of states ready to cut their school workers to part-time status , Fox Business Network reports . That means hundreds of teacher aides , bus drivers and cafeteria workers are expected to lose hours . In California , Texas and Michigan , government workers including parks and recreation officials , librarians and secretaries could also have their hours -- and benefits – slashed .
Fast-food CEOs at Subway and Papa John ’ s say they are already feeling the sting from the health care overhaul .
Papa John 's CEO says his employees may face reduced hours if ObamaCare is fully implemented . While John Schnatter has said more Americans having health insurance under ObamaCare is a good , he estimates the change will cost Papa John 's $ 5 million to $ 8 million annually . Since only full-time employees working 30 hours or more must be covered under the new law , he said he expects franchise owners will be forced to cut employees ' hours because they ca n't afford the costs of health insurance plans .
`` That 's probably what 's going to happen , '' he told a group of reporters at Edison State College 's Collier County campus in Florida . `` It 's common sense . That 's what I call lose-lose . ''
NBC News recently conducted an informal survey of roughly 20 businesses and found that they were cutting workers to 29 hours a week because of the health care law .
Not everyone is buying the critics ' claims . A recent Bloomberg analysis claims Conover ’ s method is shaky . It also claims the Bureau of Labor Statistics household survey data that he used is “ far too volatile to draw reliable conclusions from small samples . ”
“ I think the 30-hour rule in ObamaCare is bad public policy that will eventually hurt full-time work , as do Conover and Graham , ” Evan Soltas wrote . “ In fact , I ’ d like to get rid of the employer mandate entirely . But I also believe in thorough , objective use of data . And they show no evidence of a part-time surge yet . ”