Drugs originally developed to treat diseases ranging from diabetes to alcoholism may have applications in cancer treatment , according to a new study . Researchers tested thousands of existing medications , many of which have already been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for treating diseases other than cancer , against hundreds of different human cancer cell lines in the lab . The study revealed dozens of newly identified cancer-killing compounds .
Lead author Steven Corsello practices oncology at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and researches new cancer drug development at the Broad Institute of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University . He says he regularly treats patients with chemotherapy medications , many of which were developed decades ago . “ I deeply appreciate the need for improved and better-tailored cancer therapy , ” he says . But new drug development is costly and time-consuming—often requiring years of painstaking research—and potential treatments rarely progress beyond the lab . Even when a medication makes it to clinical trials , it must undergo years of safety testing . And many of those that kill cancer efficiently are also so toxic to test subjects that they are never approved .
Because of those limitations , the field of repurposing existing drugs is “ really coming to the forefront , ” says Jonathan Sexton , a medicinal chemist , who directs the University of Michigan ’ s Center for Drug Repurposing and was not involved in the study . “ We ’ re notoriously very bad at predicting what [ compounds ] are going to be most efficacious against specific cancers , which is why there is a huge attrition rate [ for drugs ] in clinical trials for cancer , ” he says . This situation has produced a wealth of medications that may not work for one type of cancer but could work for another type . And as libraries of these compounds continue to grow , Sexton says , a veritable pharmacopeia of treatments is becoming available . “ That is where we ’ re really leveraging our exposure , ” he says .
At the Broad Institute , Corsello and his colleagues investigate how drugs affect gene expression—the degree to which genes are turned on or off—to determine whether the compounds have potential applications in cancer treatment . The institute developed a library of more than 1.5 million gene expression profiles from thousands of potential drug molecules , called the Connectivity Map , to guide the search . “ In the course of that research , I realized that we were missing many drugs , ” including ones that the FDA has already approved for other uses , Corsello says . With that in mind , he and his colleagues at the Broad Institute launched the Drug Repurposing Hub ( DRH ) in 2017 to test existing drugs against various disease models . That open-access library , which researchers anywhere can use for free , now includes more than 6,000 drugs—ranging from aspirin to Zantac—originally developed for other applications .
Rong Xu , a medical bioinformaticist at Case Western Reserve University , who was not involved in the study , says that for “ dry ” labs—which use computer-generated models to investigate new drug applications—libraries such as the DRH are invaluable . “ We ’ ll use this as a starting point and correlate and also integrate these data sets with what we know about disease genetics ” to design computer algorithms that can identify potential treatment avenues , Xu says .
In the new study , published Monday in Nature Cancer , Corsello and his colleagues systematically tested 4,518 compounds from the DRH ( of which 3,350 are already approved for use in the U.S. or Europe ) against 578 cancer cell lines . Most were developed to treat diseases other than cancer ; about a quarter were originally developed for cancer . Using a molecular bar-coding method to keep track of the vast array of cancer cell lines , which employs short sequences of DNA as “ bar codes , ” the researchers were able to test multiple cancer cell types simultaneously in each Petri dish , speeding the process considerably . In total , the team identified nearly 50 compounds that killed cancer cells and left other cells unscathed .
The researchers found 11 different drugs that trigger the same cancer-killing mechanism . These included one previously approved to treat essential thrombocytosis—a blood disorder—as well as progesterone medications . The drugs all appear to work by inducing an interaction between two proteins : PDE3A , which plays a role in regulating blood pressure , and SLFN12 , whose role is not well understood . ( In contrast , many existing cancer treatments merely inhibit enzymes . ) Corsello says the interaction is “ an attractive target ” for developing new therapies . “ The drugs we found are a nice starting point to do that , ” he adds .
Once a drug shows selective anticancer effects , the next step is to find out how it works . Corsello says the team does so by looking at “ everything that ’ s known ” about the cancer cell lines the drug kills . He lists a battery of genomic features the researchers analyze to determine where and how the killing blow lands , including gene expression , mutation and the number of copies of the gene in the genotype . “ Then , using predictive modeling approaches , [ we ] determine predictive biomarkers of response to each of these therapies , ” he says .
Of course , not all of these medications will turn out to work against cancer in humans . Predictive biomarkers can indicate how effective a treatment will be against a particular type of cancer cell line in the lab or how well it can treat a patient in the clinic . “ We prioritized drugs for follow-up that had selective [ anticancer ] activity and drugs that had predictive biomarkers from these cell line features , ” Corsello says . Medications that can predictably kill certain cancer cells could eventually be tested in patients and predict individuals who could benefit from those treatments .
Corsello says that the research team plans to add 300 new cancer cell lines and 300 drug compounds to the library . “ I think there ’ s still a lot that remains to be learned and discovered from this data , ” Corsello says . By using technologies such as CRISPR gene editing and screening , “ we ’ re able to take a drug with promising activity and actually figuring out how it ’ s working , which I think is a really promising strategy for the future that may have an impact on drug development . ”