We already know ObamaCare is a poorly conceived law that is unworkable in the real world . We know the law is already driving health care premiums through the roof contrary to what President Obama promised . For instance , in my home state , our largest health insurance provider reported recently that health care premiums could go up by more than 200 percent on some customers , and the average increase could be almost 30 percent according to one study .
We also know that implementation of the law has been a disaster so far . The Obama administration made the decision last month to delay the penalty provisions in the bill on employers for another year . So the boss gets spared , but no such luck for the working stiff .
This action is an acknowledgement from the administration that the law is not ready for primetime . Worse , the delay is going to increase the cost of the already too expensive bill by $ 12 billion . And there are clearly political motivations behind the delay as moving the tax on employers beyond the 2014 elections removes a burden on Democrats running to defend this terrible piece of legislation .
The writing is already on the wall -- the entire ObamaCare law needs to be repealed .
But wait , as they say in the infomercials , there ’ s more ! By August 15 , the Obama administration is expected to spend $ 54 million of our tax dollars to hire community organizers to push this law on the American people . The president was once a self-professed community organizer , so perhaps this is his way of “ giving back ” as they say .
Over the next few weeks , the Obama administration is set to dole out grants and begin to hire thousands of marketers to help sell ObamaCare . The Obama administration came up with a clever name for these marketers – ‘ navigators ’ – who are charged with helping to sign people up for ObamaCare .
‘ Navigator ’ is a crafty name , but in reality , there are very few restrictions on who they are , and what exactly they are supposed to be doing . ‘ Navigators ’ are supposed to be hired to help consumers understand the law and the insurance coverage provisions in the new health exchanges . Sounds like a job for a rocket scientist .
The ‘ navigators ’ are prohibited from having financial ties to an insurance company , but other than that there are few constraints . Union organizers and community activists are among the types that are allowed to be hired as ‘ navigators ’ , and having prior experience working in the health care field doesn ’ t seem to necessarily be a pre-requisite for the job . I wonder what percentage of these ‘ navigators ’ will be partisan Democrats ?
The ‘ navigators ’ will be required to take only 20 hours of online course training , which will apparently make them experts on the 1,000 page ObamaCare bill . An HHS official was even quoted this week saying , “ We view training as an ongoing process. ” Count me as skeptical .
To make matters worse , these ‘ navigators ’ are going to have access to all kinds of personal information that will make the whole program ripe for fraud .
When helping individuals sign up for ObamaCare , these community organizers will have access to sensitive personal information , including social security numbers and tax information .
Amazingly , HHS is not planning on requiring background checks on these individuals before putting them to work . Besides the obvious identity theft concerns , this is a frightening development in light of the political activities and invasion of privacy , which the IRS and others have engaged in during the Obama presidency .
But the biggest problem with the ‘ navigator ’ program is it appears the federal government still doesn ’ t have the complete means to verify if an individual is even eligible for exchange insurance subsidies .
Coupled with the delay of the employer mandate , there is little way to know if a person has access to affordable insurance through their employer , making them ineligible for subsidies . This makes the system open for fraud and abuse . ObamaCare is now on the honor system .
Beyond the serious implications for taxpayers that thousands could be signing up to receive taxpayer subsidies who are not eligible , this is problematic for consumers who could be forced to pay back money if they mistakenly sign up for ObamaCare , along with the potential for fines .
You could not make this stuff up . No one would believe it . I ’ m not sure I believe it .
In Louisiana , I signed a law to ensure that felons and ex-cons are not the ones who will be in charge of the ‘ navigator ’ program and have access to all this sensitive personal data . This is a step in the right direction and some other states have passed similar legislation , but running the ‘ navigator ’ program without a proven means to verify if a person is eligible for ObamaCare has the potential for disaster .
Like he did with the delay of the employer mandate , the president needs to halt these lucrative grants to the ‘ navigator ’ program immediately .
ObamaCare is just not ready for primetime , and there is something more than a little odd about using taxpayer money for a marketing campaign aimed at taxpayers . The troubling details of the navigator program provide just another example of the poor planning and implementation of ObamaCare and shows why the law must be repealed .