Insurers and Republican members of Congress welcomed the proposed changes , which will be published in the Federal Register on Friday , giving the public until March 7 to comment . Final rules are likely to be issued in March or April . Insurers must decide by early May what kinds of health plans they will offer in 2018 .
Senator Lamar Alexander , Republican of Tennessee and chairman of the Senate health committee , said the proposals were “ important first steps to rescue a collapsing Obamacare individual market . ’ ’
But insurers cautioned that the proposed rules , while helpful , would in no way provide a solution if , in a few weeks , Republicans introduce legislation to repeal major provisions of the Affordable Care Act , such as the requirement for most Americans to have coverage .
Christopher W. Hansen , the president of the advocacy arm of the American Cancer Society , said the tighter restrictions on special enrollment periods could “ cause problems for cancer patients , ” delaying treatment and reducing their chances of survival .
Changes being made by the I.R.S . could weaken incentives for people to obtain insurance . The tax agency said it would accept and process tax returns even if taxpayers failed to indicate whether they had coverage , qualified for an exemption or were paying the penalty for going without insurance .
The individual mandate , requiring most Americans to have insurance , was to be enforced through the tax system . The I.R.S . said the requirement was “ still in force until changed by Congress. ” The government can deduct the amount of any penalty from refunds that would otherwise be sent to taxpayers . But it is unclear how it will use this authority .
In the rules proposed Wednesday , the Trump administration said that it would generally allow states to determine whether insurance plans had enough doctors , hospitals and other health care providers to serve patients . The hope is that would lure more insurers into the market . Additionally , insurers could refuse to provide new coverage to consumers who failed to pay premiums owed in the previous year . If an insurer terminates coverage for nonpayment of premiums , it could require consumers to pay all past-due premiums owed to that insurer before restarting coverage .
And insurers would be allowed to sell health plans covering a smaller share of expected costs . The administration said consumers would have “ more coverage options ” as a result , but it acknowledged that some consumers could see increases in their deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs .