The U.S. Supreme Court 's decision that President Obama 's health care law is constitutional keeps it alive for now . But it 's important to remember that the law has already lost in the court of public opinion . The Supreme Court ruling is a temporary reprieve more than anything else .
In March , I wrote that the health care law was doomed even if it survived the court . Looking at the data today , it 's hard to draw any other conclusion .
Fifty-four percent of voters nationwide still want to see the law repealed . That 's going to be a heavy burden for the Obama campaign to bear .
It 's hard to believe that public opinion will change between now and Election Day because opinion on the law has n't budged in two years . In fact , support for repeal now is exactly the same as it was when the law first passed .
Consistently , for the past two years , most voters have expressed the view that the law will hurt the quality of care , increase the cost of care and increase the federal deficit .
As a result , the fact that the law remains in place may end up hurting the president 's chances for re-election more than helping them . It gives Mitt Romney another easy target and one that can be tied directly into concerns about the economy .
If Romney wins , there is virtually no chance the existing health care law will survive .
If the president is re-elected , the law has a better chance of surviving , but it would still face an uphill struggle . Legislative battles to protect the law would most likely dominate his second term .
To understand why , keep in mind that most Americans initially supported the concept of health care reform because they wanted the cost of care to be reduced . But only 18 percent believe the current law will accomplish that goal . A massive 81 percent also believe it will end up costing the government more than projected .
The president believes that government regulation can control the cost of care , but most voters disagree . Voters think that consumer choice and competition between insurance companies will do more to reduce costs than additional regulations .
Individual Americans recognize that they have more power as consumers than they do as voters . Their choices in a free market give them more control over the economic world than choosing one politician or another .
Seventy-six percent think they should have the right to choose between expensive insurance plans with low deductibles and low-cost plans with higher deductibles . A similar majority believes everyone should be allowed to choose between expensive plans that cover just about every imaginable medical procedure and lower-cost plans that cover a smaller number of procedures . All such choices would be banned under the current health care law .
Americans want to be empowered as health care consumers . They do n't want the government telling them what to do .
The president and his colleagues in Congress thought the battle for their health care plan ended in March 2010 . Romney and many Republicans thought it might end in the Supreme Court before Election 2012 really took off .
Now , we recognize that the battle for the president 's health care plan is just beginning .