Lynn Duvall was the sole volunteer at the Centreville , Va. , OFA event . | M.Scott Mahaskey/███ Obamacare message war goes local
CENTREVILLE , Va. — A race to define Obamacare to the masses began today between the stacks at the Centreville Library . Over pizza in Decatur , Texas . And with a glass of wine in Naples , Fla .
Dozens of communities around the country hosted pro-Obamacare events , convened by the president ’ s foot soldiers at Organizing for Action . The series is the first salvo in what is fixing to be a month of high-stakes health care spin . When Congress returns from its summer recess in early September , there will be less than a month until Obamacare ’ s most sweeping coverage programs start signing up customers in new health insurance exchanges .
In the meantime , pro- and anti-Obamacare advocates are plotting to fill the silence any way they can .
That means gatherings like today ’ s in Centreville — although the slow start here is probably not what OFA organizers had in mind . After a scheduling snafu over the start time , a few people showed up and left before it actually started . Just one volunteer stayed to help work the phone bank for the health law , and the event ’ s organizer bolted after 20 minutes — although he was bound for another Obamacare event , a house party .
The poor turnout here in Centreville wasn ’ t necessarily indicative of what ’ s happening across the country at other OFA events Sunday afternoon and evening , which coincide with President Barack Obama ’ s birthday . OFA sent out pictures of bigger and more enthusiastic turnout elsewhere , including some events in places like Ohio , Florida and Missouri where volunteer enthusiasm will be needed to overcome state government resistance to implementation . Most of the events were intentionally small-scale — house parties , leafleting near a beach or a farmer ’ s market , not big rallies .
But in some ways , this suburban community 20 miles from Washington , D.C. , captures the national ambivalence about the health law . Centreville is perched on the edge of two congressional districts , a red one represented by Rep. Frank Wolf — an ardent Republican opponent of Obamacare — and a blue one by Rep. Gerry Connolly , one of the health law ’ s Democratic champions .
The Centreville event ’ s lone attendee , Lynn Duvall of Fairfax , Va. , told ███ that it was her family ’ s own medical burdens that fueled her passion for Obamacare . Duvall ’ s son Logan has Crohn ’ s disease and under the law ’ s provisions can stay on her health plan until he turns 26 , next January . Then he ’ ll be able to get coverage in the health exchange , despite his pre-existing condition .
Without Obamacare , she said , her son ’ s illness could have devastated their family finances .
“ If the Affordable Care Act weren ’ t there , we would just have to deal with it . If it means we lose all of the assets we ’ ve saved over our lifetime , that ’ s what it would be , ” said Duvall , who added that she left full-time work to care for her ailing son and aging mother , who she said was on Medicare and Medicaid before passing away at 103 . “ I would be really panicked if it weren ’ t for [ Obamacare ] . I don ’ t know what he would do . ”
The OFA event ’ s organizer , 23-year-old Toora Arsala , a Northern Virginia Community College student , said the law is important to him because he has a variety of ailments and has relied on Medicaid for coverage .
Backers of Obamacare are hoping to generate enough of their own events this summer to counteract any repeat of August 2009 , when tea party activists swarmed town hall meetings to try to stop what was then still a health reform bill with a shaky future in Congress .
The tea party did come close to stopping it that summer — and it and its allies in Congress are planning its own high-profile August messaging campaign , promising street rallies , protests , and a reinvigorated call to dismantle Obamacare . It ’ s a last-ditch push for it as enrollment starts in October , and conservatives are eyeing this fall ’ s federal-funding battles as their best hope for putting on the brakes .
“ The American people don ’ t want this law , ” Jenny Beth Martin , co-founder of Tea Party Patriots , told reporters last week . Martin said her organization would fan out to congressional town halls in August , host a series of street demonstrations and take aim at any lawmaker who won ’ t support repealing or defunding the law .
Asked whether the full-throttle posture of both sides bodes for an intense August , Martin said she expects “ heated debate . ”
“ Heated debate is what the First Amendment is about , and I think that as Americans we all want peaceable debate and discussion in America — both parties , both sides. ” she said . “ I have every reason to expect it . ”