President to address Democrats in Congress on how to save signature legislation while future vice-president will meet with Republicans eager to repeal the law
Barack Obama and vice president-elect Mike Pence will have a showdown on Capitol Hill on Wednesday as the gloves come off in the fight over US healthcare .
The president will address House and Senate Democrats over how to counter Donald Trump ’ s stated objective of repealing the Affordable Care Act , a cornerstone of his legacy . Strategies are likely to focus on aspects of Obamacare that have bipartisan support as well as exploiting Republican divisions over how to replace it .
Republicans ' plan to erase Obama legacy starts with chipping away at Obamacare Read more
Pence , meanwhile , will address a meeting with House Republicans and attend a lunch with their Senate counterparts . A new , Republican-controlled Congress convened on Tuesday eager to repeal Obamacare after years of opposition .
Wednesday will mark a poignant , high-stakes return to Capitol Hill for Obama , who in 2009 delivered a landmark speech to the House for fundamental healthcare reform that had eluded presidents for decades . In a sign of the bitter wrangling to come , at one point he was interrupted by Republican Joe Wilson , who shouted : “ You lie ! ”
The White House claims that , despite teething troubles , Obamacare has been a singular achievement . It brought health insurance to 22 million people and , for the first time in US history , means that more than 90 % of Americans are insured .
Press secretary Josh Earnest told reporters on Tuesday : “ I know that particularly at this time when there ’ s a lot of discussion about the president ’ s legacy , some people might think well , the president ’ s very concerned about political capital that he ’ s invested in this and doesn ’ t want to see it all go away .
“ That ’ s certainly true , but the president ’ s priority and the president ’ s motivation is rooted in looking out for the interests of the 22 million Americans whose healthcare would be taken away if Republicans repeal the Affordable Care Act . ”
Obama is concerned about a devastating impact on Medicare , which protects millions of elderly people , and Medicaid , a programme for low-income Americans , Earnest added .
He said : “ It ’ s not surprising to me that there are some Republicans who are now a little queasy about the prospect of the impact that repealing Obamacare would have on their own supporters , on people in their own congressional districts , because we know there are people all across the country who benefit from this law , who are protected by this law , whose lives have been saved by this law , and the prospect of taking it away is a question of life or death for some people . ”
Earnest suggested that Obama would encourage Democrats to focus on aspects of the Affordable Care Act that have bipartisan support . An obvious example is consumer protection that prevents employer discrimination against people with a pre-existing condition . “ They should be out there telling the stories of their constituents who benefit from this law . ”
During the election campaign , Trump vowed to immediately repeal and replace Obamacare although , after meeting the president , he indicated that some parts might be preserved . He nevertheless nominated a health secretary , Tom Price , who is an ardent critic of the law .
And this week Trump tweeted : “ People must remember that ObamaCare just doesn ’ t work , and it is not affordable – 116 % increases ( Arizona ) . Bill Clinton called it ‘ CRAZY ’ ” He added : “ The Democrat Governor of Minnesota said ‘ The Affordable Care Act ( ObamaCare ) is no longer affordable ! ’ – And , it is lousy healthcare . ”
As promised , Republicans wasted no time getting down to business when the 115th Congress convened on Tuesday . Senate budget committee chairman Mike Enzi , a Republican from Wyoming , introduced a resolution that he touted as a “ first step ” toward repealing the president ’ s signature healthcare law .
The resolution includes “ reconciliation instructions ” that would enable Republicans to dismantle key provisions of the law with a simple 51-vote majority in the Senate . Using this budgetary maneuver , Republicans can undo enough of the law to render it functionally ineffective .
Addressing the Senate for the first time as minority leader , Chuck Schumer , of New York , said it was “ not acceptable to repeal ” the healthcare law and “ throw our healthcare system into chaos and then leave the hard work for another day ” .
What an Obamacare replacement could look like under Tom Price Read more
In a statement , House speaker Paul Ryan applauded the resolution , saying it “ sets the stage for repeal followed by a stable transition to a better healthcare system ” .
He added : “ Our goal is to ensure that patients will be in control of their healthcare and have greater access to quality , affordable coverage . ”
However , unravelling Obamacare ’ s provisions , which offer tax credits for purchasing private health insurance and allow states to expand coverage of Medicaid , is complicated . It may be expedient to replace those provisions with other forms of healthcare coverage , but House and Senate Republicans are divided on how to go about it .
Some Republicans have conceded benefits from Obamacare , whereas others are fiercely opposed . Representative Steve King of Iowa said : “ I ’ m for the complete , 100 % , rip-out-by-the-roots repeal of Obamacare . I don ’ t want to leave any vestige of it behind , not one particle of its DNA in law . ”
Trump has wavered on his campaign promise to “ repeal and replace ” Obamacare . In a meeting with Obama after his election , Trump indicated that he was open to parts of the law , especially the measures that bar insurance agencies from refusing to cover people with pre-existing conditions and allow young people to stay on their parents ’ health insurance until they ’ re 26 .
At Trump ’ s New Year ’ s Eve bash at his Mar-A-Lago estate in Florida , the president-elect thrilled the crowd when he said : “ We ’ re going to get rid of Obamacare . ”
A recent study by the Commonwealth Fund , which was analyzed by the Rand corporation , found that implementing Trump ’ s healthcare proposal would cause nearly 20 million people to lose insurance coverage in 2018 . When people with no insurance are admitted to the hospital , the costs are often shifted to taxpayers .
On Tuesday morning , Kellyanne Conway , a top adviser to Trump , said that the replacement process would be seamless . Asked if someone currently covered under the healthcare would have healthcare after it ’ s repealed , she replied : “ That is correct . ”
“ We don ’ t want anyone who currently has insurance to not have insurance , ” Conway said on MSNBC ’ s Morning Joe . “ Also we are very aware that the public likes coverage for pre-existing conditions . There are some pieces of merit in the current plan . ”
Democrats are planning to launch an effort to mobilise grassroots support for Obamacare by explaining how its repeal would create a ripple effect hurting a majority of Americans .