CMS played down the significance of the report on Monday night . Report warned of website flaws
The administration was warned last spring that its website didn ’ t meet key requirements for a successful rollout , including relying too heavily on outside contractors , according to a copy of a “ Red Team ” report prepared for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and obtained by ███ .
The report , which was delivered at the end of March , identified six tests that the developing healthcare.gov website didn ’ t meet : Its needs were evolving , rather than clearly articulated ; there was no clear definition of success ; the program relied too heavily contractors and other outside parties ; the design , build and test phases were stacked on top of each other rather than sequential , there wasn ’ t enough time allotted or a side enough scope for valid end-to-end testing of the system ; and the site was expected to launch at full volume rather than phasing in over time .
The revelations of early warning signs , first reported by the Washington Post , are not the only ones to have been unearthed in the ongoing autopsy of the Obamacare rollout , but the previously undisclosed CMS “ Red Team ” report shows just how early and how specifically administration officials were notified about problems that ultimately plagued the website . In this case , the report , compiled by an outside consulting firm and provided by a source on Capitol Hill , pointed to issues that remained unresolved when the website launched six months later .
White House officials said that while the report hasn ’ t previously been disclosed , administration officials have been clear in the past in acknowledging that red flags were raised .
“ As we have said many times now and as has been frequently reported , flags were definitely raised throughout the development of the website , as would be the case for any IT project this complex , ” said White House spokesman Eric Schultz . “ Those issues , including the ones from 6-months before launch , were , in turn taken-up by the development team housed at CMS . But nobody anticipated the size and scope of the problems we experienced once the site launched . Since that time , experts have been working night and day to get it functioning – and that is where our focus is , and should be , right now . ”
CMS played down the significance of the report on Monday night , contending that the agency took remedial action to address the problems .
“ In early 2013 , as part of a standard process to identify potential risks and develop mitigating strategies , an independent contractor was brought in to conduct an external review . The review was completed six months before the beginning of open enrollment , was in line with industry best practices , and was followed by concrete action to address potential risks—as was intended , ” CMS said in a statement . “ As we have said , CMS has continually evaluated progress and has taken steps to prioritize and address concerns , and mitigate risks . ”
CMS officials pointed to specific steps that were taken after the private report was rendered . The agency released a rule on income verification on July 5 , prioritized the functionality of the website and outreach to healthy young adults — who form the bedrock of the financing system for the exchanges — and added more resources to deliver in-person assistance to enrollees , according to the agency .
CMS also announced in April that the Health and Human Services Department would pump about $ 800 million from existing accounts into implementing the law , the officials said , and released guidance on specific issues in May and July .
Still , the report accurately predicted many of the factors that contributed to the website ’ s failed rollout .
The key risks , according to the document , included : “ Marketplaces unavailable with system failure ; long manual processing times ; failure to resolve post-launch issues rapidly ; no viable marketplace in large-volume…states ; plans not approved and loaded in selected markets . … [ and ] lack of end-to-end operational view of interdependencies . ”
The idea of delaying the launch was moot , though , according to the report .
“ The working group determined that extending the go-live date should not be part of the analysis and therefore worked within a boundary condition of Oct. 1 as the launch date , ” the authors wrote .