With a repeal bill off the table , the Trump administration has drafted an executive order that could blow a huge hole in the Affordable Care Act , according to a source with direct knowledge of the plan .
The order would , in effect , exempt many association health plans , groups of small businesses that pool together to buy health insurance , from core Obamacare requirements like the coverage of certain essential health benefits . It would potentially allow individuals to join these plans too , which would put individual insurance marketplaces in serious peril by drawing younger and healthier people away from them .
The draft order is also said to broaden the definition of short-term insurance , which is also exempt from the law ’ s regulations . Together , these changes represent a serious threat to Obamacare : President Trump seems ready to open more loopholes for more people to buy insurance outside the health care law ’ s markets , which experts anticipate would destabilize the market for customers who are left behind with higher premiums and fewer insurers .
“ This appears to be a backdoor way of undermining the Affordable Care Act , ” Kevin Lucia , who studies the markets at Georgetown University , said of the alleged changes .
It ’ s possible that the order could change before Trump signs it , or never be signed at all , as has happened with other executive orders in the past . The details of the order as described , though , generally match up with what had been expected after Trump said he would soon issue an executive order on health care . Association health plans have been a priority for Sen. Rand Paul ( R-KY ) , who has urged Trump to expand them .
The White House declined to comment when ███ inquired about the pending order . A senior administration official detailed the outline of the executive order to the Wall Street Journal on Saturday evening , which aligns with the description provided to ███ .
On Tuesday morning , Trump promised that his forthcoming actions would provide “ great HealthCare to many people . ”
Since Congress ca n't get its act together on HealthCare , I will be using the power of the pen to give great HealthCare to many people - FAST — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 10 , 2017
But experts have warned they could significantly destabilize the Obamacare markets .
An association health plan , as ███ ’ s Sarah Kliff has previously explained , is a way for a group of small businesses pool together to buy insurance , giving them more purchasing power and access to cheaper premiums . A group of bakeries , for example , might form a bakers association and purchase health coverage together . The most famous examples have been farm bureaus , which allowed independent farming businesses to band together and get insurance .
Before Obamacare , national associations could pick and choose which states ’ insurance rules they wanted to follow and use those rules to guide the plans they offered nationwide . The bakers association could choose to follow the rules for , say , the Alabama insurance market , which mandates coverage of relatively few benefits , for all its bakeries in New York , a state with many mandates .
The result was often health insurance that skirted state rules and was a better deal for businesses with young and healthy employees , who are likely to prefer skimpier health plans . The former insurance regulator described the situation prior to the ACA to Kliff as being “ a race to the bottom , with some associations offering lower-cost plans that covered virtually nothing . ”
Obamacare changed these rules . Association health plans were treated as small businesses and were therefore required to cover all of the law ’ s mandated benefits .
Essential health benefits , mandating that insurers cover everything from hospital care to prescription drugs to maternity care , are central to the ACA ’ s insurance protections : They prevent plans from crafting their coverage to attract mostly young and healthy customers at the expense of older and sicker people , which had been one of the primary problems with the association health plan model before the law .
Requiring association health plans to follow the same rules as small businesses was one of the many ways the Affordable Care Act cracked down on skimpy health plans . Trump is now looking to roll back those changes .
Under the draft executive order as described , new regulations would allow association health plans to be considered large employers when it comes to health insurance . Large employers are not subjected to the same rules as individual or small-group plans under Obamacare . Most notably , they do not have to cover all of the law ’ s essential health benefits or meet the requirement that insurance cover a minimal percentage of a person ’ s medical bills .
If that change were made , association health plans would be freed to craft skimpier ( and cheaper ) health plans that appeal only to businesses with younger and healthier employees . Small businesses left in Obamacare ’ s marketplace would likely face higher costs and fewer options as the market became less attractive to insurers .
“ It will destroy the small-group market , ” Tim Jost , a law professor at Washington and Lee University who generally supports Obamacare , told me . “ We ’ ll be back to where we were before the Affordable Care Act . ”
The draft order did not specify whether individuals would also be allowed to buy into these associations health plans , as some Republicans like Paul want . But , according to the source , the regulations resulting from the order could potentially be written to allow self-employed people to buy into the now-deregulated association market , which would be an even bigger blow to Obamacare .
The self-employed individuals likely to flee the law ’ s markets for association plans would probably be younger and healthier , leaving behind an older , sicker pool for the remaining Obamacare plans . That has the makings of a death spiral , with ever-increasing premiums and insurers deciding to leave the market altogether .
“ The ability for individuals to purchase health insurance through an association really puts the individual market at risk and destabilizes it over the long term , ” Lucia said . “ When you have market segmentation , it over time leads to higher premiums and it becomes less attractive to carriers . ”
Trump is also eyeing short-term coverage to undercut the health law
Trump ’ s executive order would also expand what ’ s called short-term limited duration insurance . These short-term policies typically have higher out-of-pocket costs and cover fewer services than traditional insurance . They were designed for people who , for example , expect to be out of work and therefore without insurance for a limited period of time .
That kind of coverage is totally free from the health care law ’ s insurance regulations : the mandate to cover essential health benefits , the prohibition on charging sick people more than healthy people or denying people coverage based on their medical history , and so on .
Short-term insurance had previously been allowed to last as long as 364 days . The Obama administration , in an effort to curtail the use of such coverage to circumvent the health care law , shortened it to three months . Trump ’ s draft order would reverse that rule , once again allowing people to buy this non-Obamacare coverage for almost an entire year , my source said .
The effect would be much the same as the changes to association health plans : Healthier people would be the consumers most likely to use this escape hatch to find cheaper , if far less comprehensive , coverage outside of Obamacare — though they would still be subject to the law ’ s individual mandate , as short-term insurance is not considered sufficient .
“ If you allow them to sell 364-day policies , or policies that are renewable , that ’ s just going to suck a lot of the healthy people out of the individual market , ” Jost said .
And here , again , fewer healthy people in the Obamacare market means higher costs to insurers , which leads to higher premiums and possibly more insurers dropping out .
“ Consumers are going to face a less stable , less competitive individual market , ” Lucia said .
The ultimate impact on Obamacare will depend on the final language of the executive order Trump signs . But based on the draft described to me , Trump is readying the devastating blow to the health care law that congressional Republicans have so far failed to deliver .
Are you an Obamacare enrollee interested in what happens next ? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates .