Round 2 : Health Care Law Faces The Supreme Court Again
Round 2 in the legal battle over Obamacare hits the Supreme Court 's intellectual boxing ring Wednesday .
In one corner is the Obama administration , backed by the nation 's hospitals , insurance companies , physician associations and other groups like Catholic Charities and the American Cancer Society .
In the other corner are conservative groups , backed by politicians who fought in Congress to prevent the bill from being adopted .
In 2012 , a bitterly divided high court upheld the law as constitutional by a 5-to-4 vote . Now opponents of the law are challenging it again , this time contending that the text of the law does not authorize subsidies to make mandated insurance affordable in 34 states . It 's a technical argument about the wording of the law but , if it prevails , most experts say the result would be a chaotic unraveling of a system that in the past year has extended health insurance to more than 11 million Americans .
The fight is about six pesky words in one section of the law . Those words stipulate that for people who can not afford health coverage , subsidies are available through `` an exchange established by the state . ''
The government contends that those words refer to any exchange , whether it is set up by the state itself or an exchange run for the state by the federal government in accordance with individual state insurance laws and regulations . The challengers say the statute means what it says and no more .
If the Supreme Court agrees with the challengers ' interpretation , millions of people would quickly lose their health insurance and the individual insurance market could collapse in 34 states .
Those 34 are the states , mainly Republican-run , that declined to set up an exchange themselves . A few other states also found that the system they created on their own did n't work well and so opted instead to use the federally run system .
Every major regulatory law like the Affordable Care Act is carried out according to regulations issued by appropriate agencies . And the Internal Revenue Service issued this regulation , saying that subsidies would be available to people who signed up on exchanges in every state , whether state-run or federally run .
`` We do n't treat members of Congress like teenage adolescents who do n't know what they 're saying . ''
That was the whole design of the law , the IRS says , noting that Congress never even discussed limiting subsidies to state-run exchanges .
`` Ridiculous , '' says the lawyer for the challengers , Michael Carvin . `` The text says precisely the opposite of what these English-speaking people purportedly intended . ''
`` It says , you get subsidies if you make a purchase on an exchange established by the state , '' says Carvin , but the IRS wrote a rule authorizing subsidies for federally run exchanges as well .
Former Obama administration Solicitor General Neal Katyal , who filed a brief in the case on behalf of the nation 's major hospital groups , disagrees .
`` You can take a phrase out of any statute and twist it to mean something else , '' he says .
Katyal emphasizes that a basic maxim of interpreting statutes is to look at the overall structure and purpose of the act .
`` It 's notable , '' he says , `` that in all the thousands of pages of briefing that the Affordable Care Act challengers have put together , they ca n't find a single member of Congress at any point in the many debates of the Affordable Care Act who believes what these lawyers are saying . Not one . ''
Indeed , even Republicans did seem to assume that the subsidies went to everyone who needed them , regardless of where they lived .
Rep. Paul Ryan , the top Republican on the House Budget Committee , said in 2010 , `` It 's a new and open-ended entitlement that basically says , to just about everybody in this country : If your health care expenses exceed anywhere from 2 to 9.8 percent of your adjusted gross income ... do n't worry about it ... the government 's going to subsidize the rest . ''
Wisconsin Gov . Scott Walker , a leading Republican , also seemed to assume that the subsidies would go to everyone .
`` In the end , there 's no real substantive difference between a federal exchange or a state exchange , '' Walker once said .
Although some of the challengers initially portrayed their case as involving a drafting error or `` glitch , '' Carvin says the language restricting subsidies to state-run exchanges was deliberate .
`` We do n't treat members of Congress like teenage adolescents who do n't know what they 're saying , '' says Carvin . `` The only people who ever said it was a drafting glitch were liberal polemicists who are trying to deny the force of the statute , not us . ''
Carvin notes that those words limiting subsidies to `` an exchange established by the state '' actually appear in the statute 11 times . Congress was acting rationally and intentionally when it used those words , he maintains , because the whole idea was to provide incentives for states to set up exchanges themselves .
`` They wanted subsidies and they wanted state-run exchanges , '' Carvin contends . `` If you condition the subsidies , you get both . If you give unconditional subsidies , you do n't get state-run exchanges . ''
Not so , says former Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , who argues the conditional subsidy idea would lead to `` absurd results . ''
`` You would have in place a national rule that says no company could ban people with a pre-existing condition ; you would have a national rule that says everybody has to have coverage ; and then you would have millions of people who would have no affordable way to get that coverage , '' she says .
What 's more , Sebelius contends that a conditional plan such as the one Carvin outlines would amount to bait-and-switch for the states .
`` As one who was not only at the table when the law was being designed and at the front end of a lot of conversations with states , '' she says , `` I can tell you that there was never a design that suggested to governors or state leaders that somehow , if they did not have a state-based marketplace , they would lose tax subsidies for their constituents . ''
But what would happen if the Supreme Court does n't buy that argument and instead knocks a huge hole in the law ? Estimates are that 9.3 million people who get subsidies now through Obamacare in those 34 states would lose about $ 29 billion in subsidies and would not be able to afford coverage .
In addition , experts say that disallowing the subsidies in the states with federal exchanges would destabilize the individual insurance market in those states , meaning that rates would skyrocket for individuals and many small businesses that currently buy policies independent of the federal exchange .
Karen Ignagni , who heads the association that represents the nation 's health insurers , notes that without subsidies , those 34 states would be in the same position as states in the 1990s that passed laws banning discrimination based on previous medical conditions but did nothing else .
`` If you look at each and every state where they tried to do that , the markets blew up , '' Ignagni observes .
Without a mandate and subsidies to make coverage affordable , rates skyrocketed , people dropped out , and then rates skyrocketed even more to cover the older , sicker people who were left . So thoroughly did the individual market collapse in some states that insurers simply refused to do business there .
The prospect of such chaos in the health industry , which accounts for almost 18 percent of the U.S. economy , is perhaps the reason that business groups , which aggressively backed Round 1 of the legal attack on Obamacare , are conspicuously missing in action on Round 2 .
Certainly Congress could fix the problem with a quick drafting change to make subsidies available on federal as well as state-run exchanges . But everyone knows that is n't going to happen .
Congressional Republicans seem united on the idea of getting rid of Obamacare — indeed , the GOP-controlled House has voted to repeal the law , in whole or in part , more than 50 times . But there is no agreement at all on what to replace it with . And in the states , some Republican governors and state legislatures are already vowing not to sign on to exchanges to save subsidies for their constituents .
There is , of course , always political danger in such brinksmanship . Real people suffer the consequences .