House Democrats have unveiled details of their ambitious plan to expand a popular , government-run healthcare program to all Americans . The measure marks a fresh sign of the party ’ s growing support for a once fringe idea that will play a defining role in the 2020 presidential campaign .
The Medicare for All Act of 2019 , to be formally introduced on Wednesday with 107 co-sponsors , would transform the American healthcare system from one in which millions of Americans are uninsured to one that provides universal coverage .
“ The state of our healthcare system is absolutely atrocious , ” said the Washington congresswoman Pramila Jayapal , who is introducing the bill with Michigan congresswoman Debbie Dingell . “ How is it possible that the United States , the richest country in the world , is the only major country that does not guarantee healthcare to our residents ? ”
She added : “ Americans are literally dying because they can ’ t afford insulin or the cancer treatment they need . ”
The bill would establish a national health insurance program by gradually expanding Medicare – the federal health insurance program for people who are 65 or older – until it covered all Americans .
“ Everybody in , nobody out , ” Jayapal said , describing coverage under the plan , which she said amounted to a “ complete transformation of our healthcare system ” .
The bill does not include details on how the government would pay for the new healthcare system , which some studies have estimated could cost tens of trillions of dollars over the next decade .
Jayapal envisions major savings as a result of reducing administrative costs and inefficiencies in the current healthcare system . To pay for the plan , she suggested proposals such as taxing the rich at higher rates and mandated employer contributions .
Number of uninsured Americans increases by 7m in four years Read more
A universal healthcare plan that moves the US closer to the systems in Canada and the UK has long been a dream of the party ’ s left .
A version of the legislation was first introduced in 2003 by the former congressman John Conyers of Michigan , but the idea began to gain traction when Senator Bernie Sanders championed the issue in his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016 . The year after , a majority of the House Democratic caucus supported Conyers ’ bill while one-third of Senate Democrats signed on to Sanders ’ version .
The plan comes amid a widening debate over how boldly to reform the American healthcare system , pitting progressives clamoring for Medicare for All against moderates pushing for smaller-scale changes . Several Democratic hopefuls have endorsed the idea of a universal healthcare system but are split over the details .
The plan has no chance of passing the Republican-controlled Senate . But the House speaker , Nancy Pelosi , has promised to allow hearings on the bill for the first time , giving progressives a prominent platform to make the case for a single-payer system .
Supporters speak about universal healthcare as a moral imperative . They argue that millions can not afford the rising out-of-pocket costs most are obliged to pay when insurance coverage is less than comprehensive .
Some Democrats , conscious that many Americans are wary of losing their current insurance options , are pushing for more incremental changes to the healthcare system , such as allowing people between 50 and 64 to buy into the Medicare system and imposing a cap on insurance premiums and out-of-pocket expenses .
Polling shows that a growing share of Americans , frustrated with the rising costs of healthcare , support a so-called “ single-payer ” system , where the payer is the government . Surveys have , however , found that support drops when respondents are asked their view if the program would result in higher taxes or longer waiting times for treatment .
But as momentum grows , so , too , does the opposition . Private health insurers , doctors and hospitals are partnering to oppose single-payer proposals , which could significantly affect their bottom line .
The Partnership for America ’ s Health Care Future has been mobilizing members to ramp up support for improving the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare , as opposed to repealing it , as Republicans attempted to do , or replacing it with a new system .
“ Medicare for All may be a catchy slogan , ” the group tweeted on Tuesday , “ but it would do more harm than good for Americans who deserve affordable coverage and high quality care . ”
Half of Americans have employer-sponsored health insurance . Polling suggests that they , by and large , like their plans and want to keep them . Others receive coverage through a patchwork of public health programs and private insurers .
Republicans , meanwhile , are eager to see Democratic 2020 candidates embrace the plan , confident it will help cast the party as too liberal and out of touch with everyday Americans .
Under the proposal , Medicare would become the country ’ s universal insurer . But the bill would also make significant changes to the American healthcare program , by greatly expanding the type of coverage offered and eliminating all deductibles , copays and premiums .
According to a summary of the legislation provided by Jayapal ’ s staff , the program would cover “ primary care , hospital and outpatient services , prescription drugs , dental , vision , audiology , women ’ s reproductive health services , maternity and newborn care , long-term services and supports , prescription drugs , mental health and substance abuse treatment , laboratory and diagnostic services , ambulatory services , and more ” .
The transition to a Medicare for All system would happen over the course of two years .
The authors know the bill has no chance of becoming law as long as Trump occupies the White House , but they hope to lay the groundwork for a future Democratic president . Activists are working with progressive members to help build public support for the plan .
“ We will be pushing it as far as we can , as hard as we can , as fast as we can , ” Jayapal said . “ Enough nibbling around the edges . We really need to transform the system . ”