Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell on Monday rebuked critics who want the Supreme Court to invalidate Obamacare ’ s subsidies in much of the country , saying such a ruling would harm millions of Americans who “ need , want and like ” their health coverage .
Appearing at the White House , she said nearly 11.7 million new and returning customers selected a health plan on the law ’ s health exchanges through Feb. 22 .
That figure is 300,000 higher than the 11.4 million she touted after the Feb. 15 deadline to get covered for 2015 , as the administration gave HealthCare.gov customers in 37 states an extra week to finish up their applications .
Mrs. Burwell explicitly touted government subsidies that help American purchase plans on the Obamacare marketplace and averaged $ 263 per month for each enrollee .
That ’ s notable , beacuse a challenge before the Supreme Court has put the fate of those subsidies in doubt in at least 34 states .
The justices heard oral arguments in the case , with challengers saying the administration is breaking the law by paying the tax credits to customers in states that rely on the federal HealthCare.gov exchange . The law says subsidies can be paid to customers in exchanges “ established by the state . ”
Mrs. Burwell said she expects the administration expects to prevail , a result that would keep subsidies flowing to every state .
“ The law is clear . The text and structure of the Affordable Care Act demonstrate that individuals in every state are eligible for tax credits , ” she said . “ Those who support this lawsuit believe that the law should be dismantled or repealed . And they are content to roll back the progress that we have achieved together . ”
To underscore her point , Mrs. Burwell singled out Republican-governed states where residents benefited from the subsidies , including 1.5 million in Florida , more than 1 million in Texas and 500,000 in North Carolina .
“ The simple truth is that millions of Americans in all 50 states rely on the Affordable Care Act for tax credits to buy insurance , ” she said .
The Obama administration says it can not fix the “ massive damage ” that a loss before the court would cause , as an estimated 6 million people would drop coverage that ’ s no longer affordable , particularly healthy people who keep rates in check .
Republican lawmakers are hoping to fill the void with a patchwork of proposals that freeze health coverage and financial assistance in place for Americans affected by the ruling , but only for a limited time as the GOP forges a replacement to Obamacare ahead of the 2016 presidential election .
Oklahoma Gov . Mary Fallin , a Republican , endorsed plans for targeted relief in an op-ed Monday published by the Tulsa World .
“ We want to make sure people are able to keep their health insurance , but many governors do not want to be forced to create a state exchange or see our citizens lose coverage , ” Ms. Fallin wrote . “ We hope that Congress would offer targeted , temporary relief for people to maintain their current coverage while we work together on free-market , consumer-friendly solutions for the future . ”
One possibility is that the court itself gives Congress and affected states a six-month grace period to adjust to a ruling that strikes down the subsidies .
Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. , a conservative who appeared ready to side with the plaintiffs , suggested the court could postpone the burnt of its ruling so that subsidies are not cut off until the end of the year .
He cited a past case , known familiarly as “ Northern Pipeline , ” in which the court stayed its decision to minimize disruption in the real world .
Congress ’ nonpartisan research arm said “ it is possible ” for the court to delay its ruling .
“ The court has held that the federal judiciary has significant inherent discretion to fashion remedies , and Congress has specified that the court has the authority to fashion remedies that are ‘ just under the circumstances , ’ ” the Congressional Research Service said in a report Monday .
But the scenario presented in the subsides case , known as King v. Burwell , differs from precedent in an important way , the researchers said .
In the past , the court delayed rulings so that entities like the Federal Elections Commission or bankruptcy courts could reconstitute how they carried out programs that were authorized by Congress .
In the Obamacare case , the issue is whether the subsidies doled out through IRS regulation “ are themselves statutorily authorized , ” the researchers wrote .
Michael Cannon , a health policy director at the libertarian Cato Institute and architect of the legal theory behind the “ King ” challenge , said it would be strange for the court to declare the IRS ’ practice illegal , yet allow it to continue for several more months .
“ That would be awkward , to say the least , ” he said .