Thanks to a Republican amendment to the Affordable Care Act , most members of Congress will see their government-provided health insurance lapse at the end of the year , leaving many of them no other choice but to enroll in dreaded Obamacare .
As speaker of the House , Boehner is technically exempt from the requirement , but in order to avoid accusations of special treatment ( i.e. , because of politics ) he decided to take the plunge , too . And he wants you to know how difficult it was . He even wrote a blog post about it .
`` Earlier this afternoon , I sat down to try and enroll in the DC exchange under the president ’ s health care law , '' he wrote . `` Like many Americans , my experience was pretty frustrating . After putting in my personal information , I received an error message . I was able to work past that , but when I went to actually sign up for coverage , I got this 'internal server error ' screen '' : [ Here he embedded an image of an internal server error screen . ] Despite multiple attempts , I was unable to get past that point and sign up for a health plan . We ’ ve got a call into the help desk . Guess I ’ ll just have to keep trying … ''
It 's a bummer Boehner got that error message . Tyranny almost . But if he 'd reached the point at which he was signing up for coverage , it means he 'd already had a chance to shop around and pick a plan . His post is oddly quiet about that part of the experience . Which is curious . As a 64-year-old heavy smoker , it 's a marvel Boehner will be able to purchase individual market coverage at all . I wonder what crazy law guarantees that he can ?
At any rate , since he did n't disclose which plan he 'd settled on , or what his options were , I thought I 'd try to re-create his experience for you . So on Thursday night I possibly perjured myself , and created an account on D.C. 's health insurance exchange for a nonexistent 64-year-old man seeking individual coverage .
Because he 's shopping on the D.C. exchange , and not in Ohio under Healthcare.gov , I am assuming that his wife , Debbie Boehner , a real estate agent in suburban Cincinnati , has her own coverage , and so he 's not purchasing a spousal plan .
It turns out , Boehner , who as speaker makes $ 223,500 a year , has a lot of affordable options to choose from .
The cheapest policy for a 64-year-old is a high-deductible , bronze-plated BlueCross BlueShield plan with a $ 372.14 premium .
Just under 2 percent of Boehner 's income . Not bad for a man on the cusp of his golden years !
Now Boehner just had a birthday , so in less than a year he 'll qualify for Medicare . If I were him , I 'd probably take my chances with a cheap plan like this one and pocket the savings for my retirement , which could come as early as January 2015. Who 's to say ?
Then again , Boehner has a stressful job , and that smoking habit . Plus , his net worth is in the low millions . Under the circumstances ( and since he 'll only be enrolled for a year anyhow ) it might be worth it for him to purchase something more expensive .
I counted five $ 0 deductible plans ( three gold-plated , two bronze-plated ) ranging in price from $ 699.86 a month -- or 3.7 percent of Boehner 's annual income ...
... to $ 1,023.28 per month -- or a heftier 5.5 percent of Boehner 's annual income .
That was the most expensive option available , by nearly $ 200 a month .
If he 'd decided to enroll in Ohio , his options would be generally cheaper . The plans available in Butler County , where he resides , start at just $ 203.51 a month for a 64-year-old , or 1.1 percent of his annual income . Given the potential savings , I assume his decision to enroll in D.C. reflects a high degree of confidence that he wo n't be run out on a rail by conservative hard-liners before the next Congress begins ( at which point , he 'll be eligible for Medicare anyhow ) .
Boehner 's actual premiums will likely be somewhat higher due to that smoking habit . Smoking 's actually the only thing insurers are allowed to underwrite for . The fact that members are allowed to shop in the small group market might affect his options and prices somewhat too . From there , though , his costs could be dramatically offset by an Obama administration rule that allows members to carry the federal government 's contribution to employee premiums into the exchange . Presumably , even if he 's eligible , Boehner will decline the contribution to avoid a political backlash ( though he fought hard behind the scenes to preserve it for all members ) . But this gives us a decent sense of the horror show he encountered Thursday , before he encountered that even more horrible error message .
I understand how frustrating error messages can be for the elderly . And at first I assumed that what had ultimately derailed Boehner 's quest for coverage was a severe case of Acute Technological Grandpaism ( ATG ) . Befuddlement at the sight of error messages is one of the most common symptoms of ATG .
But then I thought about it some more and realized it did n't really fit the facts .
First of all , there was at least one other person in the room with Boehner at the time : the photographer . Whoever that person was is savvy enough with electronics to snap digital photos . So there 's that . But also , the pictures reveal that he went searching for coverage from his Capitol Hill office . And I know from experience that Boehner is surrounded every day by a staff that 's chock-full of smart , tech-savvy youngsters . His website is one of the best on the Hill ! Much better than Healthcare.gov .
So then I figured either the D.C. exchange is really , really broken , or he did n't actually think through his cheap shot very well . And indeed , while I was writing this article last night , shortly after his blog post went live , a breakthrough .