Bill To Limit Vaccine Exemptions Moves A Step Closer In California
A California bill that would allow students to opt out of mandatory school vaccinations only if they have a medical condition that justifies an exemption is one step closer to becoming law , though it still has a long way to go . The bill was introduced in the California Senate in response to a measles outbreak at Disneyland in late December that 's now linked to almost 150 infections .
Among several hundred supporters and protesters outside the Capitol building in Sacramento on Wednesday , the bill sparked a debate about individual rights and responsibilities .
Opponents wore American flags . One child held a sign that said , `` Force my veggies , not vaccines . '' They say eliminating the personal belief exemption threatens their ability to do what 's right for their kids .
`` I think that everybody should be able to make their own choice , '' said Lisa Cadrein of Los Angeles . She fears vaccines would harm her daughter .
`` I am afraid that her big beautiful blue eyes will not focus on me anymore , and she wo n't be the kid that she is , '' Cadrein said .
But scientific studies show no link between vaccines and autism spectrum disorder , and inside the hearing , parents also talked about protecting their kids — from children who are n't vaccinated . Democratic Sen. Lois Wolk is on the Senate Health Committee and spoke on behalf of the pro-vaccine parents .
`` Our individual rights are n't without limits , and in this particular case , your insistence on your right really could harm my children or my grandchildren , '' Wolk said .
The health committee in California 's Senate passed the bill 6-2 on Wednesday . That was just the first step — the proposed legislation has many more hearings before it could become law . Meanwhile , Washington , Oregon and North Carolina have also considered legislation to limit families ' rights to opt out of mandatory vaccinations , and all of those efforts have stalled .
This story is part of NPR 's reporting partnership with Capital Public Radio and Kaiser Health News .