When the problems occur — and they still do — the command center sees them first , in charts that suddenly spike on the television monitors . The data also serves as a reality check in a hypersensitive media environment . Last month , CNN reported that HealthCare.gov had gone down again . A quick look at the screens made it clear that whatever the problem had been , it was fleeting .
Mr. Zients ’ s metrics , meanwhile , are improving . When the repair effort began , response time — how long it takes a page to load — averaged eight seconds ; now it is less than one . The error rate — how often users are unable to click through to the next page — was 6 percent ; now it is 0.75 percent . When Mr. Dickerson announced that the day had ended with no major crashes and no one who could not log in , the engineers erupted in applause .
“ That ’ s the job , ” he said . “ When things break , you have to fix them . ”
But even as the White House points to its progress , the administration on Wednesday said troubles with HealthCare.gov had forced it to delay , by one year , an online exchange for small business .
Other people working on the project , speaking anonymously because they are not authorized to talk to reporters , say significant challenges remain .
Some of the companies building the system opposed an early decision by the Medicare agency to use database software from a company called MarkLogic , which handles data differently from systems by companies like IBM and Oracle . Some suggest that its unfamiliar nature slowed their work . By mid-November , more than six weeks after the rollout , the MarkLogic database — essentially the website ’ s virtual filing cabinet and index — continued to perform below expectations , according to one person who works in the command center .
In interviews , MarkLogic ’ s executives faulted inadequate computing power and instability at the site ’ s data center , as well as the failure to properly integrate their product , problems repeatedly cited by other website vendors .
But perhaps most important , it remains unclear whether the enrollment data being transmitted to insurers is completely accurate . In a worst-case scenario , insurance executives fear that some people may not actually get enrolled in the plans they think they have chosen , or that some people may receive wrong information about the subsidies for which they are eligible .