Hoping Trumpcare does for them what Obamacare did for Republicans at the ballot box , Democrats have seized on the House repeal-and-replace bill even as Republicans insist that fans of the collapsing health care exchange are deluding themselves .
House Speaker Paul D. Ryan described Thursday ’ s vote on the House bill as a “ rescue operation ” for the moribund Affordable Care Act as it struggles with soaring premium costs , flagging enrollment and fleeing insurers .
“ The system is failing . We ’ re stepping in front of it and rescuing people from a collapsing system , ” Mr. Ryan told ABC ’ s “ This Week. ” “ And , more importantly , we ’ re keeping our word . ”
For sheer shock value , however , it may be hard to top the Democrats . Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts predicted on Twitter that “ people will die , ” and Sen. Bernard Sanders of Vermont accused Republicans of celebrating a vote to “ let thousands of Americans die so that billionaires get tax breaks . ”
White House counsel Kellyanne Conway on Sunday blasted the “ people will die ” message as “ outrageous and untrue , ” taking the mainstream media to task for acting as “ enablers ” for “ not calling out those breathless , heartless predictions . ”
She cited Iowa , where 94 of 99 counties have just one insurance company under the Obamacare exchange , saying , “ That ’ s not choice . That ’ s not competition , and that example is going on everywhere .
“ Why have so many Americans asked for Obamacare to be repealed and replaced ? It ’ s because the premiums have increased by 40 percent on average — 100 percent in some places , ” Ms. Conway said on “ Fox & Friends . ”
Still , Democrats have reason for optimism : The Cook Political Report moved 20 House race ratings in the party ’ s direction Friday after the passage of the American Health Care Act , which repeals and replaces Obamacare .
Save My Care , a pro-Obamacare advocacy group , has targeted 24 House Republicans in a six-figure ad buy over their support for the AHCA , which passed Thursday with no Democratic votes .
The ad blasts Republicans in potentially tight 2018 races for voting for “ a disastrous health care repeal bill , ” but doesn ’ t mention by name the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare .
Republicans received a taste of things to come after being hammered repeatedly on the Sunday talk shows about the bill , particularly the Congressional Budget Office report showing that Medicaid would be cut by $ 880 billion over a 10-year period under the American Health Care Act .
Health and Human Services Secretary Thomas Price pushed back on the estimate , insisting that “ there are no cuts to the Medicaid program . ”
“ There are increases in spending , ” said Mr. Price on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union. ” “ But what we ’ re doing is apportioning it in a way that allows the states greater flexibility to cover their Medicaid and care for their Medicaid population . ”
He added that , “ Again , what the Congressional Budget Office measures is spending as if nothing changes at all , as if the program is doing just fine , thank you very much . ”
The co-architect of Obamacare , MIT economics professor Jonathan Gruber , blasted the House bill , saying it “ does nothing to fix our U.S. health care system . ”
“ All it does is just massively cut funds to have a large tax break , ” Mr. Gruber said on “ Fox News Sunday . ”
Mr. Gruber , who once credited the “ stupidity of the American voter ” for the passage of Obamacare , drew a double-take when he blamed Mr. Trump for the problems with insurers dropping out of the health care exchange .
After being told that Iowa ’ s lone insurance company in 94 of its 99 counties is considering dropping out , Mr. Gruber said , “ Look , and whose fault is this ?
“ Before President Trump was elected , there were no counties in America that did not have an insurer , ” Mr. Gruber said . “ Since President Trump has been elected — “
Host Chris Wallace then interrupted Mr. Gruber and said , “ Wait , you ’ re going to blame the problems with Obamacare on President Trump ? ”
The Affordable Care Act was signed by President Barack Obama in 2010 , but Mr. Gruber said that the president has undermined Obamacare since taking office Jan. 20 .
“ Insurers ’ profits were trending positively , insurers were saying positive things about their ability to stay in the exchange , to succeed , ” Mr. Gruber said . “ Then you have a president who comes in , undercuts open enrollment , doesn ’ t honor the obligations this law makes to insurers . ”
As a result , he said , “ premiums are going up and insurers are exiting . ”
Republican strategist Karl Rove said that Mr. Trump may have stopped the Affordable Care Act enrollment advertising after assuming office , but that Obamacare ’ s problems with soaring premiums and fleeing insurers began long before that .
“ Trump stopped the ads on the 26th of January , and the end of the enrollment period was the 31st , ” Mr. Rove said . “ Really ? The problems of Obamacare are going to be solved by four days ’ worth of TV ads ? ”
White House chief of staff Reince Priebus said he wasn ’ t concerned about the party ’ s 2018 election prospects , predicting Republicans would be “ rewarded ” by following through on their repeal pledge and pointing to the political establishment ’ s shaky track record when it comes to forecasting events involving President Trump .
He also predicted that people would support Republicans after experiencing the benefits of the new health care system .
“ We believe this is going to be a better product , ” Mr. Priebus said . “ And by the time the people see that premiums are lower , it ’ s a better service , there are more options and more choices , they ’ re going to reward Republicans that stood up and said , ‘ We ’ re not going to see the Obamacare system , which is failing and collapsing , continue any longer . ’ ”
Cook Political Report ’ s David Wasserman warned that Democrats may want to resist the urge to tie the health care plan to Mr. Trump , as Republicans did by taking the Affordable Care Act and dubbing it “ Obamacare . ”
“ The irony is that Democrats ’ temptation to refer to the GOP ’ s bill ‘ Trumpcare ’ may actually raise the popularity of the legislation , ” Mr. Wasserman said . “ Trump ’ s job approval , though low , is still almost double the public support for repealing and replacing some of the ACA ’ s most popular provisions . ”