Five years after President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law , many Americans still misunderstand key aspects of the landmark legislation and the impact it has had on the health insurance marketplace , a new poll shows .
While a majority of Americans – 60 percent – correctly assume that more Americans have been able to secure health insurance since the passage of the Affordable Care Act , misconceptions remain about who qualifies for subsidies and how much they are costing the federal government , according to a survey of 1,067 US adults conducted by PerryUndem Research/Communication for Vox Media .
Some 57 percent of respondents reported that they did not have enough information to sufficiently understand the law . That , in itself , is unsurprising . Americans ' confusion with the individual policies of the ACA have been well-documented . For example , a Kaiser Family Foundation survey released in March found that just over half of respondents were aware that the penalty for not purchasing health insurance takes effect this year . Two in 10 respondents thought it would go into effect in 2016 , while one in 10 thought the penalty was rolled out last year – and about one in 6 respondents said they did n't know when the penalty would take effect .
`` Taken overall , the poll paints a frustrating picture for Democrats : most Americans are n't changing their opinion ; those who are have mostly become more negative ; and some widely held beliefs about the Affordable Care Act are far from accurate , '' wrote Sarah Kliff of Vox . `` But it 's not all good news for Republicans , either : though most Americans dislike Obamacare , more want to see it improved than repealed . ''
No . 1 : Obamacare has driven up premiums higher than they would have gone without a federal mandate .
An overwhelming majority of Americans – 82 percent – either say the price tag for health care has gone up , or that they are n't sure , when the price of premiums has actually decreased compared to initial estimates , according to the Vox poll .
There is some truth in this particular misconception . Some 65 percent of existing plans have in fact been rising , with a median increase of 4 percent , according to analysis of emerging trends in health care exchanges conducted by the McKinsey Center for US Heath System Reform .
However , the increase seen under Obamacare is minimal compared with the sharp increases seen in health-care premium costs in the years prior to the implementation of Obamacare , suggests Rick Ungar , a left-leaning blogger for Forbes .
“ When was the last time we saw insurance premiums experience an annual increase of less than 5 percent ? I can not remember such a time and doubt that you can either , ” Mr. Ungar wrote in October .
No . 2 : Businesses are cutting employee hours to avoid having to pay for health coverage .
More than half of all Americans , 54 percent , or 74 percent of Republicans and 42 percent of Democrats , think that businesses are cutting back on employee hours to avoid the employer mandate to provide health insurance , the Vox poll shows . But Sarah Kliff of Vox points out that while this is happening in isolated circumstances , the phenomenon is not widespread . Moreover , experts say that such maneuvers could have legal consequences for the companies in question .
`` Companies can legally cut a worker 's hours if business conditions warrant such a move , but thanks to an often-overlooked section of a federal statute , if a court determines that a firm did so primarily to avoid responsibility for providing health benefits , they may be found in violation of the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 , or ERISA , '' wrote Lauren Weber for the Wall Street Journal .
No . 3 : The federal costs of Obamacare have exceeded original estimates .
Budget projections released early this month by the Congressional Budget Office and the congressional Committee on Taxation demonstrated that Obamacare would cost the federal government $ 1.2 trillion over the next decade , or 11 percent less than the CBO estimated earlier this year .
Moreover , the April report had already decreased by 7 percent , compared with a report released in April 2014 , according to US News and World Report . The estimate in the 2014 report had been marked down by more than $ 100 billion from original estimates , Vox reported .
Despite the steady decline in cost projections , only 5 percent of respondents in the Vox poll knew that the price tag for Obamacare is less than was originally estimated . Forty-two percent said that the law has cost the federal government more than originally estimated .
Only 20 percent of Americans know that undocumented immigrants can not get financial help to pay for health insurance , according to the Vox poll . Fifty-five percent said that they were not sure , while 23 percent believed that undocumented immigrants could receive financial aid to pay for health insurance .
In fact , undocumented workers can not purchase health care coverage through Obamacare marketplaces , even if they are using their own funds to do so .
No . 5 : Not enough people have signed up for Obamacare to work .
In 2009 and 2010 , one of the main concerns of lawmakers on both sides of the political aisle was that consumers wouldn ’ t sign up for coverage through the Affordable Care Act .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
However , these predictions did not materialize . Last year , more than 7.1 million people signed up on federal or state exchanges , passing the administration ’ s enrollment goal four days prior to the deadline . And in 2015 , around 9.5 million people had signed up for Obamacare or renewed their coverage 19 days before the enrollment deadline , Bloomberg reported .
Only 13 percent of respondents knew that Obamacare met its enrollment goals .