The U.S. House of Representatives voted to change the way doctors are paid for treating Medicare patients , giving Speaker John Boehner a second legislative victory following weeks of discord in his Republican caucus.Lawmakers in both parties hailed the 392-37 vote as a breakthrough for a chamber often depicted as dysfunctional. “ I hope this bipartisan approach is contagious , ” said Democratic Representative Jim McGovern of Massachusetts on the House floor.The vote , along with Wednesday ’ s adoption by the House of its version of a fiscal 2016 budget , reflects a quick turnaround for Boehner from earlier disputes among Republicans that caused a near-shutdown of the Department of Homeland Security and forced some bills to be pulled for lack of support.Unlike the budget measure , which was adopted solely with Republican support , the Medicare bill also represented the work of top Democrats , led by Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California.The bill , H.R . 2 , would replace Medicare ’ s cost-containment formula for physician payments in place since 1997 . Congress has listened to warnings that physicians might stop taking Medicare patients and voted 17 times to prevent the formula from forcing cuts in doctor fees . The existing formula would cut doctors ’ pay by 21 percent starting April 1.The American Medical Association , the largest U.S. doctors ’ organization , has been lobbying for years to change the payment system.Children ’ s InsuranceThe measure also would include a two-year extension of the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program past its current Sept. 30 expiration.Representative Michael Burgess , a Texas Republican and a doctor , said on the House floor that the plan is the result of “ careful , intricate , bipartisan negotiations. ” “ We coalesced against the constant threat of payment cuts , ” Burgess said , that “ everyone agrees has got to go. ” McGovern said , “ This bill is not perfect . Nothing around here is perfect. ” Democrats wanted a four-year extension of the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program . He also pointed to language that would restrict abortions at community health centers , though he said that wouldn ’ t change current policy.The Congressional Budget Office says the legislation would cost taxpayers $ 141 billion in its first decade , a price tag that would usually cause revolt among fiscal conservatives.Still , an alternate CBO analysis said the measure would cost less than by simply freezing physicians ’ Medicare payments for the next 10 years.The measure would save $ 70 billion by limiting or cutting some payments to hospitals and other health-care providers and requiring Medicare ’ s most affluent recipients to pay more out of pocket.Congress plans to take the next two weeks off , and the legislation doesn ’ t have to clear the Senate immediately . The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said it won ’ t begin to pay April bills for 14 days.When Congress has missed previous deadlines , it has retroactively increased physicians ’ Medicare pay .