Citing a “ volatile ” market , the nation ’ s second-largest health insurer announced Wednesday it plans to pull out of ObamaCare exchanges in Indiana and Wisconsin next year -- a move that fueled GOP calls on Capitol Hill to upend the law .
Anthem Inc. said “ planning and pricing for ACA-compliant health plans has become increasingly difficult due to a shrinking and deteriorating individual market , as well as continual changes and uncertainty in federal operations , rules and guidance , including cost-sharing reduction subsidies and the restoration of taxes on fully insured coverage . ”
Earlier this month , Anthem said it would leave Ohio ’ s ACA market . The company ’ s pullback is symptomatic of the instability many insurers are facing when dealing with ObamaCare markets .
Republicans cited the latest news as they prepare to fast-track a vote on a replacement package -- something President Trump is eager to get through Congress .
“ Obamacare is clearly collapsing , and we have to step in before more families get hurt . We are on a rescue mission to replace this collapsing law with a better system so that people have lower costs , more choices , and real peace of mind . We need to get this done , '' House Speaker Paul Ryan , who represents Wisconsin , said in response to the Anthem decision .
While the House has passed a replacement bill , Republican senators currently are working behind closed doors on a revised package that could deliver on Trump ’ s campaign promise to gut former President Barack Obama ’ s signature health care overhaul .
The bill 's key components are expected to be unveiled Thursday .
Trump has also threatened to withhold funds that offset the costs for low-income people buying plans through the exchanges .
Anthem said in a statement it will offer an off-exchange medical plan in five counties across Indiana and one in Wisconsin .
Anthem ’ s shrinking participation will not affect the 4 million members in Anthem ’ s Indiana Blue Cross Blue Shield plans . The changes also do not affect Medicare Advantage , Medicaid or employer-based plans .
MDwise Marketplace , another Indianapolis-based insurer , also announced Wednesday they would not offer individual plans next year .
Meanwhile , health insurance startup Oscar Insurance Corp. announced it would increase its participation in ObamaCare . Oscar was founded by Josh Kushner , the brother of Jared Kushner , Trump ’ s son-in-law and senior adviser .
Oscar will start selling ObamaCare plans in Tennessee next year and re-enter the New Jersey exchange , The Wall Street Journal reported . It will also expand coverage in California and Texas . Last week , Oscar announced it would start working with the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio .