There ’ s plenty of blame to go around , but one thing is clear :
The ObamaCare battle was Mission Impossible from the beginning , because Donald Trump ran against Republican orthodoxy on health insurance .
There was simply no way to satisfy the GOP ’ s most conservative wing , which wanted to junk most of ObamaCare , the center-right conservatives who don ’ t want millions to lose coverage or face huge rate hikes , and Trump ’ s own conditions .
There ’ s been lots of media chatter about how Trump might not be as great a dealmaker as he says . Perhaps , but there was no way to square this circle .
The president faulted the Democrats for their united opposition -- the same thing the Republicans did when the 2010 law passed -- but the GOP never engaged the opposition party , confident it could win on its own .
While the failure to hold the vote is a major setback for Trump , it ’ s just as much of a defeat for the House Freedom Caucus , which , while acting on principle , may have fumbled its best chance to repeal much of a program its members despise .
The plain fact is there was virtually no bill that would satisfy the Freedom Caucus that could pass the House , and even if it did , it would have been doomed in the Senate .
So those lawmakers made the judgment that they ’ d rather have no repeal than such a watered-down version .
The party ’ s mainstream conservatives feared ownership of a health care debacle in which millions of Americans lost coverage or couldn ’ t afford coverage , while states struggled with huge Medicaid cuts , while premiums didn ’ t come down .
Which brings us to the president , who realized he ’ d rather move on than fight this losing battle indefinitely .
Trump doesn ’ t come out of the conservative movement , which is a key reason why he won the election . He called for the replacement of ObamaCare a zillion times during the campaign , but he also said that no one should lose their coverage . That the ban on preexisting conditions should remain . That kids should be able to stay on parental policies until 26 . That he wouldn ’ t cut Medicaid ( or Medicare and Social Security , which also breaks with the Paul Ryan philosophy ) .
With all those conditions , Trump was always going to be at odds with the Freedom Caucus that had the numbers to kill the bill .
On the tactical questions , should Trump have tackled an easier issue like infrastructure first ? Probably . Should he have let Ryan take the lead ? Probably not , for the House speaker could n't deliver . Was the bill rushed and badly flawed ? Absolutely .
But my sense is that Trump didn ’ t care that much about the details , which is why he made several concessions , including on Medicaid . He wanted a deal , something he could declare a victory before turning to the rest of his agenda . He simply is not as passionate about the intricacies of medical insurance as he is about trade and immigration .
In the end , the bill that nobody liked died . And the Republican Party showed it ’ s far easier to be a protesting minority than to actually govern .