US National Security Adviser Susan Rice has said the risk of Ebola transmission in the US is `` very low '' , as a second ailing American arrives for treatment .
One US aid worker is being cared for in Atlanta while his colleague , also infected , is on her way from Liberia to the same specialist hospital .
Another man , in New York , is being tested after travelling to the region .
Since February , 887 people have died in four West African countries . The World Bank has given $ 200m ( £120m ) to help .
The Centers for Disease Control ( CDC ) in the US has received at least 100 calls from people questioning why the sick aid workers should be allowed into the country .
But Ms Rice told NBC the risk to Americans was deemed `` very low '' by the CDC .
`` We have in this country the protocols to isolate and manage any patient who may present with those symptoms of the disease . ''
Nancy Writebol , 59 , an aid worker infected with the virus in Liberia , is expected to arrive in Atlanta for treatment on Tuesday morning .
She is said to be progressing after receiving two doses of a experimental treatment not previously tested on humans .
Her husband , David Writebol , has told the president of the aid agency she was working for that she is weak but showing signs of improvement .
A week ago the family was considering funeral arrangements , but now they were relieved and cautiously optimistic about her condition , he said .
Her colleague , Dr Kent Brantly , 33 , who also received the experimental treatment , arrived at Emory University Hospital on Saturday and was able to walk into hospital , where he is being held in isolation .
Known as ZMapp , the treatment boosts the immune system 's ability to fight off Ebola through antibodies made by lab animals exposed to elements of the virus .
A couple of experimental treatments have been used on a compassionate basis .
The approach is based on the idea that antibodies against the Ebola virus might help the body fight off the infection .
An antibody is a protein produced by the immune system in response to harmful invaders , such as viruses .
It had shown promise in monkeys , CNN reports , but had never before been tested on humans .
It is unclear if the Americans ' improvements are related to the drug . Dr Brantly was reportedly also given a blood transfusion from a boy who recovered from Ebola while in his care .
In a statement , the company said very little of the drug is available and they were `` co-operating with appropriate government agencies to increase production as quickly as possible '' .
The US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) must grant permission to use such treatments on humans in the US , but the agency does not have authority over its use outside the country .
An FDA spokeswoman could not confirm or deny FDA granting access to any experimental therapy for the aid workers inside the US , the Associated Press reports .
The two aid workers were serving with aid groups helping fight the Ebola outbreak in Liberia .
There is no cure or vaccine for Ebola , but patients have a better chance of survival if they receive early treatment .
The current outbreak is killing between 50 % and 60 % of people infected . Initial flu-like symptoms can lead to external haemorrhaging from areas like eyes and gums , and internal bleeding which can lead to organ failure .