On the campaign trail , President Obama vowed that lobbyists would have no place in his administration , but his health care agency last month gave a half-million-dollar grant to a registered lobbying firm to help enroll people for Obamacare as Affordable Care Act “ navigators . ”
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services gave the $ 510,577 grant to Chatman LLC , which has filed disclosure forms revealing that it lobbies CMS on behalf of a private hospital client .
The firm also has filed a disclosure that it lobbied on the health care law itself .
Craig Holman , legislative representative for the watchdog group Public Citizen , said it ’ s unusual for a lobbying firm to get a government contract , but the company may have won the grant because of its grass-roots outreach apparatus .
Still , the award stands in sharp contrast to Mr. Obama ’ s campaign promises about reining in the influence of lobbyists in Washington .
Indeed , the firm ’ s principal , Priscilla Chatman , was turned away from an Obama inauguration party in January after organizers scrubbed a list of ticket purchasers and found she was a registered lobbyist , the Sunlight Foundation reported at the time .
No such barriers prevented her firm from securing work under the CMS “ navigators ” program . More than 100 organizations received grants from CMS last month to help the public apply for Obamacare coverage .
Although most of the organizations winning those grants were nonprofit and educational , Chatman appears to be the only entity that is a registered lobbying firm , according to a review by The ███ . The firm was awarded the grant to provide navigator services in Delaware .
Mr. Holman said the award should place additional restrictions on Chatman LLC , including clearly segregating between lines of business and ensuring that no grant money can be used toward lobbying .
“ And now that Chatman LLC is a government contractor , federal law also prohibits the firm from making any contributions to any federal political committee , including super PACs , ” Mr. Holman said . “ These are a few of the reasons why lobbying firms tend to shy away from government contracts . ”
Navigators , including Chatman LLC , are barred from lobbying on behalf of the health insurance industry “ and must adhere to strict conflict of interest standards , ” said CMS spokeswoman Rachel Maisler .
“ Navigators are one of many important resources to help Americans learn about their health insurance options , enroll in the Marketplace , and find the plan that is best for themselves and their families , ” Ms. Maisler said . “ HHS has run in-person assistance programs for years to help Americans enroll in Medicare and Medicaid . ”
In a separate statement , CMS said grants were awarded competitively and that Chatman LLC was in compliance with all conflict-of-interest rules .
Chatman LLC didn ’ t respond directly to questions from The Times about whether its lobbying work surfaced during the grant application process .
Instead , the firm released a statement saying it has relevant experience to be a navigator .
“ Priscilla Chatman has almost 35 years of experience working on the rollout of private insurance plans that offer government-approved insurance benefits , on Medicaid and in reaching consumers with low health literacy , ” the firm ’ s statement read .
The firm went on to describe Ms. Chatman ’ s work experience , from Medicaid caseworker to general counsel at the National Committee to Preserve Social Security and Medicare .
“ She worked on the rollout of Medicare Part C , Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D , the prescription drug benefit . Both of these efforts are most analogous to the rollout of the ACA , ” the firm said .
According to the firm ’ s lobbying disclosure forms , Ms. Chatman works for the Livingston Group — another lobbying firm — on behalf of Rush University Medical Center in Chicago . CMS was the only federal agency that firm lobbied during the most recent quarter , along with the Senate and House .
During the summer , the firm filed a separate disclosure form showing it had lobbied , among other issues , on the Affordable Care Act .
CMS has said the grants were awarded competitively , but several recipients have faced scrutiny in recent weeks .
The New York Post reported that Seedco , a community development group that won contract work to enroll people for Obamacare , had been sued by the federal government on claims of fraud . Seedco told the paper that it had made important changes , including installing new management .
Republican lawmakers also have raised questions about whether organizations and navigator personnel have been vetted properly .
“ It is simply astounding that the administration is urging the American people to give their Social Security numbers and sensitive personal information to people who have not been properly vetted , ” Sen. John Cornyn , Texas Republican , said in a statement Wednesday .
Last week , Rep. Henry A. Waxman , California Democrat and ranking member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee , called on Republican House members to correct “ inaccurate statements ” about the navigator program .