Our new issue , on war and militarism , is out now . Get a discounted subscription today .
On July 30 , 1965 , Medicare was signed into law . In eleven months , 19 million Americans were automatically enrolled , half of whom were previously uninsured . And within that same transition period — as a direct result of the policy — every segregated hospital in the South took down their “ Whites only ” signs , integrating their services for the first time . Medicare came in three parts : a universal hospital plan for the elderly ( part A ) , voluntary doctor insurance for the elderly ( part B ) , and a means-tested health care plan for the poor ( Medicaid ) . At the age of sixty-five , virtually all Americans would become eligible for Medicare . Echoing the debut of Britain ’ s National Health Service , Lyndon B. Johnson framed Medicare “ not as an act of charity , but as the insured right of a senior citizen. ” On its birthday , we must fiercely and proudly defend Medicare , while recognizing that its protection relies on expanding it to all . Doing so — achieving Medicare for All — means providing comprehensive reproductive health care , including abortion . It means providing health care to all residents , regardless of immigration status . And it means creating a system that covers everyone equally , without means-testing . The history of Medicare can teach us how to get there . Universal programs don ’ t simply generate solidarity once they ’ re won — they require solidarity to win in the first place .
From Medicare for All to Medicare for Some Why didn ’ t America pass a national health insurance plan that covered all ages , as other Western democracies did after World War II ? Before Johnson passed Medicare , both Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Harry Truman supported such a program , but only timidly . They caved to the zealously anti–single payer American Medical Association ( AMA ) and Southern Democrats who feared desegregation . In 1957 , the scope of American health reform narrowed to a program for the elderly : Medicare . Morally , the case for seniors was obvious . In 1962 , Michael Harrington stirred the nation with his book The Other America , which devoted an entire chapter to the elderly : “ Loneliness , isolation , and sickness are the afflictions of the aged in every economic class . But for those who are poor , there is an intensification of each of these tragedies : they are more lonely , more isolated , sicker. ” Economically , the case for seniors was equally apparent . In Health Care for Some , Beatrix Hoffman describes the history of America ’ s unequal health care system , explaining that the failures of the market were glaring when it came to seniors . Seen by the insurance industry as risky ( and therefore costly ) customers , seniors were dealt high premiums and sudden or outright denials . Many were put in the undignified position of having to ask for charity — or , worse , simply foregoing desperately needed care . It was clear that if seniors were to gain access to care , the state had to take on the responsibility .
The Coalition That Won Medicare Harrington ’ s book deeply moved John F. Kennedy , who made Medicare a central piece of his domestic agenda . Kennedy , unlike his predecessors , actually went to war with organized medicine . He toured the country , speaking to tens of thousands of senior citizens at Medicare rallies organized by the AFL-CIO . Organized labor was one of the staunchest proponents of Medicare , pouring heavy resources into Congressional pressure campaigns . The most prominent union fighting for universal health care at the time was the United Auto Workers , led by Walter Reuther . Reuther himself debated the president of the AMA on network cable in 1961 . The AMA ’ s propaganda , which included a red-baiting LP recorded by Ronald Reagan , prompted Reuther to joke about the anti-Medicare campaign : “ If they put it in bags , it would help your lawns grow better. ” Following Kennedy ’ s assassination , Johnson made Medicare a central piece of his presidential campaign . He won in a landslide , alongside the most liberal Congress since 1938 . Johnson saw Medicare as inseparable from his civil rights agenda , raising it in the same breath as voting rights on calls with Martin Luther King Jr. King similarly connected these issues , and in a speech rebuking the AMA he delivered an enduring rallying cry : “ Of all the inequalities that exist , the injustice in health care is the most shocking and inhuman. ” The Jim Crow hospital system was a deadly one , in which even emergency care was regularly denied on the basis of race . Prematurely discharging patients in need of emergency care is known as “ patient dumping , ” and still happens today to people who are uninsured ( often homeless or undocumented ) . An Afro American editorial in 1952 blasted the practice for what it was : “ This exclusion is another form of lynching by proxy. ” Unlike Social Security , which left out agricultural , domestic , and unwaged workers , Medicare was a universal program . And because Title VI of the Civil Rights Act required federally funded programs to prohibit discrimination , Medicare could be a weapon for fighting both disparities in health outcomes and segregation in hospitals . Though it required presidential leadership , Medicare was not a gift from on high — it was a concession made after social movements created unignorable crises . The 1960s was an explosive period for militant protest and mass activism . Medicare would never have been won without such a mass movement in the streets . Euthanizing the insurance industry today will be no different .