America ’ s race toward the so-called “ fiscal cliff ” of automatic , massive tax increases is only part of the problem . This Thelma has her Louise — the Obamacare taxes — and hand-in-hand , these two terrors are racing toward Jan. 1 .
The only thing worse than President Obama ’ s broken Obamacare promises are the promises he intends to keep : the tax hikes . Remember when Mr. Obama promised he ’ d never raise taxes on families earning less than $ 250,000 a year ? He ’ d prefer you didn ’ t , but when Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and the Supreme Court put its stamp of approval on Obamacare , Mr. Obama became a court-certified tax-raiser .
Most of the president ’ s health care takeover won ’ t begin until 2014 , but Democrats just couldn ’ t wait that long to start taxing you . The “ Top Five Worst Obamacare Taxes Coming in 2013 , ” compiled by Americans for Tax Reform , is worth reviewing .
Obamacare Medical Device Tax . From pacemakers to MRI machines , if your health depends on a medical device , you will pay more . Manufacturers will face difficult decisions to compensate for the 2.3 percent excise tax on gross sales — levied even if a firm is not profitable . Will these firms charge you more , lay off workers or sacrifice research and development ? Answer : Yes , yes and yes .
Obamacare “ Special Needs Kids Tax. ” The newly imposed $ 2,500 cap on flexible spending accounts is “ particularly cruel and onerous ” to families of special needs kids whose expenses can be many times that amount .
Obamacare Investment Income Surtax . What do your investments have to do with health care ? It doesn ’ t matter . If it moves , the Democrats will tax it . Capital gains taxes will increase by more than half and dividend taxes will nearly double . A hostile investment climate will starve business of capital and is a recipe for a double-dip recession .
Obamacare “ Haircut ” for Medical Itemized Deductions . Limiting the amount of medical expense deductions will impact families with sizable medical expenses — chief among them , near-retirees .
Obamacare Medicare Payroll-Tax Hike . An increase in the payroll tax by nearly a third just made you more expensive for your employer to keep around .
Of course , this is just the start . The labyrinth of new Obamacare regulations will kill businesses . The 2,700-page law has already generated tens of thousands of pages of regulations , and it ’ s growing . Here ’ s one example : The president ’ s crackerjack bureaucrats required an impressive 18 pages just to define what a full-time employee is . Businesses will need to hire their own in-house bureaucracies to stay in compliance with the Washington bureaucracies .
It gets worse — much worse . Obamacare imposes a $ 40,000 fine for daring to hire a 50th employee without providing government-sanctioned health insurance . Small businesses will start to resemble the television show “ Survivor ” as anyone above the magic number is voted off the island . Think this won ’ t have an impact ? There are already 2.4 times as many businesses in America with 49 employees as those with 50 . Good luck .
800,000 Jobs . That ’ s what Congressional Budget Office Director Doug Elmendorf estimated in 2011 that Obamacare will destroy , and the day of reckoning has begun . In the wake of Mr. Obama ’ s re-election , companies large and small have already begun announcing layoffs , 45 so far , including ( but certainly not limited to ) : Boeing , Hawker Beechcraft , U.S. Cellular , Husqvarna , Caterpillar , Bristol-Myers and on and on . Expect more — lots more .
Small businesses are especially vulnerable , particularly without the resources for throngs of lobbyists and lawyers . A recurring theme is unfolding : “ Elections have consequences , ” said one Las Vegas business owner as he explained that the survival of his company demands that he lay off 22 of his 114 employees . The Twitter aggregator website Twitchy.com has compiled distraught business owners facing the new normal . One user tweeted : “ I own a small business … as of today . I will be laying off 10 of my 60 employees … Thanks Obamacare . ”
These tragic stories are accumulating , and the human toll is devastating despite the administration ’ s assertions of a recovery . “ The private sector is doing fine , ” claimed the president earlier this year . This is fine ? Mr. Obama came into office promising us change , and now he ’ s delivering it : 800,000 layoffs and lost jobs during a “ recovery ” would indeed be some kind of change .
Dr. Milton R. Wolf , a ███ columnist , is a radiologist and President Obama ’ s cousin . He blogs at miltonwolf.com .