But getting “ young invincibles , ” as insurers sometimes call them , to sign up for insurance is an uphill climb . Even with the public campaigns , only about one in four 19- to 29-year-olds is even aware of the exchanges where they might buy affordable insurance , and the ignorance is especially acute among the uninsured , according to a survey this year by the Commonwealth Fund , a nonprofit research group .
“ There ’ s very low awareness among young adults , ” said Sara R. Collins , an economist with the Commonwealth Fund . “ It ’ s a concern in states that aren ’ t actively promoting these exchanges . People might remain unaware , ” she said , referring to the 36 states that have opted to let the federal government run their exchanges for them . They include Texas and Mississippi , where public officials are campaigning against the health law .
That lack of awareness makes it all the more important that those who do know about HealthCare.gov — and try to purchase insurance there — are not dissuaded because of the glitches , the analysts said . Older and sicker Americans have a stronger incentive to keep trying to sign up despite the clunky site , they said .
Though economists , insurers and health analysts are concerned about the problems with HealthCare.gov , which the Obama administration has promised to fix by Nov. 30 , they said it was too early to tell whether the problems would cause an underenrollment of the young and healthy . Insurers would have a good sense of any problems by next spring , they said .
No statistics are available on how many of them have signed up . States are providing no demographic details on enrollees . And the Obama administration has declined to say how many people have purchased insurance in the 36 states where it runs the exchanges .
Jonathan Gruber , an economist with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who helped create the Affordable Care Act , said lessons could be drawn from Massachusetts , which in 2006 implemented a similar law to provide near-universal coverage in the state .
Many Massachusetts residents waited until just before the state law ’ s tax penalty kicked in before signing up for insurance , he said . Just 123 people signed up for subsidized insurance in the first month of enrollment , and only about 2,000 in the second month .