Orrin Hatch and Amy Klobuchar sponsored the amendment . | AP Photos Dems join push to dump health tax
Thirty-four Senate Democrats joined Republicans on Thursday night in a nonbinding but overwhelming vote to repeal a key tax in President Barack Obama 's health reform law .
The Senate voted 79-20 to get rid of the law 's 2.3 percent sales tax on medical device-makers .
The amendment to the budget resolution wo n't become law because the budget is nonbinding . But it has huge political significance as momentum builds for bipartisan consensus to get rid of another piece of Obamacare .
This levy was supposed to help pay for $ 29 billion of the costs of the law . But the medical device industry has raised a raucous over the tax , slowly building support to eliminate it . The tax went into effect in January .
Assuming none of the provision 's backers rescind their support , there is now plenty of support to surpass the 60 votes needed to repeal the device tax — if it comes to a vote , on another bill in the future . Thirty-three Democrats and one independent who caucuses with them supported the measure .
The Democrats who backed the repeal include Sens . Dick Durbin of Illinois , Chuck Schumer of New York , Maria Cantwell of Washington , Barbara Mikulski of Maryland , Tim Kaine of Virginia , Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and nearly all Democrats from states with many device-makers , such as Pennsylvania , Minnesota and Indiana .
But Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) , who controls which legislation gets votes , and Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus ( D-Mont . ) , whose committee wrote the tax , voted against the measure .
Republicans have long railed against the tax , which they say stifles innovation in the medical device industry . They say that the tax is particularly unjust because it taxes sales and not profits , so startup and struggling companies will be taxed just like thriving established companies .
“ The importance of this vote can not be overstated , '' said Sen. Orrin Hatch ( R-Utah ) , who introduced the amendment and a similar bill in the last Congress . `` For the first time , Democrats and Republicans have come together in recognizing how bad this tax is . We can not stop here . We must continue the fight to get rid of this tax . ''
Democrats have slowly started to support the measure in larger numbers . In December , 19 Democrats signed on to a letter asking Reid to delay the tax .
`` We can not have taxes that put as at a competitive disadvantage '' against the rest of the world , '' said Sen. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota , the lead Democrat on the amendment .
The amendment was co-sponsored by eight other Democrats , most from states with many device-makers .
This article first appeared on ███ Pro at 9:48 p.m. on March 21 , 2013 .