WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. Senate Republicans , scolded by President Donald Trump for failing to overturn Obamacare , tried to salvage their seven-year effort for a new healthcare law on Thursday , but leading senators indicated frustration over shifting goal posts .
President Donald Trump speaks during a lunch meeting with Senate Republicans to discuss healthcare at the White House in Washington , July 19 , 2017 . From left are Senators Shelley Moore Capito ( R-WV ) , Dean Heller ( R-NV ) , Tim Scott ( R-SC ) and Lisa Murkowski ( R-AK ) . ███/Kevin Lamarque
Trump on Wednesday told the Senate ’ s fractured Republican majority to revive a bill to repeal and replace Obamacare that collapsed on Monday after Republicans from both moderate and conservative factions pulled their support .
But after a late-night emergency meeting on how to win over holdouts appeared to yield no progress , senators expressed irritation .
“ It really is starting to feel like a bazaar , $ 50 billion here , $ 100 billion there , and I feel like it ’ s losing coherency , ” Senator Bob Corker said .
Susan Collins , a moderate Republican who strongly objected to the revised bill , said she didn ’ t “ even know what we are proceeding to next week ” and said Trump had contributed to the “ lack of clarity ” over the next steps .
“ I ’ m unclear , having heard the president and read his tweets , exactly which bill he wants to pass and whether he is for just repealing , or repealing and replacing - whether he ’ s for the Senate bill , ” Collins said .
Trump , who had campaigned heavily on a promise to repeal and replace Obamacare , the signature legislative achievement of former Democratic President Barack Obama , took a hands-off approach to the healthcare debate last week .
On Tuesday he suggested that he was fine with letting Obamacare fail . But on Wednesday he switched course and demanded that senators stay in Washington through their planned August recess until they find common ground on healthcare .
The repeal and replace bill crafted by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell would leave 22 million Americans without health insurance coverage by 2026 , the nonpartisan U.S. Congressional Budget Office said on Thursday .
Before Trump ’ s Wednesday lunch with 49 Republican senators , McConnell had planned to hold a straight repeal vote next week , but that appeared doomed with several Republican senators having already said they oppose that approach .
The CBO said on Wednesday that 32 million more Americans would lose their insurance coverage by 2026 under a bill that would repeal much of Obamacare without a replacement . That compares with the 20 million who have become insured under Obamacare , as the Affordable Care Act is known .
The Senate ’ s number two Republican , John Cornyn , said he expected a procedural vote on Tuesday to take up a healthcare bill , but said knowing what the healthcare bill will be before the procedural vote is “ a luxury we don ’ t have . ”
An aide to Cornyn said he was referring to the amendment process that could change the bill once it is on the Senate floor . “ It ’ s difficult to predict what the final product will look like , ” the aide said .
Adding to Republicans ’ woes was news late Wednesday that Senator John McCain has aggressive brain cancer . With a narrow 52-48 Republican majority , their fight for votes becomes even more difficult .
McCain , a Republican known for his feisty independence , tweeted , “ ... unfortunately for my sparring partners in Congress , I ’ ll be back soon , so stand-by ! ”
As they sought to break the impasse , senators were discussing changes to Medicaid , the government healthcare program for the poor that was expanded under Obamacare . One possibility would give states flexibility to use Medicaid funding to help cover healthcare expenses of people who would lose their Medicaid coverage under the Senate bill ’ s sharp cuts to the program .
Senator Rob Portman , one of the undecideds on the healthcare bill , called the proposal “ progress. ” But Collins said she had not heard a Medicaid proposal that would tempt her to vote yes .
Republicans say Obamacare is a costly intrusion into the healthcare system , but the party is divided between moderates concerned the Senate bill would eliminate insurance for millions of low-income Americans and conservatives who want to see even deeper cuts .
McConnell revealed little of his next steps but said Republicans were not giving up . “ The fight to move beyond the status quo of Obamacare was certainly never going to be easy , ” he told the Senate on Thursday .
“ But we ’ ve come a long way , and I look forward to continuing our work together to finally bring relief . ”
The dramatic week at Congress and in the White House was taking its toll .
“ I ’ m getting a little anxious , ” Corker said . He said the best approach would be a repeal , with a delayed effective date by which time lawmakers could develop a replacement .
Democrats , who are united in their opposition to the Republican efforts and reveled in this week ’ s deadlock , told Republicans to abandon their healthcare efforts as they appeared no closer to reconciling policy differences after Wednesday ’ s meeting .
“ It ’ s time for Congress to pivot away from the bills that are going nowhere , ” said House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi .