President Obama defended his signature health care law Wednesday in a speech from Boston , saying that people who are losing their insurance plans because of the law should start shopping around for better coverage .
Speaking at historic Faneuil Hall , Obama acknowledged the problem-plagued rollout of ObamaCare and attempted to deflect criticism over the wave of cancellation notices hitting small businesses and individuals who buy their own insurance .
The cancellation notices apply to people whose plans changed after the law was implemented or do n't meet new coverage requirements . The president said those changes ensure that all Americans are able to get quality coverage .
`` So if you 're getting one of these letters , just shop around in the new marketplace . That 's what it 's for , '' Obama said . `` Because of the tax credits that we are offering , and the competition between insurers , most people are going to be able to get better , comprehensive healthcare plans for the same price or even cheaper than projected . ''
Republicans believe the president 's argument flies in the face of his repeated claims that consumers who liked their insurance would be able to keep it .
Officials in Oregon say 150,000 Oregonians enrolled in individual health care plans will see their plans cancelled by the end of the year because the plans don ’ t provide the minimum level of coverage required under the new health care law .
In Florida , about 300,000 Blue Cross and Blue Shield members will be affected . California ’ s Blue Shield and Oakland-based Kaiser Permanente will withdraw policies for a combined 280,000 customers . CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield sent notices to more than 70,000 customers in D.C. , Virginia , Maryland and Washington whose current plans don ’ t comply with the law , according to Bloomberg News .
Sens . Ron Johnson , R-Wis. , and Marco Rubio , R-Fla. , introduced legislation Wednesday aimed at giving American the ability to hold onto their plans if they liked them . The bill would add flexibility to the standards for insurance policies allowed under ObamaCare .
`` That was a fundamental promise that was made in order to get this law passed and now that ’ s being broken and we ’ re seeing that it wasn ’ t an unintended consequence , it was an intended consequence , '' Rubio told ███ ' Greta Van Susteren on “ On the Record . ''
The president 's remarks marked a striking departure from his vow stretching back to 2009 : `` No matter how we reform health care , we will keep this promise to the American people . If you like your doctor , you will be able to keep your doctor , period . If you like your health care plan , you 'll be able to keep your health care plan , period . No one will take it away , no matter what . ''
And from the final months of the 2012 campaign : `` If you 're one of the more than 250 million Americans who already have health insurance , you will keep your health insurance . This law will only make it more secure and more affordable . ''
Obama chose the site where Massachusetts ' health care system became law to promote his health care law , arguing that the state plan also faced initial setbacks and low enrollment but in time gained popularity and became a success .
`` All the parade of horribles , the worst predictions about health care reform in Massachusetts never came true , '' he said . `` They 're the same arguments that you 're hearing now . ''
The president pointed to benefits already available under the 3-year-old health care law , including ending discrimination against children with pre-existing conditions and permission to keep young people on their parents ' insurance plans until they turn 26 .
Romney took issue with Obama 's characterization of the Massachusetts health care law . In a statement , he said `` had President Obama actually learned the lessons of Massachusetts health care , millions of Americans would not lose the insurance they were promised they could keep , millions more would not see their premiums skyrocket and the installation of the program would not have been a frustrating embarrassment . ''
Obama he conceded the troubled launch of the open enrollment period that began Oct. 1 .
`` There ’ s no denying it , right now , the website is too slow , too many people have gotten stuck . And I am not happy about it . And neither are a lot of Americans who need health care , and they ’ re trying to figure out how they can sign up as quickly as possible , '' he said .
Underscoring the president 's challenge , the HealthCare.gov website was down , because of technical difficulties , during his remarks . Republicans say the current computer dysfunction is more reason to repeal the law , and they 're pressing Obama administration officials for an explanation .