Massachusetts built the model of a state-run exchange in 2006 . Mass . ditches RomneyCare exchange
RomneyCare ’ s pioneering health insurance exchange is headed for the scrap heap .
Bay State officials are taking steps this week to junk central parts of their dysfunctional health insurance exchange — the model for President Barack Obama ’ s health care law — and merge with the federal enrollment site HealthCare.gov .
The decision is part of an expensive plan that would occur alongside a parallel , last-ditch attempt to still build a working state system .
The state on Monday announced the hiring of hCentive , a Virginia-based contractor that helped construct the Kentucky and Colorado exchanges . The company would rush to build a viable state exchange in time for the next enrollment season , which begins Nov. 15 .
But officials aren ’ t sure it ’ s possible to make that happen in less than six months . Given the narrow timeframe , they intend to simultaneously start shifting the Massachusetts exchange , known as the Connector , to HealthCare.gov .
A move by Massachusetts to the federal exchange would represent a symbolic blow for local Obamacare supporters . Massachusetts built the model of a state-run exchange in 2006 , a result of the health care reform effort by then-Gov . Mitt Romney . The RomneyCare exchange , which helped the state provide health coverage to more than 97 percent of residents , became the template for the Obamacare version .
Massachusetts is the second state to begin that transition . Late last month , Oregon opted to scrap its $ 200 million system and join the federal exchange .
It ’ s unclear what either option will cost Massachusetts or whether federal officials will cover that expense . Massachusetts has already spent $ 57 million on a system that never was able to enroll people with subsidies start to finish , and its failure has forced the state to enroll more than 160,000 residents in temporary Medicaid coverage — at an estimated $ 10 million-a-month cost .
State officials traveled to Washington last week to discuss the future of their exchange with the Obama administration . Their meeting came after a review by the consultant Optum indicated that most of the state ’ s earlier efforts to build an exchange were not salvageable , the sources said . They added that the state intends to retain Optum to help oversee hCentive ’ s efforts .
CMS , the federal agency that oversees HealthCare.gov , said Monday that it is “ working with Massachusetts ” but declined to weigh in on the merits of its plan .
Massachusetts officials initially declined to comment as they prepared to announce the contours of the new approach . But Monday afternoon , they issued a press release announcing the move and calling it the start of a Connector “ turnaround. ” The board of the Connector is scheduled to meet Thursday to consider the plan .
“ No comment before the meeting on Thursday , ” said Jonathan Gruber , a member of the Connector board and also an MIT economist who helped model the state and federal health laws . Only days ago , Gruber had termed the odds of a move to HealthCare.gov as “ low . ”
Critics of Obamacare quickly characterized the state ’ s issues as an outgrowth of the “ one-size-fits-all ” nature of the federal health care law .
“ It ’ s a travesty , ” said Ryan Williams , a Republican consultant who worked as an aide to Romney in Massachusetts and on his presidential campaigns . “ What we ’ ve seen is a dismantling of a once-popular and effective system to be replaced with a wildly ineffective and broken program that has brought great shame to Massachusetts . ”
“ This will be a problem not only for Democrats in the Bay State but for Democrats across the country . If it can fail in Massachusetts , it can fail anywhere , ” Williams added .
In two high-profile races , Republican congressional candidate Richard Tisei and GOP gubernatorial frontrunner Charlie Baker said the move supported their call for a waiver for Massachusetts from Obamacare .
“ I can ’ t think of any more of an embarrassing course of events than what ’ s occurred with our website , ” Tisei said .
In an interview , hCentive CEO Sanjay Singh said that the state ’ s simultaneous effort to transition to HealthCare.gov and build its own exchange “ puts pressure ” on the company but that he ’ s confident it will succeed .
The company will “ have to show to the state that there ’ s enough progress that has been made that they don ’ t need to rely on [ the federal system ] , ” he said . “ We ’ ll work with them and set up some interim milestones and see whether we ’ re living up to the standards they ’ ve set . ”
Massachusetts officials disclosed in February that they were considering a transition to HealthCare.gov , among other options . Last week , Rep. Stephen Lynch ( D-Mass . ) said the state should strongly consider joining the federal system .
“ You have two choices — one is to expend even greater amounts of money on something that had limited success thus far or going to the federal exchange , ” Lynch said . “ There ’ s simplicity in that , and I think that may be where some within the commonwealth would like to go . ”
Massachusetts initially contracted with CGI , a massive contractor that gained notoriety for the failed rollout of HealthCare.gov . As the Obama administration did , Massachusetts dropped the company earlier this year when it became clear the Connector was still substantially broken .
In addition to placing thousands of state residents on temporary Medicaid , tens of thousands more who ’ d expected to transition to the new exchange have been forced to remain on Commonwealth Care . That pre-Obamacare program was set to phase out in January but has been extended through at least June .