In January , I quibbled with Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal ’ s word choice , so it is only fair I praise him for a strong showing on NBC ’ s Meet the Press this weekend . When asked about Obamacare , the potential 2016 contender was unequivocal : “ I think we should be fighting to defund it . ”
Those comments stand in stark contrast to those of Republican leaders in Washington , a point host David Gregory looked to exploit :
“ On Obamacare , you even have the speaker of the House [ John Boehner ] saying , ‘ The president 's not going to lose his signature achievement. ’ That efforts to defund Obamacare , even to threaten a government shutdown , simply are not going to work . ”
In what appeared to be a brush back pitch aimed squarely at congressional Republicans , Jindal responded “ I do n't know why we would negotiate with ourselves. ” After laying out a succinct and compelling case against Obamacare , Jindal returned to his initial point :
“ So I do n't know why we would take any option off the table . I do n't think this president or the Democrats are going to want to shut down the government . That 's a false choice . That 's a threat coming from them . I think Republicans should use every tactic , every option we can to repeal and replace Obamacare . ”
Jindal did not back down when Gregory pressed him on the shutdown nonsense :
“ Again , look , I think this is a false threat from the other side . I do n't think you have to shut down the government to repeal and replace Obamacare . But I do n't think Republicans should be taking options off the table . I think we should be fighting to defund it . The reality is -- is that let 's have that debate . I do n't think Republicans should be negotiating with ourselves and saying , ‘ We 're not going to do this , we 're not going to do that. ’ Let 's look at every option and get rid of Obamacare . ”
Unfortunately , it looks like Republicans in Washington are determined to take options off the table while they negotiate with themselves . Earlier this month , House Majority Leader Eric Cantor ( R-VA ) explained it was simply about math :
“ To get 60 votes in the Senate , you need at least 14 Democrats to join Republicans and pass a CR that defunds Obamacare . Right now , I am not aware of a single Democrat in the Senate who would join us . If and when defunding has 60 votes in the Senate , we will absolutely deliver more than 218 votes in the House . ”
This intense interest in the partisan affiliation of Senators is a relatively new phenomenon .
In 2011 , House Republicans didn ’ t ask Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-NV ) for a whip count or Barack Obama which pen he ’ d wield . Instead , they passed a spending bill that President Obama said contained “ deep cuts that will undermine our ability to out-educate , out-build , and out-innovate the rest of the world . ”
As the months ticked by , House Republicans began winning the public debate , which led to actual legislative victories . Those legislative victories , while small , were made possible because House Republicans didn ’ t negotiate with themselves . They didn ’ t take options off the table . Instead , they were fighting to uphold the mandate given to them by the American people .
If Republicans want to have a real debate over Obamacare – and they absolutely should – another raft of symbolic votes is unlikely to advance the national dialogue . Concrete and determined action will , though .
Throughout August , pro-Obamacare groups have followed Heritage Action around the country . Those groups have been attempting to rally support – a dozen people here , a couple dozen there – for Obamacare this August . Meanwhile , Heritage Action , along with the Heritage Foundation , Rafael Cruz and other conservatives , has served as a catalyst for anti-Obamacare events and rallies across the country .
A battle over this unworkable , unaffordable and increasingly unpopular law is waging . The only question is whether House Republicans will ask Harry Reid ’ s permission before they come to the aid of the American people .