Schools already reach out to students and families for two other health entitlements . Obamacare minor subject for schools
When children return to school a few weeks from now , don ’ t expect to find Obamacare forms stuffed inside their backpacks .
Supporters of the health law see back-to-school season as a natural time for Obamacare outreach , a chance to find young families who could benefit from new health coverage options . But weeks before the school bells start ringing in parts of the country , there ’ s no concerted effort to reach parents at the schoolhouse door . It ’ s yet another sign of how the undying controversy could overshadow attempts to get people enrolled .
Education Secretary Arne Duncan told ███ this summer that his department has no plans to actively advocate for the health law , only providing help when asked . “ No one has asked us , ” he added .
More recently a Department of Education spokesman said federal officials are sending out brochures from the Department of Health and Human Services . They are also working with “ state and local partners ” on written and online materials , and one aspect they want to stress is that Obamacare ’ s preventive health benefits would be particularly important to children and families .
But schools at this point aren ’ t a nationwide focal point of outreach and enrollment . The National PTA isn ’ t gearing up either . “ National PTA does not have any plans to assist in the dissemination of information about the Affordable Care Act , ” said spokeswoman Abiah Weaver .
And the big sign-up campaign from Enroll America , an organization of Obamacare allies and health law stakeholders , hasn ’ t focused on schools , at least not as of now .
States or school districts can act on their own ; Los Angeles , for instance , is training some high school juniors and seniors how to be Obamacare messengers to their families and communities . But the lack of a national strategy is just one more sign of how hard it is for the administration and its allies to focus on health benefits , not health politics , as Obamacare enrollment nears . And the Republicans have made it clear that they don ’ t want the schools to go anywhere near the controversial health law .
“ What authority does the Department of Education have to disseminate information and assist with the implementation of the president ’ s health care law ? ” Sen. Lamar Alexander ( R-Tenn. ) , a former Education secretary , and other GOP senators wrote Duncan in July . “ How do the Department of Education ’ s activities further the education of our nation ’ s students ? ”
Alexander says school administrators and teachers are already overwhelmed with education mandates from Washington . “ They don ’ t need another one , especially not one that ’ s outside of their mission as educators , and one for which Congress hasn ’ t appropriated any funds , ” he said in a recent statement to ███ .
Nobody working on the law ’ s implementation is ruling out more school-based activity as the fall gets underway ; enrollment in Obamacare ’ s online health exchanges doesn ’ t start until October and it lasts through March . But the lack of outreach dismays advocates who say schools have unique connections to families who could most benefit from the health law .
Schools already reach out to students and families for two other health entitlements : Medicaid and the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program . And it ’ s maddeningly easy , the advocates contend , to slip Obamacare insurance enrollment information into the packets that parents receive at the start of the school year .
“ Putting a piece of paper into the packet … is not a big deal , ” said Bruce Lesley , president of First Focus , an advocacy group for children . “ I haven ’ t heard of any national , organized context for it the way we ’ ve really been successful at with Medicaid and CHIP . ”