THE VILLAGES , Fla. ( ███ ) - U.S. President Donald Trump sought to woo seniors on Thursday with an executive order aimed at strengthening the Medicare health program by reducing regulations , curbing fraud , and providing faster access to new medical devices and therapies .
U.S. President Donald Trump holds up an executive order on Medicare he signed during an event at The Villages retirement community in The Villages , Florida , U.S. , October 3 , 2019 . ███/Kevin Lamarque
The order , which Trump discussed during a visit to a retirement community in Florida known as the Villages , is the Republican president ’ s answer to some Democrats who are pushing for a broad and expensive expansion of Medicare to cover all Americans .
Trump referred to such proposals as socialist and pledged to prevent them from coming to fruition , a political promise with an eye toward his 2020 re-election campaign in which healthcare is likely to be a major issue .
“ They want to raid Medicare to fund a thing called socialism , ” Trump told an enthusiastic crowd in Florida , a political swing state that is critical to his goal of keeping the White House .
The executive order follows measures his administration rolled out in recent months designed to curtail drug prices and correct other perceived problems with the U.S. healthcare system . Policy experts say the efforts are unlikely to slow the tide of rising drug prices in a meaningful way .
Trump suggested that drug companies were backing impeachment efforts in Washington , which he considers a “ hoax , ” as a way to sabotage his efforts to make prescriptions affordable .
“ We ’ re lowering the cost of prescription drugs , taking on the pharmaceutical companies . And you think that ’ s easy ? It ’ s not easy ... I wouldn ’ t be surprised if the hoax didn ’ t come from some of the people that we ’ re taking on , ” he said .
Medicare covers Americans who are 65 and older and includes traditional fee-for-service coverage in which the government pays healthcare providers directly and Medicare Advantage plans , in which private insurers manage patient benefits on its behalf .
Seniors are a key political constituency in America because a high percentage of them vote .
The order pushes for Medicare to use more medical telehealth services , which is care delivered by phone or digital means , leading to cost reductions by reducing expensive emergency room visits , an administration official told ███ ahead of the announcement .
The order directs the government to work to allow private insurers that operate Medicare Advantage plans to use new plan pricing methods , such as allowing beneficiaries to share in the savings when they choose lower-cost health services .
It also aims to bring payments for the traditional Medicare fee-for-service program in line with payments for Medicare Advantage .
Trump ’ s plans contrast with the Medicare for All program promoted by Bernie Sanders , a Democratic socialist who is running to become the Democratic Party ’ s nominee against Trump in the 2020 presidential election .
Sanders ’ proposal , backed by left-leaning Democrats but opposed by moderates such as former Vice President Joe Biden , would create a single-payer system , effectively eliminating private insurance by providing government coverage to everyone , using the Medicare model .
“ Medicare for All is Medicare for none , ” said Seema Verma , the administrator of the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , on a conference call with reporters , calling the proposal a “ pipe dream ” that would lead to higher taxes .
Sanders has argued that Americans would pay less for healthcare under his plan .
The White House is eager to show Trump making progress on healthcare , an issue Democrats successfully used to garner support and take control of the House of Representatives in the 2018 midterm elections . Trump campaigned in 2016 on a promise to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act , his predecessor President Barack Obama ’ s signature healthcare law also known as “ Obamacare. ” So far he has not repealed or replaced it .
In July , the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) said it would propose a rule for imports of cheaper drugs from Canada into the United States . A formal rule has not yet been unveiled .
The administration also issued an executive order in June demanding hospitals and insurers make prices they charge patients more transparent . Another in July encouraged novel treatments for kidney disease .
A federal judge in July shot down an executive order that would have forced drugmakers to display list prices in advertisements , and Trump scrapped another planned order that would have banned some rebate payments drugmakers make to payers .
The administration is mulling a plan to tie some Medicare reimbursement rates for drugs to the price paid for those drugs by foreign governments , ███ reported .