The author says 'the effects of the recent cancellations are not necessarily out of the norm . ' Study probes ACA impact on plans
Millions of the plans that were canceled because they did not meet Affordable Care Act requirements probably would have been canceled anyway — by the policyholders , a new study suggests .
Last fall , as cancellation letters arrived in mailboxes around the country , opponents of the law cited them as evidence that President Barack Obama lied to Americans when he promised , “ If you like your health care plan , you can keep it . ”
But most individuals who lost plans probably would not have continued them even without the law , according to the study , which was published online Wednesday in Health Affairs . Its author questions whether those cancellations contributed much to the nation ’ s ranks of short-term uninsured .
The study looked at people who bought nongroup , or individual , insurance plans — a market that was relatively unstable even before Obamacare took effect . Between 2008 and 2011 , fewer than half the people who started out with such coverage still had it after a year . And 80 percent of those who changed policies had a new plan within a year , usually through an employer , the study found .
Given this baseline , author Benjamin Sommers says , “ the effects of the recent cancellations are not necessarily out of the norm . ”
An estimated 10.8 million people had nongroup coverage in 2012 , according to the Congressional Research Service . Based on his own findings , Sommers estimated that 6.2 million Americans leave nongroup coverage each year under typical circumstances . News reports that as many as 4.7 million adults had their policies canceled in 2013 “ are likely capturing a great deal of the normal turnover in this market , ” he concludes .
Writing in Health Affairs , Sommers says his examination of data from the Census Bureau ’ s Survey of Income and Program Participation showed that nongroup coverage is transitional for most people . They often buy it while between jobs or waiting for employer benefits to kick in . A year after dropping their individual plans , Sommers found , 50 percent had employer-sponsored insurance , 20 percent had reacquired nongroup coverage , 6 percent joined Medicare or Medicaid , and 4 percent had other coverage .
However , Sommers did identify a group most likely to face a genuine , unwanted disruption from the ACA ’ s requirements : white , self-employed Americans of ages 36-64 . They were likely to maintain their nongroup coverage for three years or more .
Young adults of ages 19-35 were unlikely to fall in that same category , with only a third holding nongroup coverage for at least 12 months .
About 65 percent of people with nongroup plans had incomes below 400 percent of poverty , so “ many , if not most ” of those whose plans were canceled last fall are now eligible for subsidies , Sommers writes .
Sommers , an assistant professor at Harvard University ’ s medical and public health schools , serves as a part-time adviser in the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation at the Department of Health and Human Services .