Error messages initially appeared on the exchanges of at least 34 states , where federally-run exchanges went live at 8 a.m. EDT . The messages indicated online traffic as a reason for the problems .
( RealMoney ) – The Obama administration unveiled a pillar of its signature health care overhaul on Tuesday , launching insurance marketplaces -- or exchanges – just as a partial government shutdown went into effect .
We have built a dynamic system and are prepared to make adjustments as needed and improve the consumer experience
“ We have built a dynamic system and are prepared to make adjustments as needed and improve the consumer experience , ” Health and Human Services spokeswoman Joanne Peters said in a statement .
The administration predicted glitches during the roll-out of the new system , where Americans are expected to gain access to subsidized insurance plans .
Nearly 3 million people had visited the site by mid-day , as operators fielded more than 80,000 calls to government help-lines .
Peters suggested consumers go online to localhelp.healthcare.gov to find “ navigators , ” or community helpers who can assist in the enrollment process .
A majority of those who qualify for the exchanges are eligible for tax credits , which are expected to reduce consumers ’ monthly premiums .
For the next six months , they will be able to evaluate a variety of “ metallic ” health plans on the new system , with separate exchanges run by 14 states and the District of Columbia .
The bronze level plan , for example , has the lowest premium , but has higher out-pocket costs in terms of co-pays and deductibles – typically covering about 60 % of those costs .
The silver plans covers 70 % , gold covers 80 % , and platinum covers 90 % , though also maintaining the highest premium .
Coverage does not begin until January 1 . Those who are uninsured and do not enroll face a $ 95 penalty , or about 1 % of annual income , around tax time .
After March 31 , consumers can only enroll if they have experience a major life event such as marriage or divorce .
Meanwhile , the Affordable Care Act remains at the center of a hotly-contested debate on Capitol Hill , as House Republicans press to delay the individual mandate – a key part of what is perhaps the most wide-reaching social program created since Medicare and Medicaid .