The American public is now evenly split in its opinion of the Affordable Care Act , an improvement in the law 's standing , according to a new ███/TIPP poll .
Some 47 percent of American adults support the law known as Obamacare , and 47 percent are opposed , finds the poll , conducted between April 26 and May 1 .
This result is just one indicator – and a tentative one – that when the Obamacare marketplaces outperformed expectations by exceeding 7 million people enrolled , the news may have given Obamacare a boost in public opinion . So far , other recent polls still find that more people disapprove of the law than approve , and that public opinion is little changed since the April 1 enrollment deadline .
When the Monitor/TIPP poll asked in a late March survey whether people support or oppose the health-care law passed in 2010 , more than half were opposed ( 51 percent ) and 40 percent said they support the law .
So the even split between the “ support ” and “ oppose ” camps , in the new poll , looks like a considerable change since March .
“ They are in a statistical dead heat , ” says pollster Raghavan Mayur , president of TechnoMetrica Market Intelligence , by e-mail .
The margin of error , an estimate of how much the poll results may differ from actual public opinion , is 3.4 percentage points , similar to other national polling on the subject . Although the margin of error makes poll results a bit fuzzy , Mr. Mayur says support for the law “ has increased ” since late March .
With other polls not seeing that trend , what remains to be seen is whether the Monitor/TIPP result is a temporary outlier or an early sign that views toward the law are becoming a bit more positive .
Public opinion about the law is important because health-care policy promises to remain an issue of heated political debate . Republicans are hoping to leverage opposition to the law in their favor in congressional elections , while Democrats are hoping their support of the law won ’ t be too much of a liability .
This year marks the law ’ s major rollout phase , with “ exchanges , ” or marketplaces , including the federal HealthCare.gov website launching for individuals to shop for coverage that complies with the law .
Even an improved public view of the law isn ’ t a rosy one .
In the Monitor/TIPP poll , fully 44 percent of respondents say Congress should repeal the law . One of the act ’ s less-popular provisions is the “ individual mandate , ” which calls on people to buy insurance this year ( if they don ’ t have it already ) or face a possible tax penalty .
The high cost of health care remains a public concern ( as it was before the law ) , and many Americans worry about having limited access to particular doctors and care providers under the health plans available on the Obamacare exchanges .
Other elements of the law are popular , such as a provision to ensure that people can obtain insurance regardless of preexisting medical conditions .
When the White House reported that the number of people applying for insurance on the exchanges surged to 8 million as of early April , President Obama sought to use the news to galvanize public support .
“ Independent experts now estimate that millions of Americans who were uninsured have gained coverage this year – with millions more to come next year and the year after , ” Mr. Obama said on April 17 . “ This thing is working . ”
Pollsters , in framing their survey questions about the ACA , characterize it as a `` health reform law '' or a `` law making changes to the health-care system . '' ( The Monitor/TIPP poll calls it the `` health care law passed in 2010 , also known as Obamacare . '' ) For comparison , here is the mix of late-April poll results regarding Obamacare ( as tracked by the website PollingReport.com ) , presented in chronological order from the most recent poll to one that concluded on April 21 .
36 percent say law is a “ good idea ” ( up from 35 percent in March )
46 percent say “ bad idea ” ( down from 49 percent in March )
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy