Many small businesses will have to upgrade to plans that comply with new ACA rules . | REUTERS Next ACA crisis : Small biz costs ?
Think the canceled health policies hurt the Obamacare cause ? There ’ s another political time bomb lurking that could explode not too long before next year ’ s elections : rate hikes for small businesses .
Like the canceled individual health plans , it ’ s another example of a trade-off that health care experts have long known about , as the new rules for health insurance prices create winners and losers . But most Americans won ’ t become aware of it until some small-business employees learn that their premiums are going up because of a law called — oops — the Affordable Care Act .
Some will learn the opposite , that their premiums are going down because of the law . But as we saw with the canceled individual health plans , it ’ s the losers who will get most of the attention .
And the timing will be terrible for Democrats : A lot of those small businesses will have to start dealing with their new premiums in October — just in time for Republicans to make it an issue in their midterm election campaigns .
There are no widely accepted estimates for how many people could be affected , but even if it ’ s a relative minority , it won ’ t matter politically — because Democrats will once again have to defend the administration ’ s claims that the majority of Americans who have employer-based insurance won ’ t be affected by Obamacare .
“ The biggest shocker for the small-business community is going to hit in October , which is interesting because it will be prime time for the election , ” said Jessica Waltman , a top lobbyist at the National Association of Health Underwriters .
Here ’ s why : Next year , small-business health plans — those that cover 50 or fewer workers — will have to comply with a wide range of new rules , particularly the ones that say the businesses can ’ t be charged more if their workers have health problems . Their premiums will vary based only on the workers ’ ages , whether they have individual or family coverage , what part of the country they live in , and whether they use tobacco — and older workers won ’ t be able to be charged more than three times as much as younger ones .
Those changes will be helpful to small businesses with older workers and employees with health problems , but they also mean that small firms with younger , healthier workers will have to pay more than they used to . The new small-business plans will also have to cover the same set of minimum benefits that individual health plans will have to provide , including pediatric care and mental health and substance abuse services .
“ If you can ’ t use health [ to set premiums ] anymore , some people will move down and other people will move up , ” said Gary Claxton , director of the Health Care Marketplace Project at the Kaiser Family Foundation . “ If you ’ re a group of three 21-year-old men , you ’ ll pay more , because a group of three 64-year-olds somewhere else will be paying less . ”
A lot of small businesses pushed off those changes this year by renewing their old , pre-Obamacare health plans early , extending them into next year . A common tactic , according to insurers and brokers , was to reset their plans with a Dec. 1 renewal date , which allowed them to hold onto the old benefits and rules as long as possible .
Next year , though , many of those small businesses will have to upgrade to health plans that comply with the new Obamacare rules . Unlike the canceled health insurance policies that largely hit this fall , those changes will be spread throughout the year .
But there will be a cluster of December renewals , industry officials say , and those small businesses will get the first look at their new premiums in October — right at the height of an election that ’ s increasingly being framed as a referendum on the impact of Obamacare .
“ You ’ re going to have Joe the Plumber times a thousand around the country saying , ‘ I got screwed , ’ ” said a health insurance industry official who asked not to be identified in order to speak candidly .
That could be a big political problem for the Obama administration , which has taken pains to present the law as a badly needed source of relief for small businesses . It sets up health insurance marketplaces for small businesses , called SHOP exchanges , around the country to provide them with more choices and better bargaining clout , and it provides tax credits for the smallest firms .
The issue is too far down the road to get a lot of attention from the administration now , since it has plenty of more immediate concerns , especially with the start of Obamacare coverage Jan. 1 and the need to make sure no one has a gap in coverage .
But an administration official said the Obama team will be watching the small-business situation closely as the time for those renewals approaches . “ I think that ’ s something we ’ re going to take a hard look at and see if there are things that can be tweaked ” if there is a lot of disruption , the official said .
CORRECTION : Corrected by : Trevor Eischen @ 12/18/2013 07:45 PM This story has been updated to correct the description of small businesses and clarify how the new rating rules work .