The final deal to avert a breach of the debt limit and end the government shutdown included what has been described as a “ small concession ” to Republicans : tightening the income verification measures for customers on the Obamacare insurance exchanges to qualify for subsidies . But considering the hurdles associated with this step – and the enormous IT problems we ’ ve already seen with the exchanges – the concession may not be small at all .
As one prominent health care expert tells ███ , the impact could contribute to an attempted sabotage of the law by those who want to see it repealed . Rather than letting the health care law survive “ unscathed , ” the income verification piece could trigger a new round of headaches for Obamacare , and this time , Republicans – and the country – will be paying attention .
Conservatives have been grumbling for months that Obamacare invites fraud , by using an “ honor system ” to verify the income levels that determine subsidy amounts on the exchanges . Just last month , House Republicans passed the No Subsidies Without Verification Act 235-191 , with all of their members voting in favor . The bill prohibits any subsidies from being distributed until the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) certifies that a system of income verification is operational .
HHS did say back in July that they would rely on “ self-attestation ” to determine the initial subsidy level , with sample audits to verify information . But later , HHS announced the sample size would equal 100 % of the population , and that they would test self-reporting against sources like past tax filings and Social Security data . While they haven ’ t officially changed the regulation , income verification tests are included in the exchange ’ s data hubs . So you can say that the Republican measure just forces compliance with spelling out the regulations for a full verification regime .
However , there ’ s another part to this , the simplest and easiest way to ensure that everyone receives the proper subsidy level . It ’ s called the Internal Revenue Service . Every American sends in a tax return annually showing their exact income level , subject to routine verification by a large government agency . Under Obamacare , the IRS can claw back excess subsidies after the fact , something frequent conservative critic Avik Roy acknowledged in July . He added that “ the IRS ’ record of impartiality is , shall we say , contested , ” and that people in poverty who don ’ t file tax returns “ would probably not be subject ” to clawbacks ( weasel word alert ! ) . Roy is relying on the discredited IRS scandal here to suggest that the agency wouldn ’ t do their job when Obamacare recipients ( read : Democrats ) are involved . But he also takes a very curious stance for a conservative : that the IRS , far from being a group of jack-booted thugs who will stop at nothing to take your money at the barrel of a gun , is simply too lazy to do its job !
“ You have to wonder , why isn ’ t clawback enough , ” Paul Starr , Princeton professor and author of Remedy and Reaction , about the legislative fight over Obamacare , told ███ . “ This seems to me another form of sabotage . ”
Starr ’ s perspective is borne by the early experience of the exchanges . The federal exchange , which is the Obamacare portal for customers in 34 states , has performed very badly in the opening weeks . Even supporters of the law like the Washington Post ’ s Ezra Klein has called the rollout a disaster . Not only have potential customers been unable to register for the program after 20 or 30 attempts , those few who have been successful aren ’ t having their data transferred to insurance companies properly .
“ Things are worse behind the curtain than in front of it , ” according to health care writer Bob Laszlewski , describing how the system is enrolling and unenrolling customers seemingly at random . If HHS can ’ t approve subsidies until the Inspector General decides income verification is operational , that would definitely delay subsidies – nothing is operational about the federal exchanges right now . ( Subsequent reports about the deal suggest that Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , and not the Inspector General , would do the certification . But it ’ s not clear what would have to be tweaked in the process . )
And you have to question whether income verification would ever be operational , and if that ’ s contributing to the major delays on the exchange website . Accurate , real-time income verification has been a cherished goal for members of the financial services industry for many years ; they use this data to determine eligibility for loans of all types . Needless to say , big banks and financial services firms have massive resources relative to the federal government . And they haven ’ t been able to nail electronic income verification yet ; they mostly ask people to mail or fax in forms proving income , rather than submit them through the Web ( which leads to losing forms and multiple queries for data and all the rest ) .
Most of the information you can scrape from payroll or Social Security data would be 6-18 months out of date , especially for the types of part-time workers , freelancers , “ unbanked ” individuals and self-employed persons who comprise the primary group signing up for Obamacare . Demanding real-time income verification would require technology that doesn ’ t even exist for the financial sector , and to get it right would add significantly to the already burdensome delays in acquiring insurance coverage on the exchanges . It would also expand costs for IT development exponentially , achieving the neat trick of making Obamacare more costly and more ineffective at the same time .
As noted before , there ’ s an already existing method of income verification , through the IRS , that stands ready to handle any potential misreporting through clawbacks . In fact , the IRS will have to verify income anyway ; people simply don ’ t have perfect information about their future income , especially part-timers and freelancers and the self-employed . This is how many means-tested programs like Medicare and Medicaid work , and despite the cries of conservatives , fraud in those programs mostly come from health care providers bilking the government rather than individual subscribers .
Instead of using a time-tested process that works ( and would work better if Republicans weren ’ t so dedicated to defunding the IRS ) , the GOP wants to add this kludgey extra step to an already strained online exchange . The clear goal here is to make it harder to enroll or collapse the insurance exchanges entirely , along with creating the impression that Obamacare customers are automatically freeloaders and cheats , which aligns with conservative demonization of other government programs .
So far , the woes of the insurance exchanges have played in the background of the news , far behind the government shutdown and possible debt limit breach . By embarking on a white-whale quest to defund Obamacare , Tea Party Republicans have ignored the huge PR value of the exchange disaster . Indeed , many people logically assume that the problems with the exchanges are due to the shutdown ( they aren ’ t ) . The Administration has basically gotten a lifeline on the bad rollout , thanks to the GOP focusing attention elsewhere . That could change with this deal , and the added hurdle of income verification .
Obviously , verifying the income of applicants to determine their proper level of subsidy is critical to Obamacare running smoothly . But there are plenty of ways to do this , particularly through the agency best equipped to verify income . Asking the federal government to perform an impossible technical feat through a shaky online portal is a recipe for further disaster . Senate Democrats made this concession to Republicans in their fiscal deal ; House conservatives are well-positioned to exploit it .