The Affordable Care Act , signed into law by Obama in 2010 , still faces challenges . Will Americans ever love Obamacare ?
All through the Obama years , backers of the Affordable Care Act have lifted their spirits with a consistent refrain : Just you wait .
Someday , the law 's backers insisted , Obamacare will make the transition from a divisive idea to a widely popular one , from a program that many people still find confusing and scary to a familiar and comforting part of American life .
This weekend , which marks the third anniversary of the law ’ s passage , one thing remains clear : Someday has not yet arrived , and may not for a long time .
Even as the pitched ideological and legal battles have faded , a huge raft of complicated and potentially crippling practical challenges remain , raising questions about whether Obamacare ultimately will work and whether it will become the Rushmore-size achievement that President Barack Obama hopes for .
Even the law ’ s most enthusiastic backers concede the path forward is difficult .
“ Sure , things aren ’ t going to be perfectly efficient the first day , ” said Jay Angoff , a health care consultant who formerly ran the federal exchange office and who still remains optimistic that kinks will be worked out .
Here are five challenges that still confront the Affordable Care Act , even three years after it became the law of the land :
The federal role in building the health insurance exchanges is bigger than expected — and money wasn ’ t set aside .
The Obama administration didn ’ t expect 33 states to refuse to build their own health insurance exchanges . When it asked Congress for another $ 1 billion for implementation , including money for the feds to build exchanges , the Republicans did not cut a check — and Democrats didn ’ t push much . The IRS didn ’ t have better luck asking for another $ 360 million for work on Obamacare tax provisions .
That ’ s a problem because although the law provides ample funding for state exchanges , it slotted just $ 1 billion for the feds to make it work . HHS hasn ’ t responded to questions from ███ about how much , if any , of that $ 1 billion is left or precisely how it ’ s cobbling together the rest of the money it needs to finish the job .
HHS keeps saying everything ’ s on track , but some Democrats are openly worried about how to pay for things like vastly complicated computer systems .
“ Without IT infrastructure to process enrollments and payments , verify eligibility and establish call centers , health insurance for millions of Americans could be further delayed , ” Rep. Nita Lowey ( D-N.Y. ) , the top Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee , said in a recent floor speech criticizing the House for not ponying up more money .
“ The massive uncertainty around their ability to pull this off is causing real problems , ” said James Capretta , a vocal Obamacare critic and former budget official under President George W. Bush .
The law ’ s advocates maintain HHS will get the job done .