Anthem Inc. , the stalwart that has stuck with Obamacare longer than most other large health insurers , is shrinking its participation in the program and pulling out of two more states ’ marketplaces .
Anthem announced its exit from Wisconsin and Indiana on Wednesday , the deadline in many states for U.S. insurers to file their premium rates if they wish to participate in the Affordable Care Act next year . The insurer said it will leave the two individual insurance markets because uncertainty has become too great to continue offering plans .
The retreat is symptomatic of the current state of haziness in the Obamacare exchanges , with companies struggling to come up with plans and propose premiums while the fate of the law itself is uncertain . The deadline to file rates had been postponed several weeks by the Trump administration to give them more time . But carriers have shied away from Obamacare because of losses , and now many are pointing to indecision in Washington , where Republican senators are working behind closed doors on a bill to repeal and replace the health-care law .
“ While we are pleased that some steps have been taken to address the long term challenges all health plans serving the individual market are facing , the individual market remains volatile , ” Anthem said in a statement . Pricing ACA plans “ has become increasingly difficult due to a shrinking and deteriorating individual market , as well as continual changes and uncertainty in federal operations . ”
Earlier this month , Anthem said that it would pull out of Ohio ’ s ACA market
Anthem sells coverage under the Blue Cross and Blue Shield brand in 14 states . Analysts had said that the Indianapolis-based company was leaning towards exiting a high percentage of the 144 rating regions in which it currently participates . Insurers have cited doubts about the future of the program , while President Donald Trump has threatened to withhold funds that defray costs for low-income people buying plans through the program .
Uncertainty about those subsidies , called cost-sharing reduction payments or CSRs , is making it difficult for insurers to design their Obamacare plans , in many cases forcing them to move rates higher in case the payments aren ’ t available . That risk , along with the question of whether the administration will enforce Obamacare ’ s requirement for adults to carry insurance , might help drive insurers to ask for rate increases of 28 percent to 40 percent for next year , according to an analysis by Oliver Wyman Actuarial Consulting .
Oscar Insurance Corp. , the closely held insurer started by Jared Kushner ’ s brother , is one of a few companies swimming against the tide . The insurer said Wednesday that it plans to begin selling health plans on the Obamacare marketplace in Tennessee , expand into the Austin market in Texas , and sell individual and small business plans in east Los Angeles County in 2018 . The company will also return to the New Jersey market , which it had earlier dropped , according to a blog post by Mario Schlosser , the chief executive officer .
“ Why seek to expand in a time of uncertainty ? ” Schlosser wrote . “ We ’ re confident that when the dust settles , the market for health insurance will stabilize in time for 2018 . ”
Other companies are also getting into new markets while large insurers like Aetna Inc. and Humana Inc. have retreated . Centene Corp. , for instance , plans to enter Obamacare markets in Kansas , Missouri and Nevada while expanding in six other states where it already sells plans .
Colorado is another bright spot . Nine carriers filed for the individual market , and 13 for the small group market in 2018 , according to Marguerite Salazar , the state ’ s insurance commissioner . No insurers dropped out of the market -- Anthem is staying . Every county in the state has at least one insurance carrier on the exchange , Salazar said .
“ We ’ ve been doing a lot of work up front with each of the carriers , ” she said . “ We ’ ve been trying to understand what are their greatest fears and problems and trying to eliminate those . ”