House Speaker Nancy Pelosi will not bring her sweeping drug-pricing bill to the floor for a vote this month as previously expected , according to a senior Democratic aide .
Pelosi 's office is awaiting the final review from the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office , which measures the bill 's impact on federal spending . That is now expected to take two more weeks , according to the aide .
This is the second such delay . The House was expected to vote on the bill in late October , but it was later pushed to November after the CBO told Pelosi 's office its timeline had slipped .
Lawmakers made few changes to Pelosi 's bill when it was passed through three committees — Ways and Means , Education and Labor and Energy and Commerce — along partisan lines last month .
Republicans , however , repeatedly expressed concerns that Pelosi 's plan was highly partisan , secretly written and dead on arrival in the GOP-controlled Senate .
Republicans were quick to cite the preliminary CBO report released earlier that month , which said Pelosi 's drug-pricing plan would lead to a reduction of eight to 15 new drugs coming to the market over 10 years .
However , the analysis also showed Pelosi 's plan would save Medicare $ 345 billion over the decade , with the largest savings coming from the provision that would permit the Department of Health and Human Services to negotiate lower prices on the costliest drugs each year .
In the Senate , Finance Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley , R-Iowa , and ranking Democrat Ron Wyden , of Oregon , have introduced their own bipartisan drug price bill that is backed by President Donald Trump . It would make changes to Medicare by adding an out-of-pocket maximum for beneficiaries and capping drug price increases at the rate of inflation , among other measures .
Industry trade group PhRMA , short for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America , and some Republicans opposed parts of Grassley 's plans . They said the measures would fail to provide meaningful relief at the pharmacy counter for seniors . Grassley is reportedly working on a new version of the bill aimed at gathering more Republican support , according to Bloomberg Law .
High prescription drug costs have become a rare bipartisan issue , as health care remains a top issue for voters ahead of the 2020 presidential election . Congress and the Trump administration are trying to pass legislation before the end of the year that would bring more transparency to health-care costs and , ultimately , lower costs for consumers .
Earlier this year , Pelosi said she hoped to work with Trump on a bill to lower drug prices even after launching an impeachment inquiry . In response , Trump accused Pelosi of trying to distract voters .