( CNN ) - The Supreme Court has temporarily delayed key requirements of the Affordable Care Act impacting religious-affiliated groups , accelerating another high-stakes legal test for the sweeping law championed by President Barack Obama .
In a surprising twist just hours before the start of the New Year when most major rules of Obamacare were set to take effect , Justice Sonia Sotomayor exempted two Catholic Church-affiliated nonprofits from having to provide contraceptive coverage to employees of face fines for non-compliance .
The Little Sisters of the Poor , a charity congregation of Roman Catholics in Denver , and the Illinois-based Christian Brothers Services , objected on moral and religious grounds and were excused from having to comply until Friday at least .
Sotomayor set that date as the deadline for the federal government to file a legal response .
The White House on Wednesday expressed support for the measure .
The justice 's action was narrowly applied but it could ultimately impact dozens of religious groups and businesses that have mounted legal challenges in recent months , depending on how the court ultimately handles the matter .
The contraception issue has been a major sticking point in the law , Obama 's signature diplomatic achievement , that overall has been the subject of enormous legal and political controversy .
Although enacted in 2010 , key requirements of the Affordable Care Act are just now kicking into gear following years of fierce political and other turmoil that included a Supreme Court ruling that found it constitutional and a flawed rollout of its online enrollment process this past fall .
Congressional Republicans and others who bitterly oppose Obamacare call it government overreach , a burden on business and the economy , and a regulatory disaster . Repeated attempts to overturn it have failed yet Republicans continue to press the issue in the courts and on the campaign trail .
The church and state issue now in the spotlight involves rules negotiated last year between the Obama administration and various outside groups .
Under the law , churches and houses of worships are exempt from the contraception mandate .
But other nonprofit religious-affiliated groups , such as church-run hospitals , parochial schools and charities like the Little Sisters of the Poor , must either provide no-cost contraception coverage or have a third-party insurer provide separate benefits without the employer 's direct involvement .
A White House official on Wednesday said the Obama administration was confident the rules `` strike the balance of providing women with free contraceptive coverage while preventing non-profit religious organizations with religious objections to contraceptive coverage from having to contract , arrange , pay , or refer for such coverage . ''
The matter handled by Sotomayor was separate from other emergency appeals filed on Tuesday by Catholic archdioceses in Michigan , Tennessee and Washington , D.C . They were not acted on because lower courts had already issued injunctions temporarily blocking enforcement .
These organizations are all seeking delays around the employer-contraception requirement , saying in their court filing it would force them `` to choose between onerous penalties or becoming complicit in a grave moral wrong . ''
Moreover , the president of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops , Archbishop Joseph Kurtz of Louisville , pressed Obama directly on the issue .
He asked him in a letter to delay the mandates impacting religious groups and some businesses .
Kurtz pointed to other delays the administration has made , such as putting off until 2015 the requirement for all employers with more than 50 workers to provide health coverage .
The Supreme Court agreed last month to hear two cases involving for-profit corporations that contend their religious liberty is violated by the law .
The White House said in November that it believes a requirement on contraceptives is `` lawful and essential to women 's health . ''