A Washington-based consultancy has compared new Obamacare data to projected enrollment in each state , a handy tool that shows states such as Idaho , Montana and North Carolina doing quite well even though they ’ ve flown under the radar and relied on the federal government to run their new insurance marketplace .
Avalere took state-by-state data released Wednesday by the Health and Human Services Department ( HHS ) and applied it to their in-house projections and a government estimate that 6 million people would enroll in private health plans under President Obama ’ s overhaul between Oct. 1 and March 31 .
It displayed each state ’ s progress as a percentage on a color-coded map , revealing a patchwork of winners and losers across America with a month and a half left to go in the health care law ’ s inaugural enrollment period .
HHS said 3.3 million Americans have enrolled on the state-based markets , or “ exchanges , ” since October , with about 1.1 million signing up in January alone . The exchanges allow people to compare plans and sometimes qualify for government subsidies to help them pay their premiums , although a botched web rollout on the federal portal , HealthCare.gov , prevented many people from enrolling in the fall .
“ The latest data shows that exchange enrollment continues to rebound following early technological problems , although progress is uneven across states , ” said Caroline Pearson , a vice president at Avalere . “ The question remains if the final enrollment surge at the end of March will make up the ground lost in October and November . ”
Idaho has enrolled 98 percent of its projected pool , while Montana and North Carolina each enrolled more than 80 percent with a month and a half left in the six-month enrollment period .
Among states that ran their own exchanges , California has exceeded Avalere projections at 118 percent , while New York — frequently described as a success story for its sheer volume of sign-ups — has enrolled just 241,200 out of 616,000 consumers , leaving them at 39 percent of expected enrollment .
Washington ’ s state-run exchange is faring well at 94 percent , Kentucky ’ s highly touted exchange chalked up 77 percent . Vermont , too , has brought 77 percent on its state-run exchange .
Several states that embraced the Affordable Care Act and set up their own exchanges put up relatively poor numbers .
Maryland came in at 38 percent of expected enrollment , Minnesota had 40 percent and Massachusetts came in at just 17 percent . The District of Columbia brought in 22 percent .
Oregon rose above criticism of its exchange , to an extent , by bringing in 52 percent of expected enrollment even as it relies on paper applications instead of its website .
Florida , a state that is relying on HealthCare.gov , looked good under Avalere ’ s metric , at 74 percent .