President Donald Trump ’ s top health official is testing a new tactic in his bid to lower drug costs : Sound more like the boss .
Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar has slammed drugmakers for their “ runaway price increases , ” accused insurers of keeping customers in the dark and warned that drug industry middlemen are gaming the system , in what those close to Azar refer to as his “ bully pulpit ” strategy . It ’ s reminiscent of Trump ’ s frequent accusations that pharmaceutical companies are “ getting away with murder . ”
The tone is a change for the former pharmaceutical executive , who ’ s cultivated a reputation as a mild-mannered pragmatist . But it ’ s designed to serve a calculated purpose : Scare the drug industry into voluntarily cutting prices , because the administration can only do so much without Congress .
“ It ’ s carrot and stick , ” said one person familiar with the strategy . “ You ’ re with us or against us . It ’ s your call , but being against us is not going to stop us . ”
The Trump administration ’ s drug price plan unveiled earlier this month largely embraced the status quo , leaning on dozens of regulatory tweaks and promises to tackle bigger issues down the road . Drug company critics panned it as soft and ineffectual , and pharmaceutical investors breathed a little easier .
“ I ’ m yet to be convinced this will have any momentum , ” said Ronny Gal , a financial analyst who follows the pharmaceutical industry for Sanford C. Bernstein . “ It ’ s not my impression that anybody sitting there in the board seats is particularly concerned . ”
There ’ s little the administration can actually do on its own to make a measurable dent in drug prices by the end of the year , with Congress eager to steer clear of major health care debates before the midterm elections .
███ Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
So Azar is ramping up the rhetoric . He and other top health officials in recent weeks have alternately touted the way their efforts will ultimately punish bad actors and urged the drug industry to pre-empt that reckoning by slashing their own prices now .
“ We look forward to working with industry to build a better drug-pricing system , ” Azar said in a speech two days after debuting the blueprint . “ But if the industry isn ’ t willing to work with us , President Trump and his administration will keep turning up the pressure . ”
He ’ s also suggested that skeptics who dismiss the plan as soft either don ’ t understand it or don ’ t want to .
“ Even stock analysts , who are really quite smart individuals generally , totally missed the boat here , ” Azar told ███ ’ s Pulse Check podcast , a few days after he railed against the media ’ s coverage of the plan and pledged to go “ through them and around them ” to hammer home its importance .
That ’ s not quite as blunt as Trump ’ s talk about drug company profits or the president 's pledge to ensure the pharmacy benefit managers that serve as intermediaries between insurers and drugmakers “ won ’ t be so rich anymore ” — threats that momentarily drove stock prices downward and put the entire industry on edge .
But the principle behind Azar ’ s approach is the same , people close to the planning process said .
Much as corporations fearful of being targeted by a Trump tweet scrambled to curry favor after the 2016 election , Azar is betting health care companies will be eager to show they ’ re tackling drug prices voluntarily to avoid a regulatory crackdown he insists is on the way .
“ In the very near short term , progress is going to be made through voluntary actions , ” said a person familiar with the secretary ’ s thinking . “ The best way to get voluntary actions is to make sure people understand they ’ re going to be watched and called on the table if they ’ re not with the program . ”
The constant tough talk serves a more political purpose as well , sending the message that the Trump administration is working on a problem the public wants addressed — even if there ’ s little evidence the government can single-handedly drive down prices .
The next step is for HHS to back up Azar ’ s words with so-called sunshine tactics that identify companies that are hiking prices or trying to thwart competition .
A new FDA database , for example , lists all the brand drug manufacturers that the agency says are using a “ gaming tactic ” to block competing generic drugs — a clear attempt at shaming companies into abandoning the practice . A more extreme proposal that Azar has floated is requiring drugmakers to disclose product prices in advertisements . That ’ s already run into practical and legal questions , but one Azar confidant argued the mere suggestion could bring more transparency , even if the requirement is never implemented .
“ That sure would be an easy , voluntary thing a company could do if they wanted to play ball , ” the confidant said , adding that there may be data collection and enforcement authorities HHS can lean on over the next few months to ratchet up the pressure .
But that all assumes that the industry will fold in the face of some stern speeches and finger-pointing . And while major health care groups all professed a willingness to work with Azar on lowering drug prices , powerful lobbies have consistently fought off major reform efforts for decades .
Drug industry trade group PhRMA , which spent nearly $ 10 million on lobbying in just the first three months of this year , quickly came out against parts of Azar ’ s pricing blueprint that it warned would “ disrupt coverage and limit patients ’ access . ”
The main lobby representing pharmacy benefit managers — a sector that Azar and Trump have hit repeatedly — has remained more circumspect , but still signaled it ’ s ready to defend its turf .
“ The rhetoric is loud because he really wants to put some pressure on industry to come up with some solutions , ” Pharmaceutical Care Management Association CEO Mark Merritt said in an interview , adding it ’ s the drug manufacturers — not his pharmacy benefit managers members — who will be held most responsible . “ We don ’ t see this as something that ’ s unique . We just see it as , there ’ s a president who wants to solve these problems . ”
HHS spokeswoman Caitlin Oakley said the agency has received broadly positive feedback from the industry so far and is talking to groups across the health care spectrum . She also emphasized Azar ’ s refrain that solving rising drug prices is complex and won ’ t happen overnight .
Congress , meanwhile , has shown little interest in vigorously backing up Azar — even as both parties continue to bemoan rising drug prices . While Republicans issued statements of support for the blueprint , they ’ ve also allowed that it ’ ll likely take legislative action to shake up the system .
“ Congress is going to have to do something ” for prices to come down meaningfully , said Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R-Iowa ) , who has championed a PhRMA-opposed bill benefiting makers of generic drugs that remains in limbo .
And Democrats have seized on what wasn ’ t in the administration ’ s plan — namely , giving Medicare direct negotiating power — as proof that the industry has already won this round .
“ They completely folded to pharma on negotiating for lower prices through volume in the Medicare program , ” Sen. Claire McCaskill ( D-Mo . ) said . “ And that ’ s the pressure of the pharmaceutical industry . I mean , they ’ ve got a vice grip on this place . ”
HHS did notch a couple of wins ahead of its drug price initiative , when insurers UnitedHealth and Aetna both opted to start passing rebates they receive from pharmaceutical companies along to some customers . And pharmaceutical company Amgen recently said it will charge less for a new migraine drug than analysts initially expected — though it ’ s unclear whether the administration ’ s blueprint played any role in the decision .
But since Azar embarked on his blitz , there hasn ’ t been any broad clamor to be first in line for reform — a sign that the industry isn ’ t yet convinced the administration has the bite to back up its talk .
“ The solutions he ’ s suggested are not very different from everything else [ the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ] threw out before , ” Bernstein ’ s Gal said . “ The comments I ’ m getting from industry , and even just my own thinking , is that that is going to get gummed up in the usual Washington slowdown . ”