The 2015 filing season could be the most difficult in decades , officials said . Ms. Olson said new paperwork resulting from the Affordable Care Act would probably exacerbate problems with customer service , which “ has reached unacceptably low levels and is getting worse . ”
“ The I.R.S . is unlikely to answer even half the telephone calls it receives , ” she added . “ Taxpayers who manage to get through are expected to wait on hold for 30 minutes on average and considerably longer at peak times . ”
Timothy S. Jost , an expert on health law at the Washington and Lee University School of Law who supports the Affordable Care Act , said : “ It will be very easy to find people who are unhappy with the new tax obligations — people who have to pay a penalty , who have to wait forever to get through to somebody at the I.R.S . or have to pay back a lot of money because of overpayments of premium tax credits . ”
Taxpayers normally report income and compute taxes annually . But the health care law is different . Consumers may be subject to tax penalties for any month in which they had neither insurance coverage nor an exemption .
The calculations will be relatively simple if all members of a household had coverage for every month of 2014 . They can simply check a box on their tax return . But lower-income people often have changes in employment , income and insurance . If any members of a household were uninsured in 2014 , they must fill out a work sheet showing coverage month by month , and they may owe penalties .
To claim tax credits , consumers need to fill out I.R.S . Form 8962 , which includes a matrix with 12 rows and six columns — a total of 72 boxes , to compute subsidies for each month . Most taxpayers use software to prepare returns , and that will simplify the process , officials said .
Federal officials have authorized more than 30 types of exemptions from the penalty for not having insurance . One is for low-income people who live in states that did not expand Medicaid . Another is available to people who would have to pay premiums amounting to more than 8 percent of their household income . The government will also allow a variety of hardship exemptions and in most cases will require taxpayers to send in documents as evidence of hardship .