CLOSE Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said if GOP senators ca n't agree on the current health bill , they 'll have to figure something else out . Video provided by Newsy Newslook
Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz. , said Sunday the Republican bill to repeal and replace Obamacare is “ probably going to be dead . ”
`` My view is that it 's probably going to be dead , '' he said on CBS ’ s Face the Nation .
Support for the bill has been eroding over the July 4th recess , and McCain said he believes Republicans should work with Democrats to craft health care legislation .
That is a possibility floated last week by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , who said “ No action is not an alternative . ”
Sen. Ted Cruz on Sunday reiterated a push to simply repeal Obamacare , let it go into effect in a year or two and use that time to debate replacement .
“ I continue to believe we can get this done , ” he said , also on Face the Nation .
Republicans need at least 51 votes to pass their repeal and replace proposal , and haven ’ t been able to get there .
Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , said Sunday that he would support it , saying “ I think this bill is better than Obamacare . ”
“ Whether or not we can come together I don ’ t know , ” Graham said on NBC ’ s Meet the Press . “ Mitch is trying . I would support the proposal before us , but you ’ ve got different camps in the Republican Party . ”
Graham said with insurers dropping out of exchanges and premiums soaring , the failure of Obamacare is inevitable .
“ My advice is if it does fail , work together in a bipartisan fashion to replace it , ” he said .
President Trump took to Twitter later on Sunday to prod senators along .
`` For years , even as a 'civilian , ' I listened as Republicans pushed the Repeal and Replace of ObamaCare , '' he wrote . `` Now they finally have their chance ! ''
For years , even as a `` civilian , '' I listened as Republicans pushed the Repeal and Replace of ObamaCare . Now they finally have their chance ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) July 9 , 2017
More : Senate health care bill negotiations : These are the big issues on the table
More : McConnell : If GOP health bill dies , bipartisan fix will be needed