Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price ( C ) and Aetna CEO Mark Bertolini ( R ) listen to President Donald Trump speak during a meeting with health insurance company CEOs at the White House in February . REUTERS/Kevin Lamarque President Donald Trump 's administration has been quietly waging a public relations campaign to undermine public support for Obamacare , former President Barack Obama 's signature legislation , according to a new Daily Beast report .
Using social media and a series of video testimonials , the Department of Health and Human Services , led by Tom Price , is amplifying criticism of the Affordable Care Act , commonly known as Obamacare , and discouraging enrollment in the program .
Using funds earmarked for `` consumer information and outreach , '' HHS has produced and released 23 videos of Americans talking about their difficulties with Obamacare , according to The Daily Beast .
In one video , an Illinois mother , Christine Chalkey , says that her 22-year-old son , Jacob , who was born with a severe development disability , almost died as a result of the state 's 2012 cuts to Medicaid , which insured Jacob . Chalkey blames Jacob 's loss of coverage on Obamacare , which she says stretched the limits of the state 's Medicaid funding to its breaking point , denying Jacob the medicine he needed .
The videos also highlight horror stories of skyrocketing premiums and deductibles in the private marketplace .
Ryan Stanton , a Kentucky physician who was featured in an HHS testimonial , told The Daily Beast that he felt pressured to speak more critically of the health law than he wanted to .
`` I do n't think mine was the exact message they were looking for of , 'Oh , let 's march against Obamacare , ' '' he said . `` It was clearly an effort to push the repeal and replace . ''
HHS 's website has also removed and altered information about the healthcare law . One page on the site , entitled `` Empowering Patients '' reads : `` with skyrocketing premiums and narrowing choices , the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) has done damage to this market and created great burdens for many Americans . ''
Twitter accounts run by HHS and Price have also been used to criticize Obamacare and promote Republican repeal and replacement legislation .
While HHS is allowed to spend money on efforts to educate the public , it is illegal for the agency to engage in direct advocacy , or `` purely partisan activity , '' including promoting legislation .
`` You 're not hired into the administration to decide whether you agree with the law you 're asked to execute . That 's not your job , '' Andy Slavitt , the former acting administrator at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , told The Daily Beast . `` Congress appropriates funds for you to carry out laws that they passed , not to spend those funds on activities that counteract those laws . ''
Over the last several months , Democratic lawmakers in Congress have sent letters to Price , the HHS inspector general , and the Government Accountability Office requesting more information about the government 's `` actions to undermine the ongoing implementation '' of Obamacare .
Former Obama administration officials argue that these efforts are part of the administration 's broader plan to either repeal and replace Obamacare or `` let Obamacare fail , '' as Trump has most recently advocated .
`` I ’ m on a daily basis horrified by leaders at the Department of Health and Human Services who seem intent on taking healthcare away from the constituents they are supposed to serve , '' former HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told The Daily Beast . `` We always believed that delivering health and human services was the mission of the department . That seems to not be the mission of the current leadership . ''