Republicans might have a new Obamacare problem : what to do if they win at the Supreme Court later this month .
The justices are about to decide the legality of Obamacare 's insurance subsidies , which currently help 6.4 million Americans pay for their health coverage . If the justices toss out the financial help , it ’ ll be a coup for Republicans who ’ ve tried repeatedly to kill the law in Congress and in the courts .
But it will also leave Republicans holding the bag on how to prevent chaos in the insurance market . If lawmakers do nothing — and with the level of gridlock in Washington , there 's a decent chance this happens — many experts say the consequences could be severe . Obamacare premiums would spike on average by 256 percent , leaving many enrollees unable to keep up with the bills . They could decide to pay the much higher prices , or drop their coverage .
But Republicans lawmakers have also come up with five alternatives plans to keep the dollars flowing . The question is whether they ’ ll do much good . Most of the plans would extend the availability of subsidies , while dismantling other parts of Obamacare . The result would likely be a world that looks much more like America before Obamacare — where fewer people are enrolled in coverage and are paying higher premiums .
Take , for example , Sen. Ron Johnson 's Preserving Freedom and Choice in Health Care Act . It would both extend the Obamacare subsidies and kill the health-care law 's individual mandate , the unpopular requirement that nearly all Americans carry health coverage .
Without a requirement to purchase insurance coverage , health economists roundly expect that young , healthy people would no longer buy coverage . This , then , would lead to a spike in premiums as only the really sick people , who use their coverage a lot , opt to buy insurance plans .
The transitional period Johnson 's bill imagines is one where the individual market is smaller and a more expensive place to shop .
When you repeal Obamacare and maintain its subsidies , the policy outcomes are bizarre
These types of problems turn up again and again in all five Republican plans . When you try to repeal Obamacare and maintain the law 's subsidies , it turns out you end up with some very bizarre policy outcomes that are not good for the individual insurance market .
Who supports it : Sen. Ron Johnson introduced this bill in April , and it has the most mainstream support among Senate Republicans . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has signed on as a co-sponsor of the bill , signaling that this could become the dominant position of Senate Republicans in the event of a ruling against the health law .
What it does : Johnson 's proposal does two main things : it kills the individual mandate , and it sunsets Obamacare 's subsidies in August 2017 . In opinion columns , the Wisconsin senator has framed those two policy changes as setting the stage for Congress to pass a full Obamacare replacement bill in 2017 .
`` This transitional piece of legislation would live up to its name , reverse many of the negative unintended consequences of Obamacare , and pave the way for full replacement in 2017 , '' Johnson wrote in a May 27 USA Today op-ed .
Johnson wants to leave the subsidies in the individual market intact through August 2017 to create a smoother transition . But he has another policy proposal that would n't be smooth at all : immediately eliminating the individual mandate and no longer requiring Americans to carry health coverage .
How it changes the individual market : Without a requirement to purchase insurance coverage , health economists roundly expect premiums would spike as healthy , young people opt not to purchase a plan . This could , even in the transitional period , make the Obamacare markets a much more expensive place to shop .
Who supports it : Freshman Nebraska Senator Ben Sasse , who introduced the bill in March . He currently has no co-sponsors .
What it does : Sasse , like Johnson , envisions a transition period , although he has a much more complex structure around it . Sasse 's plan overhauls the health law 's subsidies to cover 65 percent of each enrollee 's premium .
This is really different from the current Obamacare subsidy structure , which covers a larger chunk of the premium for lower-income enrollees . Under the Sasse plan , a person who earns $ 15,000 and one who earns $ 30,000 would pay the same price for their coverage . The Weekly Standard outlined what , exactly , this would look like for a family of five in Milwaukee :
Take a family of five living in Milwaukee , Wisconsin with an income of $ 30,000 and parents aged 59 and 54 . If they ’ re enrolled in Obamacare ’ s second-cheapest `` silver '' plan , they currently receive a whopping $ 20,142 in taxpayer-funded Obamacare premium subsidies , plus further lavish subsidies to help cover their out-of-pocket costs . Under Sasse ’ s proposal , they would have to settle for a tax credit of $ 13,484 ( 65 percent of the $ 20,745 premium ) .
In their hypothetical example , the Milwaukee family would lose about $ 7,000 in subsidies . And this amount would decline over time : the Sasse plan would slowly wind down these subsidies , reducing them by 5 percent each month — until , after 18 months of reductions , the subsidies were eliminated .
The Sasse plan does n't do much else to change Obamacare . It does n't , like other proposals , kill the individual mandate or repeal big chunks of the law . Some conservatives have praised this strategy as a way to put pressure on Republicans to come up with an Obamacare replacement .
How it changes the individual market : Because of its regressive structure , the Sasse plan would make the individual market a more difficult place for low-income Americans to shop . And more generally , as the subsidies dwindle down month by month , all enrollees ' coverage becomes increasingly expensive .
Who supports it : Sens . Lamar Alexander ( R-LA ) , Orrin Hatch ( R-UT ) , and John Barrasso ( R-WY ) co-authored a Washington Post op-ed in March outlining this approach .
What it does : Like the two other Senate proposals , the Alexander-Hatch-Barrasso plan would authorize the Obamacare subsidies to continue temporarily . Unlike the two other proposals , it does not outline a specific timeline — whether this would be for a few months , a few years , or something else entirely .
The Bridge proposal is arguably the vaguest of the proposals that Republicans have put out . The main idea is that state exchanges would continue to operate like they do now . States on the federal marketplace would get `` the freedom and flexibility to create better , more competitive health insurance markets offering more options and different choices . '' What exactly that flexibility looks like , however , is not outlined .
How it would change the individual market : Because this plan is so vague , it 's difficult to know what , exactly , the individual market would look like in the Bridge scenario . But the idea of `` more options and different choices '' suggests a market where insurance plans would not have to cover a core set of insurance benefits , like pregnancy or no co-pay preventive care . This would make coverage both skimpier and less expensive .
Is there legislation ? No , but there is a Washington Post op-ed from March 3 outlining the main ideas .
Who supports it : A group of 21 of conservative Republican House representatives , including bill sponsor Tom Price ( R-GA ) .
What it does : First , the Patient Freedom Act kills some pretty big parts of Obamacare 's insurance expansion . The marketplace to shop for insurance , the individual mandate , the ban on preexisting conditions , the extension of benefits to young adults up to age 26 — those all go out the window .
The plan does , however , keep one key element : subsidies . This House plan would maintain subsidies for people who purchase their own health insurance , presumably in the type of individual market that existed before Obamacare .
How it would change the individual market : A world in which the Patient Freedom Act passes is one in which many fewer Americans have access to health insurance . It would once again allow insurance plans to reject people with preexisting conditions . Those who could get a plan would have access to subsidies to make insurance more affordable and , unlike the Sasse and Johnson plans , these subsidies would not go away at some point . They 're here to stay — at least until a point when Republicans could come up with a different health-care plan .
Who supports it : Reps. John Kline ( R-MN ) , Fred Upton ( R-MI ) , and Paul Ryan ( R-WI ) co-authored a Wall Street Journal op-ed outlining what their preferred reaction to King v. Burwell would look like . All three hold leadership positions in the House , meaning this is the type of plan that would likely advance through the legislative chamber in the case of a ruling against the administration .
What it does : The Kline-Upton-Ryan plan essentially gives each state a choice : stick with Obamacare or opt out of it pretty completely . Hence , they describe their solution as an `` off-ramp '' from the health-care law .
`` Off-ramp '' states would have the flexibility to ditch most major parts of Obamacare . The individual mandate would disappear , as would the requirements that health insurance plans cover a certain set of benefits . ( Obamacare makes all health plans cover things like pregnancy and preventive benefits , which some plans used to skip . ) At the same time , these states would still keep some of the most popular parts of Obamacare , like the ban on preexisting conditions and the extension of dependent benefits to young adults under 26 .
All states would continue to have insurance subsidies , regardless of whether they take the `` off-ramp '' option . In states that decline the new approach — likely states with Democratic governors — Obamacare continues to operate just like it does right now .
How it would change the individual insurance market : In those that do get on the off-ramp , the insurance market would look pretty different . The Kline-Upton-Ryan approach sets up a market where insurers are required to take all shoppers — but shoppers are n't required to purchase a plan . Only the really sick people would likely buy coverage , sending premiums skyrocketing . In this scenario , where most of the consumers are sick people with high medical bills , you could see insurers deciding to exit the market .
Is there legislation ? No , but there is a Wall Street Journal op-ed from March 3 outlining these ideas .