“ This won ’ t be a reset . This will be an intensification of trends that are very good for us . ”
-- An adviser to Mitt Romney ’ s presidential campaign to Power Play on how events this week will shape the race .
After a rocky start to his re-election effort , Obama will this week have to deal with his greatest political liability , his 2010 health law , try to whip up another showdown with Congress , dive into the year ’ s main wedge issue of illegal immigration and worry over his controversial attorney general whose own battle with lawmakers over secret documents has now landed in the president ’ s lap .
With his challenger on the rise , his own clout waning and the national mood souring again , this is an unhappy time for Obama to face these hurdles .
The hope for Obama ’ s campaign team must be that this chaotic week will mark the end of a difficult spring and clears the decks for the remaining 19 weeks of the general election . Republicans , meanwhile , hope that losses this week set a new baseline for the embattled president ’ s woes .
The biggest issue facing Obama is the Supreme Court decision on his health law , an unpopular program that may be struck down or upheld in full , or have its central funding mechanism – the mandatory purchase of insurance – ripped out .
Power Play holds that the president is least harmed for November if the entire law is pitched so that he neither has to defend nor repair the legislation . But when your best-case scenario involves the highest court in the land tossing out the central accomplishment of your term in office , your options aren ’ t very attractive .
Obama opted not to move to the middle after his 2010 shellacking , but instead tried to shift the blame for a weak economy to Republicans . As the president and his team like to do , they went on offense , rather than recalibrating their strategy .
While Team Obama imagined casting the president as a tenacious fighter , it was also a guarantee that he would accomplish nothing of substance on the domestic front for two years . That leaves the president looking like someone who is bogged down and overwhelmed . He may be effective at casting blame on Congress , but that does nothing to reduce the image of a president who is simply stuck .
For a nation that is increasingly pessimistic about the future after a few months of modest optimism , stuck is not the best adjective for an incumbent president to be carrying .
Also this week , the Supreme Court ruled on Obama ’ s effort to prevent a crackdown on illegal immigration in Arizona . The court struck down three provisions but upheld , for now , a fourth provision requiring police to check immigration status of people suspected of being in the country illegally .
While there may be support for the president ’ s executive action offering a temporary amnesty and work visas for illegal immigrants who came to the country as children , the Arizona law is also very popular .
Later on this week , Obama also faces a House of Representatives vote on whether to find Attorney General Eric Holder in contempt for not turning over documents relating to a botched gunrunning sting that ended up arming the killers of a U.S. Border Patrol agent . Obama has moved to protect Holder by invoking executive privilege . More friction , more stuck .
There ’ s also the fact that at the end of this week the funding for highways and other transportation will dry up , but Obama simultaneously wants to pick a fight with Congress over extending a Democratic program that subsidizes new student loans .
The president needs the transportation bill since the last thing he wants to see is summer road crews laying off workers just as unemployment is worsening . But the president also has his political agenda of trying to show himself fighting for parts of his base coalition – in this case college students .
Today ’ s Washington Post editorial page counseled Obama to ditch the student loan subsidy and focus on getting the highway bill through Congress . But the president has clung tightly to his belief that he is best served by being seen in constant conflict with House Republicans .
But that ’ s all chicken feed compared to the health law . What the court decides about the president ’ s program for a new health-insurance entitlement will substantially remake this race .
Mitt Romney ’ s chances at becoming just the fifth challenger in a century to unseat a sitting president are best summed up by the distance between two unrelated statistics : his personal favorability among voters and the overall sense of the direction of the country .
These are answers to the two driving questions of a presidential re-election : Would voters like to keep what they ’ ve got and is the alternative plausible .
Romney ’ s favorables have floated up , taking him now to 42.9 percent in the Real Clear Politics average . And after some late-winter optimism on the economy was dashed , the average of respondents who think the country is on the right track slipped back down to an anemic 31.3 .
The gap between them is currently 11.6 points On May 18 , the gap stood at 6.7 points . A month before that , it was 3.3 points .
Going into this pivot week , Romney has the momentum and , more importantly , he has been mostly able to lay low . Rather than a summer news lull , in which the challenger is in the spotlight , the big stories keep on coming , most of them unhappy and most of them involving Obama .
At some point , Romney will face the glare , but not this week .
Chris Stirewalt is digital politics editor for ███ , and his POWER PLAY column appears Monday-Friday on FoxNews.com . Catch Chris Live online daily at 11:30amET at http : live.foxnews.com .