Indeed , members of the Freedom Caucus — which is supported by outside conservative groups — have often claimed the mantle of pure conservatism , but their tactics have been seen by many in their party as uniformly counterproductive .
Time after time , they undermined Republican leaders ’ efforts to secure wins for the conservative cause by overreaching and demanding the impossible .
They have anointed Representative Mark Meadows of North Carolina as their leader and principal spokesman . But they occasionally get help from three senators sympathetic to their cause : Ted Cruz of Texas , Rand Paul of Kentucky and Mike Lee of Utah .
At critical times , House conservatives have forced their party to make deals with Representative Nancy Pelosi of California , the Democratic leader — an idea anathema to most Republicans , who would seethe .
This time , by negotiating with Mr. Trump on the complex issue of health care , a measure whose complexity he did not seem to fully grasp , they moved an already contentious bill further and further to the right , eliminating too many benefits to keep moderate and other conservative members on board . Even Mr. Trump was said to be taken aback by their attempts to remove things Republicans have long promised to keep , like health insurance benefits for children up to 26 years old .
Given that the House and Senate majorities were built on a promise to repeal and replace Mr. Obama ’ s signature health care law , many lawmakers fear electoral repercussions . “ It is painfully ironic that members from safe , conservative congressional districts who can ’ t ever quite seem to get to ‘ yes ’ make it harder to enact good , conservative public policy like repealing Obamacare , ” said Michael Steel , a Republican strategist and former aide to Mr. Boehner .
This seemed lost on many Freedom Caucus members on Friday . “ Part of the legislative process is working with people who have different ideas , ” said Representative Justin Amash , Republican of Michigan . “ This process from the beginning wasn ’ t designed to do that . ”