( ███ ) - Two former TV stars and political opposites - media mogul Oprah Winfrey and President Donald Trump - took to the U.S. campaign trail on Thursday , five days before elections that will determine whether Trump ’ s Republicans retain control of Congress .
Oprah Winfrey takes part in a town hall meeting with Democratic gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams ahead of the mid-term election in Marietta , Georgia , U.S. November 1 , 2018 . ███/Chris Aluka Berry
Winfrey appeared in Georgia to back Democrat Stacey Abrams , who is vying to become the United States ’ first black female governor .
“ I ’ m here today to support a change maker , ” the movie star and former TV talk show host told a crowd in Cobb County , northwest of Atlanta . “ She is dynamic . She is so inspired and inspiring . ”
Trump , who gained nationwide fame as star of the reality show “ The Apprentice , ” was in the second day of an 11-rally tour of states with competitive U.S. Senate races .
He appeared at a rally in Missouri on Thursday night with Republican Josh Hawley , who is trying to unseat Democratic U.S . Senator Claire McCaskill in Tuesday ’ s elections , and called on voters to support what he termed “ common-sense Republicans . ”
“ This election is a choice between Republican results and radical resistance , ” Trump said as he talked up the economy and gave credit for its strength to Republicans in Washington .
The contest between Abrams , a former state lawmaker , and Republican Brian Kemp has become a flashpoint in the battle over voter access . As Georgia ’ s secretary of state , Kemp oversees the Southern state ’ s elections .
Georgia has one of the country ’ s strictest voter ID laws , measures Republicans say are needed to ensure no one votes illegally . Democrats contend the statutes unfairly block poor people and minority group members from voting .
Voting rights groups sued Kemp , saying his office had inappropriately stopped processing more than 50,000 voter registration applications , many from black voters , to improve his chances of winning . Other groups have challenged voting restrictions in states including North Dakota , Arkansas and Ohio .
Abrams said improving the state ’ s healthcare system was at the top of the list of issues she wanted to tackle if elected , a message that lined up with Democrats ’ national focus as they seek to gain control of at least one chamber of Congress , which would give them the ability to oppose Trump ’ s agenda .
“ The Republican solution has been nothing , ” Abrams said on Thursday . “ It has been absolutely nothing . ”
The embrace of healthcare is a sharp shift for Democrats , who were wary of defending Obamacare in previous elections when the law that created it was unpopular with many voters .
A ███/Ipsos poll polling.███.com/ # ! response/TR112/type/week/dates/20181001-20181030/collapsed/true of 2,673 Americans conducted Oct. 1 through Oct. 28 found healthcare was the top issue for Democratic and independent voters heading into the elections , and third in priority among Republicans , behind immigration and the economy .
Democrats are favored to flip the 23 seats they need to secure a majority in the House of Representatives , although they are considered a long shot to pick up the two seats needed to capture the Senate .
Vulnerable Democratic senators in states Trump won in 2016 are also focusing on healthcare . Among them is Missouri ’ s McCaskill , who has criticized Republican challenger Hawley , the state attorney general , for joining a lawsuit filed by Republican attorneys general seeking to overturn Obamacare .
Trump vowed during his campaign to repeal Obamacare , formally known as the Affordable Care Act , and he fumed when the effort failed . Democrats warn that if Republicans keep control of Congress , people could lose coverage for pre-existing health conditions and other protections afforded by the law .
On Friday , Trump will travel to West Virginia , which he won by more than 40 percentage points in 2016 . The state ’ s Democratic senator , Joe Manchin , has attacked his opponent , Republican state Attorney General Patrick Morrisey , for participating in the same lawsuit Hawley joined .
Former Vice President Joe Biden , appearing with embattled Democratic Senator Heidi Heitkamp at a campaign event in North Dakota , took up the battle cry on Obamacare protections .
“ One-hundred-thirty million Americans have that label stamped on their record : pre-existing condition , ” he said . “ This fight is personal . ”
Trump , who will not be on the ballot next week , came under fire from Democrats and even some fellow Republicans on Thursday for an online video ad backing Republican candidates that attempted to link Democrats and immigrants to violent crime .
The ad featured courtroom footage of Luis Bracamontes - an illegal immigrant from Mexico convicted in the 2014 killings of two police officers in Sacramento , California - saying in accented English he would kill more cops . A narrator asks : “ Who else would Democrats let in ? ”
Robert Reich , who served as secretary of labor in the Clinton administration , called the ad “ desperate and vile ... They ’ ve resorted to fearmongering . ”