Story highlights William Bennett : Chief justice recast the mandate as a tax , which was n't in the law
He says he should have called the mandate a tax and sent it back to Congress
He says Obama had insisted it was not a tax ; the flip-flop will be GOP ammunition in election
Bennett : Romney has been handed a powerful issue to campaign on
The Supreme Court 's verdict on Obamacare is in . As a tax , the individual mandate stands ; as a Commerce Clause regulation , it fails .
What remains to be seen is whether Chief Justice John Roberts has crafted a masterly constitutional balancing act -- limiting federal authority and respecting the separations of powers -- or if he has engaged in a disappointing and inappropriate usurpation of the legislative function .
There are arguments on both sides . Some say that Roberts , not wanting to uphold the liberal reasoning behind Obamacare and an unprecedented expansion of federal power , concocted an opinion that would be limiting in scope , while still respecting the law and seeming nonpartisan . Others say that Roberts has unlawfully manipulated the mandate into a tax , thereby giving legs to a law that has none .
What the country thought was a debate over federal regulation of interstate trade has been transformed by Roberts into a debate over Congress ' power to shape decisions through taxation . He writes in the majority opinion , `` The mandate can be regarded as establishing a condition -- not owning health insurance -- that triggers a tax -- the required payment to IRS . ''
The dissenters , Justices Antonin Scalia , Anthony Kennedy , Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito , adamantly disagree : `` [ T ] o say that the Individual Mandate merely imposes a tax is not to interpret the statute but to rewrite it ... ''
The dissent is right . Roberts recast the mandate as a tax , a rationale that was not in the law or the government 's case . He rewrote the administration 's position , baptized it , and then blessed it . Roberts ' defenders argue that he did so to avoid a constitutional crisis , but he may have created another by judicially re-legislating policy , a policy paid for and enforced by what could be essentially the largest tax increase in American history .
Roberts could have characterized the mandate as a tax and sent it back to the Congress , whose role is to legislate taxation , to redo . In my opinion , that 's what he should have done . If Roberts is so concerned with the integrity of the Supreme Court , he should know that its integrity rises and falls with the integrity of its decisions and its adherence to the Constitution , not public perception .
As it stands , the verdict is a serious setback for conservatives , but not a total loss . Roberts ' majority opinion does deny Congress the power to mandate health care through the Commerce Clause , dealing a strong blow to future Congresses ' ability to legislate social welfare programs . Since Wickard v. Filburn , modern conservatives have lamented the radical expansion of Congress ' power to regulate interstate commerce under Article I of the Constitution . This decision may stem the tide .
Furthermore , the Roberts opinion invalidated Obamacare 's penalty on states that refuse the massive expansion of Medicaid subscribers . States can opt out of the expansion of Medicaid and not be subject to a loss of funding . This is no doubt a victory for federalism and the 26 states that filed lawsuits against the government .
JUST WATCHED Romney 's health care response Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Romney 's health care response 02:20
JUST WATCHED Obama said mandate is n't tax in 2009 Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Obama said mandate is n't tax in 2009 03:27
JUST WATCHED Romney 's past complicates mandate attack Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Romney 's past complicates mandate attack 03:05
Nevertheless , Obamacare will stand until at least the fall elections . For President Barack Obama it is a mixed blessing . On the one hand , it gives the president a political shot in the arm . His signature legislative achievement -- a massive expansion of health care -- has been validated . On the other hand , Obama must now defend his health care bill as a tax increase , something he and other Democratic leaders adamantly denied before the Affordable Care Act was passed .
In a 2009 interview with George Stephanopoulos , Obama was asked repeatedly whether his legislation was a tax . At one point Stephanopoulos said , `` But you reject that it 's a tax increase ? '' Obama replied , `` I absolutely reject that notion . ''
This flip-flop will not play well politically with the American people . Obama sold his health plan to the American people as anything but a tax . Had it been presented as the tax it is , it 's doubtful it would have passed the Congress during the economic malaise of Obama 's first years in office . The American people , particularly the tea party , may feel they are again victims of taxation without representation .
For this reason , the verdict , while a serious judicial blow to conservatives , may favor them politically . Mitt Romney and Republican leaders can now campaign relentlessly against a massive , sweeping tax increase that will fall on the shoulders of an already weak economy . Romney is already reaping the rewards . His campaign reports that he raised $ 4.6 million in the 24 hours after the Supreme Court decision came down .
For the next six months , Obamacare will remain hyper-politicized . The terms of the national political debate now center on whether a stalled economy can bear the brunt of higher taxes and more government spending . The Supreme Court did not hand conservatives a lifeline . Elections have consequences and this fall 's will be monumental .