Obama administration officials are beginning to respond to increasing pressure for a public explanation about the problem-plagued ObamaCare site , with the agency responsible vowing a `` tech surge '' to fix it and President Obama preparing to address the public on Monday .
The Department of Health and Human Services on Sunday posted a blog on its site with some preliminary statistics and an assurance to Americans that officials are “ working around the clock ” and “ committed to doing better . ”
Shortly before noon on Monday , the president will directly address the technical problems with the site that `` he and his team find unacceptable , '' according to the White House .
The website has been mired in problems since going live Oct. 1 , including crashes , slow response times and failing to allow customers to complete the online process by purchasing health insurance .
Also on Sunday , Illinois Democratic Sen. Dick Durbin said Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius would testify before Congress about the site , amid a growing call for her to accept requests to speak on Capitol Hill .
“ Ultimately , Secretary Sebelius will testify , ” Durbin , the Senate ’ s No . 2 Democrat , told “ ███ Sunday . ”
The 918-word blog acknowledges the glitches have been “ frustrating ” for Americans and states roughly 500,000 applications for coverage have been submitted . It also states that healthcare.gov has had roughly 19 million unique visits , which “ confirms that the American people are looking for quality , affordable health coverage , and want to find it online . ”
Officials said in the post they have called in additional help to solve the problems .
The agency has said it will release information on how many people have purchased insurance but has not so far .
Insurance coverage under ObamaCare begins in January and those who fail to purchase insurance under the 2010 law will have to pay a tax penalty by March 31 .
Sebelius and the entire administration have declined requests to testify on Capitol Hill .
The House Energy and Commerce Committee sent a letter directly to Sebelius last week asking her to testify Thursday on the matter .
Sebelius has yet to respond publicly , but reportedly plans to attend a gala the night before in Boston , which has fueled calls for resignation .
Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio said he ’ s “ reluctant ” to call for an immediate dismissal in such situations , but was critical of Sebelius for so far not agreeing to testify .
“ Her refusal to testify and be transparent has undermined her credibility , ” he told ███ , adding her not testifying could lead to her resignation .
House investigators say they want to know whether officials involved in the website “ didn ’ t know or didn ’ t disclose ” problems , after repeatedly saying the site was “ on track ” to launch .
Missouri Republican Sen. Roy Blunt told ███ that Sebelius ’ position appears “ unsustainable . ”
“ She can not sustain it , ” he said . “ She ’ ll have to testify . ”
Commerce committee Chairman Fred Upton began focusing on Secretary Sebelius after she went to Comedy Central ’ s “ The Daily Show with Jon Stewart ” last week to talk about the website .
“ Secretary Sebelius had time for Jon Stewart , and we expect her to have time for Congress , ” the Michigan Republican has repeatedly said .