With tax day and IRS forms fresh in their minds , most Americans might think the US tax system couldn ’ t get any more daunting .
One of the hotly debated features of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( or “ Obamacare ” ) takes effect in 2014 . Under the law ’ s “ individual mandate , ” nearly everyone who isn ’ t covered by an employer will have to buy health insurance or pay a penalty . This penalty was officially labeled a “ tax ” by the Supreme Court , or at least by five of the justices , in its decision on Obamacare last June .
The Obama administration , however , never argued that the individual mandate is an exercise of Congress ’ s taxing authority . And as recently as October , in an interview with Rolling Stone magazine , President Obama avoided the “ tax ” justification , and still insisted that the individual mandate is a regulatory action authorized by the Commerce Clause .
Just what Americans need : more confusion and ambiguity in their tax law .
By calling the mandate to buy insurance a “ tax , ” the court did more than trigger new debates about semantics . It created a potentially fatal constitutional glitch in the law .
Article I , Section 7 of the Constitution says that tax bills – “ all bills for raising revenue ” – must “ originate in the House of Representatives. ” The framers wrote this “ Origination Clause ” because they recognized the potential danger in the taxing power , and they wanted to keep it as close as possible to voters . So they entrusted it to members of the House , who are elected every two years and have smaller constituencies than senators , who represent whole states and serve staggered six-year terms .
But Obamacare didn ’ t follow the constitutional script . Instead of originating in the lower chamber , it started in the Senate , when Majority Leader Harry Reid took an old bill the House had passed that would have given veterans tax credits to buy homes , struck out all of that bill ’ s language , and inserted instead the confusing web of provisions that became the Affordable Care Act .
That question is now in front of US District Judge Beryl Howell in Washington , D.C. , in a challenge to Obamacare filed on behalf of Matt Sissel , an Iowa small business owner who was decorated for service as a medic in the Iraq war .
Obamacare was passed hastily , by lawmakers who admitted they had not read the bill . The legislation was passed during the holiday season , through questionable procedural tricks . It was never popular , and a recent Kaiser Family Foundation poll found that only 36 percent of Americans currently support the law . Even the Supreme Court ’ s liberal wing agreed that large parts of it were unconstitutional . In part of last June ’ s decision , Justices Stephen Breyer and Elena Kagan joined the conservatives to hold that Congress had illegally tried to force states to expand their Medicaid rolls .
These are all good reasons not to give a reflexive pass to the law ’ s most controversial aspects – including the way it was enacted .
The Supreme Court has never addressed whether the Senate can evade the Origination Clause by hollowing out a House bill and substituting its own tax . “ If any act violates the Origination Clause , it would seem to be the Affordable Care Act , ” Randy Barnett , a Georgetown University Law School professor and leading constitutional critic of Obamacare , has written .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
The Constitution ’ s procedural guidelines might seem like dry formalities . But such procedures were designed to safeguard the rights of the American people . And if last June ’ s Supreme Court decision is not to become a precedent for Congress to impose any variety of mandates on Americans under the taxing power , courts should take care to enforce democratic controls over that power .
Timothy Sandefur is a principal attorney with Pacific Legal Foundation , a public-interest legal organization that litigates for limited government , individual rights , and free enterprise . He represents small business owner Matt Sissel in challenging the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act ’ s individual mandate “ tax . ”