Each side is mobilizing its flock on the issue . | REUTERS The holy war over Obamacare
As in politics , the religious world is riven by the health law . Sympathetic faith organizations that see an opportunity to live up to their God-given mission to aid the poor are stepping up to White House efforts to get people covered . Evangelicals and conservative congregations view Obamacare as an affront to their values and personal freedoms .
Each side is mobilizing its flock — both evangelicals and liberal denominations are using a different kind of bully pulpit to build support for their point of view .
“ A pastor is morally responsible for how he impacts his congregation , ” said Richard Land , president of the Charlotte , N.C.-based Southern Evangelical Seminary . “ I , personally , as a pro-life evangelical Christian believe it would be the height of irresponsibility to encourage anyone in my congregation to do anything other than … oppose this . ”
Meanwhile , the White House is reaching out to supportive denominations to promote the health law . Where Americans ignore their president ’ s sermonizing on Obamacare , the thinking goes , they ’ ll listen to their pastors , rabbis and imams .
Federal health officials have blanketed southern , mainline congregations with literature , hosted online Obamacare seminars for faith groups , attended religious conferences and tutored missionaries on particulars of the complex law . Supporters hope millions will decide , perhaps with a spiritual nudge , to enroll in insurance exchanges or expanded Medicaid programs when the sign-up season starts on Oct. 1 . They ’ re modeling the push on similar efforts during the rollouts of the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program and the Medicare prescription drug benefit .
“ Medicaid expansion is part of what people of faith consider to be respecting the worth and dignity of human beings , ” said the Rev . Susan McCann , rector of the Grace Episcopal Church in Liberty , Mo . — deep in a state that is largely hostile territory for the health law . “ We believe in the worth and dignity of all human beings as created in the image of God . ”
About 17,000 “ faith and community groups ” have participated in White House-sponsored webinars on Obamacare , and community leaders — including religious figures — are on the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services stakeholder list to receive updates on the law ’ s rollout .
CMS regional offices have delivered mailings to 500 churches in the Nashville area , with similar efforts planned for late summer . The agency ’ s Atlanta office has worked with women ’ s missionary groups to disseminate information . The Philadelphia office recently visited a conference of Baptist ministers and has offered “ brief presentations ” during the morning announcements at local congregations , Bible study sessions and church-sponsored health fairs .
Some of these groups obtained six- and seven-figure grants from the administration last week to become “ navigators ” — certified guides that will walk people through the sign-up process . Among the recipients : the Catholic Archdiocese of Mobile in Alabama ; the Oak Hill Missionary Baptist Church Ministries in Mississippi ; and Ascension Health , a large Catholic health provider active in nearly half the states .
But the White House isn ’ t holding its breath for help from conservative evangelical institutions .
“ There has been no effort , so far as I know , to ask Southern Baptists to market the Affordable Care Act in this way , ” said Russell Moore , president of the Southern Baptist Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission . “ It ’ d make about as much sense as Budweiser sponsoring the Southern Baptist annual meeting . ”
Moore said most of the religious hatred for Obamacare centers on the law ’ s contraceptive coverage requirements , which they say tramples on religious freedom of business owners . But these evangelicals also believe other elements of the law restrict religious and personal freedom , from its imposition of new taxes to its requirement that individuals obtain insurance or pay a penalty . They also worry about a range of other aspects , from abortion to end of life .