One of the more important conservative beliefs about Obamacare , running right alongside the certainty that the law is a disaster that will fail in every respect , is the belief that Americans share their antipathy to the law . It certainly is true that the Affordable Care Act has a bad reputation , and the latest poll showing that support for Obamacare has dipped prompted the same wave of conservative gloating that results from every such poll . But looking even an inch beneath the surface reveals a public more frustrated and confused by Obamacare than opposed . Its specific elements poll well , though they ’ re the least known elements . Four out of ten Americans don ’ t realize the law hasn ’ t been struck down . A new poll out shows that the public , by a ten-point margin , trusts Democrats over Republicans on health-care issues . By a 52–34 percent margin , they want Congress to implement or tinker with the law rather than repeal it . The nearly ubiquitous conservative belief that the public shares its passion for repealing Obamacare is a spate of self-delusion .
That overconfident delusion is the subject of Ramesh Ponnuru ’ s long National Review essay pleading with conservatives to stop believing their own bullshit . Ponnuru faithfully affirms the general outlines of the right-wing case : Of course the law is terrible , of course it won ’ t work , of course it must be repealed . He even repeats the misleading line that Max Baucus warned the law would be a “ train wreck. ” But Ponnuru gently warns that the failure might be slow to arrive , and perhaps not the Greece-esque national catastrophe conservatives have talked themselves into expecting . His account of what conservatives expect to happen , furnished from within the movement , is actually frightening :
A few conservative lawmakers have speculated that the law will crash so badly that the Democrats will themselves demand repeal in the next couple of years . A few Republicans who believe that these effects should not be put off : that Americans should suffer them so as to see the failure of Obamacare with their own eyes . Only then will they turn against the law and its supporters with the requisite passion to undo it .
Ponnuru argues that Republicans must also get serious , finally , about replacing the law with something other than the status quo . But there ’ s a reason Republicans don ’ t make repealing Obamacare contingent on an alternative plan : Alternative plans that do anything are hard . People get attached to what they have and suspicious of change . Republicans killed Bill Clinton ’ s health reform by raising the specter that people who have insurance would get something different , which they didn ’ t trust . The GOP ’ s only real health-care traction in the 2012 elections came by assailing Obama for cutting Medicare .
Republicans have wisely decided to attack Obamacare without committing themselves to an alternative because the alternative would be easy to attack . Ponnuru , for instance , suggests changing the tax code and stripping regulations to create “ a market in which almost everyone would be able to purchase relatively cheap , renewable insurance policies that protected them from the risk of catastrophic health expenses. ” Telling tens of millions of Americans they ’ ll lose their insurance that covers basic medical expenses and get bare-bones policies with thousands of dollars in deductibles is not a winning play .
The Republican war against the implementation of Obamacare is largely an attempt to exploit Amercians ’ aversions to change . That ’ s why the GOP is throwing around wild , inflated claims of “ rate shock ” — sowing fears that Obamacare will jack up peoples ’ health-insurance premiums . The latest party organ to do this is the Republican leadership in Ohio , which is warning its citizens that they will face enormous new costs . ( Jonathan Cohn takes apart the shoddy claims . )
The tiny kernel of truth is that a handful of people — mostly young , male , and healthy — will have to buy into some kind of regular insurance plan that covers stuff , not only plans that cover your costs if you ’ re injured in a car crash and make you pay for just about everything else . The scare campaign could work , at least to some extent . But if it works , it won ’ t work because Americans are dying to be converted to an all-catastrophic , high-deductible system .
What Republicans have going for them is that health care is really complicated , people don ’ t spend hours a day boning up on public policy , and those who have insurance understandably fear losing what they have . But the vast majority of the public is not going to see any changes under the new law . Even if the Obamacare exchanges collapse , they only bring in people who don ’ t have Medicare or employer coverage anyway and are already suffering through a dysfunctional individual insurance market . The “ shock ” is going to be felt by conservatives who are expecting their Randian fantasies of socialist dystopia to come true .