House Speaker John Boehner is finding out first hand some of the costly side effects associated with ObamaCare . The Ohio Republican signed up for coverage under the Affordable Care Act -- only to find his premiums would double and his deductibles would triple .
Boehner , along with congressional colleagues and aides , are transitioning to coverage via the Washington , D.C. , exchange – called DC Health Link -- from the Federal Employees Health Benefits system as part of ObamaCare .
A spokesman for Boehner on Monday described his experience trying to sign up him and his wife for coverage . Turns out , under the new coverage , Boehner , 64 , will be forced to fork over thousands of dollars more per year .
According to his office , Boehner compared options available and initially chose a plan similar to the one he and his wife currently have . The figures came out to $ 802 per month in premiums with a $ 2,000 deductible . The monthly premium calculates to an increase of 85 percent , his office said . Under their previous plan , the Boehners had a $ 433 monthly premium and a $ 700 deductible .
Because Boehner ’ s wife Debbie will become Medicare-eligible next month , she had already applied for Medicare Part A , which is the program ’ s premium-free hospital care program . However , to qualify for full coverage , she ’ d have to also enroll in Medicare Parts B and D or in Medicare Advantage , which groups together all Medicare benefits into one plan . Because of the Boehners ' income , she ’ d have to pay up to $ 400 per month in Medicare premiums on top of additional deductibles , his office said .
The Boehners are still shopping around for the right Medicare plan , but have decided that Debbie Boehner should enroll in Medicare while the speaker has chosen an individual policy . The individual plan hiked Boehner 's monthly premium to $ 449 and his deductible to $ 1,000 .
Together with his wife 's Medicare coverage , it still means the family is paying double for premiums and triple for their deductible .
Last week , Boehner took to social media to describe his issues with the D.C. exchange . However , Boehner was ultimately able to log on successfully and enroll and was contacted by a representative from the exchange an hour after he complained .
While the Boehners took their health care hunt public , his office has stressed the couple released the information only to show how expensive ObamaCare can be .
“ Of course , the speaker and Mrs. Boehner are fortunate enough to be able to afford these higher costs , ” Brendan Buck , Boehner ’ s spokesman said in a written statement . “ They ’ re not asking anyone to feel sorry for them . We stress that . We are only providing this information for the sake of transparency . ”