Problems in society are rarely solved by Washington bureaucrats yet they seem to have taken the adage , ‘ if at first you don ’ t succeed , try , try again ’ to heart . Accordingly , the government is addressing the nation ’ s growing obesity epidemic with a regulation : Section 4205 , the menu labeling provision attached to ObamaCare meant to “ aid consumers in selecting more healthful diets. ” As currently written , however , the regulation will likely have job-killing effects and result in little , if any , significant reductions in obesity rates and/or improved health .
The provision requires chain restaurants with 20 or more locations , including franchises and perhaps some grocery stores , to post calorie information for all products on in-store menu boards . According to the Food Marketing Institute ( FMI ) , a national standard was supported by the restaurant industry as a way to “ preempt the patchwork of various state and municipal menu labeling laws. ” The rules designed by the FDA , however , eschew more common sense approaches to implementing the law . The American Pizza Community , a coalition of pizza franchises , and FMI , the association representing America ’ s grocery stores , are cognizant of the effects the regulation will have on the industries they represent and thus , have advanced a legislative solution : the Common Sense Nutrition Disclosure Act .
Lynn Liddle , executive vice president of communications , legislative affairs and investor relations for Domino ’ s Pizza , tells ███ that the Common Sense Act would , as its name suggests , make a number of sensible changes . For example , since 90 percent of pizza customers get their food delivered , small businesses shouldn ’ t be subjected to putting calorie information on menu boards in stores that most people will never step foot in . As the bill addresses , these types of restaurants should be allowed to provide a remote-access menu . The ability to use an online menu would also alleviate the burden of putting calorie information for countless pizza combinations on a menu board -- Domino ’ s alone has 34 million pizza combinations ( they did the algorithm ) , which would be impossible to display in stores anyway . The FDA ’ s rules also require the signage to display calorie ranges for a whole pizza , forcing the consumer to do the math for individual slices . Liddle says that in their stores in New York City where a similar law is in place , most people either didn ’ t look at the menu or they thought the calorie range was a “ coupon code or something. ” Instead , the bill calls for labeling by the serving size , thereby making it easier for customers to understand .
For the pizza community , estimates for the cost of signage reach up to $ 4,700 per year depending on how often products are updated . Despite being part of a big brand name like Domino ’ s Pizza , the cost will be incurred by the franchise owners , which Liddle says are mom and pop operations . The nearly $ 5,000 is an added expense against marginal profits , she says , which doesn ’ t include the uncertainties associated with future costs of food , minimum wage increases and the possibility of more regulations .
“ You can only ask the consumer to pay so much , ” she explains . “ People like pizza because it ’ s good and it ’ s a value . You can feed a family of four for $ 25 bucks or under . So that ’ s one of the attractions to pizza and so we don ’ t want to raise prices to our customers , and truly , we can ’ t . So what does it mean ? It means they ’ ll hire fewer people , it will mean that some stores will close. ” Plain and simple , the franchise owners will not be able to afford additional cost burdens .
In a truly unprecedented move and despite the fact that 95 percent of what ’ s in a supermarket is already labeled , grocery stores may become subject to the regulation as well because of the language FDA uses in its proposed rule : “ restaurants and similar retail food establishments. ” Again , if the provision is implemented as written , “ It ’ s gon na have a huge impact on whether they have to scale back a store . In this economic environment , they ’ re having trouble keeping stores open period…or scale back fresh offerings , ” FMI ’ s director of government relations Robert Rosado explains . “ It ’ s silly when literally you take produce and just because you cut it then that triggers you being in this thing . It ’ s very counter-intuitive. ” With already high commodity and energy costs , the internalization of expenses has gone as far as it can , he adds .
And what about the research showing menu labeling helps reduce obesity rates and increase overall health ? FMI ’ s Erik Lieberman writes :
“ It has been estimated by industry that the costs of extending menu labeling to supermarkets will exceed $ 1 billion in the first year of compliance alone , and hundreds of million of dollars annually thereafter . Meanwhile , the evidence that menu labeling has any significant impact on public health is scant . Indeed , of the studies FDA cites in the rule , most demonstrate that menu labeling has little to no effect on purchasing habits . Furthermore , no study shows any link to reduction of obesity rates , the purported benefit which FDA used to justify the menu labeling regulation . ”
APC and FMI are not asking that the regulation is placed on the chopping block . Through the Common Sense Act , however , they are pushing a less burdensome approach .
“ On behalf of the pizza industry…we just want to do what we do best , ” Liddle says . “ We want to make pizza…we don ’ t really want to be in Washington . We ’ re doing it reluctantly to protect our small business people that are involved in this and we want to do the right thing for the consumers . ”
Liddle suggests people write letters to their representatives asking them to co-sponsor the bill and help move it along in the lame duck session of Congress .