On Friday , Canada 's Supreme Court legalized physician-assisted suicide . This makes Canada one of a small handful of countries — the others are Belgium , the Netherlands , Luxembourg and Switzerland — that allow doctors to hasten the deaths of terminally-ill patients . Canada 's law will take effect in one year , after the country 's provinces have had time to set up rules and regulations of how new aid-in-dying laws will work .
In a landmark decision , Canada 's Supreme Court ruled that physicians should be allowed to aid a patient in dying so long as `` the person affected clearly consents to the termination of life '' and is suffering from `` '' grievous and irremediable medical condition . ''
The ruling centered on the case of 89-year-old Gloria Taylor , a resident of British Columbia who suffered from late-stage Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis , or ALS , which causes progressive muscle weakness .
`` I do not want to waste away , '' the plaintiff in the case wrote
`` What I fear is a death that negates , as opposed to concludes , my life , '' Taylor wrote of her wish for physician-assisted suicide in documents the Supreme Court quoted . `` I do not want to die slowly , piece by piece . I do not want to waste away unconscious in a hospital bed . I do not want to die wracked with pain . ''
Canada 's law will take effect in one year , after the country 's provinces have had time to set up rules and regulations of how new aid-in-dying laws will work .
Canada joins a handful of European countries with legal physician-assisted suicide
An assisted suicide clinic in Switzerland run by Zurich-based group Dignitias ( AFP via Getty News Images ) Three countries have passed legislation that allows doctors to hasten the deaths of terminally-ill patients : Belgium , the Netherlands , and Luxembourg . Switzerland has an even more liberal aid-in-dying policy , which allows non-doctors to assist suicide , that stems from the country 's criminal code .
The Netherlands was the first country to legalize physician-assisted suicide with a 2002 law , although the country has informally permitted such activities for approximately three decades . The Dutch law also legalized euthanasia , which the country defines as death from a medication administered by a physician to hasten death ( whereas physician-assisted suicide includes cases where the patient gets a prescription for a deadly dosage , but administers it him or herself ) .
1.8 percent of all deaths in the netherlands are the result of physician aid-in-dying
A 2007 study found that , in 2005 , 1.8 percent of all deaths in the country were the result of euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide .
Belgium also passed its aid-in-dying law in 2002 , and it also permits both euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide . In 2014 , Belgium extended its law to apply to children of any age living with terminal illness ( the Netherlands ' law is not available to children under 12 and , for teens using it , requires parental consent ) . Luxembourg was the third country to legalize euthanasia in 2009 .
In Switzerland , physician-assisted suicide is legal so long as the doctor is not motivated by `` selfish '' interests . Euthanasia , however , is not allowed . Switzerland is unique in that it allows non-doctors to assist in suicides as well and does not limit access to life-ending drugs to patients with terminal illness .
The ruling from the Canadian Supreme Court says that provinces there can not `` prohibit physician-assisted death . '' Whether this means they will allow physician-assisted suicide ( where doctors prescribe fatal drugs for patients to take ) or euthanasia ( where the doctor himself administers the deadly medication ) .
Protesters rally at the Supreme Court before arguments in Gonzalez v. Oregon , a 2005 decision that allowed Oregon 's aid-in-dying law to continue ( The Washington Post via Getty News Images )
No states in America allow for euthanasia . The five states with right-to-die laws — Oregon , Washington , New Mexico , Montana , and Vermont — all require the patient to administer their own deadly medications .
In Oregon , which passed its Death with Dignity law in 1997 , patients must make their request for a lethal medication in writing and then , 15 days later , make an oral request . Another 15 days must pass before the patient can fill the prescription — and they could decide never to fill it at all .
`` If a doctor is allowed to give a patient a lethal injection , the doctor is the last actor , '' says Alan Meisel , a bioethicist at the University of Pittsburgh who has written extensively on right-to-die laws . `` In Oregon and Washington , the patient is the last actor . And that lets them reserve the right not to act at all . ''
Will Canada 's new law lead to suicide tourism in North America ?
Switzerland 's law is best known for attracting suicide tourism : those who travel from abroad to end their own lives , because they can not do where they live .
Suicide tourism to Switzerland , particularly among those who are not terminally-ill , appears to have increased in recent years . One study found that 611 non-Swiss citizens from 31 countries used the country 's aid-in-dying laws between 2008 and 2012 .
There are two reasons to think Canada will not have nearly as much suicide tourism as Switzerland . First , Canada 's law is much more restrictive than Switzerland 's . While Switzerland allows those who are not terminally ill to end their lives , Canada 's laws will restrict access to those who have an `` irremediable '' condition that causes `` enduring and intolerable suffering . ''
Second , aid-in-dying has been available in the United States since 1997 , when Oregon passed its death with dignity law . The Oregon law does require those wishing to end their lives to be residents of the state . This is certainly an obstacle , but not an impossible one : 29-year-old Brittany Maynard famously moved to Oregon in 2014 to end her life after being diagnosed with terminal brain cancer .
It 's unclear , at this point , whether the Canadian law will have residency requirements — that 's up to the provinces there as they interpret the new court ruling . If it does , that will likely be a significant deterrent to Americans traveling there seeking to end their lives .