Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker wants to give people in his state a way around ObamaCare ’ s problems .
He is floating a proposal that would still channel federal subsidies to Wisconsin ’ s poor and uninsured , but his plan would allow them to purchase coverage directly from the insurer and sidestep the on-line “ exchange ” created by the Affordable Care Act .
His idea is getting support , even in the bitterly divided Wisconsin state house . Six Democrats crossed party lines and backed his proposal in the assembly , sending it over to the Senate with a healthy majority .
Still , before it goes into effect , Walker ’ s idea would need the blessing of the Obama administration .
“ If they do n't approve this , this is ultimately exposing that this is n't really about access and this is n't about affordability , ” says Walker . “ It 's about government playing a heavier hand in these kinds of decisions . ”
Regardless of support , his idea stands in the face of President Obama ’ s claim that , when it comes to health care , Republicans complain but don ’ t offer solutions .
“ They sure have n't presented an alternative . If you ask many of the opponents of this law what exactly they 'd do differently , their answer seems to be , well , let 's go back to the way things used to be , ” the President said in a White House speech Dec. 3 .
However , a number of Republican politicians have floated proposals , including Rep. Tom Price of Georgia , Sen. Tom Price of Georgia and Rep.Paul Ryan of Wisconsin .
The Republican plans are generally consumer driven , says Ed Haislmaier of The Heritage Group , a conservative think tank .
“ The patient makes choices , ” says Haislmaier , as opposed to a government-driven plan in which a third party buys coverage to fit the needs of the consumer .
Supporters of the president ’ s plan say conservative counter-proposals lack the reach of the Affordable Care Act .
“ I ’ ve yet to hear a Republican alternative which covers nearly as many uninsured or even half as many uninsured , ” says economist Jonathan Gruber . “ Or offers evidence-based solutions to the health care cost crisis . ”