Members of Congress and their staffs won ’ t face potentially massive hikes in their health care premiums next year as many had feared because of a clause in President Obama ’ s health care overhaul — causing at least one Republican senator to ask , literally , “ What the flip ? ”
The federal government plans to issue a ruling saying the government can keep contributing to health care premiums of Congressmen and their staffers , Politico reported .
Sen. Charles E. Grassley , Iowa Republican , put a provision into the original law saying that Congressmen and their aides have to be covered by plans “ created ” by the law or “ offered through an exchange . ”
Under the old system , the federal government contributed to about 75 percent of premiums ; members and staffers are covered through the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program , but it was unclear if the program could subsidize premiums of plans on the exchanges .
Enrollment in the exchanges — marketplaces where consumers can shop for and buy for insurance — is scheduled to begin Oct. 1 , and both Democrats and Republicans are planning significant public relations campaigns over the law during Congress ’ s August recess .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , California Democrat , said Friday that members of Congress and their staffs must enroll in the exchanges , as required by the law .
“ It was important for us to get this information before we left for August because October 1 is right around the corner , ” she said .
Mrs. Pelosi said staff did tell her it would be a problem .
“ But I think the main target of that piece of the legislation was the members of Congress , and the collateral damage was to staff . Now that doubt has been removed , ” she said . “ Members of Congress , of course , would always been in the exchanges . And now there was a differentiation on staff , if you were leadership staff or if you were personal staff , and that ’ s what we ’ re waiting to see , the actual final language , because we haven ’ t seen that , but that ’ s what we ’ re working on now .
Meanwhile , Republicans attacked the announcement , with Sen. David Vitter blasting it as a “ behind-closed-doors deal , announced right after Congress is safely away from the crime scene . ”
“ This is exactly why America rightly hates Washington , ” said Mr. Vitter , Louisiana Republican . “ Obamacare ’ s a train wreck , even for Congress . So it gets fixed … FOR CONGRESS ONLY . What the flip about fixing it for America ? ”