Medium-sized businesses – those with between 50 and 99 full-time employees – will have an extra year to provide health coverage for their employees , in the latest change by the Obama administration to the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) .
Such businesses will still have to report on how many of their workers have coverage , but won ’ t have to provide the coverage themselves until 2016 or pay a penalty .
Larger businesses – those with 100 or more full-time employees – also got a break in the new regulations issued Monday by the Treasury Department . Starting Jan. 1 , 2015 , larger businesses must cover only 70 percent of their employees , and have until 2016 to cover 95 percent , or face penalties . Originally , larger businesses had to cover 95 percent of employees in 2015 .
The moves are aimed at making it easier on employers to comply with the law , a Treasury official said .
“ While about 96 percent of employers are not subject to the employer responsibility provision , for those employers that are , we will continue to make the compliance process simpler and easier to navigate , ” Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy Mark J. Mazur said in a statement .
“ Today ’ s final regulations phase in the standards to ensure that larger employers either offer quality , affordable coverage or make an employer responsibility payment starting in 2015 to help offset the cost to taxpayers of coverage or subsidies to their employees . ”
The regulations also push preparations for the start of the employer mandate for medium-sized businesses away from the November 2014 midterm elections . Republicans are planning to use `` Obamacare '' as their No . 1 argument against the Democrats .
Smaller businesses – those with fewer than 50 full-time employees – still face no mandate to provide coverage . Most individuals have faced a requirement to carry coverage since Jan. 1 , 2014 , though the law allows people to be uninsured for three consecutive months in a calendar year without penalty , so the mandate really kicks in on April 1 . The regulation on employer health coverage also exempts volunteer and seasonal employees – those who work six months or less in a calendar year .
Congressional Republicans responded quickly with dismay over the latest changes to the ACA , furthering their argument that President Obama can ’ t be trusted to follow laws as passed .
“ Once again , the president is giving a break to corporations while individuals and families are still stuck under the mandates of his health-care law , ” House Speaker John Boehner ( R ) of Ohio said in a statement . “ And , once again , the president is rewriting law on a whim . ”
The tweaks to the ACA don ’ t affect as many people as it may seem , because most large employers already provide health coverage . In 2013 , 99 percent of companies with 200 or more workers offered insurance coverage to their employees , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation . And 91 percent of businesses with between 50 and 199 workers offered coverage .
Monday ’ s move follows the news Friday that the Obama administration is allowing people who are unhappy with plans purchased on the federal marketplace , HealthCare.gov , to switch their plans by March 31 , the last day of open enrollment .
People who are unhappy with their plan , because for example it does not include their old doctors , will be allowed to switch as long as they stay with the same insurer and the same basic level of coverage , according to The Washington Post , citing a memo distributed Thursday night to insurers . The administration has not announced the plan-switch option , but has quietly reworked the code on HealthCare.gov to allow plan-switching , the Post reported .
The Obama administration has been scrambling since Oct. 1 , 2013 , when HealthCare.gov opened for business in an extremely rocky start . The administration says that it has the legal right to make minor changes to the law , in the name of smoother implementation , though Republicans say the president is violating the Constitution , which requires that “ he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Some in the business community complained Monday that the delay only postpones the inevitable , and demonstrates that the ACA is tough to implement . But one group , the National Retail Federation ( NRF ) , applauded the administration for working with the business community as the health-care law is implemented .
“ The administration should receive a gold medal for recognizing the enormous complexities of the Affordable Care Act , and its agility and flexibility in working with retailers and others in crafting these much-needed and common-sense reforms and revisions , ” said NRF vice president Neil Trautwein .