Our comprehensive strategy for the opioid crisis , grounded in the best science and evidence we have , is starting to show results .
The scale of America ’ s opioid crisis can be daunting . The latest numbers show that more than 72,000 Americans died of a drug overdose in 2017 , most of them involving opioids . The tragic statistics are a reminder of why President Trump has made combating the opioid crisis a top priority for his presidency .
But everywhere the crisis has struck , there are signs of hope and resilience . Earlier this year , I visited a clinic in Dayton , Ohio — one of the hardest hit communities in the country — that treats new mothers struggling with addiction and their infants born physically dependent on opioids .
We met a young mother who was just a few months into recovery from opioid addiction . One day , late in her pregnancy , she got in a car crash on her way to buy drugs from a dealer . The crash sent her to the hospital , where her baby was born — alive , but dependent on opioids . If she had not gone to the hospital that day , doctors said , her baby probably would not have lived . Today , she is working and able to share her story of recovery .
Each life saved from addiction is an important victory . And while the epidemic still rages , we are now seeing signs of national progress .
Last week , the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) released its annual survey of Americans ’ drug use and mental health . For the second year in a row , the number of Americans misusing legal or illegal opioids dropped . Even more encouraging , the number of Americans initiating heroin use dropped by around half from 2016 to 2017 .
These are signs that dedicated efforts from the federal government on down to local governments , faith communities , families , and individuals are working . Since President Trump took office , we have seen a 264 percent increase in the prescribing of naloxone , and a 16 percent increase in the prescribing of one form of addiction treatment .
More : A mother 's guilt : my personal experience with the opioid crisis and what to do about it
Serenity Prayer inspired me to spare other families the pain that opioids caused mine
Now , HHS is taking a number of new , unprecedented steps to empower local communities in their fight . These are part of HHS ’ s comprehensive strategy for the crisis , which is grounded in the best science and evidence we have .
Thanks to new funding President Trump secured from Congress earlier this year , in just this week , HHS is disbursing more than $ 1 billion in grants to fight opioid addiction . This includes grants to support all 50 states ’ efforts to provide addiction treatment , prevention , and recovery services ; grants from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to improve data gathering and prevention ; and grants to help community health centers in rural areas provide addiction treatment .
The grants that go to support treatment have new provisions added by the Trump administration to specifically promote the use of medication-assisted treatment , which doctors and scientists consider the gold standard for helping those with opioid addiction . As part of an effort to expand that kind of treatment as widely as possible , HHS also issued a message to healthcare providers across America to promote a little-known way they can prescribe medication-assisted treatment via telemedicine . Prescribing medication-assisted treatment requires a certification that many healthcare providers do not have , but telemedicine allows them to connect patients to other providers who already have the certification .
We are also working to constantly expand our knowledge of addiction . This week , the National Institutes of Health is announcing a multi-million dollar study to test an integrated strategy for reducing overdose deaths in communities highly affected by the opioid crisis , implementing the very best practices we have for treatment and prevention and rigorously assessing the results . NIH also continues work to expand our scientific understanding of pain and addiction , including the heartbreaking challenge I saw firsthand in Ohio , of infants born dependent on opioids .
Earlier this year , I joined President Trump in New Hampshire to announce his administration-wide opioid initiative , which involves both HHS efforts and the important work of federal and local law enforcement . He declared that “ failure is not an option , and addiction is not our future. ” Every day , the administration is working with people across America toward our shared goal : success in the war on addiction and a drug-free future .
Alex Azar is Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services . Follow him on Twitter : @ SecAzar