Four states are continuing to fight against ObamaCare by including a ballot measure on Election Day that asks residents whether they want to block the mandate requiring Americans to have insurance under the new federal health-care law .
Alabama , Florida , Montana and Wyoming will join 16 other states that have already passed laws or made changes to their constitutions to say they will not enforce the so-call “ individual mandate ” in the law .
Missouri residents -- who in 2010 became the first to reject the mandate -- will on Nov. 6 decide on whether to allow the governor to establish so-called exchanges for them to buy the mandatory insurance .
Voters in 38 states will consider 174 ballot measures , including 12 referendums , on Nov. 6 , according to the National Conference of State Legislatures .
Beyond the efforts to block ObamaCare , state ballots will also include such ballot measures as ones on same-sex marriage , legalizing marijuana and even condoms for porn actors .
Legal experts and the Congressional Research Service say efforts to block the health-care mandate will have no or little impact because the U.S. Constitution supersedes state law .
“ This federal law fully applies to individuals , and any contradictory state laws will have no effect on this ( Affordable Care Act ) provision , ” a legislative lawyer with the nonpartisan research office wrote days after the Supreme Court ’ s June 28 ruling that largely upheld the law .
Still , state officials say enacting such a measure puts them in good legal standing for future changes , which could include at least the partial repeal that Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney has promised if elected .
“ The American Care Act could still be defunded and something else could replace it , ” Republican state legislator and bill sponsor Leslie Nutting told the Wyoming Eagle Tribune .
Maryland , Maine , Minnesota and Washington have ballot measures asking voters whether to approve same-sex marriage . The Maryland and Washington assemblies have each passed the legislation but have put the final vote to residents .
This is the second time in four years that Maine will vote on gay marriage . Voters in 2009 overturned a state law passed by the legislature allowing for the marriages .
Such legislation has never passed a popular vote , in 32 efforts . Supporters are encouraged by national polls that show younger generations have increasingly accepted such marriages . But in liberal-leaning Maryland , a new Baltimore Sun poll shows voters evenly split on the issue , with strong opposition from religious groups .
At least a dozen states and the District of Columbia have legalized marijuana for medical purposes , but Colorado , Oregon and Washington are trying to go a step further with ballot measures to regulate pot for recreational use , like alcohol . Arkansas and Massachusetts each have measures to legalize medical marijuana .
Los Angeles County resident will vote on a ballot initiative to require porn actors to wear condoms when making adult films . “ The Los Angeles Porn Actors Required to Wear Condoms Act , Measure B ” is backed by the AIDS Healthcare Foundation but appears to face tough opposition from the actors and actresses .
Arizona residents will vote on an initiative by the Republican-backed state legislature to take control of the Grand Canyon and millions of other acres of federal land . The effort is part of a decades-long effort known as the “ sagebrush revolt ” in which Western states try to retake land they say once belonged to them . However , residents will need help from their congressional delegation even if the measure is approved .
In Massachusetts , residents will vote on an initiative to allow terminally ill patients to receive a lethal dose of drugs . The so-called `` Act Relative to Death with Dignity ” initiative defines a terminally ill patient as somebody with six or fewer months to live . And the patient must be mentally capable of making such a decision , according to the measure .