CLOSE Trump 's actions to modify the Obamacare insurance marketplace could result in higher prices and fewer insurers . Video provided by Newsy Newslook
WASHINGTON — President Trump 's decision to abruptly cut off federal payments to insurers reverberated through the political world Saturday , putting pressure on Congress to take action to address the high premiums that American consumers could face and jolting the insurance industry .
Trump 's move late Thursday to end federal subsidies that help insurance companies reduce out-of-pocket costs for low- and middle-income consumers also could deepen the divide among Republicans over how to tackle the 2010 Affordable Care Act as the market opens in a little more than two weeks for people to sign up for health insurance .
On Saturday , a broad health industry coalition , which includes health insurance companies , hospitals , the American Medical Association and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , sent a letter to congressional leaders , urging lawmakers to `` take action immediately '' to revive the payments .
`` Millions will face higher premiums , fewer choices and less access to the medical care they need , '' if Congress fails to restore the funds , the trade groups argued .
The Republican leaders who control Congress have pledged to dismantle the health law , but some in the GOP have balked , unwilling to risk the political fallout in states where large numbers of their constituents are insured through Obamacare .
In a tweet Saturday , Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , called Trump 's decision an example of his `` failure to lead . ''
The president , he said , `` throws destructive bones to his base , then tells Congress to fix it . ''
. @ POTUS ’ M.O . : failure to lead . Throws destructive bones to his base , then tells Congress to fix it : Iran , Health care , Puerto Rico — Chuck Schumer ( @ SenSchumer ) October 14 , 2017
Trump 's move to cut the payments came on the heels of his Thursday executive order allowing consumers to buy insurance through association health plans across states lines . The move could help millions of consumers find access to cheaper insurance plans , but it could drive them into alternative plans that skirt the law 's consumer protections and minimum coverage requirements .
In a pair of early morning tweets Saturday , Trump celebrated his strikes against President Obama 's signature health care law and reveled in the damage it had done to insurance stock prices , which fell sharply Friday on news he was ending the subsidies .
`` Health Insurance stocks , which have gone through the roof during the ObamaCare years , plunged yesterday after I ended their Dems windfall ! , '' he wrote in one tweet .
Health Insurance stocks , which have gone through the roof during the ObamaCare years , plunged yesterday after I ended their Dems windfall ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 14 , 2017
Very proud of my Executive Order which will allow greatly expanded access and far lower costs for HealthCare . Millions of people benefit ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 14 , 2017
The Trump administration , and a group of House Republicans who went to court to challenge the subsidies , say the payments violate the Constitution because they were never specifically authorized by Congress , which controls the federal government 's purse strings .
The federal subsidies , which total about $ 7 billion this year , benefit about 6 million people , many of whom live in states that backed Trump in the 2016 presidential election .
Ending the payments will hit consumers ' wallets because the health-care law still requires insurance companies to lower costs for their poorest customers . Insurers are likely to make up for those lost federal payments by boosting premiums for consumers who buy their own insurance .
More : Trump 's move will lead to higher premiums for middle class consumers he 's vowed to protect
More : Steve Bannon slams establishment Republican senators , says conservative voters 'are coming for you '
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has estimated premiums could surge by 20 % with the loss of subsidies .
A group of 19 Democratic state attorneys general is suing to block the move .
Nevada 's Republican Gov . Brian Sandoval also criticized Trump 's actions , telling The Nevada Independentthat ending the payments will be `` devastating '' to lower-income consumers .
`` It 's going to hurt people . It 's going to hurt kids . It 's going to hurt families , '' Sandoval said .
But conservatives groups — such as Americans for Prosperity , affiliated with the Koch brothers — have urged Obamacare 's repeal and this week hailed Trump 's actions to weaken the law .
On Capitol Hill , attention now will turn to an effort under way before Trump 's move by Sens . Lamar Alexander , R-Tenn. , and Patty Murray , D-Wash. , to craft a bill that would reinstate the payments in exchange for Republican demands that states have greater flexibility in the kinds of insurance plans they could offer under the federal law .
In their Saturday letter to congressional leaders , the health care and business groups said a bipartisan plan should not only guarantee payments for 2017 but continue funding for the next two years .
Schumer has indicated he would like to see the subsides included in a must-pass spending bill Congress will consider this year , which could set up a showdown before a Dec. 8 appropriations deadline and increase the risk of a government shutdown if both sides ca n't reach an agreement .
There 's sharp disagreement among Republicans on how to proceed . For instance , Ohio GOP Rep. Jim Jordan , a staunch conservative , told The Hill newspaper `` heck no , '' when asked whether he supports Congress reviving the payments . He called the subsidies an insurance company `` bailout . ''
Repealing the Affordable Care Act has been a rallying cry for Republican candidates ever since the law passed seven years ago , but the Senate has repeatedly faltered in efforts to dismantle it this year .
In a speech Friday to the Value Voters Summit , Trump said Congress had forgotten `` what their pledges were . So we 're going a little different route . ''
`` But you know what ? In the end , it 's going to be just as effective , '' he said .