This is the web version of VoxCare , a daily newsletter from ███ on the latest twists and turns in America ’ s health care debate . Like what you ’ re reading ? Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox here .
Now that the zombie American Health Care Act seems to be six feet under again — for the time being — we can get back to policy discussions about the real effects of health reform .
In a new book , An American Sickness , journalist Elisabeth Rosenthal laments medicine ’ s quick transformation from a patient care system to a multitrillion-dollar business — one perverse incentive at a time .
One major failing : Even after the Affordable Care Act , there ’ s an uninsured population in the US that ’ s nearly as big as the population of Canada .
Since 2013 , the number of uninsured Americans is down from 18 percent in 2013 to 11.9 percent in 2016 — but there are still nearly 30 million people living in America without health insurance .
“ When you look at it from the perspective of much of rest of the developed world — to have 10 percent of population without good access to health care shows how far we still have to go , ” said Rosenthal , a doctor , former New York Times writer , and now the editor in chief of the nonprofit Kaiser Health News . ( Return Monday for a ███ Q & A with her about the absurdity of the health system and its out-of-control costs . )
The size of the uninsured group is well-known , but less clear is what this group looks like . A new series in the Lancet on health inequality paints a pretty good picture . People who go without insurance in America are not refusing coverage for ideological reasons : They simply can ’ t afford to pay .
Most uninsured Americans have yearly incomes that are near or below the poverty line ( $ 11 , 770 for an individual in 2016 ) . “ Among non-elderly adults , 7.6 % of the non-poor were uninsured in 2015 compared with 25.2 % of the poor and 24.1 % of the near-poor , ” the Lancet reports . In other words , the poor and near poor were more than three times more likely to be uninsured than their higher-income counterparts .
And while the ACA ’ s Medicaid expansion was meant to bring health care to people in poverty , 19 states opted out of the program , and Medicaid enrollees face barriers to access even in expansion states .
The other group that ’ s less likely to be insured are people of color , according to the Lancet . “ With respect to racial disparities , in 2015 the uninsurance rate among adults aged 18–64 years remained far higher for Hispanics ( 27.7 % ) and non-Hispanic blacks ( 14.4 % ) than for non-Hispanic whites ( 8.7 % ) , showing that long-standing racial and ethnic inequalities have been attenuated but by no means eliminated . ”
The disparities in access to care are wider in the US than in other developed countries . “ Before the 2010 passage of the ACA , which progressively expanded health insurance coverage , 39 % of Americans with below-average income reported not seeing a doctor for a medical problem because of cost , compared with 7 % of low-income Canadians and 1 % of those in the UK , ” the Lancet reads . They 're also linked to a big mortality gap : The richest 1 percent in America live up to 15 years longer than the poorest 1 percent .
The Lancet researchers don ’ t think the kind of market-based reforms the GOP is pushing are the solution to the problem here , and point out they 'll make inequality worse . Instead , they ’ re siding with a certain American champion of universal health care : “ A single-payer , Medicare-for-all reform — championed by Senator Bernie Sanders during his upstart presidential campaign , as well as by many physicians and the nation 's largest nurses union — would , in our view , best address health-care inequalities. ” ( Sanders makes an appearance in the Lancet , with an editorial . )
Rosenthal is more of an incrementalist . She does n't think blowing up the system is realistic . `` This system progressively got built one action at a time , the perversion of one incentive at a time , '' she said . To bring the US more in line with other wealthy countries — in terms of both cost and access — she thinks we need to unravel those perverse incentives , one small step at a time .
███-mark Sign up for the newsletter VoxCare Email ( required ) Zip Code By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the data transfer policy . For more newsletters , check out our newsletters page Subscribe
Here 's what the uninsurance rates in the US look like by poverty status for people under 65 . Two things to notice : This population has gotten smaller over the years , but it 's still huge . And you can see that poorer Americans are much more likely to be uninsured than their wealthier counterparts .