The most hard-line conservatives in the House are taking an unusually cautious approach to the Senate 's Obamacare replacement , promising to keep an open mind about whatever their colleagues across the Capitol send back .
It ’ s a change in strategy for the House Freedom Caucus .
When House leaders first released a health care bill in February , for instance , group members took to television talk shows to pan the plan as “ Obamacare lite , ” furious that it did n't , in their eyes , do enough to unravel the 2010 health care law .
They also threatened to withhold their support until changes were made , and later won concessions .
For now , those hardball tactics have disappeared . As the Senate looks to pass its own health care legislation this week , those same House conservatives are taking a more measured approach — even as several conservatives in the Senate are currently balking at the bill .
`` I would like it to be better , but if this is the best we can do across the whole conference and the whole Congress , I have to respect that , '' said Rep. Scott Perry ( R-Pa. ) , a Freedom Caucus member .
Freedom Caucus Chairman Mark Meadows ( R-N.C. ) said last week that he — and the majority of the group — would likely back the Senate measure if it includes a few changes offered by conservative ally Sen. Ted Cruz ( R-Texas ) . And he 's signaled in recent weeks a willingness to bend on other Freedom Caucus priorities , including state waivers for Obamacare regulations that were essential to winning over the hard-liners ’ support in the House just a few weeks ago .
As senators began negotiating , the Freedom Caucus refrained from taking formal positions on ideas floating around the upper chamber that many in their ranks would have once rushed to oppose . And Freedom Caucus vice chair Jim Jordan ( R-Ohio ) on Thursday said it ’ s unlikely that they ’ ll weigh in on the plan soon .
It 's a notable change in tone from the typically rigid negotiating tactics of the Freedom Caucus . And it ’ s all aimed squarely at allowing their Senate colleagues breathing room to conduct difficult negotiations .
`` I 'm optimistic that in the effort to find 51 votes in the Senate and 218 votes [ in the House ] , that some of those compromises are being made , '' Meadows told reporters Thursday , hours after the Senate released its initial health care plan .
███ Playbook newsletter Sign up today to receive the # 1-rated newsletter in politics Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
Since the House passed its bill in May , the Freedom Caucus has kept a low profile , freeing Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to find consensus without conservative House members blasting his every move .
In an interview late last month , Meadows even joked that his involvement would probably just tank the Senate process : “ Leader McConnell doesn ’ t need Mark Meadows to tell how to get consensus in the Senate . And quite frankly , the more that Mark Meadows tries to help him get consensus , the more difficult it is for him to get consensus , and I ’ m very self-aware of that . ”
It 's more than just simple courtesy . McConnell is working in a highly polarized Senate to cobble together 50 votes for a health care package . With no Democrats expected to support the measure , he can afford to lose only two of the chamber 's 52 Republicans .
Already , four conservative senators — Cruz , Mike Lee ( R-Utah ) , Rand Paul ( R-Ky. ) and Ron Johnson ( R-Wis. ) — have said they ca n't support the bill without amendments to dismantle more of Obamacare . A fifth senator , Dean Heller ( R-Nev. ) , is pulling in the opposite direction , warning that the initial bill cuts too deeply into Medicaid and Obamacare 's protections for him to support it .
Meadows and the Freedom Caucus are still hoping to assert themselves before the final version of the bill is passed , but they 're doing it in uncharacteristically subtle ways .
The group 's leaders , including Meadows , Jordan and Raúl Labrador ( R-Idaho ) , have kept in touch with conservative senators , especially Lee , as well as Johnson .
Meadows has also quietly been working with mainstream Senate Republicans to ward off changes that might erode conservative support — and to signal just how far his allies might be willing to go in accepting more moderate tweaks to the bill .
For example , he 's spoken to Sen. John Thune ( R-S.D . ) about Thune ’ s plan to increase tax credits for poorer individuals while cutting them on the wealthy . The Freedom Caucus has advocated against proposals for a refundable tax credit , but Meadows signaled in May that he 's open to Thune ’ s proposal .
Meadows also indicated several weeks ago that the Senate preference for a multiyear phase-out of Obamacare 's Medicaid expansion wo n't necessarily be a deal-breaker , even though conservatives have grumbled that the House 's shorter window was already too generous . And Meadows even indicated that he could possibly back the Senate bill if it weakens a conservative-favored provision that the House included : allowing states to waive core Obamacare coverage standards .
“ If the waivers come out , there will be a number of other options that are put in their place that could potentially be just as meaningful in driving down premiums , ” he said .
There are also indications the Freedom Caucus ' muted approach could change . One conservative source said the group 's current stance is n't necessarily indicative of its posture this week , as negotiations in the Senate continue .
Perhaps the most crucial bellwether for conservative support the fate of Cruz 's proposed amendments . The Texas firebrand has suggested allowing consumers to use their Obamacare tax credits to purchase insurance products that fall short of the health care law 's coverage standards . That `` consumer choice '' amendment , along with a few other conservative additions , would virtually guarantee a majority of the Freedom Caucus ' support , Meadows said Thursday .
Another flash point will come this week , when the Congressional Budget Office indicates the economic and coverage impact that the Senate bill is likely to have . CBO 's analysis suggested that the House bill would result in 23 million fewer people with health coverage in the next decade , a metric that spooked some moderate senators , who deemed the House measure a nonstarter .
Conservatives will be looking a different CBO number : how the Senate bill affects premium increases , the most important thing to them .
“ If CBO says this will continue to bring down premiums , and it protects pro-life and Planned Parenthood defunding and all , I ’ m open to it , ” Jordan said of the Senate proposal Thursday .
In the meantime , the drumbeat of news that insurers are pulling out of Obamacare 's individual market exchanges has provided fuel for Republicans to push ahead with their plans . And it appears to be making it easier for some conservatives to swallow compromises .
`` Is the bill that the Senate kicked out or the House bill my dream bill ? No , it is not , '' Perry said . `` However , the context is , what 's happening now is failing , and we have an obligation to do what we can to fix it as best we can . ''