A blunt critique from Bill Clinton on President Obama 's handling of the rocky ObamaCare rollout is prompting the White House to pledge another set of health law fixes -- though in doing so , it could inadvertently build the case for those calling for a delay in the law 's implementation .
Aside from scrambling to fix the broken HealthCare.gov website , the administration is now trying to deal with the millions of Americans who have received cancellation notices . On Tuesday , White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said the president 's team is trying to figure out a way to offer relief to some of those policyholders .
The statement comes after former President Clinton , in an interview with the site Ozy.com , said Obama should live up to his promise to Americans that if they like their health plans , they can keep them .
`` So I personally believe , even if it takes a change to the law , the president should honor the commitment the federal government made to those people and let them keep what they got , '' Clinton said .
Asked Tuesday if Obama agreed , Carney said : `` The answer 's yes . ''
Carney referred to Obama 's comments to NBC News last week , when the president apologized for the cancellation notices and said the administration was looking at a `` range of options '' to address the issue .
But Carney spoke in additional detail on Tuesday , saying the president 's team is specifically trying to help those Americans who have been forced off their plans into more expensive coverage which they might struggle to afford .
`` The president has tasked his team with looking at a range of options , as he said , to make sure that nobody is put in a position where their plans have been canceled and they ca n't afford a better plan , even though they 'd like to have a better plan , '' Carney said .
It 's unclear , though , how the administration could go about doing that . Insurance companies are the ones canceling policies -- due to new requirements under the health care overhaul -- and would likely have to be involved in any effort to restore coverage .
Robert Zirkelbach , spokesman with America 's Health Insurance Plans , told FoxNews.com that all the myriad plans to reverse or stop the cancellation notices raise questions about how that would be achieved . He said in many cases , changes to existing policies have already been filed with state regulators and consumers have been notified .
`` That 's a lot to go back and unwind , '' he said , noting that any modified health plans would have to be reviewed and approved by state regulators .
The insurance industry generally does not support any delay in the implementation of the ObamaCare insurance mandates , out of concern that a delay would deprive them of much-needed customers at a time when they 're dealing with the cost of additional coverage requirements .
But any effort to overhaul the cancellations might require an extended timeframe .
Separately , House Republicans , as well as some Senate Democrats , are planning legislation that would allow people losing their current coverage to keep their plans .
A Senate bill introduced by Louisiana Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu that would ensure Americans could keep their current health insurance plans was co-sponsored Tuesday by longtime Sen. Dianne Feinstein , D-Calif .
In his interview Tuesday , Clinton defended the health care law as a whole , but explained how the broken promise on health coverage can hurt young people . He relayed the story of a young man who said his individual market plan was canceled and replaced with one whose premiums were twice as high . Though his deductibles and co-pays were lower , that savings is only realized if he gets sick , Clinton explained .
Obama , in explaining the cancellation notices , has clarified that under ObamaCare , policies could be canceled if they had been altered in any way since the passage of the law .
That nuance was not included in the president 's initial explanations .
The administration argues that while some are losing their current coverage , those plans will be replaced by better-quality insurance . The flip side is that they could be more expensive .