John McCain created a moment of immense drama Thursday night when he thumbs-downed the Republicans ’ last-gasp attempt to keep the Obamacare repeal alive . Much less dramatic , but perhaps almost as important , is a new Reuters report that Senator Orrin Hatch plans to deliver to the Trump administration the message that “ [ t ] here ’ s just too much animosity and we ’ re too divided on healthcare. ” This is unmistakable evidence that the Obamacare repeal will not be resuscitated .
The surprise of McCain ’ s gesture probably gave an exaggerated sense of how close the Senate was to repealing Obamacare . The bill that failed , “ skinny repeal , ” was a legislative shell commanding little support . Mitch McConnell ’ s rationale for passing it was that it would allow a House-Senate conference to write some different bill . Given that Senate Republicans couldn ’ t figure out a bill capable of winning 51 Senate votes , it was hard to imagine how a conference with the House could have done the same .
Hatch ’ s statement makes clear what seemed obvious : Many Republican Senators , even those willing to go along with McConnell ’ s plan to delay the failure of Obamacare , didn ’ t think it would result in success anyway . It means McConnell isn ’ t just one vote short . Roy Blunt , a member of McConnell ’ s leadership team , said today , “ If the question is do I think we should stay on health care until we get it done , I think it ’ s time to move on to something else . ”
So repeal is dead . Relatedly , Obamacare is doing quite well . You might recall a great deal of news coverage focusing on the exit of insurers from a number of counties , leaving huge numbers of Americans with no choices at all on the exchanges . Today , Ohio announced that it had found insurers for 19 of its 20 counties lacking any plans , and believed the 20th is on the way .
19 counties in Ohio once thought to be bare have been covered .
Now 19 counties in US ( 0.1 % of enrollees ) are at risk https : //t.co/q1slgeWYJf pic.twitter.com/t242xIm3Tt — Cynthia Cox ( @ cynthiaccox ) July 31 , 2017
That leaves just some rural swaths of Nevada and Indiana — which between them contain one-tenth of one percent of all exchange enrollees — without an insurance plan in their exchanges . With the threat of legislative repeal buried , insurer participation is likely to stabilize .
President Trump claims that Obamacare is “ dead ” and “ gone , ” and has ramped up his angry threats to sabotage the exchanges . But insurers have come to a different conclusion : The president ’ s bluster will blow over , and Obamacare will remain .