Mr. Trump said his victory in the 2020 election was critical to preventing the country from being hijacked by the “ radical left , ” which he said was “ consumed by rage and radicalism and insatiable lust. ” And he said that House Democrats had begun impeachment proceedings because “ they know they can ’ t beat us fairly . ”
Mr. Trump ’ s advisers earlier in the day previewed the new executive order as part of Mr. Trump ’ s commitment to protecting Medicare . Seniors “ like what they have , so the president is going to protect it , ” Alex M. Azar II , the secretary of health and human services , said in a conference call with reporters . Mr. Azar also used the call to frame Democrats ’ health care plan as too focused on reducing the ranks of the uninsured .
The executive order seeks to beef up Medicare Advantage , the plans offered by private insurers that contract with Medicare and currently cover about a third of the program ’ s 60 million beneficiaries , according to senior administration officials . The order also calls for lowering Medicare Advantage ’ s premiums , allowing providers to spend more time with patients and reducing Medicare fraud .
The executive order , originally called “ Protecting Medicare From Socialist Destruction , ” was renamed “ Protecting and Improving Medicare for Our Nation ’ s Seniors ” before Mr. Trump ’ s speech . But administration officials said the renaming was a distinction without a difference .
Joe Grogan , the director of the White House Domestic Policy Council , said the goal was still to contrast the administration ’ s commitment to protecting seniors with “ the vision for Medicare as a one-size-fits-all , single-payer system ” supported by many Democratic candidates .
“ Medicare for all is Medicare for none , ” added Seema Verma , the administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , who has been a vocal critic not just of the Democratic proposals but also of the Affordable Care Act . “ Proposals like Medicare for all , as well as the public option , they are morally wrong because they would demote American seniors to second-class status . ”
Democrats competing for their party ’ s presidential nomination strongly disagree : All advocate expanding health care coverage , though their strategies to do so vary .