The U.S. will spend slightly more on health care over the next decade than it would have had President Obama ’ s Affordable Care Act not passed , according to a new estimate released Tuesday by the federal government .
If the Supreme Court upholds the law later this month , the Affordable Care Act is expected to add $ 478 billion to health care costs over the next decade , driving up average spending by one-10th of a percent faster than if the law had never been passed , according to the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services , a federal agency within the Department of Health and Human Services .
While Republicans said the data proves the health care law won ’ t solve the problem of ballooning health care costs , the administration defended the law , saying Americans ’ out-of-pocket expenses will be less beginning in 2014 , particularly on prescription drug .
“ That ’ s real money back in the pockets of millions of Americans , ” Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius said in a blog post defending the law .
Overall , the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services said health care spending is expected to continue growing at unusually low levels in the next year because of the slow economic recovery . But spending growth will spike in 2014 , jumping from 3.8 percent in 2013 to 7.4 percent in 2014 as major provisions of the law go into effect .
Growth will remain higher for several years , as millions of Americans obtain health coverage with the help of insurance exchanges , federal subsidies and expanded Medicaid programs , and then drop to about 6 percent annually .
By 2021 , federal , state and local governments will make up nearly 50 percent of all health spending in the U.S. , up from 46 percent in 2011 .
Republicans said the report shows Mr. Obama failed to make good on his promise to use his health law to bend the cost curve on health costs as a percentage of the American economy .
“ Exploding health care spending is hardly the relief the president promised the American people , ” said Sen. Orrin G. Hatch , Utah Republican . “ Instead of working to address skyrocketing costs and reforming our nation ’ s broken entitlement programs , the president opted to jam through a partisan government takeover of health care . ”
The projections have changed little from last summer , when the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services first projected that the Affordable Care Act would drive health care spending up slightly in the next decade .
The administration shrugged off the data , saying the law only appeared to raise spending because it was measured against unusually low recent growth rates during the economic recession .
Key provisions in Mr. Obama ’ s health care law - bringing more healthy Americans into insurance pools , allowing Medicare to experiment with new “ bundled payment ” methods and cutting down on emergency room visits by mandating coverage for everyone - could help control spending further .
Still to be seen is whether that does enough to bend the cost curve in future decades .
The newly insured population will be younger and healthier than those currently insured , and they ’ re expected to drive up the demand for prescription drugs and doctors .
That could be a good sign for reducing spending in the long term , because patients who regularly visit the doctor and practice preventative medicine can avoid more expensive health problems in the future .