Health insurance enrollments are gaining momentum . Four times as many people enrolled in private coverage via HealthCare.gov in November than in October , according to figures released Wednesday by the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) .
But the numbers are still small , relative to the Obama administration ’ s enrollment targets in its implementation of the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) .
More than 100,000 people enrolled in November on the federal website , HealthCare.gov , up from about 27,000 in October . An additional 148,000 people enrolled in coverage in November via the state-run exchanges operating in 14 states plus the District of Columbia , almost double the October figures . All told , nearly 365,000 people have enrolled in private coverage between Oct. 1 and Nov. 30 .
The Obama administration ’ s original enrollment goal for October alone was 500,000 , 3.3 million by the end of December , and 7 million by the end of March , when the 2014 open enrollment period ends . In recent days , administration officials have said they thought they could still reach their target .
On Dec. 1 , the administration began a new push to get people to enroll , after announcing that HealthCare.gov was functioning well for 90 percent of people who visited . Some news reports have indicated a “ surge ” of enrollments since then , though the administration has not confirmed that .
Still , the botched rollout of HealthCare.gov has put many administration officials , including President Obama , in a crucible of public outrage and embarrassment . But perhaps no one has faced more heat than Kathleen Sebelius . On Wednesday , a weary-looking HHS secretary told a House committee that she has launched an internal review into the failures of the rollout and is taking measures to ensure smoother functioning of the department ’ s Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) , the agency in charge of ACA implementation .
“ Now that the website is working more smoothly , ” Secretary Sebelius said , “ I 've determined it 's the right time to begin a process of better understanding the structural and managerial policies that led to the flawed launch so we can take action and avoid these problems in the future . ”
Sebelius announced that she has asked HHS ’ s inspector general to review the development and management of HealthCare.gov , including acquisition of contractors and contractor performance and payment issues . The price tag on the site is $ 677 million , $ 319 million of which has been spent through the end of October .
The secretary is also establishing a new position at CMS – chief risk officer – to focus on reducing the problems involved with large-scale initiatives such as the development of HealthCare.gov . And she is updating CMS ’ s approach to management of contractors and procurement .
Mr. Obama has said that he will seek reforms to the entire federal procurement process for information technology , long an area where the federal government has struggled .
In the hearing before the House Energy and Commerce Committee , Sebelius sought to put the troubled website launch behind her and focus on the momentum building toward higher signup rates . But she acknowledged that the problems set back efforts to promote enrollment , especially among younger , healthier Americans who may be less motivated to sign up .
“ We know that a lot of younger Americans are very tech savvy , want a fully functioning , easy-to-operate site , and so getting HealthCare.gov up and running correctly also helps with some of those targeted numbers , ” Sebelius said .
When asked if she would have delayed the site ’ s Oct. 1 launch , had she known the problems it was facing , she suggested she might have done things differently .
“ I would have probably done a slower launch , maybe with fewer people , and done some additional beta testing , ” Sebelius said .
She declined to give herself or HHS a grade for the launch . “ I ’ ve already said that I think the launch was flawed and failed and frustrating for millions of people – unacceptable , ” she said .
Sebelius also denied that more people would end up losing coverage than gaining coverage under the ACA , as some members of Congress asserted . Now that the website is functioning for the “ vast majority ” of people , those who have had their policies canceled can go shop for a new plan .
HHS highlighted additional health insurance enrollment figures Wednesday , including those who have qualified for Medicaid , the federal-state partnership that provides health coverage for low-income people . Through the end of November , some 803,000 people have been found eligible for Medicaid or CHIP , the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Another 1.9 million people have been found eligible by buy insurance on either the federal or state marketplaces , but have not yet selected a plan .
HHS ’ s enrollment numbers include those who have signed up for a plan , but not yet paid . Payment for coverage that begins Jan. 1 , is not due until Dec. 31 .