The White House kept close tabs on the creation of the online exchange , with particular attention to the Web site ’ s design , but managing the details of the software development was left to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , which Ms. Sebelius oversees . She testified on Capitol Hill this spring that the exchanges were “ on track ” to open on Oct. 1 , but those close to her say she has been far more immersed in developing policy related to the health care law , and in traveling the country to promote it , than in its technical aspects .
Ms. Sebelius ’ s decision to leave Washington this week — she will speak at a gala at the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston on Wednesday night , then travel to promote the health care law in Phoenix ; Austin , Tex . ; and San Antonio — caused an uproar among Republicans who said she has not explained why the Web site failed and how the government plans to fix it .
House Republicans , including leaders of the Energy and Commerce Committee , which planned a hearing on Thursday to examine issues related to the technical failures of the Web site , have demanded that she testify . ( She will do so next week . )
“ We ’ ve got lots of questions , ” said Representative Joe Pitts , Republican of Pennsylvania and chairman of the panel ’ s health subcommittee . “ Why would she mislead us so shortly before the rollout , when they were obviously not prepared and are still not prepared , and it ’ s going to take a long time to fix the problem ? We want to know how long she thinks it is going to take . ”
On Tuesday , Ms. Sebelius tried to provide some answers , at least in writing . In a blog post on her agency ’ s Web site , she provided details of the “ technology surge ” promised by the White House to correct the site ’ s deficiencies , and she named Jeffrey D. Zients , a management consultant and administration veteran with a history of resolving government technology issues , as leader of the effort . She said the administration also is bringing in “ veterans from top Silicon Valley companies ” and other experts to consult on the technology overhaul .