Trump 's Agenda May Be Doomed Unless He Learns That 'Little ' Stuff Matters
The look on his face , as he meandered through unscripted remarks Friday after the defeat of the Republican health care plan he supported , told the story . The unusually subdued Trump called the loss a `` learning experience . '' Then he seemed to shrug it all off and said he was moving on .
But it 's hardly going to be that simple or easy . The same fissures in the GOP that derailed the health care bill will be there when it comes to any big issue moving forward , whether it 's tax reform , infrastructure or funding the government . And Republicans warn that , unless the president is willing to learn and own the details , the result will likely be the same — failure .
`` Trump 's defeat this week was entirely predictable , '' said Alex Conant , who worked on Marco Rubio 's presidential campaign and was a spokesman for the Republican National Committee and the Bush White House . `` He has never showed any detailed knowledge of health care policy and has few relationships in Congress . Getting health care passed was always going to be a heavy lift , but Republicans should be concerned that Trump could n't even get it off the ground . ''
During the campaign , Trump connected with a significant chunk of the country with big , bold promises . But on arguably his ( and the GOP 's ) highest-profile promise — repealing and replacing Obamacare — he flamed out in one of the most embarrassing ways possible just 64 days into his presidency . It 's unlikely that Republican voters will be satisfied with leaving Obamacare in place .
`` It failed brilliantly , '' said another Republican strategist , who requested anonymity to speak frankly about a president the strategist may be working with on upcoming priorities . `` Going forward , I would expect there would be a greater ownership on the White House 's part on the legislation that is being advanced , and he 's going to have to be in a position to know the details . ''
No one comes off looking good in the debacle — not House Speaker Paul Ryan , who was the brains behind the bill and led the legislative strategy ; not White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus , who is close to Ryan ; not White House chief strategist Steve Bannon , who reportedly tried to play hardball with the roughly 40 hard-line conservatives of the House Freedom Caucus , who were largely responsible for the bill 's defeat .
`` I do n't give a s * * * what you guys think , '' Bannon reportedly told them , per CNN , in a meeting Thursday before the bill went down .
`` Guys , look , this is not a discussion , '' Bannon said , per Axios . `` This is not a debate . You have no choice but to vote for this bill . ''
Trump himself showed a level of impetuousness with the Freedom Caucus and a lack of policy understanding that eventually did him in .
`` Forget about that little s * * * , '' Trump told the group Thursday , per Politico . `` Let 's focus on the big picture here . ''
That might be how campaigning works , but it 's not how governing does . Sweating the little stuff is important when it comes to legislating . That 's especially true for the big things Trump wants to tackle .
But , though Trump said he had `` learned a lot '' and wants to move on , he was looking backward over the weekend , tweeting blame at the Freedom Caucus — a group he underestimated :
It 's a group that wo n't be intimidated by ultimatums or tweets . Current House Intelligence Committee chairman Devin Nunes of California once referred to the conservatives who became the Freedom Caucus as `` lemmings with suicide vests . ''
Trump is going to have to figure out how to deal with them .
He also faced opposition from more moderate Republicans , like Rep. Charlie Dent of Pennsylvania , who were averse to the ramifications of the policy laid out in the GOP bill . Dent did not deny an exchange reported by Robert Draper in the New York Times Magazine , in which Trump said he was `` destroying the Republican Party '' and was going to be blamed for foiling tax reform by blocking the health care plan .
Part of Trump 's `` learning experience '' was seeing how members of Congress may care more about what their constituents think than their president does . Trump may be the leader of the Republican Party , but he is n't its CEO .
Trump likes to win . He told the country during the presidential campaign that we would all get so tired of winning under him that we would all be so bored . The Art of the Deal author hyped himself as the best dealmaker anyone 's ever seen .
Instead , his first major effort at legislating handed him a stunning loss . It was a textbook chapter in how not to legislate .
Part of the problem is that Trump wanted a win on health care so badly that he may have been blinded by his willingness to take any win .
He outsourced the details to Ryan and others , and when it got difficult , Trump did n't have enough policy knowledge to close the deal .
`` How he was dismissive of policy concerns , and instead focused on the big picture and big political issue , that is never going to get you a win when you 're negotiating with Congress , '' Conant warned .
Health care affects one-sixth of the U.S. economy and includes lots of `` little '' things that are important to real people 's lives .
Every year Medicaid expansion is limited or rolled back means potentially millions of people who do n't have access to health care .
Every `` essential health benefit '' that 's put on the chopping block , for , oh say , whether your insurance is required to cover emergency room visits , means potentially thousands of dollars in or out of constituents ' and hospitals ' pockets .
Conservative writer Matt Lewis observed during the brief debate over the GOP health care bill how far it strayed from Trump 's campaign platform . `` He ran as a guy , ' I will solve your problems . I want to take care of everybody . Nobody 's going to lose anything . Everybody 's going to have the best health care . ' This health care plan is off-brand for Donald Trump , '' Lewis told NPR 's Mara Liasson .
An enduring problem for the president may be that his brand of populism does n't necessarily match the small-government conservatism that defines the House GOP Conference .
Sure , Trump made the phone calls and lobbied wavering Republicans , but he grew impatient and frustrated . After less than three weeks , he issued an ultimatum to those hardline conservatives — he was done negotiating : vote for this bill , or Obamacare stays in place .
`` Winning '' is n't everything ; it really is how you play the game in Washington that enables winning . And when it came to playing the legislative game , Trump 's lack of attention to policy detail , impatience and cavalier impetuousness cost him .
`` He should know , from being engaged in a lot of negotiations , if you 're constantly looking over your shoulder and needing someone to fill in the details in the conversation sometimes that does n't wear real well , '' the strategist said .
There 's a reason it took former President Obama more than a year to pass the Affordable Care Act .
He knew the details , and was often the best — and only — salesperson for it . He took the show on the road and got into the nitty gritty .
Pete Souza , the former White House photographer , subtly made that point in a post on Instagram on Saturday :
President Obama working on his health care speech that he made to a Joint Session of Congress in September 2009 , six months before the Affordable Care Act was voted on in Congress . A post shared by Pete Souza ( @ petesouza ) on Mar 25 , 2017 at 7:14am PDT
`` Give credit where it 's due , Obama was really good at that , '' the strategist said . `` Obama was really good at working with individual members knowing the legislation as well or better than they did . They [ the Trump White House ] need to get to that level , or close to it , or there are going to be gross inefficiencies built in and opportunities that are lost . ''
That is going to have to include more coalition-building inside and outside the GOP conference , with outside conservative groups , as well as industry groups .
`` He did n't spend much time or political capital to get this bill through , '' Conant said .
Conant also pointed out that part of the problem is a level of distrust within the White House for everyone in `` the establishment '' and anyone who has n't been on Team Trump all along .
`` There continue to be a lot of vacancies , '' Conant said , `` and they have rejected a lot of people who have government experience because of loyalty tests from the campaign . ''
That eliminates a lot of professionals with experience on Capitol Hill .
If Trump does n't start to focus on the details and become more invested in how government works — something he has always been loath to do — he should expect similar results .
`` There 's an eagerness on all sides to move on , to put this episode behind and move on to a new issue , '' Conant said . `` But regardless of what issue we turn to next , Trump will likely run into the same internal GOP divisions and partisan opposition . To be a successful president , Trump will have to display skills that we have not yet seen from him .
`` It will require humility , patience , outreach to opponents and the forging of consensus . ''