The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the Affordable Care Act this month . | JAY WESTCOTT/███ 3 health care scenarios for the W.H .
Barack Obama and his team know the health care law will be the defining legislative accomplishment of his term .
But that doesn ’ t mean they want it to be the defining issue of the 2012 campaign .
The Supreme Court , of course , has other ideas . Later this month , the Roberts Court is expected to rule on the Affordable Care Act . The justices ’ questions during arguments are a notoriously unpredictable guide but conventional wisdom predicts the law will at least be stripped of its keystone provision , the mandate that nearly every American buy their own health insurance . The court could even bring down the whole law .
Obama ’ s brain trust believes public opinion about the law is already locked in , and the decision is coming early enough in the cycle that it won ’ t have a huge impact on the race .
( See also : 10 best pro and con health care quotes )
“ The election will be about the economy . Period . Health care only matters in the context of the larger economy , ” a top Democrat with close ties to the campaign told ███ .
The president ’ s aides have vehemently denied the administration is prepping for the law to be overturned or gutted — and there ’ s good reason to downplay the notion they are scheming behind closed doors . Why antagonize the justices ? Why admit the law might be unconstitutional ?
But there is undeniable danger in the optics of an election-year health care defeat , just as there was in early 2010 when the bill teetered . Obama simply can ’ t allow health care to be a Jimmy Carter-in-the-desert moment , proof that he recklessly , fecklessly pushed through a doomed law at the expense of focusing on the economy and jobs .
So quiet plans are under way inside the administration under the cone , away from the prying eyes of the press , advocates and Hill aides , according to people close to the situation .
These are the three main scenarios Obama is likely gaming out — the ugly , the bad and the good — in that order .
Many SCOTUS watchers think one of the most likely scenarios is that the court will toss out the individual mandate and keep the rest of the law . That would leave a lot of the popular pieces alone , like covering pre-existing conditions , eliminating the “ donut hole ” gap for senior prescription benefits and letting young adults stay on their parents ’ health plans until age 26 .
The polls seem to suggest public support for a hybrid solution . While 41 percent of voters surveyed by The New York Times/CBS poll this week said they want the whole law trashed , 51 percent either say they want just the mandate killed or the whole law upheld .
That jibes with years of polling showing that a la carte parts of the bill — especially banning discrimination based on pre-existing conditions — remain far more popular than the law as a whole .
One small problem : It ’ s lousy policy , one that Democrats say is a recipe for political confusion and flawed policy that virtually guarantees that the popular stuff in the law won ’ t work .
That mean , old mandate everybody hates ? It pays for all the goodies everybody loves .
There ’ s another scenario that ’ s considered a good bet . The court could knock out the mandate and also strip out the pre-existing condition coverage , since it wouldn ’ t work anyway once the mandate is gone . That ’ s what the Obama administration says the court should do if it gets rid of the mandate .
Either way , for Obama ’ s team , a split verdict would be the worst of all worlds : a phantom law on the books that energizes tea party Republicans who want it dead .