Bernie Sanders , like many American progressives , is almost completely parochial .
Senator Bernie Sanders , gamely making the case for socialism on CNN , offers a familiar argument : that access to health care and other goods like it should be understood as a “ right . ”
Properly understood , that claim is literally nonsensical , having the grammatical form of a sentence but no meaningful content , inasmuch as it is logically meaningless to declare a right in a scarce good . ( I am using scarce here in its economic sense rather than in its common conversational sense . ) For example : If you have twelve children and six cupcakes , the possibilities of division remain the same even if you declare that every child has the “ right ” to an entire cupcake of his own . Goods are physical , while rights are metaphysical , and the actual facts of the real world are not transformed by our deciding to talk about them in a different way . Other declarations in the same form — “ Health care is quintessentially axiomatic , ” “ Health care is candy-apple gray , ” “ Health care is a spastically cloistered bottle of courageous smoke , ” etc . — would be equally meaningless as sentences .
“ Health care is a right ” is a sentence that fools some people into thinking that it means something because the synthetic impression of moral urgency that accompanies the declaration of “ a right ” overwhelms the ordinary logical faculty , which in many people is less developed than the emotional endowment , that widespread condition being the principal defect in democracy . When a politician declares a “ right ” in a scarce good , it indicates either that he is a simpleton or that he believes you to be , and one ’ s as good as the other , that being another defect in democracy .
( Another defect in democracy is its apparently inability to learn , hence the Democratic embrace of socialism in 2019 in spite of socialism ’ s unbroken track record of failure and brutality . )
Senator Sanders points to the Scandinavian model as an example of what it means to have health care as a right . Senator Sanders has traveled widely in his life — he found much to praise in the Soviet Union while honeymooning there , and said so — but he is , like many American progressives , almost completely parochial . As is the case with the United Kingdom and much of Europe , Sweden , Norway , and Denmark are in the 21st century markedly different from the countries they were in the 1970s , when Senator Sanders ’ s awareness of the world seems to have congealed into the impenetrable clot of ignorance on such ghastly display in his current political career . A generation of reform — including tax cuts and reductions in the scope of the public sector — have left the Scandinavian countries with lower public-sector spending than such European standard-bearers as France and Belgium . In the Heritage Foundation ’ s economic-liberty rankings , the Scandinavian countries come in right alongside the United States — and behind such market-oriented leaders as Switzerland , Australia , New Zealand , and Singapore . On many scores , the Scandinavian countries offer more robust free-market systems than does the United States .
Another thing the Scandinavian countries have in common : Their politicians may talk about health care as a right sometimes , too , but in none of those countries is health care free .
Those numbers in some ways say both more and less than it may seem , in that the U.S. employer-based health-insurance system plays a role similar to the social-insurance programs some other countries ( it does not perform that role especially well ) , and a dollar taken out of your paycheck for health-care coverage is a dollar gone whether we call it a tax or an insurance premium . It is a peculiarity of the American system that we attempt to deputize employers to administer what is in many other countries part of the welfare state . As it stands , the U.S. system retains much of what people dislike about private care while incorporating much of what ’ s undesirable about state-dominated systems : insecurity and relatively high costs plus sclerotic bureaucracy and cumbrous regulation — hooray for us .
The numbers may not be quite what American progressives expect , but what is interesting about them is not so much what they tell us about economic incentives as what they tell us about health-care attitudes . In an interview with James Pethokoukis , Swedish economist Tino Sanandaji links the social organizing principle behind the Scandinavian welfare states to what the Swedes refer to as duktig — loosely translated , “ competence. ” Citizens are understood not as baby birds with open beaks being fed by the state , but as having primary responsibility for themselves . “ It has the connotation that you have the social obligation to be competent , ” Sanandaji says .
As a matter of national rhetoric , this is strongly emphasized in countries such as Switzerland and Singapore . That is one reason why the individual mandate to carry health insurance is uncontroversial in Switzerland . “ We consider the health insurance mandate to be a form of socially responsible civic conduct , ” former Swiss health minister Thomas Zeltner told Health Affairs . “ In Switzerland , ‘ individual freedom ’ does not mean that you should be free to live irresponsibly and freeload from others. ” In the United States , the individual mandate has been effectively repealed , but even before that , the Supreme Court was obliged to participate in a silly charade that the mandate was an exercise of Congress ’ s taxing authority in order for the law to even partly withstand a constitutional challenge .
Adopting a rhetoric of rights is not going to simplify that . Fundamentally , health care is not a moral question but an economic one . That much can be demonstrated by the fact that even if every American agreed with Senator Sanders about health care as a moral question , we ’ d still be obliged to approach it as an economic one — the moral consensus , even if it were not mistaken , would solve precisely nothing . Medical care costs something , and we have a social commitment to seeing to it that those costs don ’ t come down on vulnerable people in an unnecessarily burdensome way , part of what F. A. Hayek described as “ providing for those common hazards of life against which few can make adequate provision. ” Contra Senator Sanders et al. , this is not a project that require socialism in any degree .
What it does require is responsibility — including responsible citizenship — and a clear-eyed understanding of the nature of the problem . What does it mean to be a responsible citizen ? In the United States , we have a poor and diminished notion of citizenship , that citizens are only “ taxpayers ” and “ voters. ” Good citizens , in the inescapable contemporary formulation , are those who “ play by the rules and pay their taxes. ” That ’ s the real individual mandate : Pay and obey . The progressive proposition is that , in exchange for this obedience , childlike citizens are to be provided for by government in loco parentis , and that their role in this is almost entirely passive : submit to taxation , follow the regulations , receive the benefits . Hence the rhetoric of health care as a right .
A fuller and more mature notion of citizenship would be one that holds , as ours once did , that among the first duties of the citizen is to provide for himself and look after his family so as not to burden his neighbors unnecessarily . The rhetoric of benefits as rights cultivates just the opposite attitude , one of learned helplessness , not in response to extraordinary challenges but in the face of the ordinary business of life . That attitude of helplessness is of great benefit to a certain stripe of politician . It is not good for people or countries .
And it isn ’ t really characteristic of the Scandinavian societies that Senator Sanders thinks he admires .