COVINGTON , La . — Sen. Bill Cassidy got cheers on late-night television for calling for an Obamacare replacement plan that would pass what he calls `` the Jimmy Kimmel test '' — that is , cover children like the comedian 's son recently born with a congenital heart defect .
But the first-term senator and physician is not seeing that support from his GOP colleagues .
“ He knows of what he speaks , ” said Sen. John Cornyn of Texas , the Senate ’ s No . 2 Republican . “ But we ’ ve got to find a way to get behind a consensus bill . ”
Cassidy is undeterred . To hear him tell it , he ’ s the one in Congress fighting to keep President Donald Trump ’ s promises to his base . On the campaign trail , Cassidy argues that Trump consistently promised a health care plan that would reduce premiums , eliminate mandates , ensure continuous coverage and protect people with pre-existing conditions . Any GOP plan , he says , needs to meet that bar .
“ I ’ ve been pretty out front and pretty bold and pretty national and pretty local , saying I want our bill to pass because our bill fulfills President Trump ’ s pledge to the voter , ” Cassidy told 220 people packed into a town hall outside New Orleans last week . “ Also , by the way , I think it is good public policy , and I think is good for the American people . ”
Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) called Cassidy a “ real intellectual driver on our side ” and said it ’ s unlikely the Louisiana senator would simply fall in line at the end of the process and vote for whatever GOP leaders demand . Graham has co-sponsored Cassidy ’ s bill even though it stands little chance at this juncture .
███ Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
“ I don ’ t think he ’ ll vote for a bill that he doesn ’ t believe in , ” Graham said .
Cassidy demurs when asked whether he would support a GOP plan that he feels doesn ’ t meet that Trump pledge .
“ I hesitate to answer that because I want to see ” the bill , he told ███ . “ I may feel like it crosses that bar and someone else may think not . ”
In many ways , Cassidy ’ s whole professional life has led up to this moment . A gastroenterologist who cared for uninsured Louisianans in the state ’ s charity hospital system , Cassidy stands out for his passionate advocacy for the people he once treated , even as he ran against Obamacare during his Senate campaign .
He was the first senator out of the gate to introduce an Obamacare replacement bill , with moderate Republican Sen. Susan Collins of Maine , that would allow states to set up the health plan of their choice — including keeping Obamacare . To date , only five Republicans have signed onto a proposal that most other Republicans regard as too liberal and Democrats as too conservative .
But should Majority Leader Mitch McConnell be unable to corral 50 votes for a more narrowly partisan bill , Cassidy hopes his bill could become a bipartisan starting point .
“ There are parts of it I like , ” Sen. John Kennedy , Cassidy ’ s GOP colleague from Louisiana , said of his proposal . “ I don ’ t like the idea of allowing states to remain on Obamacare if Obamacare is failing . ”
Sen. Chris Murphy ( D-Conn. ) derided the Cassidy-Collins effort as “ window dressing ” for what will ultimately be an all-Republican bill written by a 13-person working group that excludes Cassidy .
Cassidy says he wasn ’ t offended by his exclusion from McConnell ’ s working group — and he ’ s attending the meetings anyway . As someone who probably has more firsthand experience with Medicaid than any other Republican senator , he says he is determined to influence the debate , even if he has to muscle his way in .
Certainly , he ’ s doing everything he can to keep his own proposals in the public eye . When Kimmel ’ s tearful plea for health coverage for children went viral last month , Cassidy called for any Obamacare repeal plan to pass the “ Jimmy Kimmel test ” — a quip that got him booked on the talk show and that he ’ s regularly taken to the Senate floor .
Formerly a low-profile and somewhat anonymous senator , Cassidy is now dogged by packs of reporters and offers candid takes on the CBO ’ s score for the House ’ s health care bill ( an “ eye-popper , ” he says ) . At one point , he rolled up his shirtsleeves and walked reporters through the intricacies of his health care plan on a whiteboard .
He also handed his fellow Republicans a seven-page handout showing the strong correlation between the states Trump won and the parts of the country most in need of health care and health insurance . He created a spreadsheet of how much money each state would lose if Obamacare ’ s Medicaid expansion funding were eliminated .
And he ’ s pushing Republicans to revamp the Medicaid program , now an entitlement , to a set payment for every enrollee — an idea he first proposed in 2013 .
He 's also seeking to automatically enroll people in a health plan with a chance to opt out — a proposal some other Republicans say is too similar to the unpopular individual mandate .
Cassidy is not alone in advocating for a health care bill that would require Democratic cooperation , and several Republican senators have stated they are uncomfortable with using the budget reconciliation process to sweep away Obamacare on a party-line vote in an effort to avoid a Democratic filibuster . But Republicans say that they can not pursue work with Democrats until their GOP-only efforts fail first .
“ I don ’ t like that we ’ re doing this through reconciliation , ” said Collins . “ I understand why we are because we ’ ve had no cooperation from the other side of the aisle , but I just think that makes it extremely difficult to come up with a comprehensive approach . ”
Sen. Mike Rounds ( R-S.D . ) , a supporter of the Cassidy-Collins bill , said Democrats won ’ t cooperate unless the GOP ’ s party-line effort fails . But he said he was confident that Cassidy ’ s legislation would get consideration and that he has the most realistic view of how to move away from Obamacare : by propping up the individual markets with subsidies to keep insurance affordable for several years .
“ He understands that you can ’ t just simply look at them and say … ‘ We ’ re just going to let you fend for yourself , ’ ” Rounds said of Cassidy . “ I call it the Obamacare hangover . It ’ s the time period after Obamacare where we ’ re going to have added costs but we ’ re going to have to help them . ”
Cassidy is sometimes sensitive to his colleagues ' opinions of him . In 2014 , after being called `` weird '' by Louisiana Democratic Rep. Cedric Richmond , he sought a meeting with Richmond to bury the hatchet . These days , he expresses irritation at Democrats for refusing to work with him , calling them “ incredibly passive ” for a group of “ alpha males and alpha females . ”
In a May interview , he excoriated Minority Leader Chuck Schumer for rallying his troops to ignore Republicans on the issue until they admit they can ’ t repeal Obamacare .
“ Schumer says : ‘ Well , you need to play by my rules . And so therefore , I ’ m going to write off the needs of those millions in New York , ’ ” Cassidy said . “ It ’ s just the craziest thing in the world . ”
Meanwhile , with the GOP ’ s razor-thin Senate margin , many lawmakers don ’ t believe a health care bill can pass without Cassidy ’ s support .
Fueling concerns that he might oppose a GOP repeal bill is his alliance with Collins , the most moderate Senate Republican and the most likely to break with her party .
Collins jokingly told reporters recently that the duo would do only joint interviews .
“ Because we ’ re Cassidy-Collins , ” she said . “ It ’ s my first name now . ”
Cassidy recognizes this as his moment . As a lawmaker , “ you want to contribute ideas , and I know I am contributing ideas , ” he said in an interview after his town hall meeting last week .
He acknowledged that not all of his ideas have taken off yet and that he doesn ’ t have the clout that comes with a committee chairmanship or decades in the Senate .
So instead , he ’ s going to talk about his proposal until he ’ s blue in the face .