Jonathan Chait , at New York magazine , says Bernie Sanders ’ s Medicare-for-all bill “ gets America zero percent closer to single payer . ”
Chait ’ s argument , which I largely agree with , is that “ single payer has always been , and remains , a political dilemma that nobody has been able to resolve , and there is no evidence the resolution has grown any easier. ” But his conclusion — that Sanders “ has accomplished approximately zero percent of the necessary work ” — misses what I think Sanders is trying to do , and what a reasonable definition of success looks like .
Sanders ’ s bill stands very little chance of ever being enacted , or of getting America to single-payer . As I ’ ll explain , it solves precisely none of the problems that have foiled every other single-payer plan in American history . But it stands an excellent chance of getting the country quite a lot closer to single-payer .
What Sanders has achieved here is remarkable . A policy that used to be tentatively embraced by elected officials on the party ’ s left is now being enthusiastically embraced by key leaders from its mainstream , including the party ’ s most promising 2020 contenders . Even Joe Manchin , the Senate ’ s most conservative Democrat , is proclaiming himself open to the idea . Sanders has thrown a rock through the Overton window .
At the same time , it ’ s important to recognize what Sanders hasn ’ t achieved , and in fact hasn ’ t even tried to achieve : He has not solved or even admitted any of the very real challenges to implementing single-payer health care in the United States .
Asked by my colleague Jeff Stein how he would manage the backlash of canceling literally hundreds of millions of people ’ s existing insurance plans , Sanders refused to even consider the issue . “ It ’ s not a question of switching plans , ” he replied , although it clearly is . Pushed on the possibility that employers could stop paying for health care and pocket the savings as profit rather than pumping it back into wages , he ’ s noncommittal . “ What we are doing is taking an idea out to the American people , and you 're going to see a lot of discussion about these ideas . ”
Ask Sanders to respond to the problems his plan might create , or the difficulties of transition , or the political obstacles that have foiled past reformers , and he just ... won ’ t . If you are looking in his bill for answers to the questions that stymied previous single-payer pushes in California and Vermont and Colorado and the US Congress , you won ’ t find them . In a telling comment to Stein , Sanders said , “ What this struggle is about really , honestly , is not a health care debate , ” and he seems to mean it .
The debate Sanders is engaging lies upstream from arguments about health care policy . He is trying to remake the political framework in which future technocratic health care debates take place . And it is already working . Senate Democrats I speak to are thinking much more now about how to create single-payerish plans that they believe to be more technically and politically sound than the Sanders bill . Some of them are current cosponsors on Sanders bill . Absent Sanders ’ s advocacy , none of them would be seriously thinking along these lines . The same is true for left-of-center think tanks .
The Democratic half-measures that follow Sanders ’ s plan will be different from the Democratic half-measures that preceded it . He ’ s changing the party ’ s definition of success , and thus changing the future path of health policy .
The lesson of the GOP ’ s repeal-and-replace fiasco is that making health care policy requires a clear sense of your ultimate goals . Absent those goals , it ’ s impossible to judge the trade-offs , weigh the compromises , and rally supporters around the final product .
The Democratic Party had a clear health care goal . They wanted universal coverage . The Affordable Care Act did not achieve universal coverage . But for all its compromises , deficiencies , and half-measures , it moved the country closer to universal coverage , and that ’ s why it passed .
This was clearest at the end of the debate , when Democrats had to decide whether to sacrifice the public option , a top liberal priority , or watch the bill die . The Democratic party ’ s consensus health care aim gave the Obama administration a persuasive , even unanswerable , final argument : The bill ’ s passage would lead to more coverage , and its failure wouldn ’ t . At the end of the day , every Senate Democrat — including hardcore liberals like Bernie Sanders — voted for the legislation because it furthered their goals even if it betrayed their preferred means .
By contrast , the GOP tried to make policy severed from any agreement over goals . They wanted to repeal and replace Obamacare . But when the question became , “ Replace it with what ? ” they quickly realized that their party didn ’ t agree on an answer . Some , like Speaker Paul Ryan , had been dreaming of cutting Medicaid since they were college students attending keggers . Others wanted to protect Medicaid . Some wanted the government out of the insurance game altogether . Others wanted to preserve Obamacare ’ s coverage gains but restructure insurance markets .
The result was a Calvinball policy process where ideas came and went without any North Star save for a desperate desire to get something passed . By the end of the effort , Senate Republicans found themselves in the absurd position of trying to pass a “ skinny repeal ” bill that none of them wanted to see become law .
Both parties are now unsettled as to their next steps on health care . Democrats appear to have successfully defended Obamacare , but they have not fixed any of its problems , and its persistent political vulnerability has led to a loss of faith in the form of policy compromise it represented . Republicans are in total disarray .
This is the context in which Sanders ’ s effort should be understood . He is trying to replace the Democrats ’ old goals — universal coverage — with a new goal : single-payer .
Advocates of single-payer argue that a single-payer system would be better than America ’ s health care system , and they ’ re right . Single-payer could , in theory , achieve true universal coverage at significantly less cost . But then , a lot of possible systems could be better than our current system in theory . The problems lurk in the transition from policy paper to reality . For single-payer in particular , three problems stand out , and Sanders ’ s plan solves none of them :
First , Americans don ’ t much trust the government , and they ’ re particularly risk-averse when it comes to health care . The core feature of a single-payer system is , well , that there ’ s only a single payer . So Sanders ’ s plan makes it illegal for employers to offer benefits duplicative of his new program , and he folds all existing government insurance programs save for veterans care and the Indian Health Service into the new system .
The upshot of that is Sanders ’ s proposal will cancel the existing insurance plans of more than 250 million people . It ’ s a level of disruption that no social reform in American history has dared attempt .
Sanders refuses to admit that this will actually be experienced as disruption . That ’ s the context for his comment that “ it ’ s not a question of switching plans. ” His argument is that no one will have to switch providers , and that ’ s all anyone really cares about . “ You go to the same doctor . You go to any damn doctor you want to go to , ” he says .
This fails on a few levels . First , you may well not be able to go to the same doctor . A reform of the size Sanders envisions will have vast and unpredictable consequences throughout the health system . At the simplest level , insuring 30 million more people , and freeing everyone else from financial constraints on care , will sharply increase demand , and overwhelmed doctors will change how they practice . On the other side , the core way this bill will save money is by using the government ’ s pricing power to pay doctors and hospitals less , and that means some will go out of business , others will begin taking only richer patients who can pay out of pocket , and so on .
But even if that weren ’ t true , it ’ s still the case that there will be a period of time — multiple years , in fact — between when people are told their insurance plans will be canceled and when they ’ re moved onto the new system run by a government many of them don ’ t trust . And this is happening in a bitterly divided country , where even a reform as comparatively mild as Obamacare led to widespread belief in “ death panels ” and armed IRS agents going door to door . Imagine this playing out on Fox News . Even now , about a third of Americans hold a negative view of Sanders — how will they react as Fox News covers President Sanders ’ s effort to take away their health insurance and replace it with socialism ?
The next big problem for single-payer is that it rationalizes , concentrates , and clarifies an irrational , diffuse , and hidden financing system . Costs in the American health care sector are fractured amid dozens of payers . Workers have no idea the bill their employer is actually footing for their health care . Medicare enrollees , Medicaid enrollees , subsidized Obamacare enrollees — none of them pay the cost of their coverage in real time . This is inefficient in all sorts of ways , but actually solving it is brutally hard , as it means taking more than $ 3 trillion in annual spending and translating it into tax increases all at once .
Single-payer advocates argue that total spending in this new system would be lower , and they may well be right . ( I say “ may ” because that depends on whether you squeeze providers hard enough to make up for the increased coverage and utilization , and I ’ m not sure Sanders ’ s bill does that . ) But that doesn ’ t solve the sticker shock problem , or the fact that the people who would end up paying more in the new system — and there would be many of them — will fight like hell to stop it . Tax increases on this scale have never been done before , and they ’ ve destroyed single-payer in every state that ’ s tried it . ( This , by the way , is why Senate Republicans are eagerly asking the Congressional Budget Office to score Sanders ’ s plan : They want to hang the tax increases around Democrats ’ necks . )
One possible response to this is that , well , other countries have passed single-payer plans , so clearly it ’ s possible . This is a place , though , where America ’ s out-of-control costs paradoxically make cost control harder . America spends about twice as much per person on health care as other developed nations , and so the tax increases necessary to bring the system onto a single budget dwarf anything any other country has ever tried .
A third problem with the Sanders bill is that single-payer forces the government to decide what is and isn ’ t covered , and how much all of it will cost . Sanders “ solves ” that problem by not making any decisions at all . Everything is covered , and there is no cost sharing to speak of , making his “ Medicare-for-all ” plan far more generous than the actual Medicare program and making his single-payer plan more generous than anything that exists in any other nation . A system like this would massively increase health care use , and thus massively increase costs .
You could possibly counteract those cost increases by sharply lowering how much the government pays doctors , hospitals , drug companies , and so on . But if you cut reimbursement rates across the system that sharply , the system will convulse : Rural hospitals will close , older doctors will shutter their practices , and many , many people will find their care disrupted .
These are hard problems , and Sanders doesn ’ t solve them . He doesn ’ t even really admit they exist .
Sanders ’ s bill has 16 co-sponsors , including most of the Senate Democrats most often mentioned as possible 2020 presidential contenders . In one fell swoop , he has taken single-payer from an ideal on the margins of the Democratic Party to a goal endorsed by its likeliest standard-bearers .
The Democratic Party could ’ ve oriented itself around a number of health care goals in the coming years . It could ’ ve simply sought to improve Obamacare . It could ’ ve focused on cutting costs , or lowering premiums , or getting closer to universal coverage . But Sanders , I think , has preempted all that : He ’ s made the goal single-payer .
I highly doubt Democrats will achieve that goal , just as they haven ’ t achieved universal coverage . But simply agreeing on it changes what counts as progress . Expanding Medicaid is progress toward single-payer . Allowing Medicare to negotiate drug prices is progress toward single-payer . Allowing people of all ages to buy into Medicare is progress toward single-payer . Adding a public option to Obamacare is progress toward single-payer . Pete Stark ’ s AmeriCare plan is progress toward single-payer .
On Tuesday , I interviewed Hillary Clinton , who lit into parts of Sanders ’ s plan that she viewed as unrealistic and even politically disastrous . But the health care ideas she emphasized in response — “ to open up Medicare , to open up Medicaid , to do more on prescription drug costs ” — reflect the influence Sanders has had on the debate . Clinton is proposing half-measures to single-payer in a way that wasn ’ t common for Democrats 10 years ago .
Indeed , the most interesting part of Sanders ’ s bill , for my money , is its transition plan : Over the first four years , before it cancels anyone ’ s insurance , the plan expands Medicare to cover dental , vision , and hearing aids , makes children up to age 18 eligible , and lets adults over 35 buy in . You could pass that part of Berniecare on its own and have made real progress toward single-payer .
One question you might raise is whether any of this counts as “ closer ” to single-payer , or whether single-payer is a binary policy that ’ s either 100 percent enacted or zero percent enacted . I think it ’ s pretty clearly the former : A world in which anyone can buy into Medicare , and so Medicare slowly takes over insurance markets and expands its bargaining power , is a world in which the system is moving closer to a single-payer-like structure , and where further expansions of Medicare are both easier and more compelling .
Just as important as what counts as progress is what counts as deterioration . If Sanders is successful in redefining the goal of Democratic health policy , other policies Democrats have considered in recent years would now be dead . Raising the Medicare age , which the Obama administration weighed during budget negotiations , is antithetical to moving toward single-payer . Expanding Obamacare ’ s exchanges so private insurers cover more people and Medicaid covers fewer people is not progress toward single-payer . Adding private insurers into Medicare , as Sen. Ron Wyden has proposed , is not progress toward single-payer . Allowing private insurers to sell skimpier plans in the Obamacare marketplaces , as some Senate Democrats have proposed , is not progress toward single-payer .
By changing the Democratic Party ’ s health care goal , Sanders is changing the realistic policies that further that goal . In a way that wasn ’ t true a decade ago , the Democratic Party is becoming a party dedicated to moving the country closer and closer to single-payer . They may not get all the way there — political parties rarely fully achieve their aims — but that ’ s where they ’ re going . And it ’ s Sanders who has put them on that path .