( CNN ) President Barack Obama leaves the White House in 12 weeks , but the law that bears his name will polarize politics long after he 's gone .
Big price hikes to Affordable Care Act premiums announced this week mean that Obama 's proudest legislative achievement will fail to resolve the decades-old controversy surrounding the government 's role in managing the cost of and access to health care .
It will fall to the next administration whether to fix Obamacare 's shortcomings -- including rising premiums and deductibles , slowing enrollment growth and the increasing number of insurers pulling out of the ACA marketplaces -- or to trash the system and start again . Neither Hillary Clinton nor Donald Trump have laid out a detailed plan for how they would revise or replace the law or how they would navigate the toxic politics that surface in Washington whenever health care is on the agenda .
Trump has proven better at condemning Obamacare -- his stump speech includes vows to repeal and replace it -- than saying how he would tackle the crisis over access and cost . He has n't made health reform a centerpiece of his campaign .
`` My first day in office , I 'm going to ask Congress to put a bill on my desk getting rid of this disastrous law and replacing it with reforms that expand choice , freedom and affordability , '' Trump said Tuesday in Florida . `` Hillary Clinton wants to double down on Obamacare and make it even worse . She wants to put the government totally in charge of your health care . ''
Still , Clinton has been far more up front about what she would try to accomplish .
`` The President and I have talked about it , '' Clinton told WHCQ Radio in Florida on Tuesday . `` We 're going to get copays and premiums and deductibles down . We 're going to tackle prescription drug costs . And we can do that without ripping away the insurance that people now have . ''
Clinton 's campaign said she would increase competition among insurers to improve choices for Obamacare customers , including a public option , and would take on pharmaceutical companies over rising drug prices and provide tax relief for out of pocket expenses . Her plan also includes incentives for states to expand Medicaid . Plans previously published by her campaign include pledges to tackle diseases like Alzheimer 's and autism , substance abuse and Zika and aims to improve public and rural health infrastructure .
The former first lady and New York senator has been working in the political minefield of health care for decades -- dating back to her failed effort during her husband 's administration in the 1990s .
But her broad knowledge of possible approaches will not help her solve the fundamental political problem surrounding Obamacare : any legislative fix to the law will require some level of support from Congress . And unless she is able to whip up a Democratic wave sufficient to claim back the GOP-dominated House , the political fight over rescuing Obamacare will be fierce .
Republicans in the House who have voted over 50 times to repeal the law are n't likely to line up to save it . And even some Democratic senators from red states up for re-election in a brutal 2018 mid-term election slate may shy away from tough votes to prolong the law .
Trump does have a position paper on the issue , in which he promises to repeal the individual mandate , modify laws that prohibit the sale of health insurance across state lines and allow people to deduct insurance premiums from their tax returns .
Trump would promote individual Health Savings Accounts with tax free contributions and would allow patients access to imported drugs from overseas to bring down prices .
But he offers few insights into how he would take on and defeat the huge vested health care interests that are a powerful influence on Washington politics or how he would overcome resistance to some aspects of his plans from his own party .
Rep. Chris Collins , a New York Republican , told CNN 's Wolf Blitzer Tuesday that he believes Trump would adopt the health care plan drawn up by House Speaker Paul Ryan 's Republican conference .
`` It is my understanding that Mr. Trump has seen that plan and what he is talking about ... is in fact a better way , a replacement plan , '' Collins said .
The Obamacare price hikes -- the government said Monday premiums for the benchmark plan are set to rise an average of 22 % next year -- are a surprise twist in the final stretch of a campaign that had seemed to settle down in recent days . Trump was quick to seize on the issue , suggesting he believes it 's something he can use to throw Clinton , who is leading most polls , on the defense .
`` It 's blowing up all over the country , '' Trump told reporters Tuesday at his golf resort in Doral , Florida , vowing to repeal and replace Obamacare with something less expensive .
The rising premiums could also provide a boost for Republican Senate candidates who are struggling to overcome opposition to Trump in their states . The National Republican Senatorial Committee released a video of Katie McGinty , a Pennsylvania Democrat who is locked in a tight race with incumbent Republican Pat Toomey , in which she said Democrats should be `` proud of '' Obamacare .
`` Is Shady Katie still proud of Obamacare ? '' the NRSC released asked .
Iowa Republican Party chairman Jeff Kaufmann said in a statement that Democrat Patty Judge , who is seeking to unseat GOP Sen. Chuck Grassley , `` cheers and hollers for the Obamacare disaster . ''
That is a message likely to be adopted in other Senate races that could decide control of the chamber , including Sen. Kelly Ayotte 's uphill re-election battle in New Hampshire and Sen. Richard Burr 's tough fight in North Carolina .
Higher premium hikes in states such as Florida -- a vital battleground where Clinton and Trump campaigned on Tuesday -- and Colorado could also shape the political narrative in the run-up to election day .
And Clinton 's push into Arizona , a red state that Democrats believe they can pluck from Trump on Election Day , is now facing a new obstacle following news that Obamacare premiums could rise 116 % .
But there is no guarantee Obamacare 's new problems will necessarily be a slam dunk for Republicans . A CNN/ORC poll published Monday showed that health care was only the fifth most important issue motivating voters this year , behind other concerns including the economy , immigration , foreign policy and terrorism .
Another factor that could diminish the impact of the latest Obamacare travails is the unconventional nature of this election , which at this late stage seems to be turning far more on Trump 's personality and temperament than a detailed discussion of policy issues .
Perhaps the biggest hurdle to Obamacare 's latest woes swaying the election is the tight calendar -- the election is just 13 days away . Millions of voters have already made up their mind about Trump and Clinton and cast early ballots .
Former White House press secretary Jay Carney , who spent long hours defending Obamacare from the briefing room , admitted the law was not as popular as the president would like it to be . But he said voters would give Clinton credit for trying to repair it .
`` Is it something .... that 's going to change the election ? No , it 's not , '' Carney said on CNN 's `` New Day '' on Tuesday . `` Remember , the opportunity Republicans had to use Obamacare against the Democrats and win the White House was in 2012 . Mitt Romney , a far more credible candidate for president of the United States from the Republican Party , you know , beat us hard over the head with Obamacare . ''
`` And guess what , '' Carney continued . `` The American people re-elected President Obama . ''