Republicans and their allies are making a lot of different arguments about what Obamacare is doing to America . It ’ s hiking premiums ! It ’ s making people lose their doctors ! It ’ s destroying Medicare ! But if you listen closely , you ’ ll discern a common theme—a message aimed squarely at the middle class : Obamacare is taking away your money or health insurance , and giving it to somebody else . `` If you think about it , it 's $ 250 billion a year in Medicaid expansion , in the subsidy structure , that 's basically being paid for by people on Medicare , through Medicare cuts , and a lot of tax increases , '' James Capretta , a former Bush Administration official now at the Ethics & Public Policy Center , said on Fox News Sunday . `` It is a massive , massive income redistribution . ''
It ’ s not a novel argument . This is how Republicans have been attacking Democrats at least since the late 1960s , with varying results . For Ronald Reagan , it was a winner . For Mitt Romney , it was n't . Maybe it will resonate this time and maybe it wo n't . Honestly , I have no idea . But since we 're having this debate , it would be good to clarify who 's getting money from the law—and who 's providing it . Republicans are n't wrong when they say Obamacare amounts to redistribution . But they seem to have a distorted view of how that redistribution works .
About two-thirds of the law ’ s spending , a little over $ 1 trillion in the next decade , will be in the form of tax credits for people buying insurance on the new exchanges . About one third , or about $ 640 billion , finances the expansion of Medicaid . There 's no simple and reliable way to break down exactly how much money goes to people at different income levels . ( I 've tried ! ) And it 's certainly fair to say that a majority of people getting money from Obamacare are in the lower half of the income scale . But that includes an awful lot of people that qualify as `` working class '' or `` middle class . '' Remember that the credits are available to people making up to 400 percent of the poverty line , or about $ 46,000 a year for an individual and $ 94,000 for a family of four—well above the nation 's median income .
So that 's the money going out of the federal Treasury thanks to Obamacare . And the money coming in ? Here 's a list of major sources of revenues and program cuts , based on Congressional Budget Office reports and put together with help from Paul van de Water at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities :