Sen. Bill Cassidy Friday sought to rally support for the last-ditch Obamacare repeal plan he co-authored , saying he believes he ’ s on the verge of winning the final votes needed to jam it through the Senate .
Cassidy claims that as many as 49 GOP senators have expressed support but does n't have a hard whip count with just days left to use a fast-track process allowing the bill to pass with a simply majority . And his search for the elusive 50 `` aye '' votes got harder Thursday , when Sen. Rand Paul announced his opposition .
“ I can ’ t support a bill that keeps 90 percent of Obamacare in place , ” Paul tweeted , panning the plan crafted by Cassidy and Lindsey Graham as “ Obamacare lite . ”
That leaves Cassidy and Graham with the slimmest margin for error . With Democrats unified against any attempt to dismantle Obamacare , Republicans can only absorb two defections and still have Vice President Mike Pence cast a tie-breaking vote in favor of the bill . That means the measure needs the backing of at least two of the three senators — Susan Collins , Lisa Murkowski and John McCain — who opposed the GOP ’ s last attempt at repeal .
McCain has expressed some support for the Cassidy-Graham bill , but also cautioned that any repeal effort go through the regular committee process . Collins told reporters on Wednesday that she ’ s still reviewing the legislation but is skeptical of any plan that cuts funding to Planned Parenthood .
“ I ’ ve got a lot of questions about it , ” she said . “ And obviously the Planned Parenthood defunding is problematic . ”
███ Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
Cassidy cited a Thursday closed-door Republican lunch as a turning point in favor of the bill .
“ I ’ m pretty confident we ’ ll get there on the Republican side , ” he said , calling the midweek discussion what `` may have been my best day as a senator . ''
“ We ’ re probably at 48 , 49 , and talking to two or three more , '' he said .
An aide to Cassidy said later that they still believe there ’ s a path to 50 votes , even without Paul ’ s support .
Cassidy and Graham are also expecting Senate Republican leadership and possibly President Donald Trump to lend support in the coming days , to push it over the finish line .
“ I ’ m hoping that the president will show the same enthusiasm to repeal Obamacare that President Obama showed to pass it , ” Graham said on Wednesday .
But doing it all before the end of the month remains a long shot . The CBO has not yet scored the bill ’ s effects , and senators are still sorting through how their states would fare under legislation that would dismantle Obamacare in favor of sending block grants to individual states .
Under the legislation , rural states and those that did n't expand their Medicaid programs would largely receive more funding for health care . But the states that have been most successful so far in getting people covered stand to see billions of dollars in funding cuts .
“ At some point , you have to ask Massachusetts to control their costs , ” Cassidy said .
The Louisiana Republican preemptively dismissed any CBO calculations showing coverage losses , arguing the agency puts too much faith in Obamacare ’ s individual mandate , and that his plan would incentivize governors to get more residents covered .
CBO 's reports played a large part in derailing the GOP 's previous repeal bills , after moderate Republicans balked at projections showing millions more would go uninsured compared with Obamacare .
“ I just don ’ t care about the coverage numbers , because their methodology has proven to be wrong , ” he said of CBO . “ And ours , frankly , empirically , is correct . ”
Cassidy also waved off concerns that under the Cassidy-Graham bill , federal funding to states would need to be periodically reauthorized . Budget restrictions prevent him from funding the block grants beyond 2026 , he said , expressing confidence that Congress would keep the money flowing in the same way it ’ s continually agreed to fund the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program .
If he fails to get 50 senators on board by the end of September , Cassidy pledged to continue working toward repeal — even if his own party is ready to move onto other issues .
“ If we don ’ t get it through now , we ’ d like to do it in the future , ” he said . “ But we are thinking we can get this done by Sept. 30 . ”
CORRECTION : This story has been updated to reflect the correct day of the closed-door Republican meeting .