Republican lawmakers are breathing a sigh of relief that the Trump administration backed away from seeking an immediate repeal of the Affordable Care Act without a replacement plan , and instead will take the issue on the 2020 campaign trail .
`` I was disappointed when we were talking about repeal only without a credible plan to replace , '' Indiana Sen. Mike Braun ( R ) told ███ News . `` We need to now as conservatives start talking about what are we going to do . ''
President Trump surprised many in his own party when he declared that Republicans would be the party of health care , prompting Majority Leader Mitch McConnell to tell him this week he had no plans of taking up comprehensive health care reform with a Democratic-controlled House .
`` I made clear to him that we were not going to be doing that in the Senate , '' McConnell told reporters . `` He did say , as he later tweeted , that he accepted that and he would be developing a plan that he would take to the American people during the 2020 campaign . ''
McConnell says he wants Senate Republicans focusing on bills to keep health care costs down , not comprehensive replacement plans and Sen. Braun agrees .
`` I think the right decision was made to make sure we get our ducks in a row , throw the onus on the industry in the meantime , have senators and congressmen that know a little bit about it like me to start prodding the industry , because I think it 's going to take more than their own self-correction , '' Braun told ███ News .
Braun described his own issues dealing with health insurance companies while trying to find a plan for his employers .
`` It was like pulling teeth to get the solution , that they had the nerve to say you 're lucky it 's only going up 5 % this year and then 10 % next year , I found a way to solve that , '' said Braun .
And he calls out his own party for being longtime `` apologists for health care , '' adding it 's time for Republicans to come up with their own solutions to the growing costs .
`` I think all Hoosiers , Americans are frustrated with health care as it 's being delivered by a so-called free market industry . The fact is it 's not , its got highly concentrated with big companies running the show and I think its incumbent on the industry if it does n't want one business partner with the federal government to start doing a better job , '' said Braun . `` I am going to try and help promote that through price transparency bills , bills that would take generics from discussion to the marketplace more quickly , those kinds of things . ''
Braun told President Trump he 'd work with him on a replacement plan but is glad they have time to think through it .
`` As long as that does n't mean we 're going to lay low and let the Democrats kind of control the dialogue , '' continued Braun . `` What I 'm going to do is work on lowering the cost , making it more transparent and take that approach . Somewhere down the road , it 's going to be the alternative that the other side is offering which sounds so enticing . ''
`` Medicare for all , I think we 'd regret it because first of all it costs so much already , running deficits to where we do n't pay for the government we 're already demanding , '' he explained . `` So I think they 've got a lot that we can hit to where how 's that going to work ? It 's not going to pan out . On the other hand , we 've got to devise a system if we want to save the system . It 's got to shrink . It 's got to get better . It 's got to offer us better value . That means to solve the problems and lower the prices . ''
But Democrats say Republicans have no health care plan of their own .
`` The president tweeted that they will come up with their plan in 2021 . Translation : they have no health care plan . It 's the same old song they 've been singing , they 're for repeal , they have no replace , '' said Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D-NY ) .
███ News Political Analyst David Brody discusses President Trump 's ideas for health care and the southern border on Tuesday 's The 700 Club .