Several companies say they plan to trim health costs by using more part-time workers
Study : By 2022 , 7 million fewer people will be covered by employer-sponsored benefits
`` Obamacare was supposed to help middle-class Americans afford health insurance . But now , some people are losing the health insurance they were happy with . And because Obamacare created expensive requirements for companies with more than 50 employees , now many of these businesses are n't hiring . Not only that ; they 're being forced to lay people off and switch from full-time employees to part-time workers . ''
The Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare , requires companies with more than 50 full-time employees ( defined as working more than 30 hours a week ) to provide health insurance that meets standards set by the Department of Health and Human Services . The cost can be significant . McDonald 's says the law will raise costs by $ 10,000 to $ 30,000 for each franchise .
JUST WATCHED Marco Rubio 's dry mouth moment Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Marco Rubio 's dry mouth moment 00:22
JUST WATCHED Rubio : I care for the middle class Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Rubio : I care for the middle class 00:54
Several companies with low-wage workers -- including Wal-Mart and Darden , which operates Red Lobster and Olive Garden restaurants -- have said they plan to trim health costs by using more part-time workers .
The direct impact is n't clear , but last week , the Congressional Budget Office projected that by 2022 , 7 million fewer people will be covered by employer-sponsored health benefits . That 's nearly double the 4 million it projected a year ago .
What Rubio does n't say is that many people losing employer-sponsored benefits will obtain insurance through government-run exchanges . The CBO predicts that 27 million more Americans who would otherwise be uninsured will have insurance because of the Affordable Care Act .
So Rubio 's claims are true , but they are only part of the health care story .