Govs . Jay Nixon , Jack Markell and Deval Patrick have all reached out to the White House . | AP Photos Dem govs : Obama needs to sell ACA
With the battle over Obamacare moving from Washington to the states and a deluge of ads battering the law on TV , Democratic governors delivered a message to President Barack Obama over the weekend : We need help .
Four years out from passage of the Affordable Care Act , it ’ s state executives in Obama ’ s party who may be bearing the heaviest load when it comes to making the law work and selling it to voters . They ’ ve grappled with their own glitch-ridden enrollment sites and fought their own legislatures over Medicaid expansion .
Now , many of them are running for reelection with the ACA hanging over their heads — and only a limited effort from national Democrats and their president to reverse the consistently negative public opinion of the law .
Asked if the White House had done enough to win over the public on the ACA , Massachusetts Gov . Deval Patrick replied : “ The short answer is no . ”
Patrick said he didn ’ t mean that as a “ critique ” of the president , but he ’ s not the only governor who would like to see the White House do more .
Missouri Gov . Jay Nixon told Obama at a closed-door meeting of Democratic governors Friday that the president should do more to play up health care innovations unfolding at the state level . Delaware Gov . Jack Markell said he had counseled senior White House officials to highlight efforts to control health care costs , rather than simply telling now-familiar stories about patients with pre-existing conditions who now have access to health insurance .
As for Patrick , he said he was only noting that there hasn ’ t been a sustained effort to promote the ACA of the sort Massachusetts health care reformers assembled during the state ’ s 2006 overhaul .
“ We had this coalition of business and labor , policymakers , the medical industry , patient advocates and so on , who helped invent health care reform and then stuck together to refine it and improve it , ” recalled Patrick , who is leaving office next year after two terms . “ It ’ s not a critique ; it ’ s an observation that not only did we sell it , but we had allies in selling it . I think the president hasn ’ t had those advantages . ”
Democrats across the party — not just governors — have raised a hue and cry in recent weeks as conservative outside groups , led by the heavy-spending behemoth Americans for Prosperity , have burned tens of millions of dollars on ACA-bashing ads early in the midterm election season . There is no comparably funded effort on the Democratic side , and a half-dozen senior party strategists said that none is currently anticipated .
Insurers , desperately eager to convince people to sign up for health care policies , have poured millions into an ad campaign of their own , but there ’ s little indication those ads have served as a political counterweight .
White House aides say there ’ s a good reason why blue-state governors might not have heard much from the administration lately . For the most part , officials have been focused less on larger Obamacare messaging and more on an intense effort to reach uninsured Americans , particularly in big states with uncooperative GOP governors , such as Texas and Florida .
In places like these , the president , first lady Michelle Obama and Vice President Joe Biden have been touting the ACA on the radio , with an emphasis on black and Latino audiences . They ’ re also turning to social media : Administration aides have largely given up counting on the press to cover positive stories about Obamacare they ’ ve tried pumping out , and instead point to the viral traffic they got from having Julia Louis-Dreyfus and other celebrities tweet with the # getcovered hashtag .
“ In the places where you have a high density of uninsured , you ’ d be hard-pressed not to find an active administration voice , ” said a senior administration official . “ We ’ re doing what we think works , and what we think reaches the most people . ”
Still , in the absence of a stronger pro-ACA message emanating from Washington , governors — like Senate and House candidates — have essentially fought out the issue state by state . They have sought to persuade their constituents that they should accept federal funds for Medicaid expansion , work through the technical problems with numerous state exchanges and patiently await the benefits of the ACA ’ s transformation of the health care market .
At a ███ event after the Democratic governors ’ meeting with Obama , Nixon said there hasn ’ t been enough emphasis on how states are working to “ get better health outcomes ” within the larger framework of the ACA . “ Having the administration and others talk more about those reforms within the Medicaid system , I think would be helpful , ” said Nixon , a popular Democrat who has been blocked from accepting federal health care funds by a GOP legislature .