'We ’ re going to handle this in a very deliberative way , ' Rep. Tim Murphy said . | REUTERS ACA hearings : Helping or heckling ?
There ’ s congressional oversight that answers everyone ’ s most urgent questions — and then there ’ s just heckling from the partisan peanut gallery .
Over the next few weeks , Republicans are going to have to decide which path they ’ re going to take as they open hearings into the broken Obamacare website .
There ’ s a wealth of real questions to be answered at the hearings , starting with Thursday ’ s testimony by a group of contractors that worked on the website . What , exactly , went wrong with the development of the federal health insurance exchange ? Who dropped the ball ? And can it actually be patched up on the fly ?
Those are the most urgent questions that will be on lawmakers ’ minds at the House Energy & Commerce Committee hearing Thursday and the others that will follow . The problem is , the hearings will be run by the same House Republicans who don ’ t even want the law in the first place , and have gone through 40-plus repeal votes and a politically disastrous government shutdown to prove it .
So Republicans have a lot to prove in the hearings . They can use the investigative powers of Congress pry out the answers to the serious questions that everyone has about the website — Democrats as well as Republicans — and repair their standing with the public by showing how thoughtful oversight ought to be done .
Or they can spend the whole time yelling , “ BOOOOO ! This is never going to work . ”
Top Republicans insist they can keep the hearings on the correct side of the line . They say they can stick to a just-the-facts approach and focus on issues that all Americans should be concerned about — especially whether $ 400 million of taxpayers ’ money was wasted in building an Obamacare website that ’ s mostly unworkable .
“ This is a hearing where we don ’ t have the answers . We ’ re going to handle this in a very deliberative way , ” Rep. Tim Murphy of Pennsylvania , chairman of the Energy & Commerce oversight subcommittee , said of Thursday ’ s hearing . “ Is it fixable , and if not , should we put a pause on this ‘ tech surge ’ ? Are we going to spend hundreds of millions more on this , just to overhaul the engine of a car that ’ s still moving ? ”
“ Every time we asked [ the administration ] for details , they said , ‘ Don ’ t worry , ’ ” Murphy told ███ . “ My concern is that they weren ’ t upfront with us . Either they didn ’ t have any way to get the information , or they weren ’ t going to tell us . I don ’ t know which it was . ”
Experts on oversight say there ’ s no way Congress could avoid having these hearings . Even if Republicans really just want to repeal the law , the website is still “ a problem that needs to be fixed , ” said Angela Canterbury , director of public policy at the Project on Government Oversight , which conducts seminars for congressional aides on how to do investigations .
But Democrats insist there ’ s no way for Republicans to do Obamacare oversight well — because it ’ s too obvious that the Republicans aren ’ t actually trying to make the law work better . Rep. Gerry Connolly of Virginia , a Democratic member of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee , didn ’ t even wait for a reporter to finish asking the question .
“ No ! ” Connolly said. ” They ’ re going to say their motivation is just to make it work so everyone can have affordable health care . How can you say that ? They just shut down the government . ”
Thursday ’ s hearing is likely to be just the first in a series . Next week , Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius is likely to face blistering questions when she testifies before before the Energy & Commerce panel . The Ways and Means Committee will also hear next week from Marilyn Tavenner , administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services , which oversees the law ’ s implementation .
Rep. Darrell Issa ’ s Oversight and Government Reform Committee has been sending lists of questions to Sebelius , Chief Technology Officer Todd Park , and five technology companies about the website effort , signalling that a hearing probably isn ’ t far off . And House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan has asked Sebelius for a breakdown of the costs of the “ tech surge . ”
Keeping a hearing from drifting into grandstanding is “ always a challenge , ” House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp of Michigan said Wednesday . “ But we ’ ve got serious members , and they ’ re going to ask serious questions . ”
“ The implementation has been a disaster . We want to find out why , and what ’ s happened to the money that ’ s been spent , and who ’ s going to be held accountable , ” said Camp .
But not all of the Republicans on Camp ’ s committee are above a little old-fashioned Obamacare bashing — a sign that any discipline that occurs at the hearings probably won ’ t last very long .
“ The problems with Obamacare are so pervasive that they bear a deeper examination , ” Rep. Kevin Brady of Texas , chairman of the Ways and Means health subcommittee , told ███ Wednesday . “ There ’ s a lot of fear . A lot of people are getting cancellation notices . Why don ’ t we give people a choice on whether you need to go into this thing or not ? ”
“ You think this website is bad ? Wait until the government starts making the decisions about patient care , and reimbursements and treatments , ” Brady said .
And even Energy & Commerce Commitee Chairman Fred Upton suggested to a Michigan radio station on Tuesday that he expected to find more damaging information about the law .