WASHINGTON – The Supreme Court refused Tuesday to decide on a fast-track basis the fate of the landmark Affordable Care Act after a federal appeals court ruled that its central health insurance mandate is unconstitutional .
By refusing to step in , the justices probably blocked the third Supreme Court test of the controversial health care law from an election-year docket teeming with major cases on abortion , immigration , gun control , gay rights , freedom of religion and subpoenas seeking President Donald Trump 's tax and financial records .
This would have been the third time in eight years that the justices considered the 2010 law , not including challenges to parts of the law , such as its requirement that women receive free coverage for contraceptives . That rule will come before the high court this spring , also for the third time .
A panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit , based in New Orleans , ruled last month that the government can not force most consumers to buy health insurance because Congress eliminated the tax penalty used to enforce the requirement in 2017 . The panel sent the case back to a federal district court to decide whether other parts of the law can be saved without the so-called individual mandate .
The appeals court ruling left the law intact but facing an uncertain future . A coalition of predominantly Democratic states led by California , along with the Democratic-led House of Representatives , asked the justices to step in quickly so the case could be heard during this Supreme Court term , which ends in June .
`` The lower courts ’ actions have created uncertainty about the future of the entire Affordable Care Act , and that uncertainty threatens adverse consequences for our nation ’ s health care system , including for patients , doctors , insurers and state and local governments , '' California Solicitor General Michael Mongan said in seeking the quick Supreme Court review .
The Justice Department said the law is in no imminent danger and urged the justices to stand down and let the district court do its work .
`` Petitioners ’ submission , at bottom , is that the vitality of the ACA ’ s myriad provisions is too important to be left unresolved , '' Solicitor General Noel Francisco wrote the justices . `` But definitive resolution of that issue will be facilitated , not frustrated , by allowing the lower courts to complete their own consideration of the question . ''
The high court rescued President Barack Obama 's signature domestic policy achievement by a single vote in 2012 after an extraordinary , three-day oral argument . The justices saved it again in 2015 when tax credits critical to the law 's success were challenged .
The new challenge stems from the $ 1.5 trillion tax cut passed by Congress in 2017 , which repealed the health care law 's tax on people who refuse to buy insurance . That tax was intended to prod them into the health care marketplace rather than let them seek emergency care while uninsured .
In December 2018 , federal District Judge Reed O'Connor ruled that without the tax , the law could not survive . His ruling was put on hold while it was appealed , but it threatened to wipe out insurance for 20 million people , protection for people with preexisting conditions , subsidies for low-income people , Medicaid expansions in many states , coverage for young adults up to age 26 and more .
The appeals court panel agreed , 2-1 , that the individual mandate is unconstitutional `` because it can no longer be read as a tax , and there is no other constitutional provision that justifies this exercise of congressional power , '' Judge Jennifer Walker Elrod wrote for the majority .
Rather than strike down the entire law , as O'Connor did , the panel sent the case back to district court for `` additional analysis '' on whether the individual mandate can be severed from the rest of the statute . In doing so , the panel noted the Trump administration 's changing positions in the case .
The Justice Department originally sought to strike down only the individual mandate , then joined Texas and other Republican-led states seeking to kill the entire law . Finally , it suggested such a ruling might be applied only in the 18 states challenging it .
Dissenting Judge Carolyn Dineen King called the appeals court ruling `` textbook judicial overreach '' that `` ensures that no end for this litigation is in sight . ''