A Nevada psychiatric hospital has over the past several years purportedly released , then bused hundreds of patients to states across the country , prompting a federal warning and multiple investigations included two in California , the top destination .
The investigations into Las Vegas ’ Rawson-Neal Psychiatric Hospital come after a 48-year-old male patient arrived in February at a Sacramento facility in a suicidal and confused state while out of food and medication and with no contacts , identification or access to Social Security payments , The Sacramento Bee newspaper reports .
Gov . Brian Sandoval , R-Nev. , said this week that his administration has launched three investigations , which so far have resulted in disciplinary and corrective measures . But he denied allegations the state has engaged in `` patient dumping . ”
`` Let me be clear , improperly discharging one patient is one patient too many , ” said the governor , adding the investigations continue . “ I take the concerns regarding Rawson-Neal Psychiatric Hospital very seriously . And it is not the policy of the state of Nevada to engage in 'patient dumping ' as ( has ) been alleged . ”
His statement was followed by a letter Thursday from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services that stated the hospital has “ serious deficiencies ” in its discharge policies and gave Nevada 10 days to fix problems or risk losing federal funding , which could equal tens of millions of dollars .
The hospital has since 2008 sent at least one of the 1,500 patients to every state in the continental United States , with California receiving 389 , based on the newspaper investigation , which includes a review of state records of Greyhound Bus receipts .
While the policy is not illegal , it appears unusual , according to the investigation in which mental-health agencies in California and other states said putting a psychiatric patient on a bus without support was not permissible .
The cities of Los Angeles and San Francisco started their own investigation before Sandoval ’ s comments Tuesday .
Los Angles City Attorney Carmen Trutanich said Wednesday his investigation will proceed , despite Sandoval vowing to get to the bottom of the situation .
“ We are going to continue doing what we need to protect the city , ” he told FoxNews.com . “ This doesn ’ t change the fact 150 people have been dumped on the streets of Los Angeles . ”
The investigation by San Francisco City Attorney Dennis Herrera requests the Nevada Department of Health and Human Services provide such public records as licenses , citations , federal funding agreements and other documents relevant to the allegations .
`` Assuming the reports are true , Nevada 's practice of psychiatric 'patient dumping ' is shockingly inhumane and illegal , ” Herrera said .
Trutanich and others have suggested that cost was the reason behind the alleged busing .
The newspaper investigation found Nevada , faced with a budget deficit , cut mental-health spending by 28 percent from 2009 to 2012 and was already spending below the national average on per-patient care .
Meanwhile , several other groups – including the Joint Commission accreditation company -- have been alerted about the allegations and are now in fact-gathering stages .