A federal judge in the US state of Texas has ruled that a key part of the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) , better known as Obamacare , is unconstitutional .
Twenty states argued the whole law was invalidated by a change in tax rules last year which eliminated a penalty for not having health insurance .
President Donald Trump said the ruling was great news for America .
The law 's provisions will , however , remain in place until an appeal is heard at the US Supreme Court .
President Trump promised to dismantle Barack Obama 's landmark 2010 healthcare law , which was designed to make medical cover affordable for the many Americans who had been priced out of the market .
But despite his Republican Party having majorities in both the House of Representatives and the Senate , the ACA is still operating .
However , in 2017 Congress did repeal the requirement - the so-called individual mandate - that people buy health insurance or pay a tax penalty .
Mr Trump took to Twitter following the judge 's ruling in Texas .
He also urged incoming Democratic Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer and Democratic Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi to `` pass a STRONG law that provides GREAT healthcare '' .
The ruling came a day before the deadline for Obamacare enrolment for the coming year .
Two Republicans - Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton and his Wisconsin counterpart Brad Schimel led the legal challenge .
Sitting in Fort Worth , US District Judge Reed O'Connor noted that a $ 1.5tn tax bill passed by Congress in 2017 eliminated the tax penalties which anyone who failed to obtain health insurance had to pay .
As the individual mandate was an `` essential '' element of the ACA , the whole of Obamacare was therefore unconstitutional , Judge O'Connor said .
He said his ruling was concerned with the intentions of the 2010 and 2017 Congresses .
`` The former enacted the ACA . The latter sawed off the last leg it stood on . ''
Ms Pelosi described the ruling as `` cruel '' and `` absurd '' and said it would be repealed .
She said it exposed `` the monstrous endgame of Republicans ' all-out assault on people with pre-existing conditions and Americans ' access to affordable health care '' .
Mr Schumer , meanwhile , said the ruling appeared `` to be based on faulty legal reasoning and hopefully it will be overturned '' .
He said that if it was upheld in the higher courts `` it will be a disaster for tens of millions of American families , especially for people with pre-existing conditions '' .
The decision is almost certain to be challenged in the US Supreme Court .
White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said that the law would remain in place for the time being , pending further legal developments .
Meanwhile , the White House called on Congress to replace Obamacare with an affordable healthcare system which protects people with pre-existing conditions .
But other states have argued that eliminating Obamacare would harm millions of Americans , and pending any appeal the landmark health care law remains in place .
US Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer said : `` If this awful ruling is upheld in the higher courts , it will be a disaster for tens of millions of American families . ''