The Obama administration has been getting visibly frantic about their campaign to ‘ inform ’ the public about the ‘ benefits ’ of ObamaCare , i.e. , convince Americans to sign up for the included insurance plans en masse — because they are well aware that unless they can get large numbers of people into the system early on , the whole thing doesn ’ t stand a chance . Without Americans ’ hefty participation , most especially the young and healthy , the “ affordable ” part of the law ’ s title most definitely won ’ t be , since insurance companies won ’ t have enough low-cost participants to balance out the heightened and more expensive risk pools into which they are being co-opted .
Hence , the recent revelation about HHS Secretary Sebelius ’ s wildly sketchy push to solicit ‘ voluntary ’ funds from the very same companies and organizations over which ObamaCare now affords her executive department massive regulatory control , about which she was questioned today in a Congressional hearing today and testified that she has made on behalf of the non-profit Enroll America :
“ Three were to discuss the organization and suggest the entities look at the organization , ” Sebelius testified at a House hearing Tuesday . The other two phone calls , to officials at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and H & R Block , were direct solicitations for fundraising . Sebelius said that she did not request a specific level of donation from those two companies . Sebelius made the three outreach phone calls to Johnson & Johnson , Ascension Health , a Catholic hospital system , and health insurer Kaiser Permanente . She pushed back on multiple reports that officials at these companies , which the Health and Human Services department regulates , felt pressure to donate to Enroll America after the conversation . “ If they felt pressure , they misunderstood , ” she said . “ I can ’ t answer what they felt . I can tell you that … I have made fundraising solicitations to two groups and I did not discuss funding with the other three entities . I did discuss Enroll America . ”
You “ can ’ t answer what they felt ” ? …Fancy a guess , perhaps ?
The Obama administration , of course , has every reason in the world to worry , according to at least one new poll . CNBC reports :
Nearly two-thirds of Americans who currently lack health insurance don ’ t know yet if they will purchase that coverage by the Jan. 1 deadline set by the ACA , a new survey revealed Monday . And less than half of those in the survey released by InsuranceQuotes.com think they ’ ll get better health care after Obamacare takes full effect . Nearly 50 percent believe the ACA will make it more difficult for them to get tests and procedures done in a timely manner , according to the phone survey of 1,001 adult Americans conducted in early May . … Laura Adams , senior insurance analyst at InsuranceQuotes.com , said public uncertainty about Obamacare—particularly a lack of commitment to signing up—could end up driving up health-insurance costs under the program because not enough healthy people will participate to offset benefits payouts .
This could spell disaster for the Obama administration and the Democrats if they don ’ t fix it soon . They have no choice but to put on a brave face and fully embrace the law in the run-up to the 2014 midterms , but their desperation in getting the system operational in time is only getting more and more apparent .