Typically , a hospital patient paying out of pocket for major surgery needs a long-term payment plan , so when Gary L. Edwards ‘ friend paid off his $ 30,000 emergency hernia operation tab in about a month , it left hospital officials flabbergasted .
Mr. Edwards and his pal are members of Samaritan Ministries International , a “ health care sharing ministry ” in which Christian members pay for each other ’ s health care needs through monthly shares .
“ My doctors are very impressed by it , ” said Mr. Edwards , a 59-year-old from Falls Church who says Samaritan Ministries helped him pay for a biopsy and helped cover treatment for his wife , Susan , when she injured her back .
While most Americans next year will have to grapple with the intricacies of President Obama ’ s health law and the “ individual mandate ” requiring residents to have health insurance , Mr. Edwards and more than 160,000 others who use health-sharing ministries will be exempt .
They ’ re one of nine exemptions built into the health care law , covering everyone from illegal immigrants to prisoners ; those who have religious conscience objections , such as the Amish ; and health care sharing ministries members like Mr. Edwards .
Many of those exemptions were practical : Prisoners already get government-sponsored health care , for example .
But through long-standing pacts and persuasion on Capitol Hill , devout groups such as Samaritan Ministries and the Amish secured exemptions because they argued that they meet two of the founding principles behind Mr. Obama ’ s law — that if you like your health plan , you should be able to keep it , and that broader access to health insurance will reduce the financial toll that results when uninsured Americans use the emergency room as their go-to clinic .
“ We ’ re not free-riders on the system , ” said James Lansberry , Samaritan ’ s executive vice president .
Political controversy has surrounded many aspects of “ Obamacare ” since its passage three years ago , but clamor over the individual mandate rang the loudest until the Supreme Court deemed it constitutional last June , saying it was a viable exercise of Congress ’ taxing authority .
Starting in early 2015 , taxpayers will have to say on their returns for the previous year whether they were covered by insurance or , if not , whether they were exempt . For each nonexempt family member without coverage , “ the taxpayer will owe a payment , ” according to guidance from the Internal Revenue Service .
The penalty starts at $ 95 for low-income taxpayers in 2014 , rising to $ 659 in 2016 . Higher-income taxpayers who reject coverage will pay more — 1 percent of their income in 2014 , rising to 2.5 percent in 2016 .
People who are not legal residents of the U.S. are exempt from the mandate , although undocumented immigrants are not eligible for government benefits under the law either .
American Indians , many of whom obtain care through the government ’ s Indian Health Care system , also are exempt , although The Associated Press recently reported on concerns the law defines qualified Indians and their tribal affiliations too narrowly .
Other exemptions apply to those who do not earn enough to file a tax return , who will not be covered by Medicaid because their state chose not to expand the program under Mr. Obama ’ s law , and those who can not afford even the cheapest qualified health plan .
But the most interesting cases are the exemptions based on belief . There is a “ religious conscience ” clause for such groups as the Old Order Amish or Old Order Mennonites , who restrict or bar contact with modern society and also have never paid into Social Security or Medicare .
“ They just don ’ t do insurance , ” said Timothy S. Jost , a health care analyst at the Washington and Lee University School of Law . “ Groups like that are exempt . ”
To secure the exemption , the groups must certify to the IRS they are conscientiously opposed to public and private insurance and that their religious group provides a reasonable level of living for its members and has existed continuously since Dec. 31 , 1950 .
A second contingent , Christian-based health care sharing ministries such as Samaritan , are exempted because they pick up their own costs .
The Alliance of Health Care Sharing Ministries ’ website says ministries have members in all 50 states and share $ 165 million per year for health care . To qualify for the exemption from Mr. Obama ’ s health care law , a member must belong to a ministry that has existed in some form since 1999 .
If Congress had refused to shelter the Old Order Amish and Old Order Mennonites from the individual mandate , it would have created a high-profile standoff .
“ They would have gone to prison over it , ” said Donald B. Kraybill , a specialist on the Amish and senior fellow at the Young Center for Anabaptist and Pietist Studies at Elizabethtown College in Pennsylvania . “ There was a great deal of concern but it was kind of a no-brainer . ”
He said the roughly 280,000 Amish and 50,000 Mennonites in the U.S. emphasize a strong separation between church and state , so they don ’ t feel they should obtain public benefits they view as “ handouts . ”
Despite their lack of formal insurance , the Amish are model patients because they pay cash and will not sue doctors for malpractice , and the hospital does not have to deal with the paperwork associated with big insurers , said Mr. Kraybill , whose most recent book , “ The Amish , ” was published in April .
“ They know these people will pay , ” he said . “ They have a very good track record . ”
The Amish are not homogenous and have varying approaches to health care , but serious injuries or illnesses do result in medical bills . Some congregations will pool funds to share the burden of health costs before church leaders negotiate with hospitals “ just like an insurance company would , ” Mr. Kraybill said , while others will seek direct donations or hold benefit auctions .
Samaritan and other sharing ministries employ the same kind of concept — voluntarily sharing a burden with like-minded religious people .
Guided by Christian principles , members of the ministries promise to live a healthy lifestyle — no illegal drugs , alcohol only in moderation and no sex outside marriage . In doing so , they say , members reap the benefit of monthly payments that are far lower than insurance premiums and a community-driven system that replaces corporate red tape with prayer cards .
“ It ’ s nicer to get a call from someone saying they ’ re praying for you than a computer slip in the mail from an insurance company that says your bill ’ s been paid , ” Mr. Edwards said .
Unlike insurance , sharing ministries do not pool health risks or face state regulations mandating reserves of capital or surpluses . A local pastor must sign off on membership at Samaritan , and members say they like knowing their dollars will not subsidize practices to which they object , such as abortion .
When the health care law was being written , Mr. Lansberry of Samaritan said House lawmakers weren ’ t inclined to grant the ministries an exemption , but the bill ’ s authors in the Senate were willing to accommodate .
“ When that passed , ” Mr. Lansberry said of the upper chamber ’ s bill , “ there was a little bit of a sigh of relief . ”
He said that despite general concerns about Mr. Obama ’ s law as a government intrusion into health care , they do appreciate their self-described “ island of freedom . ”
Samaritan ’ s membership has grown steadily , but there hasn ’ t been much uptick on the cusp of the individual mandate ’ s impact in 2014 , Mr. Lansberry said . While it could still happen , he thinks it ’ s unlikely .
“ This , ” he said , “ would be the last thing on people ’ s minds if they ’ re trying to get around the mandate . ”