When it comes to government funding for drug research , an interesting paradox currently exists .
While many pharmaceutical companies benefit from federal funding for research , this doesn ’ t necessarily translate to lower prices for patients who ultimately buy the drugs that are developed . In other words , the government is effectively subsidizing companies ’ ability to develop drugs and then charge exorbitant prices for them .
Sens . Chris Van Hollen ( D-MD ) and Rick Scott ( R-FL ) want to change that .
Their new bill , first provided to ███ , would require companies that have received research funding from the National Institutes of Health and other federal agencies to follow specific pricing restrictions for the drugs they are selling . If they don ’ t , they ’ d incur strict penalties .
“ The idea is straightforward , ” Van Hollen told ███ . “ Taxpayers invested in finding cures and treatments and therefore , taxpayers should have a say in what the prices are . ”
The legislation , dubbed the We PAID Act , is the latest attempt from lawmakers to address escalating prescription drug prices . While it would only affect a fraction of new prescription drugs that are sold — an aide for Van Hollen ’ s office estimated it would apply to 20 to 25 percent of the prescription drugs that go to market after the bill is enacted and wouldn ’ t apply to any currently on the market — the legislation could still make significant inroads in reducing some drug prices , if passed .
According to Van Hollen ’ s office , current drugs that would hypothetically be affected , if this law existed when they were being developed , include Humira , a drug for adults with Crohn ’ s disease , and Enbrel , a drug that treats autoimmune diseases . According to The New York Times , a prescription for Humira currently clocks in at $ 38,000 a year .
The bipartisan nature of the bill could bode well for its advancement , and highlights how much of a priority this topic has become for voters , as well as lawmakers across the ideological spectrum . Van Hollen and Scott ’ s bill joins an expanding slate of proposals , underscoring the growing push in both chambers of Congress to actually pass legislation that could rein in Big Pharma .
The US is known for having some of the highest prescription drug prices in the world , and this bill is one of several making its way through the upper chamber that attempts to address this problem . Specifically , Van Hollen and Scott ’ s plan tackles the issue by targeting drug companies that have benefitted from taxpayer money .
Under the We PAID Act , drugs that have patents clearly tied to NIH research would be required to offer reasonable prices to consumers . These patents include those held by the federal government that are licensed out to private companies , and patents held by individuals that disclose “ government support ” in the application .
In order to determine “ reasonable ” pricing for different drugs , the legislation sets up a couple different mechanisms :
First , it would commission a study conducted by the National Academies of Science , Engineering , and Medicine . The National Academies would review key information about the drug , including its prices in other countries , distribution costs and the amount of investment that went into research and development . They would use this data to determine how best to figure out a reasonable price . Second , the bill would establish a Drug Affordability and Access Committee comprised of a number of seven agency officials , two consumer representatives , three provider representatives , a researcher , an economist , a health insurance plan representative , a pharmacy benefit manager representative and a drug manufacturer representative . They would use the National Academies study to land on a fair list price for a drug . Once the committee makes a decision about a reasonable list price , that drug would only be available on the market at that price . Year-over-year increases could not exceed the rate of inflation .
This committee would specifically include a wide range of stakeholders in order to prevent too much industry influence , Van Hollen told ███ . “ We want to make sure that this was not stacked by industry people , ” he said . Presently , it ’ s still slightly unclear how much lower the “ reasonable ” list price would be than a company ’ s existing price , but the process to arrive at that figure is intended to be a transparent one , Van Hollen noted .
Companies that do not adhere to the list price that ’ s ultimately determined would be subject to a couple different penalties : For one , they would lose any exclusive rights to a particular drug , meaning competitors could then produce a generic version of the drug to sell . Additionally , they would be barred from entering into future licensing agreements on patented technology , meaning they couldn ’ t leverage advancements that have been developed by the NIH or other federal money .
While this bill is only applicable to a segment of drugs , it could still have some serious impact in bringing down costs for some of the most expensive drugs out there , says Ameet Sarpatwari , a health policy expert at Brigham and Women ’ s Hospital , who provided assistance on the bill .
“ NIH is the largest single funder of biomedical research in the world , ” he told ███ . “ The real question is what are we getting in return for the contribution companies receive ? ”
As Sarpatwari notes , the reach of NIH funding is expansive . According to a 2018 study , all 210 drugs that were approved by the Food and Drug Administration between 2010 to 2016 relied heavily on some kind of NIH support . ( Not all would necessarily be affected by the bill , but an estimated 25 percent of all drugs that are launched would be . )
Lowering prescription drug prices is one of the few issues with momentum in Congress
Reducing prescription drug prices is among a narrow set of issues that members of the House , Senate , and White House are all interested in working on . Whether they can collectively agree on a policy solution , however , is another matter .
Van Hollen and Scott ’ s bill , because it has bipartisan support , is among the measures that could see some momentum . Another bill from Sens . Chuck Grassley ( R-IA ) and Ron Wyden ( D-OR ) , which would put a cap on out-of-pocket costs Medicare recipients pay for prescription drugs , has also recently advanced out of the Senate Finance Committee . And House Democrats are expected to unveil a bill of their own later this fall , though it ’ ll likely be too progressive for Senate Republicans .
If members of both parties could work something out , it would be an effort that resonates heavily with voters , who ’ ve showed broad support for lowering prescription drug costs in poll after poll . According to a February survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation , 63 percent of Americans think there should be more regulation of prescription drug prices .
Although many Republicans remain reluctant to impose more regulation on the health care industry , the demand from voters on drug prices is becoming too urgent to ignore .
Scott and Van Hollen ’ s bill shows lawmakers on both sides are looking for ways to answer that demand — some in more sweeping ways than others .