Larry Levitt has been thinking about and analyzing the Affordable Care Act and its insurance marketplaces since before the ACA was law . So I reached out to him to make sense of the new data showing premiums will rise by an astonishing 22 percent next year .
Levitt argues , convincingly , that some of the most important people to watch are those who aren ’ t even using the Obamacare marketplace . They ’ re the 7 million people who buy their own coverage outside of the federal website , perhaps directly from their preferred insurer or through a local broker .
“ They ’ re most important because they ’ re paying the full premium and they are most vulnerable to rate increases , ” Levitt says . “ They are getting hit with the increases . If they start to drop insurance , that could lead to bigger premium increases in the future . ”
Levitt and I spoke about why the premiums are going up , whether the law needs a stronger insurance mandate , and whether Obamacare enrollment will grow this year . What follows is a transcript of our discussion , lightly edited for length and clarity .
Why are Obamacare premiums going up so much this year ?
There are three reasons why premiums are going up so much . The first is that more sick people than anticipated enrolled . Insurers are just catching up to the fact that premiums weren ’ t covering their costs . It seems somewhat counterintuitive that this is happening four years after the insurance expansion going into effect , but it ’ s really only now that insurers have good data on who enrolled and how much it cost .
The second reason is the end of the reinsurance program , which helped pay for very sick enrollees . That expires at the end of this year . So they have to raise premiums to account for the end of that program .
The third reason is health care costs seem to be trending back upward . That is affecting Obamacare plans but really all insurance plans .
So when you think about these different factors driving up Obamacare rates , does this strike you as a one-time course correction ? Or that we ’ re at the beginning of an era with bigger Obamacare rate increases ?
That is absolutely the question of the moment : Is this a one-time bump or a sign of worse things to come ? And the shorter answer is we don ’ t know .
It seems very likely that this is a one-time bump . The upside of these big premium increases is that all those insurers that have been losing money might start to make money . I doubt many people out there would be shedding tears for insurance companies not making money , but these insurance companies have to earn a profit if they ’ re going to make the program work .
The risk is that premium increases beget more premium increases if some healthy people decide to drop coverage in response to the increases . In the marketplaces , that is not likely to happen because the vast majority are receiving subsidies and are cushioned .
Here is a smaller number , about 15 percent of marketplace enrollees , who are not eligible for subsidies . They will feel the full brunt of the rate hikes , although some of them might become eligible for subsidies because premiums have gotten so high .
The most important group to watch is people buying their own insurance outside of the marketplace , who are playing the full premium . They are getting hit with the increases . If they start to drop insurance , that could lead to bigger premium increases in the future .
Why do you think that group — the people buying coverage outside the Obamacare marketplace — is the most important to watch ?
They ’ re most important because they ’ re paying the full premium and they are most vulnerable to rate increases . By definition these people are generally higher-income . If they were lower-income they would go into the marketplace , although some new analysis suggests some of them might be eligible for subsidies and aren ’ t claiming them .
Some are sick and are going to hang on to their insurance for dear life . But the group you worry about is people who are healthy , who are buying insurance because they think it ’ s the right thing to do . The law requires insurers to look at who they ’ re covering inside the marketplace and outside the marketplace when they set premiums . So you have the same increases for everybody .
Ever since the law passed , there have been fears of a so-called death spiral , where premiums go up and healthy people leave the market . That remains highly unlikely because so many of the people are receiving a subsidy .
But if healthy people start leaving the marketplaces , which you suggest is a possibility , does that become a death spiral ? Or is there a way the markets can stabilize with losing some of the healthy people ?
It ’ s definitely possible in some states that there could be a little spiral , if not a death spiral .
Its really matter of finding an equilibrium , where premiums cover insurers costs , allowing them to earn a little bit of profit , and enrollment is stable . We ’ re at that point of equilibrium in a number of states where things are working well . We ’ re not quite at that level of equilibrium of all states .
In those places , we may not be at the end of the premium increases that are bigger than underlying health care cost growth . But I think the likely scenario in the vast majority of states is that these big premium increases will put insurers on much better financial footing .
The Obama administration thinks enrollment on the marketplaces will increase by about 1 million people this coming year . Do you think that ’ s realistic ?
There are two factors working in the administration ’ s favor . The first is they ’ ve gotten better at running the program and may have figured out ways to better target outreach efforts .
The second is the individual mandate . The penalty may still prove to be too small to get enough people to buy insurance , but I think people ’ s knowledge is still catching up as the penalty phases in . It was fully phased in in 2016 ; many people won ’ t know that until they file their taxes .
At some point this requires a culture shift , where there is just an expectation that you get health insurance . I think partly , because of the divisive politics around Obamacare , we haven ’ t yet made that the norm .
Imagine a world where the ACA passed with significant bipartisan support and there was a national effort involving politicians of all stripes and figures , and athletes , all encouraging people to get insured . That is not the world we live in . It ’ s more like what happened in Massachusetts .
Do you think Obamacare ’ s mandate is strong enough to make the law work ? Or do you think it will need to be strengthened at some point ?
I think of the mandate as going hand in hand with the subsidies . It is entirely possible that both the mandate penalty and the premium subsidy are too small to make coverage affordable and convince enough people that they should buy it .
The bigger the mandate penalty , though , the more responsibility you have to provide subsidies to make sure the coverage is affordable . We ’ ve heard talk during the campaign from Secretary Clinton about increasing the subsidies . It wouldn ’ t be a popular issue to talk about increasing the mandate , but both may need to be bigger .