Story highlights Julian Zelizer : Health reform upheld , now must find support , fend off GOP bids for repeal
He says GOP will try to attack its funding ; other challenges are in implementing , enforcing law
He says other federal programs , like Social Security , Medicare , had tough starts
Zelizer : Congress now must make law work ; 2012 election could threaten it more than court
White House officials rightly breathed a sigh of relief when the Supreme Court upheld the Affordable Care Act . President Obama and his supporters are optimistic that his re-election prospects are stronger and his lasting impact on domestic policy will be much greater .
But the battle has only begun . Even after legislation is enacted , as the political scientist Eric Patashnik says in his book `` Reforms at Risk , '' its survival is not assured . The key to success is whether a program lasts over time and builds strong political support to protect it from future attacks . As Patashnik and political scientist Jeffrey Jenkins wrote in a recent blog post , before the Supreme Court ruled : `` The partisan and ideological struggle over health-care reform is likely to continue under any scenario . ''
Congressional Republicans will likely continue attacking the program 's funding . House Speaker John Boehner has vowed to push for its repeal .
Mitt Romney has said he will do the same if he is elected president .
Congressional Republicans will use the budgetary axe to make sure that ACA does not have a smooth path to success . The Supreme Court 's decision on Medicaid has opened up questions about whether red state governors will follow through with an essential expansion of the program .
There are also challenges in making the law work . Who will enforce penalties on those who refuse to buy insurance ? How effective will the cost controls be ? States setting up their health care exchanges will need to take tremendous care so that consumers really receive the best choices about where to purchase their insurance . Some state officials , in Idaho and South Dakota for example , are refusing to implement the law until after November . Will the federal government step in to set up these states ' health care exchanges ?
The good news for Obama is that many sturdy , well-regarded federal programs did not start out that way . Social Security did not do well at first . A freeze on taxes during World War II jeopardized the program , and there were real concerns that it would not survive , given that other programs for the elderly were more popular .
JUST WATCHED 'Obamacare ' myths and truths revealed Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH 'Obamacare ' myths and truths revealed 02:40
JUST WATCHED How health reform will affect you Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH How health reform will affect you 02:24
JUST WATCHED Health care budget claims explained Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Health care budget claims explained 03:01
But Congress made adjustments , expanding coverage to include groups such as widows , increasing benefits and revising the tax system to a pay-as-you-go basis , with monthly benefits funded by monthly taxes . By 1950 , the program was sound and received bipartisan support .
When the Supreme Court struck down an agricultural-processing tax that supported a farm subsidy program in 1936 , Congress reworked it , resolving the constitutional problems and protecting farmers .
Other periods have seen similar adjustments . Congress passed a watered-down voting rights bill in 1957 , one that frustrated liberals .
Lyndon Johnson , then the Senate majority leader , promised it would be improved upon and expanded in future years .
`` It 's just a beginning , '' he told liberals . `` We 've shown that we can do it , we 'll do it again . ''
He was right . In 1964 and 1965 , Congress passed far bolder legislation .
Medicare , which Congress enacted in 1965 , has faced the chronic challenge of cost control . In the 1980s , Congress imposed regulations on what hospitals could charge the program to help contain rising costs .
Congress has taken similar action with taxes . When President Ronald Reagan 's 1981 tax cut and increased military spending made the deficit balloon , Congress -- with the support of key Republicans like Sen. Robert Dole of Kansas -- raised taxes in 1982 and 1983 .
Congress ' job is not just to make new laws , but also to fix existing ones . The question now is whether Congress can overcome polarization and gridlock to refine and improve the health care law to make sure it works . In many respects , the 2012 election will be a much bigger moment for health care than the Court decision . If Democrats do n't make sure this law works well , a future Congress might use its power to repeal the legislation and finish the job they wish the Supreme Court had done .