Washington ( CNN ) – A former member of President Barack Obama 's technology team says the website where Americans are supposed to be able to enroll in health care exchanges was created by a `` sloppy '' team of contractors who were selected through a flawed federal procurement process .
Clay Johnson , who served as a Presidential Innovation Fellow beginning in August 2012 , wrote in a blog post on October 7 that signs of flaws on Healthcare.gov were apparent from the day it went online , including the use of placeholder text in the site 's code .
`` The contractors who made this website were at best sloppy , and at worst unqualified for the job , '' Johnson wrote .
In an interview with CNN , Johnson said the federal government is increasingly relying on a shrinking list of preferred contractors for its IT work in a process that is producing lackluster outcomes .
`` There 's been a consolidation of incumbent vendors and they 've gotten lazy as a result , '' Johnson told CNN . `` They have n't kept up with the market . ''
The result , Johnson says , is a `` new digital divide between the public and private sector . ''
Selected as part of the first class of White House innovation fellows in August 2012 , Johnson worked on a project that developed an online marketplace connecting the government with small tech firms . The fellowships last for six months . Previously Johnson co-founded the tech company that built Obama 's 2008 campaign website .
Writing in the post titled `` The HealthCare.gov Fiasco , '' Johnson said the problem originated in the way the federal government selects companies for technology projects – a process he says favors a select number of firms to the exclusion of better-qualified outlets .
`` Healthcare.gov got this way not because of incompetence or sloppiness of an individual vendor , but because of a deeply engrained and malignant cancer that 's eating away at the federal government 's ability to provide effective online services , '' he wrote .
`` It 's a cancer that 's shut out the best and brightest minds from working on these problems , diminished competition for federal work , and landed us here – where you have half-billion dollar websites that do n't work , '' he wrote , linking to USASpending.gov
Obama on Monday vowed changes were coming to HealthCare.gov that would make the site easier to use for Americans looking to sign up for the exchanges , which are a key element of the President 's landmark Affordable Care Act . Later this week , three of the contractors responsible for implementing parts of the exchanges and signup process - CGI , Serco , and Equifax - will testify before a congressional committee about problems on the site .
In a statement , CGI said it and other contractors `` are working around the clock for the improvement of HealthCare.gov , a system that is complex , ambitious and unprecedented . We remain confident in our ability to deliver continuous improvement in system performance and a more positive user experience . ''
A separate posting on Johnson 's blog from Monday offered a few ways the site could be fixed , including the recommendation the administration hold the contractors responsible for the poorly-concocted website responsible .
`` The problem here is n't just the result of bad programming , '' he wrote . `` It 's the result of bad systems and bad architecture from the get-go . When you try and build the world 's biggest shopping mall and the only place you can buy your support beams from is a balsa-wood mill , your building is going to collapse . ''
Opening the website to outside experts will help fix some of the problems , he wrote , but expecting substantial changes in a short amount of time could be unreasonable .
`` The best thing that any outside experts can do in any reasonable amount of time is replace some drywall and paint . Otherwise , your experts are going to have to figure out where the balsa-wood is falling apart , and replace it with iron . That takes time . ''
Johnson said the experts scrambling to repair the technical problems with HealthCare.gov should break it up into smaller parts , bring in a new set of vendors that are `` a lot more nimble . ''
President Obama 's signature legislative achievement deserves better , Johnson said . `` This is not up to par , '' he added .