The Trump administration is quietly dismantling the Affordable Care Act , taking a series of regulatory steps that will make it easier for insurance companies to sell plans that exclude patients with preexisting conditions or don ’ t cover basic services like maternity care , mental health treatment , and prescription drugs .
Republicans weren ’ t able to repeal Obamacare in Congress . Now the Trump administration appears to be settling for the second-best thing : weakening Obamacare ’ s insurance regulations , changes that will hurt Americans who are older and sicker while benefiting the young and the healthy .
The Health and Human Services Department published new rules Tuesday that widen access to “ short-term ” health plans , a small subset of insurance products that are meant to cover short gaps in insurance coverage . The Obama administration aggressively regulated these plans , allowing insurance companies to sell them only as 90-day options .
The Trump changes allow insurance companies to sell the skimpier plans for a year , encouraging many more people to buy them and use them as a more regular source of coverage . Officials are also considering allowing insurance companies to extend them further .
These plans are likely to attract young and healthy consumers , leaving behind a pool of older and sicker patients in the Obamacare markets and driving up the prices there .
“ This all looks a lot like the landscape in 2013 [ before the Affordable Care Act took effect ] , ” said David Anderson , a research associate at the Margolis Center for Health Policy at Duke University whose work focuses on health insurance design .
Already in recent weeks , the Trump administration has shown little interest in enforcing Obamacare ’ s guarantee that healthy and sick people get access to the same type of health insurance .
For example , it hasn ’ t intervened in Idaho , where regulators recently told insurers they can simply disregard many of the Affordable Care Act rules and sell new “ freedom plans ” that discriminate against sicker enrollees .
Typically , you ’ d expect the federal government to get involved — to step in and enforce federal law when a state refuses . But when pressed by a reporter on this issue Tuesday , HHS Secretary Alex Azar demurred .
“ I ’ m not in a position to rule on something I ’ ve seen a media report about , ” he said , adding that he doesn ’ t “ believe in premature opinions on complex topics . ”
The Trump administration wants to widen access to plans that deny coverage for preexisting conditions and discriminate against women
The rules the Trump administration rolled out Tuesday relate to “ short-term ” health plans , coverage that is meant to fill gaps between more permanent policies ( for someone who takes a few months off between jobs , for example ) .
Short-term coverage is allowed to skirt several of the health care law ’ s core provisions : Plans can deny people insurance based on their medical history , charge them higher premiums because of their preexisting medical conditions , and craft skimpy benefits packages that will appeal mostly to young and healthy people .
For example : I looked at the short-term plans available to someone like me in Washington , DC , on the website eHealthInsurance . The cheapest plan would run $ 94 per month ; the most expensive would be $ 504 . The cheapest unsubsidized Obamacare plan , by contrast , is $ 232 each month .
A plan that costs $ 94 a month sounds like a great deal , if you can get it . But a lot of people can ’ t : All the short-term plans I looked at include an “ underwriting ” questionnaire , which asked whether I had any preexisting health conditions .
The application for one plan stated clearly : if I answered yes to the questions below , “ coverage can not be issued. ” These are two of the questions I ’ d have to answer :
Even if I said no , the plan would have a long list of benefits it wouldn ’ t pay for , including :
Injuries resulting from “ skydiving , scuba diving , auto racing , bungee jumping , hang or ultra light gliding , parasailing , sail planing , or rodeo contests ”
Treatment for “ skin tags and other specific conditions of the skin and skin diseases ”
This is only a partial list of exclusions for one plan ( you can read the entire list here ) . Notably , this plan would charge me a higher premium because I am a woman : a $ 94 monthly premium versus the $ 77 premium my twin brother would pay for the exact same policy . Before the Affordable Care Act took effect , it was common for insurance plans to charge women of childbearing age higher premiums . Obamacare outlawed that practice .
The Obama administration tried to curtail the presence of plans like this in the individual market , on the grounds that they disadvantage sick Americans and offer a false sense of security by excluding a whole slew of benefits .
In 2015 , the government limited these types of short-term plans to only offering 90-day policies that were not renewable ( although some states seemed to be finding ways to skirt that rule ) . Now the Trump administration is going in the opposite direction : allowing these “ short-term ” policies to run for 364 days and exploring whether to allow consumers to renew them .
The Trump administration has framed this decision as bringing more choice into the insurance marketplace , and for some , that ’ s true . Healthy people will certainly have more choice to sign up for these skimpier plans . But sicker people will end up paying the price of those healthy people exiting the Obamacare marketplace .
Help our reporting Hospitals keep ER fees secret . Share your bill here to help change that .
Health policy experts know whom these short-term plans appeal to : young , healthy people who want a cheaper option than Healthcare.gov currently offers . This is especially true for young , healthy people who earn just slightly too much to qualify for Obamacare ’ s premium subsidies , meaning they foot their entire insurance bill on their own .
“ This is really attractive to currently uninsured , young , and probably male individuals who are making just over 400 percent of the poverty line [ the cutoff for Obamacare subsidies ] , ” Anderson says .
These people will likely leave the Obamacare marketplace , flocking to these new , cheaper plans . And most of them will probably be fine if they don ’ t have a catastrophic incident . But that ’ s the thing about health care : You can ’ t predict who might have a catastrophic health expense — the result of a rodeo contest , perhaps — that these short-term plans won ’ t cover .
Some of those people might end up losers in this new insurance scheme . And we know another group of people who will definitely be disadvantaged by the Trump rules : sicker Americans , who won ’ t be allowed into these skimpy new plans .
They will stay behind in the Obamacare insurance marketplace . And those without insurance subsidies will likely see their premiums go up as the healthy people head for the exits .
How many people flee the marketplaces — and how much premiums rise — is really hard to predict . The Trump administration thinks it will be in the neighborhood of 100,000 to 200,000 people , from a marketplace that has about 10 million enrollees . They believe this will lead to premiums rising $ 2 to $ 4 per person .
Some analysts agree with them , although they expect the number would rise over time .
“ It sounds potentially reasonable , but I think longer term , you ’ d expect that number to rise , ” says Chris Sloan , a senior manager with the research firm Avalere Health .
But others think it ’ s much too low — that the marketplaces will see many more people ( particularly the 14 percent of Obamacare enrollees who don ’ t receive insurance subsidies ) leaving the market .
These people , if they ’ re healthy , won ’ t have much to lose . Their premiums will go down if they switch to a short-term plan . And unlike previous years , they won ’ t have to pay a penalty for not carrying Obamacare-compliant coverage . That ’ s because the recently passed Republican tax bill nixed Obamacare ’ s individual mandate .
What type of people are likely to lose in this scenario ? Anderson thinks of a family that was often described by Sen. Bill Cassidy ( R-LA ) during the Obamacare repeal debate as paying $ 40,000 in annual premiums ( the Washington Post tracked down this family and found it was closer to $ 31,000 , or $ 2,654 each month for a family of four ) .
That family has a daughter who has seizures and needs four different medications . They earn too much to receive Obamacare subsidies ( the family says their income is somewhere in the six figures , described by one family member as “ not high but middle class ” ) , so they pay their full premium .
This family ’ s premiums are a significant burden , no doubt . But these new “ choices ” won ’ t fix that problem because the short-term plans won ’ t accept a family whose child has significant , expensive medical needs . They aren ’ t required to take on enrollees with preexisting conditions , so they won ’ t . Those people are expensive and raise premiums .
These are the people who will get left behind in the Obamacare marketplaces as healthier people switch to the short-term plans . And they ’ ll face higher premiums there as a result .
“ That family is going to be far worse off , ” says Anderson . “ They make too much money for subsidies , but they have someone in the family who can not be in , or even get into , an underwritten plan . ”
One state is instructing insurers to ignore Obamacare . The Trump administration is doing nothing .
Want to know how the Trump administration feels about pre-existing conditions ? Take a look at the situation currently unfolding in Idaho .
A few weeks ago , state regulators sent health plans a bulletin . It said that they could once again start charging higher prices to people with preexisting conditions . They could once again exclude coverage for expensive medical needs , such as pregnancy , or decide to charge their female enrollees higher premiums . These are all practices that the Affordable Care Act clearly bars .
The Idaho guidance wasn ’ t limited to short-term plans . It said that insurers could do this for long-term , regular health plans too , so long as they offer at least one Obamacare-complaint plan on the market . This Idaho plan would have the same effect , in practice , as the federal regulations : moving healthy people to a cheaper market while leaving sicker people behind in a more expensive market .
The Wall Street Journal broke this news about a month ago , on January 25 . Blue Cross of Idaho announced one week ago that it intends to start selling these noncompliant plans in April . It sent out a press release , with details of what those plans would look like . They will have $ 1 million benefit limits ( making them unusable for certain high-cost patients ) . One will not cover maternity benefits .
Azar faced questions about the Idaho situation in a Tuesday briefing with reporters . He said he wasn ’ t “ in a position to rule on something I ’ ve seen a media report about . ”
But here ’ s the thing : This isn ’ t just a media report . It is a state sending guidance to health insurers that almost certainly runs afoul of federal law .
And Azar is the exact person who is in the position to act on Idaho . Traditionally , you ’ d expect the federal government to step in at this point and enforce a law when the state refuses . But so far , nothing has happened . Observers worry this could encourage other states to take similar steps , as they ’ ll no longer fear federal interference .
“ The thing that worries me is every single red state that wants to do something more aggressive is gon na leap at the opportunity , ” Nicholas Bagley , a law professor at the University of Michigan who is generally supportive of Obamacare , says . “ We ’ ll see a patchwork on the individual market every bit as profound as the disparity in Medicaid expansion . ”
Are you interested in discussions around health care policy ? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates .