Many commentators , including yours truly , seriously underestimated Donald Trump ’ s electoral prospects despite prescient assurances that he would win from ███ stalwarts like Jeffrey Lord and R. Emmett Tyrrell . Unlike most Trump skeptics , however , I ’ m delighted to have been proven wrong . His flaws notwithstanding , “ the Donald ” has spared the nation four years of Clintonian corruption and scandal while garnering a genuine mandate for the repeal of that crime against democracy — Obamacare . Indeed , according to the first major post-election voter survey , “ Seventy-four percent of Republicans say they want to repeal the Affordable Care Act when Donald Trump takes the White House . ”
And the desire to deep-six Obamacare is by no means limited to Republicans . Recent public opinion polls indicate that a majority of Americans want to be rid of it . In late October Gallup reported , “ When asked about repealing ‘ Obamacare , ’ 51 % said they favor repealing it. ” A week before the election Rasmussen reported , “ Voters overwhelmingly favor changes in Obamacare , with more voters than ever calling for its outright repeal. ” What about the few who like the law and those who want government-run single-payer health care ? Well , that ’ s why we have elections . They lost . After January 20 , 2017 , the President and Congress will begin working together to repeal the ironically titled “ Affordable Care Act . ”
Predictably , the legacy “ news ” media have already embarked upon a propaganda campaign designed to convince the public that the law is essentially impervious to repeal . The Washington Post portentously warns , “ Donald Trump is about to face a rude awakening over Obamacare. ” One Los Angeles Times headline declares , “ Despite Republican pledges , ‘ repealing Obamacare ’ will be almost impossible. ” My favorite is this howler from Politico , “ Obamacare defenders vow ‘ total war ’ . ” The editors of these and many other establishment publications are like those Japanese soldiers who periodically emerge from Pacific island caves , refusing to believe that World War II is over and that their side lost .
You know the media is shell-shocked when the most sensible piece about the party charged with defending Obamacare was produced by Matthew Yglesias at Vox under the headline , “ The whole Democratic Party is now a smoking pile of rubble. ” Most of Obamacare ’ s dead-enders in the media and elsewhere assume that it can ’ t be repealed because the GOP doesn ’ t have a filibuster-proof majority of 60 votes in the Senate . But , in 2018 , at least 6 of the 48 Democrat Senators who will retain their seats after January must face reelection in red states where the voters will not reward them for obstructing repeal . These vulnerable Democrats may well be willing to cooperate with the Republicans in breaking a filibuster .
Even if these red state Democrats remain intransigent , the worst elements of Obamacare can be repealed by sidestepping a filibuster . The GOP leadership can utilize the same budget maneuver , reconciliation , which permitted them to slap H.R.3762 on the President ’ s desk last January . That bill wouldn ’ t have repealed every line of the law , but it would have eliminated the individual and employer mandates , many of its taxes , and phased out its subsidies . Obama vetoed the bill , of course . However , as Paul Ryan said at the time , “ We have shown now that there is a clear path to repealing Obamacare without 60 votes in the Senate . So , next year , if we ’ re sending this bill to a Republican president , it will get signed into law . ”
Well , next January , we will have a Republican President and he has signaled that he will sign a bill like H.R.3762 that leaves some parts of Obamacare in place . Perversely , the very media outlets that denounced Trump for pledging to repeal Obamacare now accuse him of “ waffling. ” Misrepresenting an interview with the Wall Street Journal , outlets like NBC have produced headlines like , “ Repeal Obamacare ? Maybe Not , Says Trump. ” Hilariously , this fictitious change of heart is being attributed to last week ’ s meeting with the President : “ After meeting with President Obama , Trump hinted that he is willing to keep the pre-existing conditions portion. ” As it happens , Trump has always supported that provision of the law .
Conspicuously absent from all of this nonsense is any discussion of which provisions of the President ’ s “ signature domestic achievement ” are supported by the 60.3 million voters who cast their ballots for Trump , the majority of people living in all those red states that cover most of the electoral map . The answer to that question , oddly enough , appears to be of little interest to the media , the anti-Trump rioters or the thumb-suckers of the Snowflake Rebellion . Nonetheless , last Tuesday ’ s exit polls have a story to tell about Obamacare for anyone willing to listen : “ Voters feeling that the law went too far are breaking decisively for Trump , 80 percent to 13 percent. ” In flyover country , we call this a mandate .