In the race to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act , lawmakers on both sides of the political aisle have been guilty of spreading erroneous statements , exaggerating the truth , and skimping on context .
That ’ s the takeaway from a review by ProPublica and its partners at Kaiser Health News , Stat , and ███ of more than 200 letters that members of Congress sent out to their constituents in response to the public ’ s questions and concerns about the Affordable Care Act and its proposed replacement , the GOP ’ s American Health Care Act .
We reviewed the emails and letters sent by 51 senators and 134 members of the House within the past few months . More Republicans fudged than Democrats , though both had their moments . The legislators cited wrong statistics , conflated health care terms , and made statements that don ’ t stand up to verification .
It ’ s not clear if the inaccuracies were intentional , or if the lawmakers and their staff don ’ t understand the current law or the proposals to alter it . But either way , the issue has become increasingly heated as the House gets ready for a vote on the GOP ’ s replacement bill this Thursday .
Here are some whoppers from members of both parties , and the truth and context behind what they told voters .
Republicans criticize the law for not living up to its promises . They say former President Barack Obama pledged that people could keep their health plans and doctors and that premiums would go down . Neither has happened . They also say insurers are dropping out of the market and that monthly premiums and deductibles ( the amount people must pay before their coverage kicks in ) have gone up . That ’ s all true .
1 ) They lied about the number of Obamacare exchanges in a state ’ s counties
Rep. Pat Tiberi ( R-OH ) : “ In Ohio , almost one third of counties will have only one insurer participating in the exchange . ”
What ’ s misleading : Only 23 percent ( less than one-quarter ) had one option , according to an analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation .
His response : A Tiberi spokesperson defended the statement . “ The letter says ‘ almost ’ because only 9 more counties in Ohio need to start offering only 1 plan on the exchanges to be one third . ”
Why his response is misleading : Ohio has 88 counties . A 10 percent difference is not “ almost . ”
2 ) They blamed the ACA for the number of uninsured Americans
Rep. Chuck Fleischmann ( R-TN ) : “ According to the U.S. Census Bureau , approximately thirty-three million Americans are still living without health care coverage and many more have coverage that does not adequately meet their health care needs . ”
Why it ’ s misleading : The actual number of uninsured in 2015 was about 29 million , a drop of 4 million from the prior year , the Census Bureau reported in September . Fleischmann ’ s number was from the previous year .
Beyond that , reducing the number of uninsured by more than 12 million people from 2013 to 2015 has been seen as a success of Obamacare . And the Republican repeal-and-replace bill is projected to increase the number of uninsured .
3 ) They overstated the impact the ACA had on part-time employment
Rep. Dana Rohrabacher ( R-CA ) : `` It has also , through the requirement that employees that work thirty hours or more be considered full time and thus be offered health insurance by their employer , distorted the labor market . ”
What ’ s misleading : A number of studies have found little to back up that assertion . A 2016 study published by the journal Health Affairs examined data on hours worked , reason for working part time , age , education , and health insurance status . “ We found only limited evidence to support this speculation ” that the law led to an increase in part-time employment , the authors wrote . Another study found much the same .
In addition , PolitiFact labeled Donald Trump ’ s assertion that “ Because of Obamacare , you have so many part-time jobs ” a false statement last June .
His response : Rohrabacher ’ s spokesperson Ken Grubbs said the Congress member ’ s statement was based on an article that said , “ Are Republicans right that employers are capping workers ’ hours to avoid offering health insurance ? The evidence suggests the answer is ‘ yes , ’ although the number of workers affected is fairly small . ”
Why it ’ s misleading : We pointed out that “ fairly small ” was hardly akin to distorting the labor market . To which Grubbs replied , “ The congressman ’ s letter is well within the range of respected interpretations . That employers would react to Obamacare ’ s impact in such way is so obvious , so nearly axiomatic , that it is pointless to get lost in the weeds . ”
4 ) They blamed the ACA for eroding the quality of health care in the country
Rep. Kevin Yoder ( R-KS ) : “ Quality of care has decreased as doctors have been burdened with increased regulations on their profession . ”
Why it ’ s misleading : Some data shows that health care has improved after the passage of the ACA . Patients are less likely to be readmitted to a hospital within 30 days after they have been discharged , for instance . Also , payments have been increasingly linked to patients ’ outcomes rather than just the quantity of services delivered . A 2016 report by the Commonwealth Fund , a nonprofit health care think tank , found that the quality of care has improved in many communities following the ACA .
5 ) They said a majority of health insurance marketplaces run by states have failed
Rep. Blaine Luetkemeyer ( R-MO ) : “ Nearly 75 percent of state-run exchanges have already collapsed , forcing more than 800,000 Americans to find new coverage . ”
What ’ s misleading : When the ACA first launched , 16 states and the District of Columbia opted to set up their own exchanges for residents to purchase insurance , instead of using the federal marketplace , known as Healthcare.gov .
Of the 16 , four state exchanges , in Oregon , Hawaii , New Mexico , and Nevada , failed , and Kentucky plans to close its exchange this year , according to a report by the House Energy and Commerce Committee . While the report casts doubt on the viability of other state exchanges , it is clear that three-quarters have not failed .
Democrats emphasize that millions of previously uninsured people now have medical coverage thanks to the law . They say insurance companies can no longer discriminate against millions of patients with preexisting conditions . And they credit the law with allowing adults up to age 26 to stay on their parents ’ health plans . All true .
1 ) They exaggerated the number of young adults who stayed on their parents ’ health plan after the ACA
Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy III ( D-MA ) : The ACA “ allowed 6.1 million young adults to remain covered by their parents ’ insurance plans . ”
What ’ s misleading : A 2016 report by the US Department of Health and Human Services , released during the Obama administration , pegged the number at 2.3 million .
Kennedy may have gotten to 6.1 million by including 3.8 million young adults who gained health insurance coverage through insurance marketplaces from October 2013 through early 2016 .
His response : A spokesperson for Kennedy said the office had indeed added those two numbers together and would fix future letters .
2 ) They wrongly stated family premiums are declining under Obamacare
Sen. Dick Durbin ( D-IL ) : “ Families are seeing lower premiums on their insurance , seniors are saving money on prescription drug costs , and hospital readmission rates are dropping . ”
What ’ s misleading : Durbin ’ s second and third points are true . The first , however , is misleading . Family insurance premiums have increased in recent years , although with government subsidies , some low- and middle-income families may be paying less for their health coverage than they once did .
His response : Durbin ’ s office said it based its statement on an analysis published in the journal Health Affairs that said individual health insurance premiums dropped between 2013 and 2014 , the year that Obamacare insurance marketplaces began . It also pointed to a Washington Post opinion piece that said premiums under the law are lower than they would have been without the law .
Why his response is misleading : The Post piece his office cites states clearly , “ Yes , insurance premiums are going up , both in the health-care exchanges and in the employer-based insurance market . ”
3 ) They incorrectly said the Republican bill to repeal Obamacare would cut funding for seniors in nursing homes
Sen. Ron Wyden ( D-OR ) : `` It ’ s terrible for seniors . Trumpcare forces older Americans to pay 5 times the amount younger Americans will — an age tax — and slashes Medicaid benefits for nursing home care that two out of three Americans in nursing homes rely on . ''
What ’ s misleading : Wyden is correct that the GOP bill , known as the American Health Care Act , would allow insurance companies to charge older adults five times higher premiums than younger ones , compared with three times higher premiums under the existing law . However , it does not directly slash Medicaid benefits for nursing home residents . It proposes cutting Medicaid funding and giving states a greater say in setting their own priorities . States may , as a result , end up cutting services , jeopardizing nursing home care for poor seniors , advocates say , because it is one of the most expensive parts of the program .
His response : Taylor Harvey , a spokesperson for Wyden , defended the statement , noting that the AHCA cuts Medicaid funding by $ 880 billion over 10 years and places a cap on spending . “ Cuts to Medicaid would force states to nickel and dime nursing homes , restricting access to care for older Americans and making it a benefit in name only , ” he wrote .
Why his response is misleading : The GOP bill does not spell out how states make such cuts .
4 ) They exaggerated the percentage of Medicaid spending that covers the cost of long-term care
Rep. Anna Eshoo ( D-CA ) : “ It ’ s important to note that 60 percent of Medicaid goes to long-term care , and with the evisceration of it in the bill , this critical coverage is severely compromised . ”
What ’ s misleading : Medicaid does not spend 60 percent of its budget on long-term care . The figure is closer to a quarter , according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities , a liberal think tank . Medicaid does , however , cover more than 60 percent of all nursing home residents .
Her response : Eshoo ’ s office said the statistic was based on a subset of enrollees who are dually enrolled in Medicaid and Medicare . For this smaller group , 62 percent of Medicaid expenditures were for long-term support services , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation .
What ’ s misleading about the response : Eshoo ’ s letter makes no reference to this population , but instead refers to the 75 million Americans on Medicaid .
Have you corresponded with a member of Congress or senator about the Affordable Care Act ? We ’ d love to see the response you received . Please fill out our short form .
███ partnered with ProPublica , Kaiser Health News , and Stat to report this story .