`` Medicare for All '' is , arguably , the rallying cry for progressive Democrats these days . Health care costs were a major issue in the midterm elections and the best way to fix everything once and for all , say progs , is to give all Americans the same sort of coverage given to those of us who are 65 and over . What 's not to like about Medicare , say proponents . Seniors love it and it 's a proven form a single-payer health care .
Er , no , says a concise and persuasive op-ed in The Wall Street Journal , by Scott W. Atlas of the Hoover Institution . For starters , there is the cost problem :
For California alone , single-payer health care would cost about $ 400 billion a year—more than twice the state 's annual budget . Nationwide `` Medicare for all '' would cost more than $ 32 trillion over its first decade . Doubling federal income and corporate taxes would n't be enough to pay for it . No doubt , that cost would be used to justify further restrictions on health-care access .
In 2017 , Eric Boehm noted at ███ that a single-payer bill passed by New York 's state assembly would cost $ 173 billion annually ( the state generates about $ 71 billion a year in revenue ) . Even when you factor in savings from people not having to pay insurance premiums and co-payments , there 's just no way to raise the revenue on such plans . In 2014 , Boehm writes , Vermont had to throw in the towel because it `` would have required an extra $ 2.5 billion annually , almost double the state 's current budget , and would have required an 11.5 percent payroll tax increase and a 9 percent income tax increase . ''
But cost is n't the only problem . Atlas writes that in Great Britain , `` a record 4.2 million patients were on England 's [ National Health Service ] waiting lists . '' And there 's this :
In Canada last year , the median wait time between seeing a general practitioner and following up with a specialist was 10.2 weeks , while the wait between seeing a doctor and beginning treatment was about five months . According to a Fraser Institute study , the average Canadian waits three months to see an ophthalmologist , four months for an orthopedist and five months for a neurosurgeon .
In contrast , wait lists are not a major concern in the United States .
Finally , there 's also the development of new drugs . Atlas writes :
Single-payer systems also impose long delays before debuting the newest drugs for cancer and other serious diseases . A 2011 Health Affairs study showed that the Food and Drug Administration approved 32 new cancer drugs in the decade after 2000 , while the European Medicines Agency approved 26 . All 23 drugs approved by both Europe and the U.S. were available to American patients first . Two-thirds of the 45 `` novel '' drugs in 2015 were approved in the U.S. before any other country .
Most proponents of Medicare for All say they do n't want to fully nationalize health care , as Canada has done . Instead , they want to guarantee a basic , accessible , free ( or near-free ) system . Atlas has an answer for that , too : `` America 's poor and middle class would suffer the most from a turn to single-payer , because only they would be unable to circumvent the system . '' In fact , he warns that ,
the nations most experienced with single-payer systems are moving toward private provision . Sweden has increased its spending on private care for the elderly by 50 % in the past decade , abolished its government 's monopoly over pharmacies , and made other reforms . Last year alone , the British government spent more than $ 1 billion on care from private and other non-NHS providers , according to the Financial Times . Patients using single-payer care in Denmark can now choose a private hospital or a hospital outside the country if their wait time exceeds one month .
Our health care system is definitely screwed up , but that 's because we refuse to let markets function with the same sort of effectiveness they do in other parts of the economy . There are ways to take care of people who have pre-existing conditions that do n't end up causing costs for everyone to go berserk . We can speed up drug trials without compromising safety , and we also need to rethink how we certify and license doctors , nurses , and everyone else who provides some dimension of health care .
Given the way the Republicans refused to take health-care policy seriously in the wake of Obamacare 's passage , it seems unlikely that we 'll be moving toward market-friendly solutions any time soon . That 's a damn shame and if we do end up with Medicare for All , the bill will be almost incalculable in terms of more than taxes .
Related video ( from 2012 ) : Meet Keith Smith , a doctor in Oklahoma who brought market forces to bear on the delivery of surgery .