Mississippi has the largest percentage of poor and uninsured people in the country — 13 percent . Willie Charles Carter , an unemployed 53-year-old whose most recent job was as a maintenance worker at a public school , has had problems with his leg since surgery last year .
His income is below Mississippi ’ s ceiling for Medicaid — which is about $ 3,000 a year — but he has no dependent children , so he does not qualify . And his income is too low to make him eligible for subsidies on the federal health exchange .
“ You got to be almost dead before you can get Medicaid in Mississippi , ” he said .
He does not know what he will do when the clinic where he goes for medical care , the Good Samaritan Health Center in Greenville , closes next month because of lack of funding .
“ I ’ m scared all the time , ” he said . “ I just walk around here with faith in God to take care of me . ”
The states that did not expand Medicaid have less generous safety nets : For adults with children , the median income limit for Medicaid is just under half of the federal poverty level — or about $ 5,600 a year for an individual — while in states that are expanding , it is above the poverty line , or about $ 12,200 , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation . There is little or no coverage of childless adults in the states not expanding , Kaiser said .
The New York Times analysis excluded immigrants in the country illegally and those foreign-born residents who would not be eligible for benefits under Medicaid expansion . It included people who are uninsured even though they qualify for Medicaid in its current form .
Blacks are disproportionately affected , largely because more of them are poor and living in Southern states . In all , 6 out of 10 blacks live in the states not expanding Medicaid . In Mississippi , 56 percent of all poor and uninsured adults are black , though they account for just 38 percent of the population .
Dr. Aaron Shirley , a physician who has worked for better health care for blacks in Mississippi , said that the history of segregation and violence against blacks still informs the way people see one another , particularly in the South , making some whites reluctant to support programs that they believe benefit blacks .