“ Public health is not about convincing stupid people what they ’ re supposed to do , ” says Professor Navin , “ it ’ s about developing relationships and trust , and that takes resources and sustained efforts . ”
“ The history of public health is full of abuses , ” says ethicist Mark Navin . It ’ s up to physicians and public health workers to restore that broken trust .
Yes , vaccine hesitancy , as it ’ s often known , is a serious issue . But the solution is rarely about shaming or even stricter mandates , but working to understand why that distrust exists in the first place .
Those who comply with the required vaccine schedule often feel that vaccine skeptics are needlessly endangering the broader community . Non-vaccinating parents , meanwhile , can feel attacked and misunderstood . The reality , say experts , is more nuanced than the shrill extremes on social media might lead us to believe .
The United States is experiencing its worst measles year since 2000 , with more than 750 cases reported so far . With that increase has come a renewed focus on those who delay or opt out of vaccinating , with angry rhetoric on both sides .
When it comes to the fraught topic of vaccines , Julie Rehmeyer is sometimes balancing on a razor-sharp edge .
She ’ s a science writer with an advanced mathematics degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . She also has many friends who , like her , have struggled with poorly understood diseases and share a distrust of the medical establishment as a result . For many that trust carries over to vaccines . Ms. Rehmeyer , whose memoir “ Into the Shadowlands ” chronicles her struggles with chronic fatigue syndrome , says she ’ s often hesitant to wade into the topic on public forums like social media because of how loaded it can be . But she also feels as if she occupies an unusual space in such a polarized realm .
“ I value and respect people who don ’ t value and respect one another , ” she says . “ A lot of science writers don ’ t know anybody they respect who is hesitant about vaccines . ... Whether [ those who are skeptical of vaccines ] are right or not , this is an issue that deserves compassion and deserves to be taken seriously . It ’ s not the case that this is just a whole bunch of anti-science crazy people . ”
The United States is experiencing its worst measles year since 2000 , with more than 750 cases reported so far . The outbreak is due primarily to the fact that the disease has exploded globally , and international travelers have brought it back to the U.S . But it has spread in communities with low vaccination rates , including some in New York and Washington state .
With the increase in measles cases has come a renewed focus on those who delay or opt out of vaccinating , with angry rhetoric on both sides . Those who comply with the required vaccine schedule often feel that vaccine skeptics are needlessly endangering the broader community . Non-vaccinating parents , meanwhile , can feel attacked and misunderstood .
The reality , say experts , is more nuanced than the shrill extremes on social media might lead us to believe . Yes , vaccine hesitancy , as it ’ s often known , is a serious issue . The World Health Organization listed it as one of its 10 threats to global health in 2019 . But , in the U.S. at least , broad compliance rates are high enough that there ’ s no large concern in most communities . And reasons for not vaccinating – or for simply feeling unsure about it – can vary widely , and often hinge on a lack of trust . The solution , in that case , is rarely about shaming , or even stricter mandates , but working to understand why that distrust exists in the first place .
“ We have to reframe this debate , ” says Bernice Hausman , a humanities professor at the Pennsylvania State College of Medicine and author of the new book “ Anti/Vax. ” “ Framing it in terms of misinformation and scientific illiteracy is not helpful at this point . ”
Ultimately , says Professor Hausman , “ vaccination controversy is not a scientific problem , it ’ s a social problem . ... We need people who understand how to understand culture , how to understand why people come to the beliefs they hold , and why it ’ s hard to change certain beliefs . ”
The science around vaccines is clear : They involve negligible risk and huge societal benefit , and in order to be most effective , they require the vast majority of a community to be vaccinated ( for a disease like measles , the rate is about 95 % ) . The most vulnerable members of a population are those with the most vested interest in their surrounding community getting vaccinated : those too young to be immunized or who have medical reasons to avoid vaccination .
But while it ’ s common to stereotype “ anti-vaxxers ” as selfish , science-illiterate , or believing in debunked studies like the one connecting vaccines with autism , many are , in fact , thoughtful , educated , or may have real reasons for their lack of trust . The portion of people truly unwilling to vaccinate , at all costs , is very small , say experts – perhaps 2 % of the population . A much larger portion of the population – 40 % to 70 % , depending on the study – exhibits some degree of “ vaccine hesitancy , ” even though most fully comply with vaccine laws .
“ There ’ s huge diversity in motivations , ” says Mark Navin , an applied ethics professor at Oakland University in Rochester , Michigan , who has extensively studied vaccine resistance . Several of the biggest outbreaks this year occurred in Orthodox Jewish communities . That ’ s not surprising , he notes , given that these are insular communities with fairly frequent travel to Israel , one of the countries currently experiencing a significant measles outbreak . But just as telling , he adds , is the strained history that some of these communities have had with public health departments .
While there is every reason to trust government officials on vaccine safety , Professor Navin emphasizes , some of the underpinnings of broader distrust are legitimate : the opioid epidemic driven by big pharmaceutical companies ; profit motives in that industry ; poor information about things like water safety ; or even unethical programs that targeted some disadvantaged communities .
“ The history of public health is full of abuses , ” says Professor Navin . “ Given this history , and given this context of reasonable distrust , it ’ s helpful to begin by realizing there ’ s a positive responsibility on the part of physicians and public health and government to build this trust . ”
Instead of asking why people don ’ t vaccinate , he adds , it can be helpful to ask why so many people do . In general , the research shows that it ’ s because they trust their doctors , have no reason to worry , and have no history of bad treatment around vaccination .
“ Public health is not about convincing stupid people what they ’ re supposed to do , but about developing relationships and trust , and that takes resources and sustained efforts , ” says Professor Navin .
When the outbreak in Southeast Michigan occurred recently , he adds , health officials had an existing relationship with the rabbis , and within a period of a week got 2,000 members of the community to show up for MMR ( measles , mumps , and rubella ) shots .
“ Public health workers will tell you the most important thing in an outbreak is having good relations with the community , ” says Professor Hausman of Penn State .
While it ’ s getting increased attention now , the issue with vaccine hesitancy is hardly new .
“ There has been vaccine resistance as long as there has been compulsory vaccination , ” says Elena Conis , the author of “ Vaccine Nation ” and a journalism professor at the University of California , Berkeley . And many of the reasons for the resistance have remained consistent , she says : concerns about risks , concerns about incursions on personal liberty , and religious objections . ( For example , some Christian Scientists choose not to vaccinate for religious reasons . )
What ’ s somewhat new in the latest incarnation , Professor Conis says , is the degree to which some social movements have given people a vocabulary for voicing objections and the number of vaccines that are now compulsory .
“ We ’ re asking more of our citizens with respect to vaccinations than we ever have before , ” she says .
Peter Borten , a doctor of Chinese medicine and acupuncture in Boulder , Colorado , notes that the aggressive vaccine schedule is one of the concerns he hears from patients who are hesitant to vaccinate . Many tell him that they don ’ t trust the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to clearly report vaccine risks . They may know someone who has had a legitimate complication from a vaccine or may have concerns about Big Pharma and “ don ’ t trust that these companies care more about humans than profits , ” he says .
He also acknowledges that the health risks from the diseases we vaccinate against , while low for most people , are higher for some vulnerable populations , like babies and pregnant women – another complicating factor .
Dr. Borten and his wife have vaccinated their kids on a schedule that he feels minimizes the risk , but he says he still holds his breath when it ’ s time for his children to get another shot .
“ The more I learn – and I actively try to stay well informed about it – the less opinionated I am , ” writes Dr. Borten in an email . “ In the end , the actual rate of vaccine complications is extremely low , and so is the risk of getting and being permanently injured by any of the diseases we have these vaccines against . This is important for people on both sides of the issue to remember . ”
Internationally , where vaccine hesitancy is a major reason for some outbreaks of disease , there ’ s a concerted effort to start addressing the problem , as well as calls for self-reflection on the part of the medical establishment .
“ An anti-vaxxer in California , USA , for example , is vastly different from someone potentially exposed to Ebola in rural DR Congo . Yet there are similarities in their mistrust . A belief that vaccines cause autism or that Ebola is a government ploy likely has as much to do with wider grievances and distrust of authority as with the specifics of the scientific evidence and education , ” opined a recent editorial in The Lancet , a premier medical journal . “ Part of the problem is that a lack of faith in government , the health-care system , and pharmaceutical companies is not always irrational . ... It is impossible to build trust while at the same time abusing it . ”
The medical community tends to shy away from social media programs , or from “ softer ” community engagement , but often that ’ s a more effective way to reach skeptics than just lecturing at them , says Heidi Larson , an anthropologist and director of the Vaccine Confidence Project , which monitors public confidence in vaccines around the globe and has developed an index that serves as an early detection of public concerns .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
When there were big concerns in Denmark , Ireland , and some other countries around the HPV vaccine , which is recommended for adolescent girls to protect against cervical cancer , Dr. Larson says that the immunization program in Denmark brought together a group of young girls and helped them co-create a social media campaign . It was positive , pro-health , and the design and message were entirely created by the girls .
“ It really helped , ” says Dr. Larson , noting that Ireland then launched a similar campaign . “ Kids can be real advocates . ... We need to think differently about how we engage with people from early on . ”