The Republican-controlled House will vote Wednesday on delaying key parts of ObamaCare , the party ’ s latest effort to dismantle the law amid signs that it may be vulnerable .
The lawmakers will vote on bills to delay the start of the law ’ s distinct employer and individual mandates , which respectively require businesses and individual Americans to purchase insurance next year or face penalties .
The Obama administration earlier this month delayed the start of the employer mandate , saying the decision was in response to business owners expressing concerns about the law ’ s complex reporting requirements . Republicans say it 's unfair to only delay that provision -- they want the requirements effectively pushed off for everyone .
Late Tuesday , the White House issued a threat to veto the Republican bills , saying their passage would help `` further efforts to repeal a law that is already helping millions of Americans stay on their parents ' plans until age 26 , millions more who are getting free preventive care that catches illness early on , and thousands of children with pre-existing conditions who are now covered . ''
Political analysts have said that the administration 's move to delay the employer provision until 2015 was an attempt to prevent Republicans during next year ’ s elections from pinning ObamaCare problems on Democratic candidates .
However , the administration ’ s decision appears to have energized Republicans , who say it validates their concerns about the law being too complicated and expensive , particularly on job-creating businesses .
“ They have conceded to the argument we have been making , ” Arkansas Republican Rep. Tim Griffin , whose bill delays the implementation of the employer mandate , told FoxNews.com .
Griffin argues only Congress can change the law and that the companion bill by fellow House Ways and Means Committee member Rep. Todd Young , R-Ind. , delaying the so-called individual mandate is only fair .
“ Despite all of the talk about helping families , the president singled out big business , ” Griffin said . “ To me , that seems to make no sense . Let ’ s also give some relief to workers , families , all of us . ”
Labor unions started to complain about the law in May , fearing it would increase insurance costs for millions of union workers , despite Obama promising the opposite .
Their primary concern is that the roughly 20 million workers covered under the so-called Taft-Hartley Act will see their premiums increase because they will not get subsidies like those being given to workers seeking coverage in the upcoming , state-based marketplaces for insurance , known as exchanges .
They were joined last week by the powerful Teamsters union , which joined in sending a letter to House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , both Democrats .
“ We have been strong supporters of the notion that all Americans should have access to quality , affordable health care , ” the letter reads in part . “ We have also been strong supporters of you . … Now this vision has come back to haunt us . ”
The letter also argues that employers not having to offer coverage to part-time workers will “ destroy the foundation of the 40-hour work week that is the backbone of the American middle class . ”
Republican House Speaker John Boehner on Tuesday reassured voters that his chamber will not give up the cause , despite having already voted at least 35 times on either a full or partial repeal of ObamaCare .
“ We ’ ll vote tomorrow to make sure that families and individuals get the same break from ObamaCare that the president gave big businesses , ” he said on the House floor . `` This week we will take action to protect every American . ”
Later in the day , Senate Republicans joined in the fight , with South Dakota Sen. John Thune suggesting that Democratic counterparts vowing to change chamber rules was really an attempt to avoid discussions about ObamaCare , officially known as the Affordable Care Act .
“ This really is a train wreck , ” Thune said . “ I see why Democrats would rather talk about something else . ”