Some states are running their own websites and enrolling a lot of people . State successes show ACA can work
With all the waves of bad news about the Obamacare website and the canceled policies , it would be easy to conclude that nothing in this law will ever work — that it ’ s just too big and complicated and messy .
But that ’ s not the complete picture of the Affordable Care Act rollout . There are a few bright spots — just enough to suggest that , for all the early disasters , the law ’ s fate isn ’ t final yet .
There are states that are running their own websites and enrolling a lot of people , way more than the amateur-hour federal website that serves most of the states . Medicaid enrollment , another part of the law , is going significantly better than the signups for private insurance — nearly 400,000 people were determined to be eligible in October .
( Understanding Obamacare : ███ 's guide to the Affordable Care Act )
And nationally , 1.5 million people applied for health coverage in October — suggesting that there ’ s a lot more potential interest than the 106,000 who got all the way through the federal and state Obamacare websites to select a private health plan .
So what do the bright spots tell us about the future of Obamacare ? They certainly don ’ t tell us that the rollout is going well . But they do suggest that it ’ s not impossible for the law to work , health care experts say — because if it really were impossible , it wouldn ’ t be working anywhere .
In other words , the Obamacare rollout that we ’ ve all seen is not the story of a fatally flawed law . It ’ s a story of incompetence .
That ’ s probably not the talking point the White House is looking for . But it does suggest to health care experts that if the federal HealthCare.gov website ever does get its act together , there ’ s more potential for success in achieving the main goal — expanding health coverage to millions of Americans who couldn ’ t get it before — than the early numbers suggest .
“ What we ’ re seeing is what ’ s possible under the Affordable Care Act , ” said Alan Weil , executive director of the National Academy for State Health Policy . “ The question is , how long will it be before we see those possibilities ? ”
In California , nearly 80,000 people had selected private health plans as of Nov. 19 — way beyond the 27,000 people who had picked private health plans in October through the federal website that serves 36 states . In New York , more than 76,000 had enrolled as of Nov. 24 , including roughly 41,000 in private health plans and 35,000 in Medicaid . Enrollment has been also been going smoothly in Washington state and Connecticut — and even in Kentucky , Mitch McConnell ’ s home state , where Democratic Gov . Steve Beshear has been a vocal advocate of the law .
Only 14 states and the District of Columbia are running their own health insurance exchanges , so the law can get only so far with their efforts . But the lesson of these states ’ early successes is that “ where a state wants to make this work , it looks like they can , ” said Peter Lee , executive director of Covered California , the state ’ s health insurance exchange .
Elaine Kamarck , a former adviser to Al Gore who worked on the “ reinventing government ” project in the Clinton administration , says that even at the national level , it shouldn ’ t have been impossible to build a functioning health care website . Despite all the federal government ’ s IT procurement problems , “ the federal government does technology fairly well , ” she said — from the advanced electronic surveillance capabilities of the National Security Agency to the rovers NASA sends to Mars .
The real lesson of the rollout , Kamarck said , is that the Department of Health and Human Services broke every rule for managing a big technological project well — and the successful states didn ’ t .
The three basic rules for launching a successful government tech project , Kamarck said , are to give one person the power and responsibility to supervise the entire project ; build and test the technology repeatedly , since everyone knows websites crash ; and create an environment where people feel free to give the boss bad news .
“ Somehow , every rule of managing technology in government was broken with this website , ” said Kamarck , who ’ s also the founding director of the Brookings Institution ’ s Center for Effective Public Management .
The bright spots don ’ t erase the other unpopular tradeoffs that Americans are discovering with the law — they ’ ll still be furious over canceled policies and whatever other nasty surprises are around the corner .
And there won ’ t be any end to the debate over whether the law has basic problems that can never be overcome . Lanhee Chen , Mitt Romney ’ s former policy director and now a research fellow at the Hoover Institution , says he believes the law is fundamentally flawed — even if a few states do well with it — because the conditions for success are too narrow to work across the country .
“ There are going to be states where they won ’ t get help from state regulators . They ’ re not going to get that promotional push to get people enrolled , ” said Chen . “ The fundamental flaw in the law is that it requires people to be enrolled who don ’ t want to be enrolled . ”
The successes also don ’ t even mean every state is doing well . Maryland , a blue state that was determined to be one of the leaders in implementing Obamacare , is still struggling with its website . Oregon ’ s website has never worked and hasn ’ t signed up a single person , according to Reuters . Hawaii ’ s is barely bumping along .