The Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association wants late-enrollment fees . Mandate may be 'mandate plus '
Can ’ t get enough of Obamacare ’ s individual mandate ? Get ready for “ mandate plus . ”
The Obama administration always said there was a practical reason it needed the mandate , which starts next year . It wasn ’ t to be mean to people — it was supposed to pull in enough healthy customers to help pay for all the sick people who will get coverage . That ’ s why the White House stuck with it all the way to the Supreme Court — however unpopular politically , it was the best tool to make the new health system work .
Here ’ s the catch : The individual mandate penalties will be pretty weak as they are phased in over two years — only $ 95 when they start in 2014 , much less than it costs to buy insurance . And yet , everyone with pre-existing conditions will have to be accepted for coverage right away .
That ’ s why insurance companies are telling the administration the mandate won ’ t be enough for the first two years . They want more incentives — such as a late enrollment fee — to get healthy people to sign up quickly . Without getting the healthy folks in , the fear is that everyone ’ s health insurance premiums could shoot through the roof when all those sick people get their coverage .
The idea is being called “ mandate plus ” — because some of the ideas were floated by health experts last year as replacements , in case the Supreme Court struck the mandate down . Now that the mandate is here to stay , insurance companies and some policy experts say the other ideas should go hand in hand with the coverage requirement to make the whole system work — and be affordable .
The states could impose some of these incentives , too , and they could become a future lobbying battleground . But right now , the insurers are focused on persuading the Department of Health and Human Services to add them on its own .
“ The key really is , how do you get younger people to buy coverage ? ” said Justine Handelman , vice president for legislative and regulatory policy at the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association . “ If you can jump in and out every time you need services , costs will go up . ”
The mandate is the “ stick ” that ’ s supposed to prevent that , by making people pay a penalty ( or as the Supreme Court called it , a tax ) if they don ’ t get health coverage when they ’ re eligible . When the mandate is at full strength in 2016 , people will pay $ 695 or 2.5 percent of their income , whichever is greater .
But from a practical perspective , it ’ s really not that much of a stick in the first two years . Next year , if you don ’ t get health insurance , you ’ d pay $ 95 or 1 percent of your income — a little less than you might pay for an iPod Nano . In 2015 , you ’ d pay $ 325 or 2 percent of your income .
“ Certainly , we are concerned that the penalty is just $ 95 in the first year , which is far below the cost of coverage , ” Handelman said .
That ’ s why some insurers want HHS to give them more sticks .