Thirty-one Republican senators are urging the White House to reject union `` demands '' that ObamaCare subsidies be extended to some workers that already have coverage through their jobs , saying this is blatantly prohibited under the law .
The senators fired off a letter to President Obama Thursday following a newspaper report that unions -- worried that the law 's other requirements would drive up the price of health care plans -- want lower-paid workers to have access to federal subsidies .
According to The Wall Street Journal , the Obama administration dismissed the idea early on of giving aid to workers in union-sponsored policies . But a Treasury official , in the same article , said the issue is `` the subject of pending regulations . ''
`` We respectfully , but strongly , disagree , '' the senators wrote . `` The statement made by Treasury simply ignores the letter of the law . ''
A number of provisions in the health care law threaten to raise the cost of coverage , including the elimination of caps on benefits . The unions , echoing statements by employers across the country , voiced concern that the increase in up-front coverage costs could lead unionized employers to drop health coverage .
But the senators said workers with an employer-based plan simply can not , under the law , receive subsidies intended for those who do n't get insurance through their jobs .
`` The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( PPACA ) is not ambiguous , in fact it is explicit , on this point , '' the lawmakers wrote . `` Any consideration of expanding access to subsidies therefore is not subject to regulation , but a change in the law . ''
They cited one Congressional Research Service report that said employer-sponsored coverage would `` generally '' make an employee `` ineligible to receive a premium subsidy . ''
The subsidies , along with most major provisions of the health care law , are set to go into effect next year .
According to the Journal , 20 million people are covered in plans run by unions and employers .
Those signing the letter to Obama included Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , Sen. Orrin Hatch , R-Utah. , and Sen. John Barrasso , R-Wyo .
`` Concerns about rising premiums are driven by policies in ( the health care law ) , '' they wrote . `` Rather than considering a diversion of subsidies not remotely contemplated in the statute , perhaps the concerns being raised by union plans should be cause to revisit the taxes , fees and other policies that drive premium increases . ''