Ebola exposed significant weaknesses in the USA 's ability to handle infectious disease outbreaks , according to a report that gives the nation low grades in preparedness .
On a scale of 1 to 10 , half the states and Washington , D.C. , scored a 5 or lower , according to the report released today by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Trust for America 's Health . Arkansas received a 2 , the lowest score . The highest score was an 8 earned by five states : Maryland , Massachusetts , Tennessee , Vermont and Virginia .
The report scored states on measures as diverse as food safety , vaccination rates , hospital-associated infections and being prepared for emerging threats . Those threats included not just Ebola but also respiratory viruses such as pandemic flu , MERS ( Middle-East Respiratory Virus ) and enterovirus D68 , a respiratory virus that has been diagnosed this year in 1,149 people , including 12 who died .
`` The Ebola outbreak is a reminder that we can not afford to let our guard down , '' says Jeffrey Levi , executive director of the Trust for America 's Health .
The USA made numerous missteps with Ebola , says Lawrence Gostin , faculty director at Georgetown University 's O'Neill Institute for National and Global Health Law .
`` Where we erred badly with Ebola -- and where our greatest vulnerabilities lie -- was at the state and local level , '' Gostin says .
While many people look to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in a crisis , Gostin notes that the foundation of the public health system is local health departments and hospitals , because those are the places where sick people show up .
A Dallas emergency room sent home a Liberian national with a fever , for example , instead of testing him for Ebola . The man , Thomas Eric Duncan , was the USA 's first Ebola case . He infected two of his nurses . While both nurses survived , Duncan died . Nurses around the country staged protests , saying hospitals were't adequately protecting them from Ebola .
In spite of widespread fears , though , Ebola has not caused widespread outbreaks . Thanks to excellent hospital care , eight of the 10 Ebola patients treated in U.S. hospitals survived , including all of the Americans , Gostin notes .
The USA could have fared far worse if Ebola spread as easily as influenza or other airborne viruses , Gostin says .
`` We got off very easy , '' Gostin says . `` We have been extraordinarily lucky . ... We 've dodged a bullet . But if we do n't learn lessons from Ebola , we are going to pay for it someday . ''
One of the biggest hurdles to preventing and controlling outbreaks of infectious disease is the lack of consistent funding , Levi says .
The nation increased public health funding after the 2001 terrorist attacks , only to slash that funding during the recession .
The CDC 's budget shrank by 10 % -- nearly $ 1 billion -- from 2012 to 2013 . Twenty-two states and Washington , D.C. , reduced their public health budgets from fiscal years 2012-2013 to 2013-2014 , the new report says . State and local public health agencies have lost more than 50,000 staff members -- almost 20 % of their workforce -- since 2008 , according to the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials .
In response to Ebola , Congress approved more than $ 6 billion in emergency funding .
The USA ca n't maintain a robust public health system by careening from one crisis to the next , Levi says . It takes time to train staff and develop public health systems that work well with surrounding cities , counties and states .
`` When a fire breaks out , we do n't hire and train a fire department that day , '' Levi says . `` And when the fire is out , we do n't send them all away . We know there is a core capacity that we need to protect the public . ''
Ebola has infected more than 18,600 people and killed 6,915 , mostly in Guinea , Liberia and Sierra Leone .
Millions of Americans suffer from serious infectious diseases that get far less attention , the report says . More than 2 million preschoolers are vulnerable to life-threatening infections because they have n't received all of their vaccinations on time , the report notes . Low vaccination rates have contributed to measles outbreaks in recent years . The CDC has reported 609 measles cases so far this year , compared with 187 cases in 2013 and 55 in 2012 .