Two Republican lawmakers admitted Sunday the initial GOP bill to repeal and replace the nation ’ s health law is probably “ dead ” and President Trump ’ s proposal to solely repeal it appears to be a “ non-starter . ”
Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz. , said in a televised interview on CBS it may now be time for Republicans to come up with a new proposal with support from Democrats .
`` I think my view is it 's probably going to be dead , '' McCain said of the GOP bill . If Democrats are included , he said , it does n't mean `` they control it . It means they can have amendments considered . And even when they lose , then they 're part of the process . That 's what democracy is supposed to be all about . ''
Sen. Bill Cassidy , R-La , speaking on “ ███ Sunday , ” told Chris Wallace “ We don ’ t know what the plan is . Clearly , the draft plan is dead . Is the serious rewrite plan dead ? I do n't know . ''
Sen. Chuck Grassley , R-Iowa , signaled pessimism as well . He wrote on Twitter late Saturday that Republicans will lose their Senate majority if they don ’ t pass health care legislation . Grassley added the party should be `` ashamed '' that it has n't been able to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act , or Obamacare .
Trump used Twitter Sunday afternoon to urge Republicans to follow through on their pledge to get rid of the health care law pushed by his predecessor .
`` For years , even as a `` civilian , '' I listened as Republicans pushed the Repeal and Replace of ObamaCare . Now they finally have their chance ! , '' Trump said in a tweet .
At least 10 GOP senators have expressed opposition to the initial bill drafted by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. Republicans hold a 52-48 majority and Democrats stand united against the bill , meaning that just three GOP defections will doom it . The weeklong July 4 recess only raised more doubts among senators as many heard from constituents angry about the GOP bill and the prospect of rising premiums .
McConnell last week said he would introduce a fresh bill in about a week scuttling and replacing much of former President Barack Obama 's health care law . But McConnell also acknowledged that if the broader effort fails , he may turn to a smaller bill with quick help for insurers and consumers and negotiate with Democrats .
Sen. Ted Cruz ’ s plan , which aims to lower premiums for healthy people , has drawn support from the White House and some conservatives in the House , which would have to approve any modified bill passed by the Senate . But his proposal has limited appeal to Republican moderates such as Grassley , who told Iowa Public Radio that it may be `` subterfuge to get around pre-existing conditions . ''
Cruz on Sunday sought to dismiss Grassley 's criticism as a `` hoax '' being pushed by Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer , insisting that people will be able to get the coverage they need at an affordable price . Cruz cast his plan as a compromise to unify the party on a GOP health bill .
`` When it comes to repealing Obamacare , what I think is critical is that Republicans , we 've got to honor the promise we made to the voters that millions of Americans are hurting under Obamacare , '' Cruz said .
`` In my view failure is not an option , '' he said .