During the last presidential debate , Hillary Clinton denounced Donald Trump for pledging to repeal the “ Affordable Care Act ” and take our health care system back to “ the way it used to be. ” The underlying assumption of this accusation is , of course , that the system works better now than before it was “ reformed. ” Many accept that as a given , but think about it . Before Obamacare was foisted upon us by Mrs. Clinton ’ s fellow Democrats , do you remember reading headlines announcing that more than a million people were about to lose their health insurance plans in one fell swoop ? Neither do I .
Yet if you paid any attention to the news over the weekend you probably noticed a Bloomberg story titled : “ More Than 1 Million to Lose Obamacare Plans as Insurers Quit. ” Its basic thrust is that insurance companies have been fleeing federal and state exchanges in droves because the law ’ s perverse incentives make further participation financially unsustainable . Thus , as it is phrased in the article , “ At least 1.4 million people in 32 states will lose the Obamacare plan they have now , according to state officials. ” This is the system Hillary pledges to “ defend and expand ” on her campaign website .
And , as with all stories about Obamacare , the further you read the uglier it gets . The Bloomberg story continues : “ For the people losing plans , there are fewer and fewer choices… for at least 19 percent of the people in Obamacare ’ s individual market next year there will be only one insurer to choose from. ” These plans will , of course , cost enrollees far more than the plans they are about to lose . Even the conservative estimates recently released by the Kaiser Family Foundation predicted that the average 2017 rate hike will double this year ’ s increases . Some states will see increases exceeding 50 percent .
In Minnesota , for example , rates will spike 50 to 67 percent . This increase was so dramatic that the state ’ s Democrat governor , Mark Dayton , lamented , “ The reality is the Affordable Care Act is no longer affordable for increasing numbers of people. ” And Dayton is by no means the highest profile Democrat to point out that Obamacare is dysfunctional . Hillary must have been particularly delighted to hear her husband describe it thus : “ You ’ ve got this crazy system where… people are out there busting it , sometimes 60 hours a week , and wind up with their premiums doubled and their coverage cut in half . ”
When asked about the former president ’ s embarrassing comments , Mrs. Clinton recited a canned list of benefits Obamacare has ostensibly provided to an ungrateful electorate . Predictably , she began with the dispensation most commonly lauded by the law ’ s apologists : “ Number one , insurance companies can ’ t deny you coverage because of a preexisting condition. ” But , as Michael Cannon explains it in Time , “ Obamacare itself is denying coverage to people with preexisting conditions. ” How can this be true when it is supposedly illegal ? Easy . It ’ s causing insurers to leave the individual health insurance market .
Cannon provides the example of Pinal County , Arizona . “ Obamacare made covering everybody in the exchange prohibitively expensive , so insurers stopped covering anybody. ” In other words , if you were a resident of Pinal County with an individual health plan that paid for an expensive medical condition yet didn ’ t contain all of the “ minimum essential benefits ” mandated by Obamacare , your insurer was prohibited from renewing that policy . And because no insurer can absorb the losses associated with participating in your exchange , you have been effectively denied coverage for your pre-existing condition .
Admittedly , it isn ’ t this bad in most of the country — yet . But there are five states whose Obamacare exchanges offer precisely one choice : Alabama , Alaska , Oklahoma , South Carolina , and Wyoming . The lack of competition in these states will inevitably produce rate increases that dwarf the hike decried by Minnesota ’ s governor . In Oklahoma it has already happened . The average increase for the hapless enrollees of that state will be 76 percent . Alabama enrollees will be hit with a mere 36 percent increase . The final rates aren ’ t in for the other three states on the single-insurer list , but they will make news .
In addition to these states , there will be several others that are likely to have significant numbers of single-insurer counties next year . The Kaiser Family Foundation reports , “ States with significantly more single-insurer counties in 2017 will likely include Arizona ( 87 % of counties in 2017 , compared to none in 2016 ) , Mississippi ( 80 % vs. 0 % ) , Missouri ( 85 % vs. 2 % ) , Florida ( 73 % vs. 0 % ) , North Carolina ( 90 % vs. 23 % ) , and Tennessee ( 60 % vs. 0 % ) . ” The only county that appears likely to remain with no insurer at all is Pinal County , Arizona , the travails of which are discussed above .
All of which means that more than a million Americans are going to lose their health plans — again . The only silver lining to this dark cloud is that , unlike the last time the enrollees took it in the shorts , they won ’ t be losing coverage they like . As I wrote in this space last May , most Obamacare enrollees hate their plans . In 2017 , they will be stuck with more expensive plans they like even less . In a normal election year , people vote their pocketbooks . This issue provides more than a million reasons to reject Obamacare and delete Clinton from history with the same alacrity with which she deleted her emails .
This cycle is anything but normal . But wouldn ’ t it be pleasant to go back to “ the way it used to be , ” when the vast majority of Americans were satisfied with our health care system and we at least had a right to buy coverage that we had chosen ourselves ?