On Tuesday morning , President Trump came to the basement conference room of House Republicans to do what he was supposedly born to do : Seal the deal . In this case , that meant lining up enough House votes to pass the GOP plan to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act on Thursday .
The closer-in-chief talked up the huge opportunity to deliver on a major promise to voters . He also pointed to the political cost of failure to deliver – singling out Rep. Mark Meadows , the leader of the hard-line House Freedom Caucus . The North Carolinian opposes the GOP health-care bill .
Mr. Trump ’ s involvement has intensified as the House nears its do-or-die vote on the American Health Care Act , the Republican effort to replace Obamacare . Last week , Trump invited more than a dozen conservatives to the White House , worked out a compromise with them , then proudly announced they had all flipped to “ yes ” votes .
Compromise is not exactly what House Republicans are known for . But it will be necessary if they are to pass their first big legislative test as a governing party this week . While the outcome is still up in the air , the “ party of no ” is trying mightily to prove that it can get things done , with leaders urging members to back the bill , even if they don ’ t get everything they want .
“ They ’ ve been in blocking mode . I think they are starting to learn that they have to govern , ” says John Feehery , spokesman for Republican Dennis Hastert of Illinois when he was speaker during the George W. Bush presidency .
To get to “ yes , ” House leaders have worked out a compromise amendment to the bill to lure moderates and conservatives . It promises more financial help to older Americans whose premiums are expected to skyrocket under the GOP plan – $ 85 billion to people between 50 and 65 years old .
To appease conservatives , it gives states more flexibility in running Medicaid , the federal-state program for the poor – for instance by allowing them the option to institute a work requirement for able-bodied recipients .
The amendment is changing some minds , with several Republicans coming on board . “ This is a bill that I think has come a long way , ” said Rep. Tom MacArthur ( R ) of New Jersey on Tuesday . He now supports the bill .
Compromise is an adjustment . For eight years , Republicans worked hard to thwart much of President Barack Obama ’ s agenda – through a partial government shutdown , in the courts , and legislatively . In both houses , the majority of Republicans have never known anything but being in the opposition .
In the House , only 60 Republicans – a mere quarter of their members – have served in the majority when a Republican occupied the White House .
The opposition mind-set is starting to change , said Rep. Hal Rogers ( R ) of Kentucky , a congressman with more than three decades under his belt .
“ I think there is beginning to be a realization of ‘ Hey , we ’ re in charge here , and we ’ ve got to cast some maybe personally unpopular [ votes ] in order to lead , ’ ” he said after the president ’ s visit Tuesday .
Another sign of that realization : The Freedom Caucus has decided not to vote as a block on the health-care bill , but to leave this one up to individual members to decide . Representative Meadows has also reached out to moderates in the House and Senate , in addition to an intense weekend of negotiation with White House aides in Mar-a-Lago over the weekend .
He ’ s still a “ no ” vote , and says there are enough opponents in the caucus to sink the bill – and perhaps wrangle more concessions . But one Freedom Caucus member in the group that visited with Trump last week has been convinced . That presidential attention is itself another sign of a party intent on getting things done .
“ Neither Republicans nor Democrats have seen any charm offensive coming from the White House in many years , and a little goes a long way , ” says former Rep. Matt Salmon ( R ) of Arizona , who retired from Congress last year and used to belong to the Freedom Caucus .
Despite many aspects of the plan that appeal to Republicans – the elimination of penalties associated with the individual and employee mandates of Obamacare and a reduction of federal deficits by $ 337 billion within 10 years – the legislation encountered a fierce political tornado last week .
That ’ s when the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office estimated that 24 million people would lose coverage by 2026 under the plan . Federal contributions to Medicaid would drop by $ 880 billion over the same period . The program would be radically changed , with open-ended federal payments capped based on the number of people a state has enrolled in Medicaid . That cheers budget hawks but has some governors reeling .
Additionally , the plan would hit older , low-income Americans particularly hard , with premiums for a 64-year-old soaring from $ 1,700 a year to more than $ 14,000 .
The path to passage is particularly steep for House Speaker Paul Ryan ( R ) of Wisconsin . He can afford to lose only 21 votes . The Freedom Caucus alone has roughly 30 members and then there are Republicans from swing districts and members of the moderate Tuesday Group to convince .
Democrats are hammering home the “ crushing costs ” of Trumpcare ’ s “ age tax. ” On average , only 30 percent of voters approve of the Republican bill , compared with 47 percent who oppose it , according to Nate Silver ’ s FiveThirtyEight blog .
Meanwhile , if the bill passes and is taken up by the Senate next week , enough moderate and conservative Republicans stand opposed that it has no chance of passing there as-is – even with the compromises added this week .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ In this day and age , in this business , in politics , if you get 85 percent of what you want , that ’ s pretty darn good , ” said Speaker Ryan , talking with reporters after the president ’ s visit and enumerating the compromises added to accommodate members ’ suggestions .
If Republicans want to keep their “ rendezvous with destiny , ” as the speaker put it , they ’ ll have to give a little . It ’ s part of governing . Whether enough Republicans will see it that way is the question .