The US has announced a countrywide ban on some e-cigarette flavours amid concerns about vaping among teens .
The ban applies to mint and fruit flavours that are offered in cartridge-based e-cigarettes , like the popular pods sold by Juul .
The US will continue to allow menthol and tobacco flavours , as well as fruit flavours delivered in other ways .
The action has been under consideration for more than a year , with several states passing similar rules .
South Korea , India , Brazil are among the dozens of countries that have announced sweeping vaping bans . Others , like China , have announced restrictions .
Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar said the Trump administration wanted to continue to offer adults an alternative to traditional cigarettes , while responding to concerns about growing addiction to a new product among teens .
`` By prioritizing enforcement against the products that are most widely used by children , our action today seeks to strike the right public health balance , '' he said .
Fifty-five people have died and more than 2,500 people have been hospitalised with injuries linked to vaping , US health regulators say .
Investigators have said they believe vitamin E acetate , which is sometimes added to marijuana vaping products , is playing a role .
Citing the crisis , President Trump said in September the US would ban all e-cigarette flavours except tobacco , but the administration loosened its position after pushback from the industry .
`` We have to protect our families . At the same time , it 's a big industry . We want to protect the industry , '' Mr Trump said this week .
Juul , the biggest e-cigarette company in the US , had already pulled its flavoured pods from the market , but Thursday 's action forces competitors to make a similar move , within 30 days .
Advocates for stricter rules have said that teens will switch to menthol if other options are eliminated .
But officials said they would take steps against menthol and tobacco flavoured e-cigarettes if the Food and Drug Administration sees that their use among teens is rising .
The US also recently raised the age for purchasing tobacco products to 21 . E-cigarettes are also governed by those rules .