The House Democratic leadership appears to be gambling on a strategy to rally its political base with vigorous support of Obamacare , at a time when polls show the healthcare measure is unpopular with the overall voting public .
With Democrats needing to pick up 17 Republican-held seats in 2014 to recapture a majority in the House , leaders are not only urging lawmakers to stand firmly behind the Affordable Care Act , but have told them how to sell the measure back home during the congressional recess .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi told Democratic congressmen before the Memorial Day recess that “ we now want to educate our constituents about the new law , help to implement it , and strengthen the hands of those who have helped to enact this historic reform . ”
Attached to the document , which was co-signed by the Democratic co-chairs of the House Steering and Policy Committee — Reps. Rosa DeLauro of Connecticut and Rob Andrews of New Jersey — was a “ tool kit ” that provided “ frequently asked questions ” from constituents about Obamacare .
That document provides “ a list of district training sessions and relevant federal contact information ” to further explain the healthcare measure .
Among the selling points is that , starting this fall , `` consumer-friendly marketplaces will enable families and individuals who are uninsured or buy their own coverage to buy their own quality , affordable coverage . ''
`` The majority of Americans will have access to subsidies to make their insurance more affordable . …There will be no annual limits on coverage for any patient and everyone will be guaranteed the availability of health insurance , regardless of medical history or pre-existing conditions , ” House Democrats are told .
In what is tantamount to laying the groundwork for a national campaign based on support of Obamacare , the Democratic leadership , according to Pelosi ’ s letter , is “ strongly encouraging ” House Democrats to name an Affordable Care Act `` coordinator ” from their staffs .
“ This individual should be in a district office and be the primary person tasked with the casework and constituent queries about the ACA , ” wrote Pelosi , who urges her colleagues to register their coordinator through a special email address “ so that this staff member will continue to receive important updates on ACA implementation . ”
Five days after the Pelosi memo went out , a CNN/ORC International Poll showed that , among likely voters nationwide , 54 percent opposed Obamacare and 43 percent support it .
“ Not surprisingly , the Obama coalition is most supportive of Obamacare , ” CNN Political Director Ken Holland told the Huffington Post . The poll found that 75 percent of Democrats favored Obamacare , while only 16 percent of Republicans supported it .
House Republicans have taken the opposite approach from Democrats , often using Obamacare as a political punching bag .
The Republican-led House on May 16 voted for the 37th time to repeal Obamacare and is now focused on denying funding to the healthcare program , set to take effect Jan. 1 .
The House vote was 229 to 195 . Two Democrats — Mike McIntyre of North Carolina and Jim Matheson of Utah — joined the 227 Republicans voting to overturn Obamacare ..
McIntyre and Matheson both eked out re-election last fall in two of the closest House races in the nation . Both face rematches with their Republican opponents in 2014 .
For Pelosi , lining up her colleagues and educating them on how to defend Obamacare is no major problem . As to whether making it a key plank in the coming midterm elections is good politics — and whether it can help vulnerable members — remains to be seen .
John Gizzi is chief political columnist and White House correspondent for ███ .