Elusive estimates of how many people actually were able to sign up for ObamaCare since enrollment launched more than two weeks ago are finally starting to emerge -- and , as expected , show a slow start amid widespread problems with the main federal website .
The federal government has not yet released its own enrollment figures . But private firms and analysts have taken a crack at it .
One private-sector analysis showed that , during the first week , less than 1 percent of those who entered the registration area actually enrolled .
The review was released by Kantar US Insights , based on the findings of the Millward Brown Digital research firm . It showed 9.47 million unique visitors to the federal site during the first week , including 3.72 million who entered the registration area , 1 million successfully registering and 36,000 who completed enrollment .
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said Monday on Comedy Central 's `` The Daily Show with Jon Stewart '' that she does n't know how many people have enrolled but `` hundreds of thousands of accounts '' have been created on the federal site , HealthCare.gov .
Officials still have time to fix the myriad glitches on the website , before Jan. 1 when health-insurance coverage begins , and ultimately mid-February , when analysts say most Americans will have to sign up in order to avoid a tax penalty .
Asked about the issue on Wednesday , White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said : `` Health care reform is more than a website . ''
He said while the site glitches are `` unacceptable , '' so is leaving millions without health insurance
The Obama administration disputed the Kantar US Insights assessment but provided only site-visit numbers .
Health and Human Services spokeswoman Joanne Peters told The Washington Post the federal site got 14.6 million unique visits in the first 11 days , `` showing the intense demand for quality , affordable health insurance . ''
The 14 states with their own ObamaCare websites , as well as the District of Columbia , are releasing some information about the number of enrollees in the first couple of weeks .
The Advisory Board Daily Briefing , a go-to site for enrollment tracking since signups started Oct 1 , says more than 42,000 people have enrolled through the state-run exchanges . That estimate , though , is missing final numbers from several states .
Exactly how many Americans have signed up remains unclear because federal officials are not disclosing numbers for the problem-plagued site it runs for the 36 other states .
The administration still appears to have a long way to go toward the White House 's goal of enrolling 7 million in the first year , though Americans can still submit off-line applications .
Experts point out the disparity in numbers is in part the result of groups using different approaches and time frames .
Peters also told The Post that the administration will release enrollment figures on a monthly basis but did n't provide a starting date . So most of the official data is meanwhile coming from the 15 local exchanges , with no indication about when a more comprehensive picture will emerge .
Maryland is among the states making public the most up-to-date numbers .
The state reported Friday that its website has had 217,091 unique visitors , 25,781 verified accounts created and 1,121 enrollees .
Colorado officials reported 162,941 unique visitors to the state-run site in the first two days , including 18,174 people creating accounts .
Officials did not respond to requests for more updated information , and to verify a news report that just 226 people bought health plans .
Carney said Americans continue to get information about ObamaCare through call centers and websites , despite `` challenges '' and that President Obama has instructed his team to `` work 24/7 '' to address the website problems .