Terrorists rely on irrational thinking to spread paralyzing fear . Stark evidence of this is that millions of Americans are probably more afraid of being killed in a terrorist event than dying suddenly of a heart attack or being diagnosed with incurable cancer . Yet , the chances of heart disease or cancer taking our lives are about 30,000 times greater than of terrorism taking our lives . That ’ s 3 million percent higher .
You ’ re many thousands of times more likely to fall victim to major depression and take your own life than you are to die at the hands of terrorist . Over 100 Americans a day die by suicide .
Think about that , in case you ’ re curtailing your travel plans or shying away from a sporting event or parade because you fear a terrorist attack . You ’ d be 30,000 times smarter to go get an EKG before the parade , if you haven ’ t had one , in order to check for cardiac ischemia . And you ’ d be at least 30,000 times smarter to go get a colonoscopy , prostate exam , testicular cancer screening or breast exam ( or check your blood pressure ) before attending a football game .
As frightening as the videos of beheadings are , as raw as our memories of 9/11 are as horrifying as the coverage of the Paris terrorist attacks has been , I still worry a whole lot more that I could get a call from my internal medicine doctor telling me I need to repeat a lab test that looks ominous or need to follow-up his physical exam with an MRI—let alone hearing that about one of my kids ( which I truly dread and pray to God never happens ) .
We need to elect leaders who recognize the very real threat of radical Islam to civilized societies . But we also need not to panic , in our everyday lives .
None of this , of course , means we need not fight terrorism and extinguish ISIS and Al Qaeda . We must . But we must also do so strategically and methodically , without , as Franklin Roosevelt once said during the Great Depression , “ unreasoning , unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance . ”
We need to direct more funding to our military , law enforcement and intelligence communities . We need to elect leaders who recognize the very real threat of radical Islam to civilized societies . But we also need not to panic , in our everyday lives . The statistics show that that would be completely irrational .
If you want to do something today to safeguard your life , don ’ t give in to terror and stop living your life . Go get one of the medical tests I mentioned , so that you have a better chance of living a long life . Really . Do it .
And if you want to save a child ’ s life , donate to Children ’ s Miracle Network Hospitals , or Save the Children at https : //give.causemo.com/causes . Really . Please . Do it . Love has always been the antidote to fear . ISIS hasn ’ t come close to changing that and never will .