On Monday , Suzanne Somers published a column on WSJ.com regarding her thoughts on nationalized health-care . Her basic argument , though it takes some work to decipher , is fourfold . Once the Affordable Care Act is implemented , she says : the U.S. will have a healthcare system like Canada ’ s and that is bad news for the quality of care ; premiums will skyrocket ; Medicare funds will be used to pay for Obamacare efforts ; our privacy will be “ invaded. ” As well , she mentions that Canadians doctors would rather practice in the U.S. ( or choose to be veterinarians ) so they can make more money .
1 . The Affordable Care Act is socialized healthcare like Canada ’ s . And Canadian care is the worst .
The Affordable Care Act isn ’ t socialized health care . Private insurance companies still provide insurance . The ACA creates regulations that private insurers have to follow—like allowing children to stay on their parent ’ s plan and not denying coverage because of a preexisting condition . Provisions , which by the way , up to 88 percent Americans actually support . The biggest parts of the ACA involve expanding the eligibility of Medicaid for the poor and offering subsidies to make insurance affordable through the public marketplace .
In Canada , healthcare is managed with a single-payer system . Each provincial or territorial government provides publicly-funded medical care for all of its citizens .
Somers offers anecdotal evidence of wait times and rationing to show that Canada ’ s healthcare system is terrible . According to Somers , her incredibly ill sister-in-law had to wait a month to see the proper doctor . And death panels , she implies , offered her 75-year-old friend only treatment for pain at the end of her life . She was denied treatment , Somers says , “ because she was too old . “
Canadians do tend to wait a long time to see a specialist . In 2010 , 59 percent of Canadians said they waited at least four weeks for an appointment compared to 20 percent in the U.S . But those long wait times are not necessarily a by-product of their single-payer system . A 2012 article in AARP Magazine reports that wait times are a result of Canada ’ s choice to be fiscally conservative . And a little waiting might not be so bad , actually . As the OECD notes in the 2011 report on Health Care , “ It can be cost-effective to maintain short queues of elective patients because the adverse health consequences of short delays are minimal , and there are savings in hospital capacity from allowing queues to form . ”
It is true that the ACA will expand the patient pool and likely put stress on a system with a growing physician shortage . But the real problem has less to do with Obamacare and more to do with the number of aging Americans who use doctor services more . As Brookings Institute Senior Fellow Henry Aaron told Fox News , “ I think the most serious shortage has nothing to do with the ACA , it ’ s more to do with the population aging—the elderly being newly covered is negligible . ”
The news is abuzz , Somers asserts , with stories of “ premiums are doubling and tripling. ” I can ’ t be sure what news sites Somers is visiting , but there is little evidence to support that claim . Sure , unsubsidized premiums for individuals will be a little higher , but about 80 percent of individual enrollees won ’ t pay the sticker price because they will receive subsidies . Moreover , these people will , according to Kaiser Family Foundation , be getting better insurance , with capped out-of-pocket costs that include benefits like maternal care and mental health .
The ACA made $ 700 billion in cuts to Medicare over 10 years . These cuts weren ’ t to benefits , but to reimbursements rates for doctors and hospitals . So far , these cuts have not had any impact on the elderly enrolled in Medicare Advantage plans . In fact , the program has seen an unexpected 30 percent increase since the health care law was enacted . And as a direct result of the new law , more than 6.6 million seniors with Medicare have saved over $ 7 billion on prescription drugs .
Somers says the “ most frightening ” aspect of the ACA is that , “ your most intimate and personal information is now up for grabs. ” As far as I can tell , she ’ s alluding to this report in the Weekly Standard on the source code of a Healthcare.gov page , a portion of which states that users , “ have no reasonable expectation of privacy regarding any communication or data transiting or stored ” on the site . Texas Rep. Joe Barton also referenced the report in a congressional hearing last week , asking , “ How in the world can this be HIPAA compliant ? ''
A couple things : First , it ’ s neither rational nor legal to hide provisions of a contract in the code used to build a webpage . This language in the source code had been “ commented out , ” meaning a programmer said , “ This shouldn ’ t be displayed on the site. ” Maybe it was being used as a placeholder and never taken out . It may be strange , but it ’ s inconsequential , and no one signing up for insurance on the marketplace has waived his or her right to privacy because if it . In fact , the online marketplaces come with pretty strong privacy safeguards .
5 . Canadian doctors are heading to the U.S. to make money .
Despite what Ms. Somers has heard from her husband ’ s cousins , Canadian doctors are not leaving en masse for the U.S . In fact , more doctors move into Canada than move out .