By early this year , people inside and outside the federal bureaucracy were raising red flags . “ We foresee a train wreck , ” an insurance executive working on information technology said in a February interview . “ We don ’ t have the I.T . specifications . The level of angst in health plans is growing by leaps and bounds . The political people in the administration do not understand how far behind they are . ”
The Government Accountability Office , an investigative arm of Congress , warned in June that many challenges had to be overcome before the Oct. 1 rollout .
“ So much testing of the new system was so far behind schedule , I was not confident it would work well , ” Richard S. Foster , who retired in January as chief actuary of the Medicare program , said in an interview last week .
But Mr. Chao ’ s superiors at the Department of Health and Human Services told him , in effect , that failure was not an option , according to people who have spoken with him . Nor was rolling out the system in stages or on a smaller scale , as companies like Google typically do so that problems can more easily and quietly be fixed . Former government officials say the White House , which was calling the shots , feared that any backtracking would further embolden Republican critics who were trying to repeal the health care law .
Marilyn B. Tavenner , the administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , and Kathleen Sebelius , the secretary of health and human services , both insisted in July that the project was not in trouble . Last month , Gary M. Cohen , the federal official in charge of health insurance exchanges , promised federal legislators that on Oct. 1 , “ consumers will be able to go online , they ’ ll be able to get a determination of what tax subsidies they are eligible for , they ’ ll be able to see the premium net of subsidy , ” and they will be able to sign up .
But just a trickle of the 14.6 million people who have visited the federal exchange so far have managed to enroll in insurance plans , according to executives of major insurance companies who receive enrollment files from the government . And some of those enrollments are marred by mistakes . Insurance executives said the government had sent some enrollment files to the wrong insurer , confusing companies that have similar names but are in different states . Other files were unusable because crucial information was missing , they said .
Many users of the federal exchange were stuck at square one . A New York Times researcher , for instance , managed to register at 6 a.m. on Oct. 1 . But despite more than 40 attempts over the next 11 days , she was never able to log in . Her last attempts led her to a blank screen .