President Trump threw his support Tuesday behind a short-term Obamacare fix that would restart payments to insurance companies , saying it was a way to buy time while Republicans work toward a broad repeal that he insisted they will eventually find the votes to pass .
Senate Health Education , Labor and Pensions Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander , Tennessee Republican , struck the agreement with Sen. Patty Murray , Washington Democrat , to fund pivotal “ cost-sharing ” payments for two years , a win for Democrats and skittish Republicans who said states were forced to approve higher premiums after Mr. Trump failed to guarantee the money .
The bill will also give states added flexibility under Obamacare ’ s rules — though Mr. Alexander said it does not free them from the onerous coverage requirements that have sent premiums soaring and chased some Americans from the health care market altogether .
Mr. Trump said the package will help the markets get beyond the uncertainty , though he still wants Republicans to again try to scrap the Affordable Care Act next year .
“ It ’ ll get us over this intermediate hump , ” he said at the White House . “ For a period of one year , two years , we will have a very good solution . ”
He also refused to take blame for rate hikes next year , tweeting that Democrats were to blame for passing a health care program that “ never had a chance of working . ”
Under the deal , states would be able to use Obamacare ’ s existing waiver system to offer new plan choices so long as they offer “ comparable affordability ” as those under the 2010 law . But they can not chip away at the slate of “ essential ” benefits and services that insurers are required to cover .
Democrats fought to preserve those coverage requirements , saying insurers would offer junk insurance without them .
States could allow anyone , instead of just those younger than 30 , to buy catastrophic-level “ copper plans. ” It was a nod to Republicans who wanted to provide healthy customers with more affordable options .
The plan halves the period that federal officials can take to review a state waiver , known as a “ 1332 , ” to tweak Obamacare , and governors would not need their state legislatures to approve their plans first . They could swiftly secure “ me too ” waivers for changes to Obamacare that other states already received .
The proposal also takes $ 106 million from existing user fees and sends it as block grants to the states , who can use it to promote insurance offerings however they like .
Negotiators said they have agreed on those principles and will now draft a bill and share it with colleagues .
They also will need to figure out ways to make sure insurers , some of which already raised rates to make up for an expected loss of cost-sharing payments , are not effectively paid twice in 2018 .
“ We ’ re going to round up co-sponsors as best we can , ” Mr. Alexander said .
That may be tough since conservatives don ’ t want to be viewed as propping up Obamacare after failing to fulfill promises of swift repeal .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , Kentucky Republican reacted cautiously . He said Republican leaders “ haven ’ t had a chance to think about the way forward yet . ”
Republican Study Committee Chairman Mark Walker of North Carolina was more blunt , dubbing the plan an unacceptable “ bailout ” for Obamacare insurers .
“ The GOP should focus on repealing & replacing Obamacare , not trying to save it , ” said Mr. Walker , who leads a bloc of about 170 House Republicans .
Democrats , though , praised the emerging bill as a win for bipartisanship after Mr. Trump , frustrated with Republicans who didn ’ t back repeal , started to chip away at the law on his own .
“ I hope the House will take it up and the president would sign it , ” said Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat .
The cost-sharing payments are the most critical piece of the deal , after Mr. Trump pulled the plug on money last week .
He said he could not legally make the payments after a federal court last year ruled them illegal because Congress never approved the money . President Obama continued to make the payments while the decision was being appealed .
Pennsylvania on Monday said premiums in its individual market would increase by an average of 30 percent , instead of 7.6 percent as originally projected , because the payments won ’ t be made , fueling Democratic claims of “ sabotage ” against the White House .
Tuesday ’ s deal is the product of weeks of bipartisan talks and four public hearings , a stark contrast to the secretive process that led to failed attempts at repealing Obamacare .
Mr. Trump said he still believes the block-grant plan provides the best path to reform . “ I think we have the votes , ” Mr. Trump said at a news conference . “ We are very close . ”
Sen. Bill Cassidy , Louisiana Republican and key architect of the block-grant proposal , credited Mr. Trump with setting the table for congressional action in the short term while clearing the way for work on his long-term replacement .
“ President Trump asked Congress to fix it in the short term . I agree . If combined with greater flexibility to allow states to lower costs , this will set the stage for replace through a mechanism such as Graham-Cassidy . I will study this proposal to see if it accomplishes these goals , ” Mr. Cassidy said .