The agency ’ s role at the front end of the health care law is rather small . IRS unscathed in Obamacare rollout
An irony of the botched Obamacare rollout is that one of the federal government ’ s most reviled agencies has not messed up — yet .
The IRS operations to accept and process data on income and health insurance plans from HHS appear to be working and the logjam created by the faulty website has not extended to the IRS , according to interviews with former IRS officials and industry experts .
It ’ s a welcome reprieve for the agency , which has spent the last six months recovering from a series of controversies over targeting conservative groups and lavish spending .
And at least for now , with the praise from former commissioners and the lack of outright criticism from Congress , it seems as if the IRS could emerge from the rollout headache as the one agency that didn ’ t , as President Barack Obama said , “ fumble the ball . ”
“ So far , so good , and every indication is that the service is keeping up with its very significant responsibilities , ” said former IRS Commissioner Mark W. Everson , a President George W. Bush appointee . “ The work they have done has been solid . ”
To be sure , the IRS was a key player in the administration ’ s one-year delay earlier this year of employer shared responsibility provisions of the Affordable Care Act , also known as the employer mandate , a postponement that hinted at the major technical glitches that were yet to come .
But the delays have mostly been outside of IRS control , including the announcement from the administration late last month that it would delay for a year the online enrollment for small businesses to purchase health coverage through federally-run exchanges .
Unlike the public floggings of HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius or CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner , acting IRS Commissioner Daniel Werfel and the agency ’ s health care chief Sarah Hall Ingram have escaped much of the criticism .
And despite a controversial change to the Senate filibuster rules , Obama ’ s nominee to lead the IRS , John Koskinen , hasn ’ t faced any public questions from senators about the agency ’ s role in implementing the health care law .
That jives with what Ingram told the House oversight committee just 10 days into Obamacare ’ s rollout . She testified then that the IRS systems are working and the agency is able to process requests to determine a taxpayer ’ s eligibility for the premium tax credits . The agency has processed nearly 300,000 of those requests as of late October .
A major reason the IRS has been able to stay out of the fire during the health care law ’ s troubled first months is the agency ’ s role at the front end is rather small . Currently it relies on HHS to feed it data on insurance signups to process and determine income , but that is a minor function compared to the IRS ’ s broader ACA duties .
Experts do worry that having the IRS beholden to HHS could put the already embattled agency in a precarious position . If Sebelius ’ s agency is unable to send updated information regularly , the IRS could see delays — and a hit to its reputation .
“ The IRS would absorb the consequences but the action is on HHS to deliver , ” said a former IRS official , who asked to remain anonymous to speak freely .
It will be another year before the IRS ’ s main implementation functions rev up . The 2014 tax filing season is when the agency will begin doling out the premium tax credits designed to help consumers afford new insurance plans . Sen. Orrin Hatch , the top Republican on the Senate Finance Committee , has expressed concerns that the credits may be susceptible to fraud and has promised to closely monitor the IRS ’ s allocations .
But experts believe the agency will be well prepared — if the many moving parts from HHS align .
“ The IRS has a heavy lift — there is no question about that — to prepare for the filing of individual income tax returns in 2015 . Millions of [ taxpayers ] will claim the premium credit , ” the same official said . “ They ’ ve been steadily at the work of building the systems , processes and forms , and the problems going on with the exchange should not impact the IRS . ”
Brian Haile , the senior vice president for health care policy at Jackson Hewitt , said the IRS could face issues when it begins garnishing the tax returns of those who elect not to purchase insurance for the 2014 tax year .
The fine for individuals who don ’ t purchase insurance in 2014 begins at $ 95 and increases based on income .
But past HHS regulations likely created another headache for the IRS , because while it has exempted some people from those fines based on the faulty rollout or hardship , the department overlooked families with children who have insurance through a Medicaid governed program for minors .
“ The IRS is looking at this and saying ‘ oh dear god ’ because HHS came up with this guidance and … it may not accomplish what it is supposed to accomplish but [ the IRS is ] going to end up holding the bag and assessing a penalty on the poor family , ” Haile , who previously worked with Tennessee on their health care law .
He added , “ the IRS is going to be the public face of this anger . ”
Everson , now a vice chairman at the tax firm alliantgroup , said he worries that any hiccups from the IRS could even have unintended consequences on tax compliance .
“ Because of the controversies associated with statute , which is very important but remains very heated in terms of the political process , the service will be damaged [ if ] the controversy bleeds over onto the IRS , ” he told ███ .