Mike Chaney said he 'll oversee the health insurance exchange despite the objections . Republicans feud over Obamacare
Republicans have been fighting Democrats for years over Obamacare . Now , they ’ re fighting each other .
In red-state capitols in places like Idaho , Tennessee and Mississippi , Republicans are clashing over whether to participate in a Democratic president ’ s signature legislative achievement .
At issue are the state-based health care exchanges , set to start in 2014 , which will create new marketplaces for people who can ’ t get insurance elsewhere . If states don ’ t declare their plans to set one up by Dec. 14 , the Department of Health and Human Services will begin doing it for them . So Republicans face a choice : Create their own and appear to endorse a federal government health care takeover , or allow Washington to take control .
Nowhere is the fight playing out more publicly among Republicans than in Mississippi .
Mississippi Insurance Commissioner Mike Chaney informed HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius Nov. 14 that he will oversee the creation of a health insurance exchange despite the objections of Gov . Phil Bryant . On Monday , in a previously unreleased letter , Bryant wrote Sebelius to say he “ feels compelled to notify you of my complete disagreement with this move . ”
Chaney — who by state law has broad authority to create a health care exchange without oversight from state legislators or Bryant — said the governor has failed to explain why Washington would be better than Mississippi to operate the state ’ s health care exchange .
The two Republicans have squabbled since July over whether to pursue an exchange , with Bryant insisting the state not do so and Chaney arguing in favor .
“ The governor asked me , ‘ What authority do you have to do this ? ’ ” Chaney told ███ . “ And I said , ‘ Phil , what authority do you have to stop me ? ’ ”
After Obama won reelection , Chaney said he confronted Bryant Nov. 12 in a men ’ s room during a local conference and asked why the governor wasn ’ t returning his phone calls . The governor , he said , explained that he ’ d been on a hunting trip out of cellphone range . The next day , the two men met at the Mississippi Governor ’ s Mansion , where Chaney said Bryant told him that the GOP governors had agreed to stand together in opposing the exchanges .
“ I said , ‘ Can you articulate any reason for us not to do this ? ’ ” Chaney told ███ . “ He said , ‘ We — some of the Republican governors — should not give in to the Obama administration on this , because they will change the rules and control everything . You can not trust them . ’ ”
Bryant ’ s office confirmed the meeting but declined to discuss specifics of the conversation .
The next day , Chaney , a vocal Mitt Romney supporter who says “ I hate the Affordable Care Act ” and would have voted against it , submitted his exchange plans to HHS . Two days later , Bryant fired off a news release condemning the move .