The Pittsburgh Tribune-Review highlighted a right-wing think tank study which found that premiums would significantly increase for 27-year-old Pennsylvanians without pointing out any other costs savings for young people due to the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) .
The October 14 Tribune-Review editorial cited a study by the Commonwealth Foundation to claim “ premiums [ will ] go up 121 percent for 27-year-old males and 62 percent for same-aged females in the Pittsburgh area. ” The paper also included sparse anecdotal evidence to come to the sweeping conclusion that there will be “ outrageous cost hikes . ”
The Commonwealth Foundation , which has a dubious funding record from right-wing mega-donors and ties to the American Legislative Exchange Council ( ALEC ) , published a study claiming that , compared to current insurance premiums on ehealthinsurance.com , 27-year-olds in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia would see their premiums rise significantly . Although left out of the Tribune-Review editorial , the study itself notes that “ the comparison does not take into account the tax credits available to individuals ” or “ out-of-pocket costs , including co-pays and deductibles ” which have been predicted to fall under the ACA .
By failing to note the impact of subsides , both the editorial and the study leave out a significant portion of savings that would manifest as a result of the ACA for young adults . According to a report by FamiliesUSA , almost 900,000 Pennsylvania residents would be eligible for premium tax credits or subsidies in 2014 . Of that number , young adults -- those between the ages of 18 and 34 -- are “ the likeliest age group to be eligible for premium tax credits , making up approximately 36 percent of all those who are eligible . ”
The potential savings for young adults are significant . As a McClatchy article pointed out , subsidies will range from a “ few hundred dollars a month to more than $ 10,000 , based on family size , income , and the cost of coverage in an individual 's area. ” According to data released by the Department of Health and Human Services , a 27-year-old Pennsylvanian making an income of $ 25,000 a year who selects a bronze plan after receiving a subsidy would be almost $ 40 per month cheaper than the non-subsidy cost .
The editorial also failed to note the many other benefits young adults would see under the ACA . According to the health care advocacy group Young Invincibles 's executive director , Aaron Smith , only about 5 percent of young adults do n't want health insurance because of how much it costs . However , under the Affordable Care Act , 17 million out of the 19 million currently uninsured young adults “ could be eligible for free or reduced cost coverage. ” With reduced costs , these young adults -- who are more likely to go to the emergency room than adults over the age of 75 -- wo n't see the astronomical costs associated with a hospital visit and can use their health care to begin accessing preventative care services . Young women , who were routinely denied insurance due to gender-based pre-existing conditions or charged more under a practice known as “ gender rating ” will no longer pay higher costs or be denied insurance for being female , as such practices are banned under the ACA .