It 's not the sign that the Obama administration wants people to see on its health overhaul website : down for repairs .
Using overnight hours this past weekend to debug the system , the Health and Human Service Department hoped to fix the technological problems that overwhelmed the launch of new health insurance markets . This past week , glitches have frustrated millions of consumers unable to complete their applications .
Enrollment functions of the healthcare.gov site were unavailable during off-peak hours this past weekend The site was be taken down at 1 a.m. EDT each night for a few hours .
The enrollment function was back online at little before 8 a.m. EDT Saturday , but was working slowly because of heavy traffic .
`` Please stay on this page , '' said a notice . `` We 're working to make the experience better , and we do n't want you to lose your place in line . We 'll send you to the login page as soon as we can . ''
There was no indication of how long the wait would be .
In an interview with the Associated Press Friday , President Obama 's advice to frustrated citizens : `` They definitely should n't give up . Typically , what happens is when people are shopping for insurance , they visit a site or make phone calls or look at brochures five , six , seven times before they make a final decision . And they 're not going to have to pay premiums until December -- the insurance does n't start until January . So they 'll have plenty of time .
And my message to them would be , each day the wait times are reduced . Each day , more and more people are signing up , and the product will save you money . People will save hundreds of dollars -- in some cases , thousands of dollars -- as a consequence of being able to get health insurance that is priced for them and gives them the choices that they need . ''
Credit card companies , banks and other online service providers regularly take down websites for repairs . That may also become a feature of the new insurance program .
An effort by congressional Republicans to defund or delay the health care law led to an impasse with Democrats over passing a budget bill , and that sparked a partial government shutdown Tuesday . Republicans quickly pointed to the website problems as another reason that the law they call `` Obamacare '' should be pulled back .
`` Americans have seen once again that Obamacare is not ready for prime time , '' Rep. Eric Cantor of Virginia , the No . 2 House Republican , said in a statement Friday . `` A dysfunctional website is the least of that law 's problems . ''
The administration put the best face on the situation , noting the unexpectedly strong interest from millions of consumers .
`` Americans are excited to look at their options for health coverage , with record demand in the first days of the marketplaces , '' said the release announcing the planned fixes .
The statement was headlined : `` Health Insurance Marketplace Open for Business - Week One Success . ''
The state-level markets were designed to be the gateway to health insurance for people who do n't have access to coverage on the job . Middle-class consumers will be able to buy government-subsidized private plans , while the poor and near-poor will be steered to Medicaid in states agreeing to expand the program .
Federal and state websites experienced problems this week . Some states , including Maryland , have also announced they are scheduling repairs .
The federal site , which serves 36 states , drew millions of users , an indication of strong consumer interest . Yet many people were unable to get on the site . They encountered a screen that told them to wait , and they did , sometimes for hours . Refreshing the screen only sent them to the back of the line .
Quite a few got hung up trying to create security questions to protect their accounts . The drop-down menus providing the questions would not populate . As a result , consumers could not advance through the application process and learn if they were eligible for a tax credit to help pay premiums , much less pick a plan .
Some who did make it through were timed out because they took too long comparing plans .
At the end of the first day at most a handful of people had managed to successfully enroll through the federal site .
However , by Friday , enrollments seemed to be picking up — though not yet at desired levels . The administration is not releasing numbers .
`` We are pleased that enrollment for health care coverage through the new marketplaces is picking up , '' the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association said in a statement . `` We expect enrollment to continue to increase . ''
The so-called Blues are major players in the individual insurance market , but some smaller insurers have yet to see any new customers .
By Monday , `` there will be significant improvements in the online consumer experience , '' HHS said .
The upgrades include extra capacity for more users to get into the system , more technicians working round-the-clock to fix problems , and new pathways to get to the application faster . No details were given . Call centers are also getting more staff and HHS said wait times are now down to less than a minute .
The administration previously announced it is adding equipment to handle the high volume of users . Now it looks like software fixes are also needed .
Consumers have until Dec. 15 to enroll for coverage that starts Jan. 1 .
Because of the glitches , in Florida organizations were trying to build on momentum for the health insurance program even though there was little they could do .
Most of the counselors hired through federal grants to help sign people up for health insurance quickly went to Plan B when the website failed Tuesday morning . Several community health centers around the state , fearing the worst , printed paper applications in advance , even translating them into other languages . Other groups took down consumers ' contact information , promising to schedule appointments when the website begins to work better .
There was an odd mix of excitement that the Affordable Care Act was garnering so much attention and frustration that it was n't accessible .
John Foley , an attorney and certified counselor for Legal Aid Society of Palm Beach County , said he 's tried unsuccessfully to log into the system almost non-stop since 5 a.m. Tuesday . A frustrated Foley said his navigators would not try again to enroll anyone until Monday .
`` I am too worried to even involve a consumer at this point . I would hate to see a problem in the middle of the process , '' he said . `` I am very worried that people will lose faith in the system . Clearly we are losing most , if not all , of the momentum that was built up leading to open enrollment . ''
Federal health officials played up the high volume traffic , noting 7 million visits to HealthCare.gov in the first two days . Employees were working around the clock to fix issues and by Thursday had increased capacity to the server and cut down wait times by one-third . But it 's unclear when the problems will fully be resolved . Most people were still unable to access the site on Friday .
Cigna , which offers several insurance plans through the exchange , said it had successfully enrolled a small number of consumers Thursday using the website . Counselors at a Miami Gardens enrollment event that night with Sen. Oscar Braynon were also able to access the website long enough to enroll a few people on the spot .
`` There have been a lot of successful moments and every event we attend has been overcrowded with people who want to learn more and get a better understanding of the process , '' said Jerson Dulis , a counselor with Broward Community & Family Health Centers , Inc .
Turnout has been uneven at events to sign up in-person with a counselor . Counselors sat alone at a Pensacola office Tuesday and also at a Fort Lauderdale library for much of Thursday . But at Borinquen Health Care Center in Miami , more than 400 people wanted to sign up for a plan and asked for more information about their options .
Valerie Carr , a 46-year-old Kendall resident , has n't had insurance in years . She does n't qualify for Medicaid because she does n't have children so she pays about $ 170 a month for medication for her mental illness , plus regular psychiatrist and therapy appointments . Under the new health law , insurers are required to cover certain essential benefits , including mental health , and they are barred from charging more for having those pre-existing conditions . Carr tried to sign up at a community health center in South Miami this week and counselors said they 'd contact her when the website was working again .
Federal health officials declined to say how many signed up for health insurance this week and likely wo n't release those figures until mid-November . It 's also unclear whether the problems are only because of high traffic or a combination of programming errors .
The delays come three months after the Government Accountability Office said a smooth and timely rollout could not be guaranteed because the online system was not fully completed or tested . Experts said the Obama administration may have rushed to meet the Oct. 1 deadline .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy