He fought every attempt to repeal the law ; now he wants to ‘ stabilize ’ it .
Ohio governor John Kasich , the most vocal Republican critic of Obamacare-repeal efforts this year , is pleading with Congress to pass the health-care bill proposed by Senator Lamar Alexander ( R. , Tenn. ) and Senator Patty Murray ( D. , Wash. ) .
The Alexander–Murray bill follows a template that Kasich and Colorado governor John Hickenlooper , a Democrat , began promoting in August : Obamacare ’ s mandates , regulations , and Medicaid expansion would all remain in place , and Congress would authorize spending to “ stabilize ” the exchanges .
In particular , Alexander–Murray would reimburse insurers for “ cost-sharing reductions ” Obamacare requires them to provide to certain low-income enrollees . Congress has thus far refused to appropriate money for these payments ; President Obama paid the subsidies illegally anyway , but President Trump recently halted them .
“ This should be a no-brainer . Get Alexander-Murray passed & signed , ” Kasich wrote in a Twitter update Monday after Trump endorsed — and then unendorsed — the bill . “ Then we take on the big reforms necessary to get American families the coverage they need . ”
Kasich ’ s ideas for reform amount to managing an increasingly vast federal health-care bureaucracy more efficiently . While conservative Republicans have prodded Senate moderates to enact modest free-market reforms , Kasich has attacked all of their proposals from the left .
When Alexander–Murray was introduced , Kasich ’ s band of ten pro-Obamacare governors — only two of whom , including Kasich , are Republicans — fired off a letter to House and Senate leaders imploring them to “ quickly pass legislation to stabilize our private health insurance markets and make quality health insurance more available and affordable . ”
Kasich latched on to the Congressional Budget Office ’ s estimate that Alexander–Murray would reduce federal deficits by $ 3.8 billion over ten years , posting a video statement on Twitter the day CBO ’ s report was released .
“ The Congressional Budget Office says that we can actually reduce the deficit modestly but also not have anybody removed from health care under Alexander-Murray . It is a great thing to be for : stabilize our market , save peoples ’ health care , and move on to controlling health-care costs , ” Kasich said .
“ With the positive CBO score in hand , passage of Alexander-Murray is a must , ” he wrote in the accompanying tweet .
But past Obamacare-related cost estimates have proven remarkably unreliable . Kasich projected that expanding Medicaid would cost $ 13 billion by 2020 , but it has already cost taxpayers more than $ 15 billion . Other states have seen similarly unsustainable welfare-spending increases since expanding Medicaid , and the CBO sharply underestimated Medicaid-expansion costs , too .
Kasich was less concerned about deficit spending when he was pushing the Ohio General Assembly to expand Medicaid .
“ There really is not a legitimate argument against it , ” he told newspaper reporters in 2013 . “ What it is , is , ‘ Well , you know , we ’ re ringing up the federal debt ’ – I mean , what ? You think by turning this down you ’ re gon na solve the federal debt ? ”
And listening to Kasich lobby for greater Obamacare funding now , it would be easy to forget that last year he was promising to repeal and replace Obamacare if elected president . The year before that , Kasich scoffed at CNN host Jake Tapper when Tapper questioned his embrace of Obamacare ’ s Medicaid expansion .
“ I don ’ t support Obamacare ; I want to repeal it , but I did expand Medicaid because I was able to bring Ohio money back home to treat the mentally ill , the drug-addicted , and to help the working poor get health care , ” Kasich insisted in that May 2015 interview .
Perhaps Kasich can run for president in 2020 as the pragmatic central planner who can make Obamacare work as intended .
When Kasich decided to implement Obamacare ’ s expansion of Medicaid to working-age adults with no kids and no disabilities , it was not to “ bring Ohio money back home , ” but rather to accept a blank check for new federal deficit spending . “ If a state doesn ’ t implement the ACA Medicaid expansion , the federal funds that would have been used for that state ’ s expansion are not being sent to another state , ” the Congressional Research Service clarified in a 2015 memo .
In a New York Times op-ed this July , Kasich acknowledged that states “ can not expect the federal government to continue paying 90 percent of Medicaid expansion costs given our nation ’ s historic debt , ” but since then he has continued working tirelessly to delay changes to the Medicaid expansion until after he hits his term limit in January 2019 .
Kasich tried for several years to argue that Medicaid expansion was not really part of Obamacare , even though most of the Obamacare spending increases and coverage gains in Ohio and nationwide result from the law ’ s Medicaid expansion . With Republicans in Congress seemingly unable to deliver on years of repeal promises , Kasich is leaning into the role of pro-Obamacare Republican .
If Barack Obama ’ s biggest domestic-policy achievement remains in place , perhaps Kasich can run for president in 2020 as the pragmatic central planner who can make Obamacare ’ s mandates , subsidies , penalties , and regulations work together as intended .