The Health and Human Services Department has told contractors working on the problem-plagued ObamaCare website not to release documents to congressional investigators , a mandate slammed as “ criminal obstruction ” by House Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa .
The Dec. 6 letter from CMS official Daniel Kane says that although the department understands Congress ’ need for documents to continue its probe into the issues with Healthcare.gov , the agency is concerned about security risks from releasing testing information to third parties .
Therefore , the letter states , the agency has decided to not allow contractors to release any documents to any third party , telling the contractors to send congressional investigators to CMS , who will handle the request themselves .
The letter was sent after the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee contacted 11 of the top contractors on the ObamaCare website as part of its investigation into its problems .
In a press release Wednesday , Issa , R-Calif. , said the HHS ’ s request amounts to criminal obstruction , and he has sent a letter to HHS Secretary Sebelius demanding the agency have no further communication with the contractors about the probe .
“ The department ’ s hostility toward questions from Congress and the media about the implementation of ObamaCare is well known , ” Issa said . “ The department ’ s most recent effort to stonewall , however , has morphed from mere obstinacy into criminal obstruction of a congressional investigation . ”
Issa said that by requiring CMS handle the information requests instead of the contractors , the agency is breaking a federal statute that prohibits anyone from interfering with a worker ’ s right to cooperate with a congressional investigation .
“ The federal obstruction laws reflect the fact that Congress ’ right of access to information is constitutionally based and critical to the integrity and effectiveness of our oversight and investigative activities , ” Issa said . “ For that reason , it is widely understood that private citizens and companies can not contract away their duty to comply with a congressional request for documents . “
The HHS did not respond to an email request for comment .