Washington ( CNN ) - The requirement that businesses provide their workers with health insurance or face fines – a key provision contained in President Barack Obama 's sweeping health care law – will be delayed by one year , the Treasury Department said Tuesday .
The postponement came after business owners expressed concerns about the complexity of the law ’ s reporting requirements , the agency said in its announcement . Under the Affordable Care Act , businesses employing 50 or more full-time workers that do n't provide them health insurance will be penalized .
`` We recognize that the vast majority of businesses that will need to do this reporting already provide health insurance to their workers , and we want to make sure it is easy for others to do so . We have listened to your feedback . And we are taking action , '' Mark J. Mazur , assistant secretary for tax policy , wrote in a post on the website of the Treasury Department , which is tasked with implementing the employer mandate .
Mazur said the extra year before the requirement goes into effect will allow the government time to assess ways to simplify the reporting process for businesses . Penalties for firms not providing health coverage to employees will now begin in 2015 – after next year ’ s congressional elections .
The new delay will not affect other aspects of the health law , including the establishment of exchanges in states for low-income Americans to obtain health insurance .
Supporters of the employer mandate note that most firms already provide health insurance to full time workers , and downplay the effect the requirement would have on small businesses , citing figures showing the vast majority of small businesses employ fewer than 50 workers .
But opponents claim the employer mandate is a potential job killer , saying businesses near the 50-worker cutoff will be unlikely to ramp up hiring if it means they 're required to provide employees health insurance .
“ The administration has finally recognized the obvious – employers need more time and clarification of the rules of the road before implementing the employer mandate , ” said Randy Johnson , a vice president at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , a business group .
Obama 's administration has previously expressed openness to making the health care law easier to implement , and acted to shorten applications for health insurance on government-run exchanges from 21 pages to three .
On Tuesday , Obama ’ s senior adviser Valerie Jarrett – who acts as the White House ’ s liaison to big business – wrote the new delay was indicative of the administration ’ s determination to implement the health care law effectively and fairly , and that it wouldn ’ t affect other aspects of Obamacare .
“ While major portions of the law have yet to be implemented , it ’ s already a little more affordable for businesses to offer quality health coverage to their employees , ” Jarrett wrote , adding later : “ As we implement this law , we have and will continue to make changes as needed . In our ongoing discussions with businesses we have heard that you need the time to get this right . ”
READ MORE : How the next battle over Obamacare could be the ugliest yet
Yet many Republicans – and even some Democrats - have continued to express serious concerns about the roll-out of Obamacare . On Tuesday , GOP lawmakers said the delay of the employer mandate didn ’ t go far enough .
“ This announcement means even the Obama administration knows the 'train wreck ' will only get worse , ” House Speaker John Boehner wrote .
`` Obamacare costs too much and it isn ’ t working the way the administration promised , ” Sen. Mitch McConnell , the Senate Minority Leader , wrote in response to the decision , adding : “ The fact remains that Obamacare needs to be repealed and replaced with common-sense reforms that actually lower costs for Americans . ''
Rep. Eric Cantor , the House Majority Leader , was more succinct . `` The best delay for ObamaCare is a permanent one , '' he wrote on Twitter .
Many allies of Obama , including major labor unions , did not immediately weigh in on the delay . A spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said in response to the decision , `` Flexibility is a good thing . ''
`` Both the administration and Senate Democrats have shown – and continue to show – a willingness to be flexible and work with all interested parties to make sure that implementation of the Affordable Care Act is as beneficial as possible to all involved . It is better to do this right than fast , '' Adam Jentleson continued .
Yet even some Democrats have voiced concern about the roll-out of the health law – Sen. Max Baucus , a key Democrat who helped craft the legislation , expressed serious anxiety in April about its implementation .
`` The administration 's public information campaign on the benefits of the Affordable Care Act deserves a failing grade . You need to fix this , '' Baucus told Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius at a hearing .
`` I just see a huge train wreck coming down , '' he added later .