The congressional leadership of the GOP seems determined to hand their congressional majorities back to the Democrats . Otherwise , why would they even consider including two Obamacare bailouts — the cost-sharing reduction ( CSR ) and risk mitigation programs — in the upcoming omnibus budget bill ? These bailouts would allegedly reduce future increases in health insurance premiums and incentivize insurers to remain in the Obamacare exchanges . They will accomplish neither , but they will send a clear signal to the voters that the GOP was never serious about getting rid of Obamacare . The taxpayer-funded bailouts would be , in other words , bad policy and worse politics .
Beginning with the politics of these bailouts , it should be blindingly obvious to the Republicans that they have a serious enthusiasm gap to close , and that chasm is largely the result of their failure to honor the pledge to repeal Obamacare . That promise fueled Republican gains in the 2010 and 2014 midterms , and it would be an egregious understatement to say that the voters who believed it are extremely unhappy to find themselves still laboring under the yoke of the “ Affordable Care Act. ” If the Republicans actually prop it up with these bailouts , many of their constituents will stay home on November 6 . In fact , Tuesday ’ s special election in Pennsylvania provided an ominous portent :
Pennsylvania 18 was yet another example of a Democratic turnout advantage — the telltale sign of an enthusiasm gap — helping the party do better than expected in special elections . The number of votes Lamb received was 80 percent of the number of votes Clinton received in this district in 2016 — but Saccone got just 53 percent of the number of votes Trump got . Anecdotally , turnout was also much higher in Democratic precincts than it was in Republican precincts .
The loss of a special election in a state like Pennsylvania doesn ’ t necessarily spell doom for the Republicans , of course . But , considering that Donald Trump beat Hillary Clinton by 20 points in the same congressional district , Tuesday ’ s turnout numbers should be considered a shot across the GOP bow . It ’ s possible that the effective elimination of the individual mandate , and the repeal of IPAB , combined with benefits associated with the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act , may have mollified conservative voters enough to get them to the polls in November . But that will certainly not happen if the GOP colludes with the Democrats to bail out the “ reform ” law . A recent Heritage poll found the following :
With health insurance premiums rising annually as a result of Obamacare taxes and regulations , Congress is considering paying health insurance companies taxpayer money to temporarily lower costs . A majority of Americans ( 61 % ) oppose these payments , even to provide temporary premium relief . Just 39 % support such a measure , and only 8 % strongly support it . Furthermore , two-thirds agree that subsidies like these “ are not only a bailout for the companies , but also hide the fact that Obamacare is failing . ”
Even if the voters were in favor of the bailouts , conservative policy experts are vehemently against them . The Hill reports , “ A coalition of 15 conservative groups wrote to Congress on Monday to urge against including a ‘ bailout ’ of Obamacare in the coming government funding bill. ” The coalition , which includes American Commitment , Americans for Prosperity , Campaign for Liberty , Club for Growth , Competitive Enterprise Institute , Concerned Veterans for America , Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce , FreedomWorks , Heritage Action for America , Independent Women ’ s Voice , and the Taxpayers Protection Alliance , did not mince words in their letter :
Lawmakers should not be fooled by ludicrous claims that spending new federal money on Obamacare bailouts will save the federal government money . Creating a new Obamacare corporate welfare program will increase government spending . Nor should lawmakers fall for the argument that bailouts are only temporary . The same insurers who are lobbying for bailout money this year will be back again when funding expires , threatening to withdraw from the exchanges or raise premiums if bailouts aren ’ t extended .
Yesterday afternoon , in an opinion column for Fox News , Republican Senators Ted Cruz and Mike Lee , along with Representatives Mark Meadows and Jim Jordan , point out that , despite the GOP ’ s failure to repeal Obamacare in one fell swoop , they have successfully eliminated a number of its worst provisions and made changes to the law that make it easier for enrollees to access market-based alternatives to former President Obama ’ s “ signature domestic achievement. ” Observing that they are “ closer than ever to sending Obamacare to the ash heap of history , ” they suggest that helping the Democrats pass bailouts would amount to “ snatching defeat from the jaws of victory ” :
This Frankenstein combination of a new Republican-created insurance bailout plus funding Obamacare ’ s existing pro-abortion CSR bailout is exactly what we counseled against in March last year . If we ignore the years of promises we made to the people on ObamaCare , the voters would , quite rightly , distrust Republicans for years to come .
That pretty much sums it up , while providing hope that some Republicans are smart enough to avoid the blunder that quislings like Tennessee ’ s Lamar Alexander would have them commit . And there is other good news . AP reports , “ Congress ’ effort to stabilize the nation ’ s insurance markets is faltering amid escalating demands by each party.… The bickering could collapse the whole effort , with each side blaming the other. ” The Democrats claim the GOP will “ own ” Obamacare if the bailouts don ’ t pass . But the voters aren ’ t that stupid . They know who created the monster , and the Dems have permanent title to the beast unless the Republicans are dumb enough to go along with the bailouts .