Democrats in Congress worry that Obamacare 's rollout has left them vulnerable in 2014 . | AP Photos ACA deadline tests Dem patience
Some Capitol Hill Democrats are preparing to launch broadsides against President Barack Obama if the Affordable Care Act website isn ’ t fixed by the end of the month .
That will come in the form of more aggressive scrutiny in Republican-led oversight hearings , open advocacy for further delay in the enrollment deadline and individual coverage mandate , and more calls for a staff shake-up in the White House .
“ The president and his team have repeatedly assured us that the system will be working by Dec. 1 . That ’ s when I start looking at what we have to do in our oversight function to hold the administration accountable for making it work. ” Rep. Bruce Braley , an Iowa Democrat who is running for an open Senate seat said Thursday , adding that he ’ s contemplating whether to ask the president to fire members of his staff . “ I ’ m thinking about those options . But my biggest concern is fixing the system and making it work . ”
( Understanding Obamacare : ███ 's guide to the Affordable Care Act )
Asked whether he was mad at the president , Braley hesitated for a few seconds amid the din of a Capitol hallway .
The building frustration — expressed in part Nov. 15 when 39 House Democrats voted for a GOP bill that would have let consumers keep expiring insurance plans — is driven by the fear that Obama ’ s failed rollout has suddenly left scores of Democrats vulnerable to defeat in the House and Senate .
These Democrats won ’ t win legislative changes without the assent of Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) — and likely Obama — but their public positioning could put unsustainable pressure on the administration ’ s efforts to hold the line on the current contours of the law . And while the House is scheduled to return to session on Dec. 3 , the Senate won ’ t be back in from its Thanksgiving break until the week of Dec. 9 .
But already , Sen. Mary Landrieu ( D-La . ) is leading an upper-chamber push to allow people to keep their existing health plans . Sen. Mark Begich ( D-Alaska ) , who has introduced his own plan to give people other health care options , recently said he thought the appropriate time to act was after Thanksgiving break .
“ Let ’ s just wait and see what happens . We ’ re gon na — we ’ re gon na take two weeks off . I ’ m gon na visit with my five children together for the first time , 16 grandchildren , 44 people for Thanksgiving dinner . Let ’ s talk about that for a while , ” Reid said last week .
But in the meantime , Democratic lawmakers — particularly those on the House side — are preparing to try to put distance between themselves and the president because they ’ re not confident that the White House has a Plan B for getting the policy right or protecting them in the mid-term elections .
“ I don ’ t sense that at all . When you think about it , a week after the October shutdown Democrats were experiencing a euphoric high . We thought we had Republicans on the mat . We thought we were going to win back the House and then this rollout fails , ” said one House Democrat from a traditionally safe seat based in a major city . “ Now , we need to be concerned , all of us , me included , that we aren ’ t viewed as ineffective and kicked out of our seats . ”
Not only are Democrats watching helplessly as visions of taking over the House begin to dissolve , but they increasingly perceive the danger that the Senate could flip into GOP hands and that Obama ’ s final three years in office could be a total loss for their party ’ s agenda .
That is , the Affordable Care Act has a lot of Democrats feeling uninsured or under-assured by Obama .
White House officials , from the president on down , insist they don ’ t have to prepare a contingency plan — at least not in terms of the flawed website ; it will be operating for the “ vast majority ” of consumers by the end of the month , they say .
“ The truth is , we ’ re going to fix it , ” Vice President Joe Biden said last Monday , adding a self-conscious appeal to a higher power for help . “ God willing , ” he said .
But the president ’ s promises don ’ t carry the same weight they once did with Democrats on Capitol Hill , and they ’ d like a little more to fall back on than Biden ’ s casual appeal for divine intervention . Soon , Democrats say , it won ’ t just be Republicans who are using high-profile hearings to tear into Obama administration officials .
Democrats , anxious to separate themselves from Obama before the 2014 midterm election , are gearing up to use Capitol Hill hearings to point out examples of waste , fraud , abuse or just outright incompetence to try to persuade constituents that they aren ’ t responsible for the bungled rollout .
The big-city lawmaker predicted oversight hearings are “ going to be ugly ” come next month . “ The more we find out about this implementation of the ACA , the worse it looks . The Congress did our job . We passed the ACA . It ’ s up to the administration to implement the law . ”
Rep. Diana DeGette ( D-Colo. ) , a senior member of the Energy and Commerce Committee , said Thursday that if the website isn ’ t operating , as promised , by the end of the month , there won ’ t be enough time for consumers to sign up for the exchanges before the Dec. 15 deadline to begin receiving coverage on Jan. 1 .
“ If it ’ s not working substantially by the end of November then we have to think really hard about the Jan. 1 enrollment , because people will only have a couple of weeks , ” DeGette said , hinting that there might be congressional Democratic support for a delay at that point . On Friday , the administration announced that it would allow another week — until Dec. 23 — for people to enroll and still begin receiving coverage at the start of the new year , but that may not be enough to please lawmakers who are frustrated that their constituents haven ’ t had as much time as they thought they would to sign up .
White House chief of staff Denis McDonough ’ s trip to Capitol Hill two weeks ago appeared to stave off a mass insurrection , but 39 Democrats still abandoned the president on the GOP bill . The vote was held the day after Obama announced his own competing administrative fix and a series of apologies to the American public — and fellow Democrats — which appeared to have the effect of lowering the count of defectors .