Tom Price was sworn in to lead the Department of Health and Human Services after winning Senate confirmation early Friday morning , placing him in position to lead the way in dismantling Obamacare .
It was the Senate 's fourth consecutive contested vote for a Trump Cabinet secretary . Partisan battles for Cabinet posts are usually rare , but the first weeks of Trump 's presidency have seen little collegiality between the two sides .
Price is a veteran House member and orthopedic surgeon who Republicans call a knowledgeable pick for the job . Democrats say he 's an ideologue whose policies would snatch care from many Americans .
“ This is the first vote in the dismantling of the Affordable Care Act , ” Sen. Maria Cantwell , D-Wash. , said .
On his first day in office , Trump signed an executive order directing federal agencies to pare back elements of ObamaCare that do not require a congressional vote , The Wall Street Journal reported . Price is expected to follow through on the order .
Until recently chairman of the House Budget Committee , Price has proposed repealing Obama 's health law and replacing it with tax credits , health savings accounts and high-risk pools for sick , costly consumers .
Democrats say those ideas are inadequate and would leave people unprotected against significant health expenses.Republicans have yet to produce a replacement plan and have differed over when they will do so .
Citing Price 's long-time support for revamping the Medicare program for the elderly , Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , said that with Price 's confirmation , `` The Republicans launch their first assault in their war on seniors . '' Trump has said he wo n't cut Medicare .
Republicans see Price as a knowledgeable leader who will help scuttle Obama 's health care overhaul , partly by issuing regulations weakening the law . Democrats describe an ideologue with a shady history of trading health care stocks and whose policies will snatch insurance coverage from Americans .
`` He seems to have no higher priority than to terminate health coverage for millions of people , '' said Sen. Jeanne Shaheen , D-N.H. She said his preference for limiting women 's access to free birth control was `` not only wrong , it 's arrogant . ''
Price 's nomination is part of a larger clash in which Republicans want to quickly enact priorities long blocked by Obama . Democrats , with few tools as Congress ' minority , are making a show of resistance , stretching some floor debates to the maximum 30 hours Senate rules allow .
The high stakes plus Trump 's belligerent style have fed the combativeness . They 've also produced remarkable scenes , including Democratic boycotts of hearings , Republicans suspending committee rules to approve nominees and GOP senators voting to bar Sen. Elizabeth Warren , D-Mass. , from joining a debate .
Price has supported ending federal payments to Planned Parenthood , and paring Medicaid and giving states more power to shape the health care program for the poor . He 'd reshape Medicare 's guaranteed health coverage for the elderly into a program offering subsidies for people to buy policies .
Democrats have accused Price of lying about his acquisition of discounted shares of an Australian biotech company and benefiting from insider information . They 've also asserted he pushed legislation to help a medical implant maker whose stock he 'd purchased .
Price has said he 's done nothing wrong . It 's illegal for members of Congress to engage in insider trading .
The Senate has approved the previous three consecutive Cabinet nominees along mostly party lines .
Sen. Jeff Sessions , R-Ala. , became attorney general by 52-47 after Warren was punished for reading a 1986 letter by Coretta Scott King criticizing him . Betsy DeVos was approved as education secretary , rescued by Vice President Mike Pence 's tie breaker in a 51-50 vote , and Rex Tillerson won approval 56-43 as secretary of state .
That contrasts with the past four decades , when Senate records show most Cabinet selections have been approved overwhelmingly .
During that period , no secretary of state nominee received fewer than 85 votes . The closest tally for health secretary was the 65-31 roll call for Obama 's 2009 pick , Kathleen Sibelius .
Just four of 31 votes for Obama Cabinet vacancies drew at least 40 `` no '' votes , as did only two of 34 votes for Cabinet positions under President George W. Bush .