Americans may be able to keep their individual insurance plans for one more year , under a fix offered by President Obama on Thursday to address a controversial provision of the Affordable Care Act .
The deal is meant to mollify millions of people enraged after their insurers canceled policies that do not meet Obamacare requirements . But how many it will ultimately help remains to be seen .
The uproar over the cancellations has ensnared the White House for weeks , shining a spotlight on Obama 's previous promise that people who liked their insurance plans can keep them .
`` This fix wo n't solve every problem for every person . But it 's going to help a lot of people , '' the president said at the White House .
But the fix , as reported earlier by CNN 's Dana Bash , puts the onus of the renewals outside the president 's control : The administration is not requiring insurers or state insurance commissioners to extend the existing plans , but instead is letting them offer an additional year of coverage .
Also , insurers must notify policyholders of the difference in benefits between their policies and the Obamacare plans available on the insurance exchanges . And the companies must inform people that additional policies are available on the exchanges and that subsidies may be available to those who qualify .
Not everyone who has received a cancellation notice , however , may be able to extend .
Since insurance is regulated at the state level , it remains up to the commissioners to permit the extensions and the companies to do so . The president noted that not all commissioners may agree to extensions . At least four states -- California , Idaho , Virginia and Kentucky -- are requiring all individual plans adhere to Obamacare rules .
The insurance industry said the reversal could cause major problems , including a hike in premiums if fewer younger and healthier people opt to buy in the exchanges .
`` Changing the rules after health plans have already met the requirements of the law could destabilize the market and result in higher premiums for consumers , '' said Karen Ignagni , chief executive of America 's Health Insurance Plans , an industry trade group. `` Additional steps must be taken to stabilize the marketplace and mitigate the adverse impact on consumers . ''
In his remarks , Obama said he did n't want his signature policy to be the reason people are losing their insurance .
`` The key point is that it allows us to be able to say to the folks who receive these notices , look , you know , I , the president of the United States , and the insurance -- the insurance model of the Affordable Care Act -- is not going to be getting in the way of you shopping in the individual market that you used to have , '' he said .
But he also stressed that the reason for health reform is that the current system did not work well , and that Americans will be able to find better quality insurance on the exchanges .
`` It 's important that we do n't pretend that somehow that 's a place worth going back to , '' he said , of the existing individual market . `` Too often , it works fine , as long as you stay healthy . It does n't work well when you 're sick . ''
Also , in announcing the changes Thursday , Obama apologized for the rough start to enrollment in the federal and state exchanges . The websites have been marred by major technological problems that have stymied many visitors from registering accounts , determining whether they are eligible for subsidies and picking insurance plans . Only 106,185 people signed up for insurance in the first month , with fewer than 27,000 of them going through the federal healthcare.gov site , which is handling enrollment for 36 states .
`` We fumbled the roll out on this health care law , '' he said .
Only 106,185 people signed up for insurance in the first month , with fewer than 27,000 of them going through the federal healthcare.gov site , which is handling enrollment for 36 states . And the site is still far from fully operational , leaving tech experts racing to get it working by month 's end , as the administration promised .
Obama said the website healthcare.gov will see `` marked and noticeable '' improvement .
Americans have until March 31 for sign up for a plan , but people must select and pay for a plan by Dec. 15 for coverage to start Jan. 1 .
-- CNN 's Jim Acosta , Gloria Borger and Leigh Ann Caldwell contributed to this story .