No one knows what the Supreme Court is going to say about the health care law next week , but that hasn ’ t stopped the law ’ s opponents from planning the celebrations .
One of the groups is even throwing a party — just in case the ruling is good news for them .
Dick Armey ’ s followers at FreedomWorks — the group that was behind a lot of the protests when Congress was debating health reform in 2009 — have scheduled a June 26 gathering at their D.C. headquarters in anticipation of the ruling , which could come as late as June 28 .
“ If the Supreme Court comes down on the side of liberty , then we ’ ll celebrate ! If not , we promise to have ample food and libations to help you forget your worries , ” the group wrote in an invitation to supporters obtained by ███ . “ And if there ’ s no decision yet ? Well … who really needs an excuse to get together anyway ? ”
Other opponents are getting ready to mobilize for rallies as soon as the ruling comes down . And the law ’ s supporters are preparing to make their voices heard in events across the country — though they ’ re saying a lot less about their plans for now .
It ’ s all part of the warm-up for the biggest Supreme Court decision since Bush v. Gore . Whatever the outcome is , it will energize the groups that have been on the front lines of the political and legal battles over the Affordable Care Act — even though it ’ s not going to be the end of the debate by any stretch .
House Speaker John Boehner is trying to make sure Republicans don ’ t cheer too loudly if the law gets struck down . “ If the court strikes down all or part of the president ’ s health care law , there will be no spiking of the ball , ” he wrote in a memo Thursday . “ We will not celebrate at a time when millions of our fellow Americans remain out of work , the national debt has exceeded the size of our nation ’ s economy , health costs continue to rise , and small businesses are struggling to hire . ”
But outside groups have already been making their plans . And for the law ’ s most vocal opponents , the tone is one of barely restrained revelry .
The Tea Party Patriots are readying a two-pronged response . First , any members living within two hours of Washington have been asked to be “ Tea Party Minute Men ” and rally in front of the Supreme Court .
“ Have your camera , bullhorn , flags , or any other things you might bring to the rally ready to go so that when the time comes you are ready to roll ! ” the group posted on its Facebook page and website .
Within two days of the ruling , the group plans to hold a “ Tele Town Hall ” with Congress ’ s most prominent crusaders against the health care law — Reps. Michele Bachmann ( R-Minn. ) and Steve King ( R-Iowa ) and Sen. Rand Paul ( R-Ky. ) . Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli , a candidate for governor , is also planning to be on the call , according to organizers .