Tuesday 's announcement does n't derail Obamacare , but it does affect public perception . 6 questions on Obamacare
The bombshell announcement came from the Treasury Department on Tuesday night , catching even the administration ’ s close allies by surprise : A key part of Obamacare will be postponed for one year .
The employer mandate — or as the administration calls it , the shared responsibility rules — was put on hold . Businesses won ’ t have any new requirements to cover workers , or penalties if they don ’ t , until 2015 .
The news came just as the White House was building momentum for its public education campaign and trying to send out signals that everything was on track for enrollment to begin in October .
It doesn ’ t derail it . But it hurts , at least in how the public sees it and how the critics can talk about it .
Polls have already shown that Americans still don ’ t know much and have a lot of misperceptions about the 3-year-old law . This won ’ t help , particularly with the critics emboldened to talk about chaotic implementation of a fatally flawed policy .
The administration insists that the new health insurance exchanges or marketplaces will start enrollment on time this Oct. 1 . A lot more people will get covered in those new markets than through the employer mandate , which wasn ’ t as central to the coverage push because most big businesses already offer health benefits . But it could mean that fewer people do get coverage next year .
Republicans used it to again say that the law should be repealed and replaced . Repeal won ’ t happen as long as President Barack Obama ’ s in the White House , but some groups on Tuesday renewed their calls for defunding the health law – a throwback to congressional fights in the previous Congress . Even before this announcement , some in the GOP had been pushing for another funding fight , maybe tied into the coming battles over the debt ceiling . And of course it will resonate in the 2014 House and Senate campaigns .
“ Pushing the implementation of the employer mandate until after the 2014 election confirms the law was a historic mistake , ” said Sen. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee , the top Republican on the Senate Health , Education , Labor and Health Committee .
One immediate question people were asking : Is this the only delay the Obama administration will be announcing ? Or is it the first in a line of dominos — with the individual mandate being the most important domino . After all , the administration has already delayed until 2015 a key feature in the small-business exchanges that would have given workers more choice in health plans .
And the individual mandate is a prime target for opponents who can say , why should big companies get out of confounding Obamacare rules if an average citizen can not ?
The White House put up a blog post stressing that the main elements of the law will be ready to go in October . And allies said the move Tuesday put a piece of the law — but not the core of it — on hold .
Asked whether the individual mandate could be pushed back , Ron Pollack , head of the Families USA advocacy group said , “ I believe that is inconceivable. ” The employer mandate is a segment of the law , but the individual mandate is its core .
And don ’ t expect the individual mandate , which survived a Supreme Court challenge last year , to go down easily . For starters , insurance companies would pitch a fit . They need the individual mandate if they are going to provide costly new services to cover everyone , sick and healthy , as the law requires .
Businesses with more than 50 workers were supposed to provide health insurance starting in 2014 or face a penalty of $ 2,000 per employee . That ’ s been put on hold after a noisy outcry from business groups and a lot of commentary about how the law was hurting business as the economic recovery was still fragile .
Business groups said the rules and regulations about employee coverage — who was full time , what kind of benefits they were getting , what requirements were being fulfilled — were cumbersome . So on Tuesday the Treasury , which is responsible for this piece of Obamacare , said it had agreed to go back to the drawing board .