Story highlights House debate includes off-beat references to popular culture
Democrats tie the federal health care law to Mitt Romney
A repeal vote Wednesday will be the latest House GOP attempt to undermine Obamacare
Even if passed by the House , the repeal measure has no chance of passing the Senate
House Republicans launched an all-out assault Tuesday against President Barack Obama 's signature health care reform law , holding a series of committee hearings and other events ahead of a planned vote Wednesday on repealing the measure .
The vote will be the latest of more than 30 House GOP efforts to undermine the 2010 Affordable Care Act , including previous Republican-led moves to repeal the measure or cut funding for various provisions .
Any House repeal effort is sure to die in the Democratic-led Senate , and the White House made clear Obama would veto such a measure .
At news conferences , in media interviews and before congressional panels on Tuesday , GOP opponents of the health care law depicted it as an unwarranted government intrusion in health decisions that would reduce patients to commodities treated on a cost basis .
`` This is all about the government . It is Washington knows best , and it is wrong , '' said House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dave Camp , R-Michigan , in floor debate ahead of the Wednesday vote .
Republicans also complained that the bill known as Obamacare would fail to control spiraling health care costs , and that it included new taxes and fees despite the president 's promise not to raise middle-class taxes .
To Democrats , the entire exercise was an unnecessary repetition of past political posturing on a settled issue , now that the Supreme Court has upheld the law 's constitutionality .
`` This repeal vote is a waste of time and tax dollars , '' said Rep. G.K. Butterfield , D-North Carolina , while Rep. Frank Pallone , D-New Jersey , noted , `` We 've had this debate so many times that it really sounds like we just keep repeating the same thing . ''
Other legislators tried to liven up the rhetoric with references to popular culture . Democrats mentioned the movie `` Groundhog Day , '' about a character forced to live the same day over and over , while Rep. Chris Murphy , D-Connecticut , likened Republican obsessiveness on the issue to the Glenn Close character in `` Fatal Attraction . ''
Wondering if Republicans had `` finally hit their 'boil the bunny ' moment '' -- a gruesome incident in the film -- Murphy challenged GOP colleagues to work with Democrats on moving forward `` instead of channeling their inner Glenn Close . ''
Republican Rep. Phil Gingrey of Georgia chose to compare Obama to Boss Hogg , the unethical county commissioner from `` The Dukes of Hazzard '' television show . Gingrey stood next to a poster featuring the character 's photo that said : `` You can have whatever you like ... as long as THE BOSS approves it . ''
`` Let 's get rid of the boss , once and for all , '' Gingrey said .
The daylong GOP attacks were intended to ignite public opposition to the law and force Democrats to publicly defend it . Republicans made clear that the goal is to inspire voters to rally against the law and Obama in the November presidential election .
`` If you give us more elected representatives to fix this problem , we will fix this problem in 2013 , '' House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan , R-Wisconsin , said in an interview with CNBC .
Wednesday 's vote will be the first on the subject since last month 's Supreme Court ruling , which Democrats argue should have ended the political debate over the health care law , rather than revive the Republican repeal effort .
On Monday , the White House formally notified House leaders that Obama will veto any repeal bill that manages to reach his desk , saying repeal `` would cost millions of hard-working middle-class families the security of affordable health coverage and care they deserve . ''
`` The last thing the Congress should do is refight old political battles and take a massive step backward by repealing basic protections that provide security for the middle class , '' a White House statement said . `` Right now , the Congress needs to work together to focus on the economy and creating jobs . ''
But Republicans , led by certain presidential nominee Mitt Romney , call for eliminating the law and starting over on the complex issue that affects every American .
JUST WATCHED Obama : No apology for health care fight Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Obama : No apology for health care fight 01:19
JUST WATCHED Reps work to repeal health care reform Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Reps work to repeal health care reform 04:04
JUST WATCHED Romney calls health care law a tax Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Romney calls health care law a tax 03:41
JUST WATCHED GPS : Fareed 's take on U.S. health care Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH GPS : Fareed 's take on U.S. health care 03:35
`` That 's why we 've voted over 30 times to repeal it , defund it , replace it . And we are resolved to have this law go away and we 're gon na do everything we can to stop it , '' House Speaker John Boehner , R-Ohio , told reporters Tuesday .
Democrats repeatedly noted the federal law was modeled after a Massachusetts health care law implemented by Romney when he was governor .
`` It would have been relevant if we could have had a doctor from Massachusetts be part of this hearing , '' Rep. William Clay , D-Missouri , told a House Oversight subcommittee hearing on the law 's effect on the health care industry . `` You know , their views would have been relevant since for the past five years they have been living with comprehensive health care reform , signed into law by Gov . Mitt Romney , that is substantially similar . ''
At the hearing , the lone Democratic witness on the panel of five people who testified noted support for the health care law by major national organizations including the American Medical Association , the American Association of Pediatrics , the American College of Physicans , the AARP advocacy group for senior citizens and others .
However , the witness , Ron Pollack of Families USA , was repeatedly cut off by Republicans on the panel when he responded to questions they asked him . Three times , Pollack was admonished to limit his responses to `` yes '' or `` no '' by the GOP committee members .
Republican witnesses , meanwhile , said the health care law would deny people medical care based on need , saying cost would be the determining factor .
Dr. Dick Armstrong of Docs4PatientCare , an advocacy group opposed to the federal law , said the act destroys the doctor-patient relationship , adding : `` This is the reality of Obamacare . There is no care . ''
The GOP 's conservative base strongly opposes the individual mandate in the law , which requires people to obtain health insurance or pay a fine .
In its ruling , the Supreme Court said the mandate is constitutional under the government 's taxing authority , and Republicans have jumped on that to characterize the provision as a tax increase on middle-class Americans .
Obama and Democrats respond that only people who can afford health insurance but choose not to get it would have to pay , amounting to about 1 % of the population .
The health care issue has been among the most divisive of Obama 's presidency . Conservative anger over the measure helped launch the tea party movement , and conservative groups joined with industry groups to fund a giant public pressure campaign against the legislation , which Democrats pushed through Congress with no Republican support .
Some provisions already have brought popular benefits , such as preventing insurance companies from denying coverage for children with pre-existing conditions .
The bulk of the health care law will take effect in 2014 , including health insurance exchanges to provide options for individuals and small businesses to purchase coverage . Full implementation also will expand benefits , such as preventing insurance companies from denying coverage for adults with pre-existing conditions .
Romney , while pledging to repeal the health care law if elected , also says some provisions of it should be maintained , including the ban on denying coverage for pre-existing conditions .