The media often turned a blind eye to conservatives ' warnings . | John Shinkle/███ GOP rides wave of cancellations
Since the Affordable Care Act was introduced in 2009 , Republicans have dismissed President Barack Obama ’ s oft-repeated promise that anyone who liked their insurance plan would be able to keep it .
For years , the media turned a blind eye to conservatives ’ insistent warnings , often taking the president ’ s promise for granted . But this week , as health insurance cancellation letters started showing up in Americans ’ mailboxes and the website rollout flopped , the GOP message finally broke into the mainstream .
On Monday , NBC News reported that at least half of the approximately 14 million Americans with individual insurance are set to have their health plans shut down by insurers under Obamacare . On Wednesday , the story was featured on the front page of some of the nation ’ s leading newspapers and was the main talking point for Republican lawmakers during the congressional hearing with Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius .
“ We ’ ve been warning that these things were going to happen since 2009 , ” said Kirsten Kukowski , the press secretary for the Republican National Committee .
“ There were stories all across the country , ” said Brendan Buck , the press secretary for House Speaker John Boehner . “ We see stories like that get dismissed — but this was going to happen at some point , it was inevitable . ”
For the past few years , the RNC , top conservative think tanks and several influential right-leaning bloggers have been trying to convince Americans that Obama ’ s claim about being able to keep your plan was wrong . A few news outlets also cautioned against the president ’ s promise . As early as June 2009 , The Associated Press wrote that “ no president could guarantee such a pledge . ”
But for the most part , the mainstream media failed to aggressively pursue the story , taking Obama ’ s claim at face value without testing it against the facts . Meanwhile , congressional Republicans , who had given a burst of attention several years ago to the issue that people may lose their plans , moved on to critiquing other aspects of the legislation and the press coverage followed .
“ For the mainstream media , this matters to them now because they feel like they were lied to — that ’ s why it ’ s caught on , ” Kukowski said . “ The White House made it out like we were the ones crying wolf , now it turns out they ’ re the ones who were wrong . ”
In a speech in Boston on Wednesday , Obama said media reports that ignored “ that almost all the insurers are encouraging people to join better plans ” were misleading and that the 5 percent of Americans with individual plans will ultimately get a better deal . But his argument has done little to stem the sense that it was Obama who misled the American people when he promised that no one would have to change their insurance plan if they didn ’ t want to .
That the message finally broke into the mainstream this week has as much to do with the Obama administration ’ s own failures — “ the president kind of handed this to us , ” one GOP operative said — as it does with Republican persistence to find a message against Obamacare that would gain traction .
“ People in the media rarely give us the benefit of the doubt , so we have to go to great lengths to prove what we ’ re saying is accurate and fair , ” Buck said . “ Now we have real-world , concrete examples that show what we ’ re saying is true — that the president was misleading the public . ”
It also has something to do with the fickle nature of the press .
“ Let ’ s face it , the media , particularly in Washington , can only focus on one big thing at a time . The reason this is happening now is because people are actually starting to get the cancellation letters , ” said Glenn Kessler , the author of the Washington Post ’ s Fact-Checker blog , who on Wednesday gave Obama ’ s claim “ four Pinocchios . ”
“ The best media story is a story with a victim , and now you have people who can hold up the [ cancellation ] notices that say , ‘ You ’ ve lost your plan , ’ ” he added . “ Until now , it was very difficult to say definitively that the president was not correct , because that hadn ’ t happened yet . ”
And yet , the warning signs were there from the beginning .
In June 2009 , more than a year before the law was passed , the AP ’ s Ricardo Alonso-Zaldivar wrote that Obama ’ s vow “ sounds reassuring and gets applause , but no president could guarantee such a pledge. ” ( In May of this year , he also wrote , “ Like your health care policy ? You may be losing it . ” )
Since then , Republican politicians , conservative think tanks and right-wing bloggers have continued to warn about the coming realities for people with individual insurance plans .