Staging a fresh assault on President Barack Obama 's signature healthcare reform law , the Republican-led House of Representatives on Wednesday approved largely symbolic legislation to delay key coverage requirements .
The measures , the 38th and 39th House bills to take aim at the 2010 reforms known as Obamacare , would delay for a year the requirement that Americans obtain health insurance and would codify the Obama administration 's recent decision to delay the mandate for larger employers to offer health coverage .
The White House 's surprise announcement of the one-year employer delay this month sparked a new wave of Republican anger over the healthcare law that threatens to bleed into other issues , such as government spending legislation , in the next fiscal year .
Obama administration officials have insisted that the law 's core provision , the requirement for uninsured Americans to obtain subsidized coverage through new online exchanges , will remain in place . Those with no coverage will face tax penalties starting in January .
The House voted 264-161 for the individual delay , and 251-174 in favor of the employer delay , with some Democrats joining the Republican effort .
The legislation stopped well short of previous efforts to fully repeal Obamacare , but gave Republicans a new chance to vent their frustration at the law and discredit it as the state-run insurance exchanges prepare to open in October .
`` The delay of the employer mandate is the latest confirmation of the fatally flawed nature of Obamacare and the need to dismantle it , '' said Rep. John Kline , a Republican from Minnesota . `` It is n't right to deny American families the same relief available to American businesses . ''
While the legislation faces a White House veto threat and is virtually certain to be blocked in the Democratic-controlled Senate , Republicans insist they will keep trying to kill Obamacare and keep it alive as a 2014 campaign issue .
They argue that the law 's mandates will drive up healthcare costs , stunt job growth and cause businesses to cut back employee working hours to avoid the coverage requirements .
Many Democrats derided the votes as another political sideshow consuming the House 's time and energy . They pointed to new health insurance pricing information released by New York Governor Andrew Cuomo on Wednesday as evidence that the law will reduce coverage costs .
Cuomo 's report showed that many New York state residents who buy health insurance next year will most likely see their premiums cut by half .
`` What we 're hearing right now is the sound of Republican heart rates going up : Obamacare is coming , '' said Representative Jim McDermott , a Democrat from Washington state . `` These last benefits are going to happen - like it or not - and worse , they 're going to work . ''
White House spokesman Jay Carney said Republicans were simply trying `` to refight old battles than have been fought . ''
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
He said Obama will give a speech on Thursday touting the healthcare law 's benefits , including the 8.5 million consumers who are receiving an average $ 100 rebate this summer from insurance companies . The rebates are due to a provision in the law that requires companies to spend at least 80 percent of premiums on medical care , rather than on administrative costs .
( Additional reporting by Roberta Rampton and Caroline Humer ; Editing by Stacey Joyce )