WASHINGTON ( CNN ) - As a potential government shutdown inched closer Saturday morning , the Obama administration reiterated that it will not negotiate with Republicans over delaying the president 's signature health care law .
A day after President Barack Obama said any attempt to `` gut '' or repeal the Affordable Care Act `` will not happen under the threat of a shutdown , '' a White House official echoed the commander-in-chief , telling CNN 's Jim Acosta a continuing resolution that alters or delays Obamacare will not merit the president 's signature .
`` I do n't think the president could have been any more clear , '' the official said , in reference to Obama 's comments Friday .
Arriving at the Capitol to prepare for a noon meeting with his caucus , Rep. John Boehner , R-Ohio , again slipped into his mantra of late , declaring himself a `` happy warrior '' to reporters . Despite the speaker 's nom de guerre , it appears as if both sides remain unwilling and unable to move towards a compromise . Responding to Obama 's Friday remarks , Brendan Buck , a spokesman for the Ohio Republican , blasted the president for refusing to negotiate with House Republicans and assailed Obama 's comments as `` grandstanding '' that `` wo n't bring Congress any closer to a resolution . ''
The administration 's staunch refusal to negotiate would seem to render potential bargaining points under consideration by the House Republican caucus as non-starters . A source within the Republican Party told CNN 's Dana Bash on Friday night that options being examined by the GOP-controlled lower chamber include delaying the health care legislation one year , eliminating the Independent Payment Advisory Board - commonly referred to by right-wing partisans as `` death panels '' - and repealing a tax on medical devices .
Two House Republican sources informed Bash Saturday morning that a vote on a continuing resolution is likely sometime today . The sources say the bill would include delaying Obamacare for a year or a repealing the medical device tax .
White House press secretary Jay Carney is already on the record saying the president would reject doing away with the medical device tax if it were included in a stopgap spending bill . Adam Jentleson , a spokesman for Harry Reid , D-Nevada , also weighed in on behalf of his boss , relaying that the Senate majority leader thinks the Republican proposal is `` stupid . '' Even the ranking Republican on the Senate Finance Committee , Orrin Hatch , who helped write the medical device tax repeal , agrees that it 's the wrong time to push for axing the tax and opponents of the measure would be better served waiting until the mid-October debt ceiling fight .