“ I personally believe even if it takes a change in the law , the president should honor the commitment the federal government made to those people and let them keep what they got , ” Mr. Clinton said in the interview , published by Ozy , a web magazine .
Mr. Clinton , who tried to pass a health care overhaul during his presidency , has been a powerful advocate for the Affordable Care Act , especially among the president ’ s key Democratic constituencies . And Mr. Clinton ’ s wife , Hillary Rodham Clinton , is weighing a White House bid in 2016 that could be affected by the fortunes of the health care law .
Mr. Clinton followed a steady stream of Democrats who have announced their support for legislation to let people keep their coverage . Senator Dianne Feinstein , Democrat of California , endorsed one such effort by Senators Mary L. Landrieu of Louisiana and Joe Manchin III of West Virginia , both Democrats .
“ Since the beginning of September , I have received 30,842 calls , emails and letters from Californians , many of whom are very distressed by cancellations of their insurance policies and who are facing increased out-of-pocket costs , ” Ms. Feinstein said . “ The Landrieu bill is a common-sense fix that will protect individuals in the private insurance market from being forced to change their insurance plans . ”
Ms. Landrieu , who faces a difficult election fight next year , said the cancellation notices “ should have never gone out . ”
“ We said , and the president said over and over , that if people have insurance and they like the insurance they have , they can keep it , ” Ms. Landrieu said . “ That is my bill . That is the single focus of my bill . It is not to undermine the Affordable Care Act . It is to strengthen it and to keep our promise to millions of Americans . ”
The White House declined to comment specifically on Ms. Landrieu ’ s bill , but said that another effort by Representative Fred Upton , Republican of Michigan , and the chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee , was especially problematic . Under Mr. Upton ’ s bill , an insurer that had individual policies in effect on Jan. 1 of this year could continue to “ offer such coverage for sale during 2014 ” in the market outside an exchange .