Share All sharing options for : Congress is grilling pharma CEOs . Here are 8 ideas for bringing down drug prices .
Americans have said for years that they ’ re frustrated with the price of medicine and it should be high on lawmakers ’ to-do list . Now Congress has put together an extensive menu of ideas for reducing prescription drug costs .
Democrats have made drug prices a top priority for their new House majority — and this is one of the rare policy areas where they might find some common ground with Republicans .
Seven executives from major pharmaceutical firms are appearing before the Senate Finance Committee on Tuesday , where they should face tough questions from senators about rising drug costs . Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R-IA ) , who heads the influential committee , has signaled he wants to pursue a few targeted bills this Congress , leading to new optimism that bipartisan compromise on the issue is within reach . Rep. Elijah Cummings ( D-MD ) and Sen. Bernie Sanders ( I-VT ) also recently released a slew of bills to lower prescription drug prices , pulling together some of the most popular ideas already out there .
Democratic aides have made clear that while their conference is united on the necessity of action , they still need to figure out where the consensus on the actual policy is .
“ How do you take this gargantuan menu of things and figure out how things fit together in a way that stem some of the abuses ? ” is how one senior House aide summarized the dilemma to me last fall .
The reality of drug prices is always more complicated than the rhetoric . List prices get all the attention , and they have gone up , but they don ’ t tell the full story . The real cost to patients is more opaque , buried in a tangled web of manufacturer rebates and insurance cost sharing . The current system , for its flaws , has also delivered remarkable medical breakthroughs in recent decades ; then again , the matter of research and development is also a complex one , given how many scientific breakthroughs originate in government and academic labs .
Drug prices are a thorny problem . What we do know for sure is people want something done about drug costs . The current proposals on the table range from the realistic to the purely aspirational . In roughly such an order , they are :
Let ’ s run through both types , starting with the humbler , but today more politically viable , possibilities .
Idea 1 : help generic competitors get on the market as quickly as possible
In terms of what could actually pass Congress and get to President Trump ’ s desk during a divided government , the best starting point would be two bills supported by Grassley , the Iowa senator who just took over the Senate Finance Committee , to speed the development of generic drugs .
Grassley told reporters that he wanted to move a pair of bills that would , through different means , try to make sure that generic competitors to brand-name drugs are able to come on the market ( and thereby start to bring down prices ) as quickly as possible .
They are both co-sponsored by Sen. Amy Klobuchar ( D-MN ) , a potential 2020 Democratic presidential contender , with Sen , Pat Leahy ( D-VT ) also attached to one . Those bills would , in brief :
Strengthen the legal remedies for generic companies if a brand-name drug manufacturer refuses to provide the materials necessary to develop a generic alternative for a given drug , while also requiring brand-name companies to provide such samples in sufficient quantities at a reasonable price . Crack down on “ pay for delay ” : payments brand-name drug companies sometimes make to potential generic competitors that delay the development of the generic version of a drug
There are also other targeted proposals to ramp up government-funded research on the effectiveness of drugs and to stem other kinds of patent abuses that fall under the same umbrella and which consumer advocates expect to be a part of the upcoming debate over drug costs .
These ideas aren ’ t new ; industry groups have tried to keep them from getting anywhere on Capitol Hill for years . But Grassley has a powerful perch as finance chair and sounds like he is serious about trying to do something over the next two years .
One irony of the ongoing drug prices debate , says Rachel Sachs , an associate professor at Washington University in St. Louis , is that the drug industry opposition to more modest proposals like this , targeted to particular bad actors and actions , is driving Democrats to embrace more ambitious and potentially disruptive proposals .
“ When the industry opposes even those bills designed to rein in bad actors — those engaging in collusive settlements or other anticompetitive practices — it is not surprising that Democrats would seek to introduce more extreme ideas , ” she told me .
We ’ ll get to those in a moment . But first , there is another idea that enjoys support from both Democrats and Republicans .
Drug importation was the other item on Grassley ’ s list , and it is also part of the Sanders-Cummings rollout . Grassley wants to pursue a bill that resembles prior proposals from the late Sen. John McCain ( R-AZ ) .
For the time being , let ’ s look at the freshly introduced Democratic bill , co-authored by Sens . Cory Booker ( D-NJ ) and Bob Casey ( D-PA ) .
Functionally , the proposal is pretty straightforward , though there are a lot of granular conditions for which foreign sellers would be allowed to export medications into the United States , safety protocols , and even criminal penalties for people who try to bring counterfeit products into the country . ( Safety and the risk of counterfeit drugs is the big issue raised by the industry in opposition to importation . )
US wholesalers , pharmacies , and individuals would be allowed to import medications from Canada that were manufactured at sites inspected by the Food and Drug Administration . After a few years , importation from other countries would also be permitted , so long as the countries have comparable regulatory and safety standards to the United States .
Patients would be allowed to import drugs only from licensed foreign sellers , only if they have a valid prescription from a US doctor , and they could only order a supply that would last for 90 days or less . The Congressional Budget Office estimated a prior version of the Democratic importation bill would save the federal government nearly $ 7 billion over 10 years .
( The McCain proposal is a more limited version of the same idea , restricting importation to Canada and individual patients . )
Importation is a popular idea that is easy for the public to understand , though policy wonks don ’ t love it . There is a risk that the other countries would move to intervene if they feel their own prices rising in response to a US importation program .
There is also the matter of insurance benefits . Pharma argues , and with some justification , that the pain Americans feel on drug affordability is less about drug prices ( as set by drug makers ) and more about drug costs , what people are required to pay out of pocket under their insurance plan .
There are a few proposals to specifically target out-of-pocket costs for prescription drugs :
As part of a broader drug prices bill introduced last year , Sen. Tina Smith ( D-MN ) and Sanders proposed introducing a $ 250-per-month cap on cost sharing for prescription drugs for Obamacare and group insurance plans .
Sen. Elizabeth Warren ( D-MA ) introduced a standalone bill in 2017 to do the same thing .
Another bill from Sen. Ron Wyden ( D-OR ) would place a hard cap on cost sharing for prescriptions drugs for Medicare beneficiaries , who are currently required to continue paying either copayments or coinsurance even after they nominally hit the program ’ s out-of-pocket cap .
Six in 10 people take a prescription , and one in four say they or a family member have declined to fill a prescription or skipped a dose because of the cost of their drugs . Those folks would surely welcome the immediate relief of lower cost sharing .
However , Democrats in particular believe more fundamental changes are needed to the prescription drug market .
Medicare negotiations have become the signature policy idea , particularly out on the campaign trail , for Democrats who say they want to lower drug prices . It tends to poll well ; President Donald Trump even flirted with the concept during his 2016 campaign .
A new bill , co-sponsored by Rep. Peter Welch ( D-VT ) , sets out parameters for negotiations :
The bill would repeal an existing prohibition on the health and human services secretary negotiating prices for drugs covered by Medicare Part D .
The secretary would prioritize certain kinds of drugs for negotiation : high-cost drugs , drugs with recent price hikes , and drugs without any notable competition .
The federal government would account for a given drug ’ s clinical effectiveness , as well as cost-effectiveness , and its impact on the Medicare budget when negotiating new prices .
The health secretary would create a formulary for Medicare drug coverage . Part D would be required to cover at least two drugs in every class and category .
The legislation creates a so-called fallback price if the negotiations fail . Those fallback prices would be based either on what other federal programs like Medicaid pay for drugs or on what certain foreign countries pay , whichever is lowest .
The tricky part of Medicare negotiations has always been the formulary ( which gives preference to certain drugs and/or places restrictions on when a drug is covered ) . The Congressional Budget Office has previously said that without the formulary , Medicare negotiations wouldn ’ t necessarily save a meaningful amount of money . That makes sense : Negotiators need the leverage of access restrictions to extract deeper savings from drugmakers .
However , such restrictions also make the government vulnerable to attacks that it is denying patients access to drugs they want or need ; pharma argues that private Medicare Part D plans already negotiate discounts for drugs and patient access could be hindered under a model like this one . The new bill does notably allow for patients to make an appeal to Medicare to cover drugs not included in the formulary .
There is a peripherally related provision in the bill that could also lower costs . Low-income seniors who are covered by both Medicare and Medicaid currently receive drugs through Medicare . The Sanders-Cummings bill would require drug manufacturers to pay Medicaid rebates for those patients , which CBO has estimated would save $ 154 billion over 10 years .
Sens . Kirsten Gillibrand ( D-NY ) and Sherrod Brown ( D-OH ) — the former already running for president , the latter actively considering a run — have introduced a plan that would simply tax pharmaceutical companies for hiking the prices of their medications .
Under the Stop Price Gouging Act , drug makers would face an excise tax if their price increases exceed the annual rise in the consumer price index for medical care . The tax would capture between 50 and 100 percent of the revenue that drug companies bring in from their price hikes . Exceptions could be made if there is a good reason for the increase , if the price is still quite low ( less than $ 10 for a 30-day supply ) , or if there are alternatives to the drug available to consumers .
The Brown-Gillibrand plan builds on the idea of drug transparency , i.e . requiring drug companies to report and justify any increase in their prices . The weakness of simple transparency , without an enforcement mechanism , is that there isn ’ t much more than shame to compel drug makers to keep prices down . This bill would require transparency ( companies must report certain data to federal health officials ) , but then uses it to actually levy a tax for price hikes .
Idea 6 : use foreign drug prices to reduce American prices
The last piece of the Sanders-Cummings package has some similarities to a recently minted Trump administration initiative . You could think of it as an America First plan .
The bill is actually pretty simple in its mechanics : If the US price for a medication is higher than in other developed countries , the drugmaker ’ s monopoly would be ended and generic competitors could enter the market to sell alternative versions of the drug at a lower price .
Every year , the federal health department would identify “ excessively priced ” drugs : medications priced higher in the US than the average price in Canada , the United Kingdom , Germany , France , and Japan .
The health secretary could also label a drug as “ excessively priced ” based on other criteria , including the size of the patient population , the value of the drug to patients , and the costs of developing the drug ( among other metrics ) .
If a drug is deemed “ excessively priced , ” its manufacturer would lose the patent protections that prevent competitors from developing generic versions of the drug .
New generic competitors could then start selling their own iterations of the drug , though they would be required to pay a “ reasonable royalty ” to the drug ’ s original manufacturer .
Some experts , even those who generally favor aggressive actions to bring down drug prices , worried that an earlier version of the plan , introduced last month by Sanders and Rep. Ro Khanna ( D-CA ) , had such broad criteria for labeling drugs as “ excessively priced ” that the risks to medical innovation started to outweigh the benefits of lower prices .
I spoke with staffers who worked on the bill about this issue , and they told me their theory of the case : Drug companies will have the information they need — what they charge in the United States , what they charge elsewhere — to lower their prices enough to avoid having their patents invalidated . Democratic aides believe that most drugmakers will do what they must to maintain a monopoly in the United States .
Elizabeth Warren and Rep. Jan Schakowsky ( D-IL ) want the federal government to start manufacturing prescription drugs when the market fails and prices for some medications become unaffordable .
In their bill , under limited circumstances , the federal government would produce a more affordable generic version of certain drugs . These are the scenarios where the feds could start manufacturing their own medications :
If no company is producing a generic version of the drug
If only one or two companies are producing a drug and there is either a price hike or a drug shortage
If only one or two companies are producing a drug , the price makes it difficult for some patients to afford , and the World Health Organization classifies it as an “ essential medicine ”
The bill allows the federal government to either produce the drugs itself or contract an outside company to do it . It would set “ fair ” prices to cover the costs of making the drugs . The bill also directs the federal government to start producing insulin , which helps treat diabetes ( which tens of millions of Americans have ) and has seen prices triple or so over the past decade .
Wonks on the right and left found this to be an intriguing idea ; it is similar to a new nonprofit started by hospitals and philanthropic groups to do the same thing . “ This proposal could be a helpful intervention for those generic drugs that have recently seen price spikes or are in shortage , ” Sachs told me last month .
Idea 8 : end pharmaceutical monopolies and give out “ prizes ” instead
This is the most audacious idea on the list , and when evaluating its political prospects , remember that Sanders has stood alone in the Senate in supporting it . The 2017 version of his bill attracted no co-sponsors . ( An updated version is expected in the new Congress . )
But if we ’ re putting everything on the table , this proposal would effectively end the drug market as it exists today — in which drugmakers receive a decade-long monopoly on new treatments before any generic competitors can come on the market — and replace it with something new .
Under the “ prize ” model , developers of new drugs would instead receive a payment from the government and then other companies would be allowed to manufacture the treatment ( within FDA safety and regulatory rules , of course . ) The Sanders bill sets aside $ 100 billion every year to pay for the prizes , with specific pools of funding reserved for global neglected diseases , diseases affecting smaller populations , and certain infectious diseases .
A board of government officials and presidential appointees would oversee the prize fund . Prizes for specific drugs would be based on the number of patients who could benefit from a new treatment , how much the new drug improves on existing treatments , and other value considerations .
A “ prize ” system is a pipe dream for the near future , though Sanders has previously indicated such a program could start small by focusing on conditions with unique needs , like HIV/AIDS . Its biggest challenge is probably disruption : drug companies have made investments on the assumption that they would enjoy long monopolies on new drugs . The fundamental premise of the market would change under a “ prize ” plan — for the better , in the eyes of its supporters , but pharma is going to argue on the other side that innovation is at risk in this new market .
Sanders believes his prize fund would be generous enough to keep R & D thriving . Also potentially in the idea ’ s favor are libertarian scholars who also support giving out prizes instead of patents , creating an odd-duck alliance of democratic socialists and free market absolutists . It ’ s an interesting idea , at the very least .
In the nearer term , the proposals at the top of this list are much more realistic . But as some experts wisely noted , the intransigence in Congress and the persistent drag of drug costs on so many Americans ’ wallets will keep the pressure on lawmakers to propose bigger and bolder solutions to the problem .