President Obama 's re-election and the retention of a Democratic majority in the Senate means the likelihood of a repeal of the Affordable Care Act has receded .
`` The law is here and we should at this point expect it to still be here Jan. 1 , 2014 , '' says Alan Weil , executive director of the nonpartisan National Academy for State Health Policy .
Jan. 1 , 2014 , is the date the major parts of the law , like the new insurance policies available to individuals and small businesses , are supposed to become available .
`` The question is , '' says Weil , `` what does implementation look like ? ''
There 's not a lot of time left to get ready . Many states and some key parts of the health care industry delayed gearing up much of this past year . They assumed either the Supreme Court would rule the law unconstitutional — which it did n't — or that Mitt Romney and a Republican Congress would be elected and make the law go away . That did n't happen , either .
Now one of the law 's big implementation deadlines for states is bearing down fast .
`` When it comes to insurance exchanges , states have nine more days to decide whether they want to run their own or let the federal government do it for them , '' says Weil .
Insurance exchanges are where people will go to shop for insurance coverage . They are also where people will get help paying for that coverage if they qualify for subsidies from the federal government . So far , according to Weil , only 13 states and Washington , D.C. , have said they plan to set up their own exchanges . If states decide not to set up their own exchanges , the federal government will step in and do it instead . But federal officials still have n't spelled out exactly how that will work .
Meanwhile , opponents of the law say the measure is still not out of the legal woods yet . The problem goes back to those subsidies that will help people afford coverage starting in 2014 .
`` They are a crucial part of the law . Without them , the law is not going to work , '' says Michael Cannon , who heads health policy for the libertarian Cato Institute . `` Health insurance markets are going to collapse ; right after , health insurance premiums are going to go sky high . ''
That 's because , he contends , the law only makes those subsidies available through exchanges set up by states — and not by those run by the federal government . That 's also the contention of a lawsuit filed by the state of Oklahoma .
`` The law is not beautifully crafted , but there are enough cross-references within the statute to make it clear that the subsidies are meant to be available to everyone based on their income , '' Weil says .
`` I do n't think who runs the administrative apparatus is relevant . I actually think the statute is quite clear in that regard , '' he says — meaning the subsidies should be available whether the insurance exchanges are run by states or by the federal government .
The insurance exchanges are not the only big question mark facing the law , Cannon says .
`` It 's vulnerable because ... it was handed a defeat by the Supreme Court when the Supreme Court said that the Medicaid expansion is optional for states , '' he said .
That led several Republican governors to vow that they would not add millions of new low-income adults to their Medicaid programs — even though the federal government will pay most of the bill . But now public hospitals and others who serve those currently uninsured people are agitating to bring that federal money in . So those governors may find themselves under increasing pressure at home .