White House Budget Director Mick Mulvaney responded Wednesday to a heartfelt appeal to lawmakers by late-night host Jimmy Kimmel that children not be denied care because of pre-existing conditions – with Mulvaney saying he agrees , and Republicans aren ’ t looking to kick people off their health care .
“ Everyone , I think , agrees with Jimmy Kimmel that we have enough money in this country to provide care for those type of folks , ” he told `` Fox & Friends . ''
Kimmel , host of “ The Jimmy Kimmel Show , ” choked up Monday night as he told the story of his son ’ s birth and subsequent health scare , which revealed he had a heart defect requiring urgent surgery . After telling his story , he urged lawmakers discussing health care reform on Capitol Hill to work together to make sure no child can be denied health insurance because of a pre-existing condition .
“ Before 2014 , if you were born with congenital heart disease like my son was , there was a good chance you would never be able to get health insurance because you were born with a pre-existing condition , ” he said .
“ If your baby is going to die and it doesn ’ t have to , it shouldn ’ t matter how much money you make . I think that ’ s something that if you ’ re a Democrat or a Republican , we all agree on that , we do , ” he said , adding that lawmakers in Washington need to understand that .
“ Don ’ t let their partisan squabbles divide us on something every decent person wants , we need to take care of each other , ” Kimmel said . “ No parent should have to ever decide if they can afford to save their child ’ s life , it just shouldn ’ t happen , not here . ”
Democrats leapt on Kimmel ’ s viral remarks – which had already picked up over 7 million hits on YouTube alone – to pressure Republicans over a new health bill in the works which is struggling to attract enough support .
“ Well said , Jimmy . That 's exactly why we fought so hard for the ACA , and why we need to protect it for kids like Billy . And congratulations ! ” former President Barack Obama tweeted .
Well said , Jimmy . That 's exactly why we fought so hard for the ACA , and why we need to protect it for kids like Billy . And congratulations ! https : //t.co/77F8rZrD3P — Barack Obama ( @ BarackObama ) May 2 , 2017
Watch & prepare to tear up . Thanks @ jimmykimmel for sharing your story & reminding us what 's at stake w/health care.https : //t.co/2kTEeUEG2f — Hillary Clinton ( @ HillaryClinton ) May 2 , 2017
But Mulvaney said on “ Fox & Friends ” that Kimmel ’ s call is something that everyone agrees on .
“ I don ’ t think the logical conclusion is that , ‘ Oh , by the way , Republicans are going to kick these people off of health care . ' That ’ s not the point , ” he said .
Kimmel ’ s remarks have drawn focus in particular to Republican plans to allow states to weaken protections that prevent insurance companies from denying coverage to those with pre-existing conditions .
The current bill includes a provision by which companies can charge more to those with pre-existing conditions as long as states create high-risk pools for those affected . Some more centrist Republicans have declined to back the bill in the House because of the provision , making it unclear if the bill can pass before a looming recess .
But Mulvaney said the plan wasn ’ t so much about weakening protections , but giving states more power to take control of health care for their people .
“ The point behind the state waiver program is that state governments know how to treat children like the Kimmel baby better than the federal government does , ” he said .
“ If we give more control to the states they can figure out a way to best provide for children like Mr. Kimmel ’ s baby , ” he said .