WASHINGTON—Chief Justice John Roberts joined the Supreme Court 's four liberals Thursday to uphold the linchpin of President Barack Obama 's plan to expand health coverage to nearly all Americans , a surprise conclusion to a constitutional showdown .
The ruling clears the way for the biggest revamp of America 's health-care system since the 1960s—and sets the stage for a renewed political fight over its merits .
By a 5-4 vote , the court held the law 's mandate requiring Americans to carry health insurance or pay a penalty valid under Congress 's constitutional authority to levy taxes . The financial penalty for failing to carry insurance possesses `` the essential feature of any tax , '' producing revenue for the government , Chief Justice Roberts wrote .
The Surprise Vote : Roberts The pivotal -- and most surprising -- vote to uphold most of the Obama administration 's health-care law came from Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts . Read more .
But the court handed a consolation prize to the 26 largely Republican-led states that challenged the health-care overhaul—and opened a new door to their resistance . It ruled that the federal government could not expel states from Medicaid if they refused to go along with the expanded eligibility for the federal-state health program that is part of the health-care law .
The decision , tensely awaited for months , proved a vast relief to Democrats and Mr. Obama .
President Barack Obama , in a White House speech , gives his reaction to today 's Supreme Court ruling on his health-care law .
Speaking at the White House , the president retold the story of a woman with cancer who had to go without insurance and said , `` Because of this law , there are other Americans … who will not have to hang their fortunes on chance . These are the Americans for whom we passed this law . ''
Live Chat Recap WSJ 's D.C. deputy bureau chief Tim Hanrahan , health policy writer Janet Adamy , and legal editor Peter Landers took reader questions a few hours after the ruling . Replay the event .
But the decision also handed Republicans a sharper message for the fall campaign : They said they would tell Americans who dislike `` Obamacare '' that electing GOP candidates is the only way to repeal it . What 's more , by calling the insurance penalty the legal equivalent of a tax , the court allows Republicans to accuse the president of raising taxes for some .
`` This is now a time for the American people to make a choice , '' said presumptive Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney . `` You can choose whether you want to have a larger and larger government . ''
A noisy and divided crowd waited on the steps of the Supreme Court Thursday for the contentious health care law ruling . As WSJ 's Neil Hickey reports , the 5-4 decision to largely uphold the Affordable Care Act was greeted with shock and celebration .
The ruling means that the law 's reordering of the $ 2.7 trillion health industry will move forward mostly as planned , with implications affecting every hospital , doctor , health insurer and drug maker in the nation . About 30 million more Americans are expected to gain coverage , although the Medicaid change could lower that .
A line of onlookers waited to enter the Supreme Court building Thursday morning to hear the court 's ruling in a landmark case over President Barack Obama 's health-care overhaul law . Evan Vucci/Associated Press Timeline : The Health-Care Debate Read a timeline of events surrounding President Barack Obama 's health-care legislation , from the bill 's path through Congress to the legal challenges . Looking Back : Health Care in America Read about past efforts to change how Americans receive and pay for health care . Supreme-Court Arguments Listen to audio excerpts and explore the transcripts of the health-law arguments at the Supreme Court . Day One : March 26 , 2012
Companies said they were relieved to have a greater degree of certainty about what 's in store , and some welcomed the influx of new customers the insurance mandate will provide . Others pointed to concerns , including the complexity of the law and the remaining questions about Medicaid .
Altogether , the ruling is both a political and a constitutional landmark . It bestows a measure of validation on President Obama 's legislative achievement after two years of relentless attacks and casts a new light on Chief Justice Roberts—a George W. Bush appointee whom some Democrats had pegged as a Republican partisan—reaching across the ideological divide even while reinforcing some long-standing conservative principles .
Not only did the chief justice revive states ' rights in the Medicaid ruling , he also rejected the principal legal basis the Obama administration invoked to justify the health-care overhaul , Congress 's constitutional authority to regulate interstate commerce . Since the New Deal of the 1930s , the Supreme Court had only twice found Congress exceeded its commerce authority , and never for a program designed to expand the social safety net .
Congress has invoked its commerce power to pass a vast array of laws , from the Endangered Species Act to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , often over conservative complaints that such regulation exceeded the intent of the Constitution 's framers . On Thursday , however , Chief Justice Roberts drew a firm limit on the commerce power , writing that if accepted as the basis of the individual insurance mandate , federal authority would be virtually unlimited .
`` The Commerce Clause is not a general license to regulate an individual from cradle to grave , simply because he will predictably engage in particular transactions , '' the chief justice wrote . Four dissenting conservatives , Justices Antonin Scalia , Anthony Kennedy , Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito , agreed .
But Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , joined by Justices Stephen Breyer , Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan , said the Commerce Clause was enough to justify the law , which she said `` addresses the very sort of interstate problem that made the commerce power essential in our federal system . ''
Chief Justice Roberts went on to say that the penalty for failing to carry insurance met the criteria for a tax . Because of the court 's duty to defer to the elected branches when possible , the mandate must be upheld , he wrote .
Neither the label of `` penalty '' nor the fact it was intended to influence behavior mattered , he wrote . The penalty functioned like a tax—and other taxes , such as those on cigarettes , are enacted principally to create incentives rather than raise revenue , he said .
Although the Obama administration always asserted the penalty was valid under the federal taxing power , until Thursday no court had fully accepted that .
It was a day of surprises at the court , including the role of Chief Justice Roberts as the deciding vote instead of the usual swing voter , Justice Kennedy . Reading a joint dissent from the bench , Justice Kennedy said the majority engaged in `` vast judicial overreaching '' and decided `` to save a statute Congress did not write . ''
Before the decision was read , the packed courtroom was silent . The chief began by rejecting Congress 's power to legislate the mandate under the Commerce Clause . Many in the audience thought he was en route to striking down the law .
Then , about halfway through his 20-minute recitation , Chief Justice Roberts turned to Congress 's taxing power . Some in the audience expressed surprise as listeners realized the law would survive . Republican lawmakers who had entered the court smiling exited grim-faced .
What It Means for Consumers The health law 's future depends on which party controls the White House and Congress after elections in November . Read More .
The court 's decision leaves intact hundreds of provisions in the sweeping overhaul , with major changes to the U.S. health system set to take effect by 2014 . That is the year when individuals and employers will face their coverage mandates . Insurance companies will have to accept all customers regardless of medical history and wo n't be able to charge more to those who are sick .
New exchanges are set to open where consumers can purchase health insurance and apply for subsidies towards the cost of premiums .
The Obama administration still faces an uphill battle to make that happen in 18 months , especially when the elections could bring to power Republicans who would repeal all or part of the law .
The court 's ruling on Medicaid presents new and unexpected choices for states opposed to the law .
Seven justices agreed that the law 's expansion of Medicaid effectively created a new program . They said it would be coercive to tell states , as the law did , that they would lose existing Medicaid funds if they did n't participate in the new program , although Washington will shoulder at least 90 % of the new costs .
Chief Justice Roberts said that would put a `` gun to the head '' of states , and said participating in the expanded program should be voluntary . Some Republican governors said they might choose not to participate . That could mean some lower earners in those states would lose their chance to gain coverage under the law .
`` Wisconsin will not take any action to implement ObamaCare , '' said Gov . Scott Walker , a Republican . `` I am hopeful that political changes in Washington , D.C. , later this year ultimately end the implementation of this law at the federal level . ''
—Anna Wilde Mathews , Evan Perez and Carol E. Lee contributed to this article .
Explore the Health-Care Ruling Read more about the Supreme Court 's decision on the health-care law .