Republicans have been vowing to repeal Obamacare for nearly five years . But 2015 could be the year that Republicans finally define how they would replace it .
In March , the Supreme Court will hear another case that threatens subsidies that form a core of the Affordable Care Act . That has Republicans putting pressure on themselves to coalesce around a plan , drawing on ideas they ’ ve discussed for years such as tax credits to buy insurance , high risk pools and allowing insurance to be sold across state lines .
King v. Burwell is the most serious legal challenge to Obamacare since the justices upheld the individual mandate in 2012 . If King prevails , subsidies could be abruptly cut off to millions of people in states relying on the federal health exchange . That financial assistance would be available in just the 13 states running their own exchanges .
That would be a calamity for the health law , a blow to the insurance industry and a hardship for the people whose tax credits would be cut off .
“ What the King case does is gives us an opportunity and a reason to come to a consensus sooner so , when we get the ruling of the Supreme Court in June , we are then prepared to say , ‘ Here is what is better for the American people in terms of affordability , quality and choice , ’ ” said Sen. John Barrasso ( R-Wyo . ) , chairman of the Senate Republican Policy Committee .
Barrasso said Republicans earlier had thought that they could put off the replacement debate until the 2016 presidential campaign was well underway , and the GOP nominee put down a marker for the party .
The GOP conversations so far are preliminary , and a breakthrough isn ’ t imminent . Various Republican proposals have been put forth over the years , but forging agreement requires bridging deep ideological differences among Republicans about the scope of a plan , the role and responsibility of the federal government in health care , and how much to money to spend .
But Barrasso said several groups of lawmakers — members of the Republican Policy Committee and the two Senate committees with jurisdiction over health care — have begun talking about how to build consensus on a replacement plan .
The Republican moves come , ironically , as the Affordable Care Act is working fairly well . The three-month enrollment season for 2015 is going smoothly and will likely surpass the administration ’ s modest second year goals of having 9 million covered in exchange plans . As of mid December , more than 6 million had signed up in the federal exchange , a tally that will rise when the state numbers are added in . And there are two more months to go . Since the November midterm elections , three Republican-led states have proposed ways to potentially expand Medicaid under the health law . And the HealthCare.gov website is working .
But a ruling in King against the White House would hobble President Barack Obama ’ s signature law and spill over into the rest of the U.S. health insurance system . Without subsidies in two-thirds of the states , the uninsured rate would probably rise , reversing its sharp decline . Premiums could soar if only the sickest people stick with their more expensive coverage .
And the GOP could face a political backlash if people lose coverage from a lawsuit it supported — reminiscent of the fury Obama faced over last year ’ s plan cancellations .
That threat will dangle over the law until the court rules , likely in June . The uncertainty surrounding the court case also adds complexity to the Republican attempts to undermine the law through repeal votes as well as the budget process known as reconciliation . Republicans may wait until the court ’ s ruling to decide how they want to use reconciliation .
No matter what strategy they adopt , they won ’ t be able to get rid of the law legislatively while Obama is in the White House — although they hope that the Supreme Court could create an opening for significant changes .
“ If [ the justices ] do what I think they should do — if they really read the law and act according to the way the law is written — then we ’ re going to have a real problem in America , ” said Sen. Ron Johnson ( R-Wis. ) , who is up for reelection in 2016 in a state that Obama carried twice . “ The American public ’ s going to be asking us to act at that point in time . So we ’ ve got to figure that out . ”
Republicans cite a sense that articulating their own alternatives may send a message to the Supreme Court that it doesn ’ t have to fear health care chaos if it rules against the White House .
To that end , GOP Sens . Richard Burr of North Carolina and Orrin Hatch of Utah are tweaking their Obamacare replacement draft , which is probably the most comprehensive in the Senate . They ’ ve brought into the discussion two other key committee chairmen — Fred Upton ( R-Mich. ) of the House Energy and Commerce Committee and Lamar Alexander ( R-Tenn. ) , incoming chairman of the Senate Health , Education , Labor and Pensions Committee .
“ The onus is on us to present a logical solution prior to that case ever being heard , ” Burr said . “ Maybe the court will feel more confident making a decision if in fact there is a legislation solution [ to the subsidy problem ] that is realistic . ”
Several House Republicans have replacement plans as well . Dozens of conservatives have signed on to a Republican Study Committee replacement plan that has the backing of House Majority Whip Steve Scalise .
Whether a vote on a replacement plan actually takes place is far from certain . In the nearly five years since the law passed , there have been dozens of repeal votes — but not a single vote on a replacement plan in either the House or the Senate . And a “ replacement ” that unwinds most of the Affordable Care Act would never become law with Obama still in the White House .
Meanwhile , Democrats are preparing for yet another year of defending the five-year-old law .
They ’ ve consistently struggled to figure out how to message the law , a problem that ’ s likely to be more acute with near-constant attacks on the law in 2015 .
Sen. Chris Murphy ( D-Conn. ) says Democrats are hoping to bring the people who are benefiting from the law into their argument next year .
“ We ’ ve got to go out and build coalitions all across the country to defend the gains , ” Murphy said . “ We now have millions of people who have something to lose by repeal . We ’ ve got to do a better job of organizing those groups to come up to Congress and be actively opposing repeal . ”