Sen. Bernie Sanders ( I-VT ) may be leading the pack of progressive potential options for the 2020 Democratic nomination , but he ’ s not sitting back and allowing others to get a leg up by suppoting vast new government expansions , like the Green New Deal .
On Wednesday , Sanders introduced a “ revamped ” version of his Medicare-for-All plan , which would completely replace private insurance in the United States with a single , public option — though this iteration of the plan is more comprehensive than previous versions , covering more , and expanding long-term care coverage to satisfy Baby Boomer voters .
CNN reports that Sanders unveiled the bill with a sweeping speech likening the quest for “ affordable health care ” to unionization of the workforce in the early 20th century and the Civil Rights movement .
“ We are involved in a great struggle not unlike , to be honest with you , the struggles of the labor movement , the struggles of the civil rights movement , the struggles of the women ’ s movement , the struggles of the gay community , the struggles of the environmental movement , ” Sanders said . “ This is what we ’ re about . ”
The plan creates a federal universal health care program that completely supplants any private insurance ( though that isn ’ t immediately clear from Sanders ’ rhetoric , which conveniently never mentions that people who like their coverage won ’ t keep their coverage ) . The system would cover “ medically necessary ” services and basic dental and vision services , as well as some prescription drugs . If you want name brand medication , you ’ ll have to pay $ 200 .
“ Insurers would only be allowed to provide services not covered by the universal plan , such as cosmetic surgery , ” according to CNN .
In this plan , unlike previous plans , long-term care , including nursing care , is covered . The change seems tailor-made to attract older individuals , who might be used to a more comprehensive health care plan , into the Sanders ’ fold .
A few 2020 hopefuls , like Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand ( D-NY ) are on board with Sanders ’ plan and support the move to universal health care . Others , like Sen. Cory Booker ( D-NJ ) , expressed skepticism , noting that there ’ s no way a full overhaul of the existing health care system would pass a divided Congress , and a president might be better off seeking out bipartisan agreement on ways to make health care more affordable .
Few other 2020 candidates have spoken on the issue , and that ’ s likely because it ’ s probably not a winning proposal with most Americans . Slate , hardly a right-leaning outlet , reported last year that while Sanders ’ has touted a poll that shows 70 % approval for his Medicare-for-All plan , sentiment among voters changes when the question is restated to indicate that “ Medicare-for-All ” would be in place of their current private insurance .
“ According to [ health care company ] Kaiser , support for Medicare for all drops to 37 percent if survey takers are told that the bill would eliminate private insurance companies , with 58 percent opposed , ” Slate reported .
The “ 70 % ” — or , actually “ 73 % ” — is really support for a “ public option ” for health insurance , something that the Affordable Care Act tried to create , and that some 2020 Democratic candidates are proposing . But those same supporters of Medicare-for-All were skittish when asked whether they ’ d be willing to pay more in taxes to give their fellow Americans a health care safety net .
A whopping 60 % said they ’ d oppose the measure if it meant they ’ d “ feel the Bern . ”
But Sanders is nothing if not consistent . He says he and the bill ’ s co-sponsors will present the plan officially in the coming days . In order to vote on it , Sen. Mitch McConnell ( R-KY ) will have to bring the bill to the floor for a vote . That is , of course , unlikely .