If he loses both his law and re-election , many will conclude “ that he bet on his major reform , and the Supreme Court defeated it , and he lost his hold on the presidency , ” Robert Dallek , the presidential historian , said in an interview .
On the day the ruling comes out , one Obama adviser joked , “ I might have to clean out my sock drawer . ”
In grappling with what the court may do , Mr. Obama and his advisers now appear to be far past the denial stage ( when they dismissed constitutional challenges ) but nowhere near acceptance ( they still believe the law will be upheld . ) Instead , they have quietly entered a surprising new state that might be called Learning to Live Without Universal Coverage .
Former advisers are emphasizing the many aspects of the bill that are not connected to the mandate , like the subsidies to buy insurance . Some aides even argue privately that losing the mandate could be a political boon , because it would rob Republicans of their core complaint against the law .
But that position is uncomfortable for a deeper reason , one that goes to the core of who Mr. Obama wanted to be as president . Earlier in his term , he refused every chance to settle for the more limited health care overhaul that the Supreme Court may now effectively deliver , making epic sacrifices to win something far broader .
Before he became president , critics said that Mr. Obama ’ s greatest achievement was his own rise , that he played it safe — sometimes voting “ present ” in the Illinois State Senate — rather than taking risks for what he really believed . “ What ’ s he ever done ? ” Representative Bobby L. Rush , Democrat of Illinois , asked repeatedly in 2000 when he crushed his upstart Congressional challenger , and opponents later echoed the question .
Early in the presidential race , Mr. Obama summoned the historian Doris Kearns Goodwin for a conversation about Abraham Lincoln . He was only an upstart candidate , but he was already talking about leaving a legacy , about accomplishing vast things .
In the White House , many of his top advisers , including Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and his first chief of staff , Rahm Emanuel , counseled Mr. Obama against a sweeping health care overhaul . By summer 2009 , with the country still stunned by economic crisis and Republicans falsely raising the specter of death panels , some aides practically begged the president to scale back , take interim steps and move on to other issues .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
Mr. Obama did not relent . He had an economic rationale for stabilizing a dysfunctional health system , but he also “ saw what Teddy called the moral issue , ” Victoria Reggie Kennedy , Senator Edward M. Kennedy ’ s widow , said in an interview , referring to her husband . For those who wondered what Mr. Obama really believed in , universal health coverage seemed to be the answer .
As the brutal fight continued , the president sacrificed more and more in its name : an overhaul of energy and environmental laws , greater focus on economic issues , some of his own popularity and that of House Democrats , who eventually lost their hard-won majority . “ Michelle and I are perfectly comfortable if we ’ re only here one term if we feel like we really accomplished something , ” he told aides .
That declaration sounds different today . Mitt Romney , the presumptive Republican presidential nominee , uses “ Obamacare ” as an epithet and applause line , promising outright repeal if he wins . A few years ago , the health care law seemed a reason for Mr. Obama to risk losing re-election , former aides said . Now , it is a reason he feels he must win re-election .
As he awaits the decision , Mr. Obama has no more knowledge of or influence on it than any of the other lawyers handicapping the odds in Washington bars and boardrooms .
The former law professor turned president is scathing about the argument that the mandate violates the Constitution , saying it has no merit whatsoever . Sometimes , to the nervousness of advisers , he says as much in public ; a few days after oral arguments , he laid down a gauntlet for the Supreme Court , all but saying that striking down the law would be politically motivated judicial activism . ( He later softened his statement . )
“ To have a voice as profound as the Supreme Court say it ’ s unconstitutional , ” said Jonathan Gruber , an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who was an adviser on the law , would be “ bad news all around . ”
But there are clues that Mr. Obama is privately grappling with both the potential loss of universal health care and how much of it he might be able to restore . At a recent fund-raiser in Manhattan , he rattled off a second-term agenda , and along with tax reform and immigration , he mentioned coming back to health care , to work around a negative ruling . His tone was matter-of-fact , one attendee said .
If the court strikes down the mandate and Mr. Obama wins in November , he could face one last version of his perpetual choice on health care : would he settle , learning to live with a sharply edited law ? ( Given that Republicans see the bill as a signature piece of big-government overreach , he might have no choice . ) Or would he expend yet more precious capital on health care ?
Ezekiel Emanuel , Rahm ’ s brother and a former health adviser to the president , predicted the second path . “ Too much of the president ’ s legacy — and the good of the country — is tied up with this , ” he said .
The final result on health care , then , will help determine whether Mr. Obama is the game-changing president he aspired to be .
“ This is his singular policy achievement , ” said Barry Friedman , a law professor at New York University who wrote a brief supporting the law . “ So there ’ s a palpable pain in having this go down . ”
Though the White House continues to maintain official silence on contingency plans , Mr. Obama hinted at his thinking a few weeks ago . “ In my first term , we passed health care reform , ” he began a joke at the White House Correspondents Dinner in April . “ In my second term , I guess I ’ ll pass it again . ”