* * Want ███ First in your inbox every day ? Sign up here . * *
NO WONDER THEY WON ’ T RELEASE THE NUMBERS ! - The first look at administration efforts to track signups for ObamaCare shows just how bad the Oct. 1 crash of the new entitlement program was . Memos obtained by the House Oversight Committee are not official enrollment numbers , but say that as of the morning of Oct. 2 , “ six enrollments [ had ] occurred so far. ” After two days , only 248 enrollments were on the books out of an estimated population of uninsured Americans in the tens of millions . More from ███ .
[ Watch Fox : Health Oversight and Government Reform Committee Head , Rep. Darell Issa , R-Calif. , discusses new ObamaCare subpoenas in the 11 a.m . ET hour ]
Dire digits - President Obama and Health Secretary Kathleen Sebelius have refused to share enrollment numbers , but this snapshot shows the extent of the failure as ObamaCare opened for business . That ’ s significant as bipartisan demands for delaying penalties for the uninsured continue to grow . Team Obama is trying to hold the line , but with a steady stream of stories showing the plight of families losing coverage because of ObamaCare regulations , the failure to launch becomes increasingly dire . The scope of the debacle also ups the chances that Sebelius will have to be cashiered as part of a re-launch in the months to come .
Frustration flares as WH briefs Senate Dems - White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough and other senior administration officials got an earful when they briefed Senate Democrats Thursday on the problem-plagued ObamaCare rollout . Multiple reports of the meeting describe several senators as “ agitated . ”
“ I don ’ t think there ’ s confidence by anyone in the room . This is more of a show-me moment , ” – Sen. Jeff Merkley , D-Ore. , describing the ObamaCare briefing to reporters .
Welfare dominates - ObamaCare ’ s architects envisioned a nearly even split between enrollees in private-sector policies and the government program for low-income Americans , Medicaid . But as WaPo points out , the first month of the program shows a massive skew toward the welfare program . Maryland , for example , has seen 96 percent of its ObamaCare enrollments going into Medicaid . Federal tax dollars pay for the first three years of the expanded Medicaid offerings under the law , but then , taxpayers in those states that opted to join the program are on the hook .
[ On ███ Opinion – Rep. John Barrasso , R-Wy. , marks today ’ s conspicuous date with “ One month of HealthCare.gov horrors -- time for Obama to apologize , meet with Republicans ” ]
New York policies crumble - NY Post : An estimated 100,000 New York state residents are slated to lose their individual policies as a result of ObamaCare , with a still-unknown number of small-business plans headed for the scrapheap . Breitbart reports a survey from the state medical society says 44 percent of doctors won ’ t accept ObamaCare plans .
Oregon ’ s crash continues - Oregon officials are moving to process paper applications for ObamaCare after news that its online portal may not be fully functional for another two months . A report suggests 150,000 state residents are slated to lose their current health coverage because of the law . Daily Caller has more .
Dr. K ’ s reveals all ­- Charles Krauthammer cuts to the bone in ObamaCare laid bare : “ …when you find your policy canceled , your premium raised and your deductible outrageously increased , you 've learned the real meaning of 'free ' in the liberal lexicon : something paid for by your neighbor -- best , by subterfuge . ”
OBAMACARE FOR CHRISTMAS - President Obama ’ s permanent campaign apparatus , Organizing for America , is urging his supporters to give the gift of ObamaCare this holiday season . The political group has launched a new effort “ Health Care for the Holidays ” that includes tips on how to get family members to sign up for the new entitlement and to develop strategies for introducing ObamaCare into the holiday conversation . “ Be persistent , but keep it positive… ” the site encourages .
Naughty , naughty -The OFA site also features a video of a young man confronted by his parent over his lack of insurance at the family table .
LOIS LERNER ’ S IMPROPER EMAILS REVEALED - We knew that IRS division chief Lois Lerner had likely shared confidential tax information about conservatives with the Federal Elections Commission . Now it ’ s official after the elections agency was forced to release emails confirming Lerner ’ s work to help target conservatives . Congressional investigators caught an improper February 2009 back-channel request for information in a document dragnet of IRS emails , but the agency managed to avoid revealing Lerner ’ s response . A FOIA field by Judicial Watch shows she responded just 10 minutes later , and showed no hesitation : “ I have sent your email out to some of my staff . Will get back to you as soon as I have heard from them. ” Read the rest at Washington Examiner .
PAUL : NSA PROBABLY SPIES ON OBAMA - Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , told National Review Online that the National Security Agency , “ could well be spying on the president , for all I know ... He has a cell phone , and , in fact , my guess is that they have collected data on the president ’ s phone. ” Paul has introduced a Senate resolution calling on President Obama to address a recent report the NSA spied on Catholic cardinals during their selection of Pope Francis . Meanwhile , the White House has announced an end to NSA spying on officials at the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , Reuters has more .
[ Watch Fox : Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky , , discusses the NSA in the 1p.m . ET hour ]
FOOD STAMP FIGHT AS STIMULUS EXPIRES - A boost to food stamp benefits enacted as part of the 2009 Obama stimulus and extended during various fiscal cliffs expires today . Democrats want to keep the boost , worth about $ 38 a month for a family of four . Republicans say the more than tripling in the overall cost of the program in the past 13 years is cause for concern . Both House Republicans and Senate Democrats are both proposing new , higher baselines for the program as part of budget negotiations . ███
SECURITY WORKERS ’ BIG TAX DEBT - Washington Free Beacon : “ More than 8,000 federal workers and contractors with security clearances owe $ 85 million in unpaid taxes to the IRS , according to the Government Accountability Office . ”
[ Employees at the Department of Homeland Security have abused overtime pay to the tune of $ 8.7 million a year , according to a report . ]
WITH YOUR SECOND CUP OF COFFEE ... Kimberly Strassel wants to know what ’ s Driving Dick Durbin : “ You do n't come to be the No . 2 Senate Democrat without proving you can help your friends along the way . That 's why the motivation behind Dick Durbin ’ s ongoing campaign against a prominent free-market [ The American Legislative Exchange Council ] group deserves attention… Mr. Durbin knows that every company that can be harassed out of donating to ALEC means a bit less firepower for tort reform…Government unions are relying on Mr. Durbin to put ALEC out of business . ”
Obama Job Approval : Approve – 43.9 percent//Disapprove – 51.5 percent
Direction of Country : Right Direction – 22.1 percent//Wrong Track – 70.9 percent
CLOSING ARGUMENTS IN VIRGINIA - Both campaigns are blitzing the airwaves in the lead up to Tuesday ’ s Virginia gubernatorial election . The latest ad from Democrat Terry McAuliffe casts him as a consensus builder and a friend of business . Republican Ken Cuccinelli counters by slamming McAuliffe ’ s support of ObamaCare and claims McAuliffe ’ s agenda would cost Virginians an average $ 1,700 per family .
TEAM OBAMA CONSIDERED DUMPING BIDEN - A new book claims President Obama considered dumping Vice President Joe Biden in favor of then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to improve the president ’ s re-election prospects . The book , “ Double Down ” by Mark Halperin and John Heilemann , says Team Obama scrapped the plan after focus groups showed the switch wouldn ’ t improve the president ’ s prospects . Former Obama aide David Plouffe is refuting the claim on Twitter . But former White House Chief of Staff William Daley told the NYT that the move was considered as part of “ due diligence ” to help the then-struggling campaign . “ You have to remember , at that point the president was in awful shape , so we were like , ‘ Holy Christ , what do we do ? ’ ”
[ Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will be the keynote speaker as the Philadelphia Conference for Women marks its 10th anniversary this afternoon . ]
Hill Hints in the Highlands - Hillary may have tipped her hand during a recent reception in Scotland . NY Post reports Clinton told guests at a private reception “ I ’ m minded to do it , ” when pressed about a potential 2016 run .
@ laurenashburn ’ s top tweet pick for this morning : CNN ’ s @ JohnBerman : “ Back last term , with polls a slidin ' , did POTUS want to dump Joe Biden ? '' BOOM ! Beat that newsy # MorningRhyme # EarlyStart . ”
[ Lauren Ashburn of “ # MEDIABUZZ ” tracks the Twitterverse every day in Top Twitter Talk . ]
GOP GETS TOP-TIER DRAW FOR MONTANA SENATE RACE - Rep. Steve Daines , R-Mont. , is expected to announce his bid to fill the Senate seat of retiring Sen. Max Baucus , D-Mont. , next week , The Hill reports . Daines is likely to face Democratic Lt. Gov . John Walsh in the general election
SORRY , CHARLIE - Gov . Rick Scott , R-Fla. , will greet Monday ’ s expected announcement from Republican-turned-independent-turned-Democrat Charlie Crist with a half-million-dollar ad blitz . Crist , who left the GOP after losing a 2010 Senate primary to Sen. Marco Rubio , is seeking to return to his old job as governor . The ad ’ s title : “ Opportunist . ”
WIN FOR TEXAS PRO-LIFERS - A federal appeals court has reinstated part of Texas ’ law requiring abortion providers to have admitting privileges at nearby hospitals . Planned Parenthood had won a lower court battle to strike down part of the law . The decision marks a victory for Attorney General Greg Abbott , who is also the Republican frontrunner for next year ’ s gubernatorial election . Democratic contender state Sen. Wendy Davis predicated her candidacy on her opposition to the regulations , including the ban on late-term abortions . ███ has more .
Pressure grows for federal ban on late-term abortions - Washington Examiner reports Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , has sponsored a bill that would bar abortions after five months of pregnancy . The House has already passed a similar measure .
[ Watch Fox : Sen. Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , appears in the 1 p.m . ET hour ]
# MEDIABUZZ - Washington Examiner ’ s Tim Carney and Juan Williams will join host Howard Kurtz to examine how the media is now portraying Barack Obama as a disengaged president after his “ in-the-dark ” defense on NSA spying , health care rollout , IRS , journalist surveillance and other issues . What explains the dramatic change in tone ? Plus , a very special surprise guest . Tune in this Sunday at 11 a.m . ET .
SEMPER FI - Marine Sgt . Joshua Moore will receive the Navy Cross for heroism in the Afghan war by “ grabbing a live enemy grenade and throwing it away ” to save the members of his sniper team while they were pinned down by intense fire inside a building . Marine Times has more .
TELL COOTER TO SOBER UP - How much money does it take to burn a wet mule ? How fine is a frog hair ? Who is Cooter Brown and why is he so drunk ? Why would a dead pig be happy ? Business Insider offers the culturally disadvantaged a translation of Southern sayings . Remember , “ Bless your heart , ” isn ’ t a compliment .
AND NOW A WORD FROM CHARLES… “ As long as the exchanges are down , all you 're getting are stories of people losing insurance and practically no one gaining insurance . This is a program that ’ s doing the opposite of what it was intended ... the insurers are going to have to increase their premiums [ which ] reduces further the incentive and you get a system that can not sustain itself economically . And it collapses. ” -- Charles Krauthammer on “ Special Report with Bret Baier ”
Chris Stirewalt is digital politics editor for ███ . Want ███ First in your inbox every day ? Sign up here . To catch Chris live online daily at 11:30 a.m . ET , click here .