Opponents of President Obama ’ s health care law are eagerly scouring the paperwork insurers file with states , looking for early evidence of “ rate shock ” — rising prices ahead of full implementation of the state “ exchanges ” that begin next year .
Open enrollment begins in October for the exchanges , or state-based markets where those without insurance will be able to purchase policies , often with government subsidies . But even before that , insurers are submitting their plans to states , and in at least one instance a major player in Maryland ’ s market asked for approval of a 25 percent premium increase .
Sen. Orrin G. Hatch of Utah , the ranking Republican on the Senate Finance Committee , is “ closely monitoring the proposed plan rates all across the country and especially in his home state , ” a spokeswoman said .
One congressional aide said Senate Republicans are watching the rates “ like a hawk ” because they know the still-to-come fight over implementation will not even be relevant if the initial rates send the reforms into a “ death spiral . ”
Under the law , insurers can no longer turn away people for having pre-existing health conditions , so average consumers may expect to pay more with sicker patients entering the market , according to a Kaiser Family Foundation analysis . But the analysis also said premium increases could be the result of consumers getting better benefits .
“ It ’ s something that people feel strongly about , philosophically , and there are political points to be made , ” said Gary Claxton , a vice president of the nonpartisan Kaiser Foundation .
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius has accused Republican lawmakers of ignoring the other side of the ledger .
The initial rates may decrease because they are subject to a “ rigorous review process ” by state regulators , and tax credits on a sliding , income-based scale will help consumers on the exchanges pay for their premiums , she told a House subcommittee on Capitol Hill last week .
So far , insurers have submitted rates in Vermont , Rhode Island and Maryland . Although the New England states ’ rates didn ’ t make much of a splash , Maryland ’ s largest insurer — CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield , which insures 70 percent of the state ’ s individual market — proposed raising premiums by an average of 25 percent .
“ I want to stress that these rate filings reflect the carriers ’ requested rates , ” state Insurance Commissioner Therese M. Goldsmith said in a statement attached to the filings last week . “ In Maryland , the premium rate a carrier requests is not always the rate that is granted . ”
Republican Rep. Andy Harris , a doctor from Maryland , said in an interview the proposed rate increase is a real problem that will be repeated elsewhere .
He thinks CareFirst is “ realistically pricing the risk ” because they are experienced in the individual market . Young and healthy consumers may opt to remain uninsured and pay a penalty as low at $ 95 for flouting the law ’ s individual mandate in the first year , he said .
The premium tax credits were supposed to tempt younger , healthier consumers into the exchanges , tempering risk within the pool and ostensibly decreasing premium costs among the broader market .
“ I think Sen. [ Max ] Baucus hit the nail on the head when he said it ’ s going to be a train wreck , ” Mr. Harris said , referring to the Montana Democrat ’ s now-famous remarks from a hearing this month , in which he challenged the Obama administration to educate small businesses and others about the law ’ s effects .
Mr. Claxton said the state-by-state submissions offer a look at how insurers are sizing up the situation , but it ’ s too early to draw conclusions about the plans ’ value and affordability .
“ It ’ s the start of the story , ” he said , “ but not much of the story yet . ”