( CNN ) As Republicans scramble to tamp down fears that their health care bill would gut protections for sick people , they 're running into a chorus of opposition -- from fellow Republicans .
With direct orders from President Donald Trump to fulfill the GOP 's years-long promise to repeal Obamacare , House Republican leaders are trying yet again to get the 216 votes they need to pass a bill this week . Thus far , they 're failing .
The biggest problem : The legislation would let insurers charge people with pre-existing conditions more for their health care if those people let their insurance lapse at any point .
It 's an ironic twist in the Republican Party 's crusade to gut the Affordable Care Act , the landmark health care law enacted by former President Barack Obama in 2010 . A major pillar of the law is the ban on insurance companies from discriminating against people based on their past medical conditions .
Now , even some of the very Republicans who have long vowed to dismantle Obamacare acknowledge that that protection is simply untouchable .
`` From day one , I 've supported the rights of those with pre-existing illnesses to be covered , and in my view this undermines that effort , and I ca n't be a part of it , '' GOP Rep. Fred Upton of Michigan told reporters Tuesday . `` Yes , there are ways to fix it . But the proposal that 's on the table now does n't work . ''
Upton , the former chairman of the House 's Energy and Commerce Committee , will oppose the bill , a significant blow to the GOP leadership .
He and Rep. Billy Long of Missouri plan to meet at the White House Wednesday morning in hopes that an amendment on pre-existing conditions could be negotiated .
Even Republicans who say they are inclined to support the latest House proposal are haunted by the concerns raised by constituents with medical histories .
In a strikingly candid and extended conversation with reporters in the ornate House Speaker 's Lobby Tuesday afternoon , Rep. Tom Rooney of Florida said he has confronted `` extremely angry '' and `` sincerely scared '' constituents back home .
`` You know , the most sincere anger I 've noticed comes from people that are sincerely scared , people that may have a pre-existing condition that feel like they 're about to lose it and they 're going to die , and they 're going to die because of a vote that we might be taking , '' Rooney said .
`` And if we can not explain to people that that is not going to happen , then it is going to be very difficult to ever bring a bill to the floor , '' added Rooney , who said he is leaning towards voting for the bill .
`` Pre-existing conditions are in the bill . And I mandate it . I said , 'Has to be , ' '' Trump said on CBS 's `` Face the Nation '' Sunday .
In another interview with Bloomberg News , Trump went as far as to claim that the GOP legislation `` will be every bit as good on pre-existing conditions as Obamacare . ''
The concern over pre-existing conditions has been so pervasive that CNN 's whip count has 22 House Republicans who have publicly said they would vote against the health care bill . If 23 Republicans defect , the bill would likely fail a floor vote .
Democratic supporters of Obamacare say the GOP 's struggle to repeal it validates the law 's merits .
`` The injustice of how people with pre-existing conditions had been treated before the Affordable Care Act was its biggest selling point . It 's a concern that cuts across lines of race , class and geography , '' said David Axelrod , Obama 's former senior adviser and a CNN contributor .
`` By tampering with this fundamental element of the law , the Republican leadership and White House have touched the third rail of health care politics , '' he added .
The hard-to-swallow reality for Republicans , Axelrod said , is this : `` It 's very hard to dismantle the ACA and preserve its protections for people with pre-existing conditions . ''
Republican leadership is engaged in a frenzied whip effort , talking with members and educating them in hopes they can get rank-and-filers comfortable with the protections that do exist in the bill for people with pre-existing conditions .
Vice President Mike Pence was on Capitol Hill Monday and Tuesday talking with Republicans about their concerns , and lawmakers have also been speaking with Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price .
For decades prior to the enactment of the Affordable Care Act , many Americans were unable to even afford or obtain insurance because of their past medical history . As Obamacare has shifted that norm , Republicans have grown increasingly careful in recent years to say they would not repeal protections for people with pre-existing conditions , wary of being branded the party that wants to take that protection away .
While Republicans have campaigned aggressively to dismantle Obamacare , there has been a quiet recognition that gutting protections for people with pre-existing conditions might be a political bridge too far . Even in the GOP 's 2015 repeal bill that was ultimately vetoed by Obama , Republicans did n't try to repeal the protections .
That bill was mostly a message effort , however , as Obama 's veto was guaranteed . This spring , Republicans have majorities in both the House and Senate , and a President excited to repeal Obamacare .
`` Before 2014 it was all theoretical , but now it is actual people , '' said Rep. Larry Levitt , a health care policy expert at the Kaiser Family Foundation .
`` As a kid , I was adamant that I did n't like broccoli no matter how good it was for me but , as an adult , I eat it all the time , '' said Jesse Ferguson , a former Hillary Clinton aide now working with Democrats to oppose Obamacare repeal . `` After spending years adamant about repealing health care , part of the GOP seems to be growing up , ready to eat their broccoli and stop repealing the law because it 's good for us . ''