The administration must convince the public that the law is more than a series of hiccups . | REUTERS Obamacare : What defines success ?
Democrats have a general idea of what it would take to put the Obamacare rollout back on track . Fix the damn website , they say , and most of the other problems will take care of themselves .
But will they ? The problem is that neither the administration or the House and Senate yoked to it can describe a threshold for when the public will view the health law as on the way to recovery .
What does the moment of success look like ? Democrats aren ’ t quite sure - which makes party faithful up for re-election in 2014 increasingly nervous and makes the White House ’ s ability to set realistic expectations exceedingly difficult .
After a month of devastating stories and late-night jokes about the launch of the health care law , the administration needs to convince the public that Obamacare is more than a series of canceled policies and computer hiccups . It ’ s just not clear how the Obama team can convincingly do that , especially now that the early enrollment in the federal website could be as low as 40,000 to 50,000 people , according to the Wall Street Journal — way below the administration ’ s goal .
And it ’ s not just President Barack Obama ’ s reputation that ’ s on the line — it ’ s every Democrat who ’ s up for re-election in a year , especially the red-state Senate Democrats who are facing the closest races .
Democrats are still hoping to get back to the law ’ s broader vision : a health care safety net that closes huge gaps and helps all Americans , especially those who have been shut out of the market because of pre-existing conditions .
But how can they recover when the stumble-filled website , and now the canceled health insurance policies around the country , have already given the Obamacare rollout such a lousy first impression ? And when every new development - such as the low enrollment numbers , which the administration is supposed to release officially this week - is viewed within the prism of the president ’ s signature domestic achievement turning into a national joke ?
Most Democrats insist that the main path to recovery is as easy as fixing the website . That ’ s the line even from the Senate Democrats who bent Obama ’ s ear at the White House last week about the rollout . They just can ’ t give any concrete suggestions on what else it would take — which is why most of them sound like the old Saturday Night Live “ fix it ” guy : “ Identify a problem , FIX IT . Identify another problem , FIX IT ! ”
“ Getting the website working again would be a major step in the right direction , ” said Mark Pryor of Arkansas , whose re-election race is expected to be one of the closest contests next year .
“ These technical problems can be fixed , and they ’ re working very hard every day to fix them , ” offered Mary Landrieu of Louisiana , another top GOP target .
Health care experts agree that patching up the federal website by the end of the month , as the administration has promised , is the key to solving a lot of problems — especially by allowing Obamacare enrollment to soar beyond the early , pitiful numbers that are trickling out now . But even if the website was working tomorrow , it wouldn ’ t solve all of the Democrats ’ headaches .
The other big priority , as Obama promised in his NBC interview last week , is to take care of the millions of people whose individual health insurance policies are being canceled because they don ’ t meet Obamacare standards . And there ’ s no easy way for the administration to do that without unraveling the law in other ways .
Obama declared in the NBC interview that “ we ’ re going to have to work hard— to make sure that those folks— are , you know , taken care of. ” Landrieu has said she has the perfect solution : She ’ s introduced a bill that would allow people to keep their individual health plans , and just tell them how many extra benefits are in Obamacare plans so they can decide whether to switch . House Republicans have scheduled a vote on their own version on Friday .
But that ’ s not what all Democrats want — the White House has been silent on it , and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid has been noncommittal on whether Landrieu will ever get a vote . The reason , health care experts say , is that the bill could actually hurt more people than it helps . Insurers have based their pricing on the ability to get all of those people into Obamacare plans — so if they don ’ t switch , the prices could go haywire for everyone else in those plans .
Just try explaining that in a non-tone-deaf way , though , if you ’ re on the White House communications team — or a Democrat in a close re-election race .
“ If you allow the healthy enrollees to stay out in their old policy , the insurers lose money and the program falls apart . There is no free lunch here , ” said Jonathan Gruber , an MIT health economist who consulted on both Obamacare and the Massachusetts health care reform law .
Somehow , though , a complete Obamacare recovery would have to include some measure to make those people whole — even if the administration is still searching for a way to get there .