Facing higher premiums , less choice and a last-minute advertising pullback , fewer people signed up for coverage this year through HealthCare.gov , according to data from a preliminary government report Friday .
About 9.2 million people signed up through HealthCare.gov , the insurance marketplace serving most states , said the Health and Human Services department . That 's about 500,000 fewer customers than had enrolled last year in those same 39 states , or slippage of around 5 percent .
Trump administration spokesman Matt Lloyd said Friday that `` Obamacare has failed '' and the new president looks forward to providing relief through `` patient-centered solutions that will work for the American people . ''
Ron Pollack , executive director of the advocacy group Families USA , said Trump had tried to `` sabotage '' enrollment .
`` Millions of consumers still got their insurance through the ACA , '' said Pollack . `` The Republican rush to repeal the ACA without a replacement will do real harm to real people . ''
The report does n't include figures from 11 states that run their own health insurance markets — including California and New York — so the final national number will be higher . But the preliminary report is being closely watched , because President Donald Trump and the GOP-led Congress have vowed to repeal the Obama-era health law and replace it with a plan yet to emerge .
“ Enrollment numbers are down and costs are up . These cost hikes are exactly the reason why Republicans are committed to repealing and replacing Obamacare , ” Sen. Orrin Hatch , chairman of the Senate Finance Committee , said in a statement
Insurance markets created by former President Obama 's law provide subsidized private coverage for people who do n't have access to health care through their jobs . Along with a Medicaid expansion aimed at low-income adults , the Affordable Care Act has helped millions get coverage , reducing the nation 's uninsured rate to a historic low of about 9 percent .
But even before Trump 's election victory , the ACA 's markets were facing double-digit premium increases and a sharp drop in insurer participation . Although most customers receive taxpayer subsidies for their premiums , the increases averaged more than 20 percent nationally and much higher in several states .
The night he was inaugurated , Trump signed an executive order directing his administration to provide relief from Obamacare . That was interpreted as a signal that officials would waive the law 's tax penalties meant to nudge uninsured people to sign up . Then last week the administration pulled back about $ 5 million in ads that were part of a closing bid to woo the uninsured . Former Obama administration officials cried foul .
But independent analysts said the report also highlights the challenges that Trump and the GOP Congress will face trying to deliver on their promises without disrupting coverage for millions . That includes many people in states that Trump won in November , among them Florida ( 1.8 million ) ; Texas ( 1.2 million ) ; North Carolina ( 549,000 ) ; Georgia ( 494,000 ) , and Pennsylvania ( 426,000 ) .
`` While enrollment is down , this does not exactly paint a picture of a program collapsing , '' said Larry Levitt of the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation .
`` Enrollment had been tracking on pace with last year , but sign-ups slowed down in the final weeks of open enrollment , '' said Caroline Pearson of the consulting firm Avalere Health . The controversy over unwinding the health care law may have contributed , she said .
Nonetheless , Pearson said the demand for coverage `` remains strong . '' She added , `` Policymakers will need to consider how forthcoming changes will impact those currently purchasing coverage . ''
Supporters of the health care law , trying to beat back or blunt efforts to repeal it , blamed the Trump administration for the lackluster number .
Facing higher premiums , less choice and a last-minute advertising pullback , fewer people signed up for coverage this year through HealthCare.gov , according to data from a preliminary government report Friday .