The Senate gave sweeping bipartisan approval Thursday to a proposal by Orrin Hatch , R-Utah , and Amy Klobuchar , D-Minn. , to put senators on record in favor of repealing a tax on medical devices – a key part of President Obama ’ s controversial health care law .
The Hatch-Klobuchar amendment to the GOP budget plan is the latest effort to roll back the tax that applies to a range of medical products , from surgical tools to heart devices . It ’ s among several taxes in Obama ’ s 2010 health care overhaul .
The amendment passed the Senate by a vote of 79 to 20 . The bill that it was attached to did not pass , but the sponsors used it as an opportunity to rally support for repealing the tax -- as well as a separate bill they 've introduced to achieve that .
“ Today , bipartisan members of the Senate spoke loudly and clearly that this tax on medical devices simply must go . It is a drain on innovation , on job creation and on our ability to provide ground breaking medical technologies to patients , ” Hatch said in a statement .
The Affordable Care Act levies a 2.3 percent tax on medical devices with the goal of raising nearly $ 30 billion over the next decade .
Manufacturers say the impact of the tax is far greater than meets the eye -- the 2.3 percent tax is on gross sales , meaning it 's a much greater percentage of net income .
The Obama administration has defended the medical device tax , saying companies actually stand to benefit from the law . Though the 2.3 percent tax hits the industry , the department argues that the millions of new health care customers insured as a result of the law will increase the demand in hospitals to order more equipment -- in turn boosting medical device companies ' profits .
Last year the White House threatened to veto a House bill that would have repealed the tax , citing concerns that the House proposal would offset the lost revenue from the tax by cutting down on subsidies for some families .
This , they said , would effectively `` raise taxes on middle-class and low-income families . ''