President Obama ’ s top health care official apologized Wednesday for the broken Obamacare website and said it would take another month to fix — but even as she defended the law as a good deal for most Americans , she said there was no reason for her to have to purchase coverage from the exchanges .
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius also was on the defensive over Mr. Obama ’ s 2010 vow that his health care program wouldn ’ t force Americans out of their existing insurance .
Mr. Obama waded into that fight late in the day , using a campaign-style speech in Boston to parse his promise , saying that while some may be kicked off their plans , they will end up getting better deals from their insurance companies .
“ One of the things health reform was designed to do was to help not only the uninsured but also the underinsured , ” Mr. Obama said . “ Before the Affordable Care Act , the worst of these [ health care ] plans routinely dropped thousands of Americans every single year . This wasn ’ t just bad for the folks who had these policies , it was bad for all of us because when tragedy strikes and folks can ’ t pay their medical bills , everybody else picks up the tab . ”
Both Mr. Obama and Mrs. Sebelius said they take ultimate blame for the early problems with the HealthCare.gov website , which was supposed to be the main way for many Americans to buy insurance from state-based health car exchanges . The site went live Oct. 1 but has been plagued by glitches . It crashed even as Mrs. Sebelius was testifying to the House Energy and Commerce Committee on Wednesday morning .
“ Hold me accountable for the debacle . I ’ m responsible , ” Mrs. Sebelius told angry Republicans during her appearance , which marked the first time she has answered to Congress for the website ’ s problems .
Calls for Mrs. Sebelius to resign took a back seat to complaints about who knew what — and when — about the flawed website and stories of constituents who have lost their health care plans and could face higher premiums .
Lawmakers also relied on backhanded humor and personal challenges to make their points .
Rep. Cory Gardner , Colorado Republican , wanted to know if Mrs. Sebelius would enroll herself in a health care plan on one of the Obamacare exchanges .
She refused because she has employer-based coverage from the federal government .
“ I would gladly join the exchange if I didn ’ t have affordable coverage in my workplace , ” she testified .
But Mrs. Sebelius appeared to confuse the law when she told lawmakers , “ If I have available employer-based coverage , I am not eligible for the market . ”
HealthCare.gov tells users that if they are eligible for job-based insurance , they “ can consider switching to a marketplace plan ” but may put their subsidies at risk .
The site says “ you won ’ t qualify for lower costs based on your income unless the job-based insurance is unaffordable or doesn ’ t meet minimum requirements . You also may lose any contribution your employer makes to your premiums . ”
Mrs. Sebelius gave her testimony a day after one of her agency chiefs , Marilyn Tavenner , administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , testified to another House committee .
Both women laid some of the blame for the website ’ s problems on the lead company they hired to help build the site .
But the vendors have said the Obama administration did not test the system “ end to end ” until days before its launch , and a CMS memo said the website hadn ’ t completed security testing as of Sept. 27 .
“ From a security perspective , the aspects of the system that were not tested due to the ongoing development , exposed a level of uncertainty that can be deemed as a high risk for the [ Federally Facilitated Marketplace ] , ” the memo said .
Making matters worse for the administration , website problems have been eclipsed this week by concerns that many Americans in the individual market will not be able to keep their health care plans , as Mr. Obama had promised .
Committee Chairman Fred Upton , Michigan Republican , said Mr. Obama ’ s vow has been cast into doubt by a flood of cancellation notices nationwide .
Mrs. Sebelius told lawmakers that if a plan was in place in 2010 , when Congress passed the legislation , then it could have been grandfathered in as long as the companies didn ’ t make major changes .
“ Insurance companies cancel individual policies year in and year out , ” she said . “ They ’ re a one-year contract with individuals . They are not lifetime plans . ”
She reminded lawmakers that the individual market covers a small percentage of Americans — many are covered by their employers or by programs such as Medicare — and that some consumers will gain better health plans at similar or lower costs , especially with the help of government subsidies .
Mr. Upton said Americans are “ scared ” and “ frustrated ” with the situation because many of these people can not use the Obamacare websites to explore their options — just weeks after Mrs. Sebelius and her lieutenants assured lawmakers that the federal exchange system was ready to launch .
Rep. Marsha Blackburn , Tennessee Republican , told Mrs. Sebelius that the law is taking away a personal choice to hold a bare-bones plan .
“ I will remind you , ” she said , “ some people like to drive a Ford , not a Ferrari , and some people like to drink out of a red Solo cup , not a crystal stem . ”