Democrats have a message for Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus , who has said the GOP will “ tattoo ” Obamacare to Democrats ’ foreheads in the 2014 midterm elections .
In a memo issued Thursday afternoon , Democratic National Committee spokesman Mo Elleithee touted the law ’ s benefits , such as provisions that bar insurance companies from denying coverage based on pre-existing conditions and allow young people to stay on their parents ’ insurance plans until they are 26 .
The DNC challenge came after President Obama said earlier in the day that he will let Americans renew any health plans that do not meet his law ’ s coverage standards , attempting to quell the political firestorm — and consternation among many members of his own party — surrounding his broken promise that if people like their health insurance plan , they can keep it under the law .
“ Has it been perfect ? No , ” Mr. Elleithee wrote . “ President Obama and Democrats are the first to admit the website challenges have been unacceptable . Would more people be able to enroll if the website was working properly ? Yes , of course . And they will . ”
But , Mr. Elleithee continued , the prospect of the law actually working “ terrifies ” Republicans , and he wrote that their ultimate goal is to get rid of the law entirely .
Americans ’ approval of the law has declined rapidly in recent weeks ; 40 percent approve of it and 55 percent disapprove , according to new numbers from Gallup — the largest gap in a year .
Nevertheless , the DNC is trying to stay on the offensive in the fallout over troubles with the implementation of the law .
“ I ’ m eager , anxious and proud to run on this in 2014 , ” Mr. Elleithee wrote . “ Because every single Democratic member of Congress is committed to finding the solutions to make the Affordable Care Act work even better . The Republican Party ? It shut down the federal government , delivering a $ 24 billion hit to our economy . ”
“ I ’ ll take that fight any day of the week , ” he continued . “ Republicans tried to ‘ tattoo ’ Obamacare to our foreheads in 2012 . We won . They tried it in Virginia in 2013 . We won . Now they want to try it again in 2014 ? OK. I ’ ll buy the ink . ”
Republicans didn ’ t appear to be frightened . The National Republican Senatorial Committee ( NRSC ) re-tweeted a tweet from a DNC spokeswoman highlighting Mr. Elleithee ’ s post .
The National Republican Congressional Committee , which oversees the House Republican campaign for 2014 also sent out a tweet changing a DNC slogan from “ Change that matters ” to “ Change that health plan . ”