Both sides want the justices to settle an issue that has divided lower courts . | AP Photos SCOTUS to weigh contraceptive rule
The Supreme Court has agreed to revisit Obamacare , this time to review the requirement that most employers provide contraceptive coverage in their employee health insurance plans .
On Tuesday , the court accepted two cases centered on the issue of business owners ’ religious expression .
It ’ s another test for the embattled health care law , which is already struggling under the weight of a botched website and a political backlash after millions of Americans saw their current insurance plans cancelled for 2014 .
The case could also rekindle the same clash that unfolded during the 2012 presidential campaign , when Republicans attempted to make the contraception rule an important issue . A ruling against the contraception coverage rule wouldn ’ t knock down the whole health law , but it would give more fuel to its opponents .
This is not Obamacare ’ s first trip to the high court . In 2012 , the court ruled in favor of another controversial piece of the law — the individual mandate , which requires most Americans to have health insurance . Chief John Roberts sided with the liberal wing of the court to uphold the mandate , a surprise move that kept a key piece of the law intact .
The court also ruled at the time that states could opt-out of the Medicaid expansion designed to cover low-income Americans . About half the states did opt out , meaning that in some states poor people can get covered and in others they remain uninsured .
The Affordable Care Act requires most large employers to provide health insurance that includes coverage of certain treatments and medicines , including several forms of contraceptives . Under pressure on the contraception mandate , the White House gave an exemption to certain non-profit religious organizations but not to private employers generally .
Contraceptive coverage proved to be popular with most Americans , especially unmarried women – key supporters of President Barack Obama .
In Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby Stores Inc. , the appeals court temporarily lifted the requirement that the craft-store chain provide contraceptive coverage for their workers . The company cited religious reasons .
A separate lower court ruled against Conestoga Wood Specialties Corp. , requiring the Pennsylvania company to follow the contraception rule .
The Obama administration wants the high court to resolve the split in the lower courts and uphold the contraception rule .
The White House released a statement Tuesday calling the requirement for private companies to provide contraceptive coverage “ lawful and essential to women ’ s health. ” It pointed to what it called a “ commonsense ” exception for religious institutions .
“ These steps protect both women ’ s health and religious beliefs , and seek to ensure that women and families—not their bosses or corporate CEOs—can make personal health decisions based on their needs and their budgets , ” said White House press secretary Jay Carney in the statement .
On Capitol Hill , Rep. Joe Pitts ( R-Pa. ) , whose district includes Conestoga , immediately voiced support for the justices ’ decision . “ I am very pleased that the Supreme Court will consider whether Obamacare is violating the religious freedom of employers , ” he said . “ Conestoga and people of faith across the nation are waiting to see if the court will protect their constitutional right to live out that faith in the marketplace . ”
And Sen. Ted Cruz ( R-Texas ) also weighed in quickly , welcoming the high court ’ s review . “ Illegal mandate tramples religious freedom , should be struck down , ” he tweeted .
The central question in both cases is whether a for-profit , secular corporation can claim constitutional protection from the provision based on religious grounds . The two cases will be combined and given one hour of oral arguments before the justices next spring .
The justices did not announce whether they will hear cases brought by other companies , including Autocam Corp. , and Liberty University .