Just 17 Percent Of Americans Approve Of Republican Senate Health Care Bill
Americans broadly disapprove of the Senate GOP 's health care bill , and they 're unhappy with how Republicans are handling the efforts to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act , according to a new NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist poll .
Just 17 percent of those surveyed say they approve of the Senate 's health care plan , the Better Care Reconciliation Act . Fifty-five percent say they disapprove , while about a quarter said they had n't heard enough about the proposal to have an opinion on it .
With mounting defections within the GOP caucus over the bill , leaders decided to delay a vote on the legislation until after Congress returns from next week 's July Fourth recess .
A Congressional Budget Office analysis released Monday found that if the bill were enacted , 22 million fewer people would have health insurance over the next decade due , in part , to the bill 's rollback of Medicaid expansion .
`` With numbers like these , it 's not surprising the Republican leadership in Congress is having a difficult time building consensus , '' said Lee Miringoff , the director of the Marist Institute for Public Opinion .
While Democratic opposition to the bill , as expected , is high , GOP support for the Senate GOP 's plan is very soft . Twenty-one percent of Republicans oppose the bill and just 35 percent support it . Sixty-eight percent of independents also oppose the proposed legislation .
In fact , while many Americans want changes to the ACA , also known as Obamacare , they want it to be more far-reaching . A 46 percent plurality say they want to see the ACA do more , while just 7 percent want it to do less . Keeping the ACA and having it do less is essentially what GOP congressional plans are doing .
Only 17 percent want the 2010 bill left intact and unchanged , while a quarter of Americans want it repealed completely — including just over half of Republicans .
If Congress does n't go through with a repeal of the ACA , 37 percent of Americans said they would blame Republicans in Congress , while 23 percent would blame Democrats , and 15 percent would blame President Trump .
Among Republicans , Trump would n't bear the brunt of the blame if Congress is unable to repeal and replace Obamacare . Just 6 percent would blame him , and half said they would blame congressional Democrats . Another 20 percent said they would blame GOP lawmakers .
The NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist poll surveyed 1,205 adults from June 21-25 , 2017 , contacted by live interviewers using a mix of landline and mobile numbers . There is a ± 2.8 percentage points margin of error . A sub-sample of 995 registered voters were also surveyed , with a ± 3.1 percentage points margin of error . Questions relating to how congressional Republicans are handling the issue of health care , the plan proposed by Senate Republicans , and whom should be blamed if Congress does not repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act were fielded from June 22-25 , 2017 with 939 adults and 769 registered voters . The margin of error is +/- 3.2 percentage points and +/- 3.5 percentage points , respectively .