Renelsa Caudill , a nurse at MedStar Washington Hospital Center , is greeted by Sen. Bernie Sanders , I-Vt. , after speaking at an event to introduce the “ Medicare for All Act of 2019 , ” in Dirksen Building on Wednesday , April 10 , 2019 . Sens . Kirsten Gillibrand , D-N.Y. , and Jeff Merkley , D-Ore. , are also pictured . ( Tom Williams/CQ ███ )
Sen. Bernie Sanders on Wednesday released an updated bill to implement a single-payer health insurance system , a politically divisive hallmark of his White House bid .
The unnumbered Senate bill would transition the U.S. health care system to a single-payer system over a four-year transition and eliminate nearly all premiums , co-pays and deductibles . The legislation largely mirrors Sanders ’ 2017 proposal , but the new plan also would cover home and community-based long-term care services through an expanded Medicare program , according to a summary . The earlier version would have maintained those services through existing Medicaid benefits .
The “ Medicare for All ” legislation appears destined to receive more attention on the campaign trail than in Congress . The concept , which the Vermont independent senator ran on during his unsuccessful 2016 presidential campaign , has become more popular since then . Still , Sanders ’ single-payer bill secured just 14 Democratic Senate co-sponsors , fewer than the 16 that signed on by last year .
One previous co-sponsor , former Minnesota Democrat Al Franken , is no longer in office . Another , Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire , decided not to support it this time , an indication of how the issue divides Democrats who otherwise are unified behind a general desire to expand coverage . Shaheen ’ s office noted she has backed four other bills to expand insurance coverage since Sanders ’ bill was first introduced in 2017 .
“ There are faster ways to reach universal coverage by building on the progress we ’ ve made through the Affordable Care Act , while addressing the high cost of care and medications , ” Shaheen said .
Sanders ’ bill comes after other Democrats have offered their own proposals to expand coverage , such as allowing people to buy into Medicare or Medicaid or creating a Medicare-run public option to be sold on the exchanges created under the health care law .
Other Democrats , including House Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California , say that Democrats should focus their efforts on strengthening the 2010 health care law , which is based on a private insurance industry . Pelosi and others raised concerns about the cost of a single-payer system , which outside analysts have projected to be more than $ 30 trillion over a decade .
Still , Sanders has been adamant that a single-payer plan is the best way to reach universal health care . At an event to announce the bill on Wednesday , he focused on how the bill would eliminate the profit motive that insurance companies now operate on .
“ At least in my view , the current debate over Medicare for All really has nothing to do with health care . It has everything to do with greed and profiteering , ” he told a room full of supporters in a Senate office building .
Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand , D-N.Y. , was the only other Democrat seeking the party ’ s nomination at the rollout , although Sens . Kamala Harris , D-Calif. , Elizabeth Warren , D-Mass. , and Cory Booker , D-N.J. , also are co-sponsors . Gillibrand said steps like taking money out of politics and increasing voter accessibility would be crucial to enacting Medicare for All .
By allowing people to buy into the program throughout the transition , she said , the insurance industry would not be able to compete with public coverage .
“ Their goals are not aligned with ours , ” she said . “ That ’ s why we could never get where we wanted to go with universal coverage building it on top of a for-profit industry , because they must maintain corporate profits . They must maintain shareholder value . ”
The biggest change from Sanders ’ previous bill — to expand long-term care services — in part mirrors a House bill introduced by Rep. Pramila Jayapal , D-Wash. , earlier this year . Sanders ’ proposal would cover home and community-based care through the expanded Medicare program , but care in an institution , such as in a nursing home , would continue to be covered through Medicaid . Jayapal ’ s bill would cover all of that through the universal Medicare program . That change earned significant support from disability advocates .
The Medicare program envisioned through Sanders ’ and Jayapal ’ s plans would be a significant expansion of the program as it exists today . It would cover mental health care , vision and dental , emergency transportation and substance abuse treatment , among other things .
Sanders proposed a four-year phase-in , so the qualifying age for Medicare would fall from the current 65 by a decade each year . That ’ s slower than the two-year transition under Jayapal ’ s measure .
During that transition , people could buy into the program . People currently enrolled in federal health programs would transition into the universal Medicare program , although the Indian Health Service and the Department of Veterans Affairs would both stay independent for at least a decade .
All health care providers would be required to sign a participation agreement which would ban discrimination on issues including race , national origin , income , religion , age , sex or sexual orientation , disability , or illness . Providers would be paid based on the existing Medicare fee schedule and existing alternative payment methods created under the 2010 health care law and a 2015 Medicare overhaul law would continue .
That differs from the House bill , under which hospitals would be paid through a global budget that would pay institutions regular lump sums throughout the year to cover care , while individual providers would be paid on a fee-for-service payment schedule .
Sanders ’ bill would also create a national health budget to cover the cost of services delivered under the act and make other payments , including public health activities , capital expenditures and administrative costs . For the program ’ s first five years , that budget may also cover transition assistance to workers affected by the change to the insurance industry . It would establish a trust fund for the program to cover issues such as public health emergencies .
The plan would require Medicare to negotiate prescription drug prices and establish a drug formulary , while allowing patients and providers to petition for certain drugs to be on or off the formulary .
While the bill would eliminate premiums and deductibles , enrollees would still face a $ 200 maximum co-pay each year for prescription drugs .
The plan would ban the Hyde amendment , which prohibits federal funds from covering abortion in most cases
The program would be run by the Health and Human Services secretary leading the new Universal Medicare Agency , along with six other people to be confirmed by the Senate .
Sanders ’ bill does not lay out how the measure would be financed , but in a separate white paper he argues that funding the program would be repurposing current spending . The average family would save thousands of dollars annually without out-of-pocket spending on health care , he says .
Still , families would likely face higher taxes to finance a single-payer system .
Some ways he ’ s proposed to pay for the bill include a 4 percent income-based premium paid by employees that exempts the first $ 29,000 for a family of four , a 7.5 percent income-based premium on employers that exempts the first $ 2 million in payroll , making the federal income tax more progressive , or establishing a tax on extreme wealth .
Others supporting the bill are Sens . Tammy Baldwin , D-Wis. ; Richard Blumenthal , D-Conn. ; Martin Heinrich , D-N.M. ; Mazie K. Hirono , D-Hawaii ; Patrick J. Leahy , D-Vt. ; Edward J. Markey , D-Mass ; Jeff Merkley , D-Ore. ; Brian Schatz , D-Hawaii ; Tom Udall , D-N.M. ; Sheldon Whitehouse , D-R.I. ; Booker ; Gillibrand ; Harris ; and Warren .
Get breaking news alerts and more from ███ on your iPhone or your Android .