While President Obama campaigned on a promise that his universal health care plan would lower premiums , his controversial adviser and plan architect was privately warning the state of Wisconsin that Obamacare was poised to massively increase insurance costs for average residents , internal documents show .
Jonathan Gruber , the MIT economist currently under fire for suggesting the Obama administration tried to deceive the public about the Affordable Care Act , was hired by former Democratic Wisconsin Gov . Jim Doyle in 2010 to conduct an analysis on how the federal health-care reform would impact the state .
Mr. Gruber ’ s study predicted about 90 percent of individuals without employer-sponsored or public insurance would see their premiums spike by an average of 41 percent . Once tax subsidies were factored in , about 60 percent of those in the individual market were projected to see their premiums go up 31 percent , according to his analysis .
In addition , 53 percent of those insured by companies with fewer than 50 employees , would see their premiums rise by an average of 15 percent even after subsidies , Mr. Gruber forecasted . The report warned such increases could impact small companies ’ decision whether to provide health insurance to their workers .
“ There remains some uncertainty about employer reactions given the many forces which might impact their decision to offer insurance , ” the report said .
The contrast between the Obama administration ’ s optimistic rhetoric on Obamacare and Mr. Gruber ’ s private warnings to Wisconsin is certain to attract new attention from the Republican-led Congress , which wants to know whether there was an effort by the administration to deceive the public about the true consequences of the law as Mr. Gruber suggested in a videotape that surfaced recently .
Mr. Gruber and the White House declined comment when contacted by The ███ this week .
The Gruber study , which was released publicly in August 2011 with little fanfare in the state of Wisconsin , was largely ignored by Mr. Obama , who campaigned in 2012 that insurance premiums would actually decrease under his healthcare legislation .
“ So when you hear about the Affordable Care Act — Obamacare — and I don ’ t mind the name because I really do care . That ’ s why we passed it , ” the president declared in a campaign speech in Cincinnati , Ohio back in July 2012 , “ you should know that once we have fully implemented , you ’ re going to be able to buy insurance through a pool so that you can get the same good rates as a group that if you ’ re an employee at a big company you can get right now — which means your premiums will go down . ”
In Wisconsin , Republican Gov . Scott Walker , considered by many to be a potential 2016 presidential candidate , distrusted the campaign promises , largely because of the work Mr. Gruber had done for the state ’ s previous administration , and has long advocated for repealing the law .
In addition to premium rate increases , Mr. Gruber ’ s work estimated that 100,000 Wisconsinites would be involuntarily dropped from their employer sponsored health insurance also running counter to the President ’ s claim at the time that if a you liked their health-care policy , you could keep it .
The study did project the implementation of Obamacare would decrease the state ’ s number of uninsured by 65 percent by 2016 , but doing so would come at the expense of other groups .
Wisconsin ’ s working-class families would be forced to pay a hidden tax to pay for the purchase of health insurance for a family of four earning up to $ 89,400 , the study said . It also showed Obamacare would shrink the numbers of people in the private insurance marketplace from 180,000 individuals to 30,000 .
Mr. Walker has said he would like to see the Affordable Care Act repealed and after entering office in January 2011 , he opted not to create a state-run marketplace and to instead rely on the federal one . Mr. Walker also has refused Obamacare ’ s Medicaid expansion , refusing to accept federal aid offered under the Affordable Care Act , arguing he doesn ’ t trust the federal government ’ s pledge to cover the cost .
After entering office , Mr. Walker replaced Mr. Doyle ’ s Office of Health Care Reform which had been created to carry out the federal Affordable Care Act with Wisconsin ’ s Office of Free Market Health Care . It was that office that inherited Mr. Gruber ’ s study .
The state of Wisconsin paid $ 443,718 to conduct the analysis with $ 200,000 going to Mr. Gruber himself , and the rest of the costs dedicated to Gorman Actuarial , a Massachusetts-based consultancy .
Mr. Gruber developed the model for the report that outlined the federal Affordable Care Act ’ s impact on Wisconsin , and his contract ended June 30 , 2011 , according to Mr. Walker ’ s office .
“ Health care reform was supposed to provide affordable health care for Americans but major concerns have been demonstrated by the results of this study , ” said Dennis Smith , Wisconsin ’ s Health Services Secretary , in a press release when the report was released in August 2011 .
That year , Wisconsin had 33 health insurers actively participating in the individual market and 25 insurers in the small group market , a dynamic Mr. Walker ’ s administration thought competitive and cost effective . The Badger State ’ s uninsured rate is also better than the national average , with 9 percent of its population lacking insurance in 2013 , compared with 14.5 percent nationally , according to U.S. Census Bureau estimations .
Because Mr. Gruber ’ s contract was entered into under a previous administration and the vast majority of the work was performed for that administration , Mr. Walker declined to comment on Mr. Gruber ’ s work for the state .
In 2011 , Mr. Gruber defended his Wisconsin study to The Cap Times , a Wisconsin-based news site .
“ They picked out the most negative aspects of the report to highlight , ” Mr. Gruber told the Cap Times in an interview in August 2011 . “ Overall I think health care reform is a great thing for Wisconsin . ”
Meanwhile , earlier this month , videotapes were leaked from a University of Pennsylvania speech Mr. Gruber gave last year where he refers to the “ stupidity of the American voter ” as to how Obamacare got passed legislatively , saying the lack of transparency of the bill was a “ huge political advantage . ”
Mr. Gruber received about $ 400,000 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for his work focusing on health care computer models . He has also been a frequent guest at the White House , meeting with senior officials more than a dozen times and the president himself , once , visitor logs show .
White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said this month that Mr. Gruber only advised the administration on the economics of health care .
“ He certainly is somebody who is well-versed in understanding how economics will have an impact on health care policy , but it ’ s pretty evident from these videos that he doesn ’ t have nearly as much insight as it relates to politics or communications or legislative strategy , ” Mr . Earnest said of Mr. Gruber .
A Kaiser Family Foundation analysis of 2015 premium changes as of November show that nationally the lowest cost bronze plans and lowest cost silver plans will increase two and four percent , respectively , with premiums rising as much as 43 percent in Minnesota counties and decreasing as much as 45 percent in Colorado .
In Wisconsin , the analysis found the premiums for the bronze and silver plans in Milwaukee increased by at least 5 percent , less than one percent after tax credits are applied .