( CNN ) - Sen. Ted Cruz argued Thursday that people are starting to understand why he and other conservative activists embraced a strategy that tried to derail Obamacare this year but instead resulted in last month 's government shutdown .
Speaking at the Aspen Institute 's Washington Ideas Forum in Washington , the Texas Republican said the troubled rollout of HealthCare.gov and revelations of people losing their health care insurance have led to changed feelings about his strategy .
`` A few weeks ago there were lots of people - particularly in Washington - that were saying , 'Why are you guys fighting so hard on this ? ' And with just the passage of a few weeks , people are n't asking that anymore , '' he said .
Cruz added that those who joined him in the effort are feeling `` vindication '' in the wake of a barrage of negative headlines about the botched Obamcare rollout .
`` We 've seen that those millions of Americans were right , and I wish Congress had listened to them before '' people began getting cancellation notices , he said .
Asked if the shutdown was worth it , Cruz said , `` Absolutely . ''
Among those who are changing their tune , he said , are some of the same congressional Democrats who refused to compromise on Obamacare earlier this year .
`` In the last few weeks over a dozen Democrats have publicly called for delaying Obamacare in significant respects , '' he said , referring to some vulnerable Democrats up for re-election who want the administration to push back the deadline for enrolling in health care insurance because of the turbulent launch .
The reason they did n't support delaying parts of Obamacare earlier , Cruz said , was because `` it was a simple , partisan , political decision by the White House '' to let the government shut down .
`` I remember in the middle of the shutdown the president invited the Republican senators to the White House . We all sat there in a room and he came out and said , ' I 'm here to tell you I will not negotiate . I will not compromise on anything . ' That 's not a reasonable position , '' Cruz said .
`` That 's why we had a shutdown . Because the White House believed , politically , it benefited them to shut down the government . ''