Bill McCollum and Paul Clement helped put the mandate on the map . | AP Photos The men behind the health care case
Thursday ’ s Supreme Court decision on the future of President Barack Obama ’ s health care reform law will undoubtedly define the court under Chief Justice John Roberts . But it also has the potential to define the careers of several of the legal minds who helped the case get there .
When Congress started debating health care reform in 2009 , the individual mandate — the requirement for nearly all Americans to buy health insurance — wasn ’ t one of the biggest issues opponents raised . But that changed when a handful of conservative legal scholars started writing articles , including an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal in September 2009 , that suggested the mandate could be the bill ’ s real legal weak spot .
Now , the law is on the verge of being gutted — or even wiped off the books — because of the mandate .
So who is responsible for what could be the Supreme Court case of the decade ?
Rivkin and Casey , constitutional lawyers at the law firm Baker Hostetler , were the first to go public with their skepticism about the constitutionality of the mandate . Their September 2009 op-ed in The Wall Street Journal served as the snowball that quickly rolled down the hill .
After reviewing the health law , “ we concluded pretty quickly that this kind of mandate was beyond the constitutional power of the federal government , ” Rivkin said in an interview .
In fact , Rivkin and Casey felt the same way the last time a health mandate came up . They raised similar questions when a mandate was proposed in the early 1990s .
When it became clear that the 2010 health law was going to pass with a mandate , several states hired Rivkin and Casey to represent them in a lawsuit against the federal government . That lawsuit — which now includes 26 plaintiff states and the National Federation of Independent Business — was filed the day Obama signed the bill into law .
Rivkin represented some states in the district court and won — Judge Roger Vinson ruled that the mandate was unconstitutional and that the entire law should fall .
He said he ’ s confident the Supreme Court will rule against the mandate , too , arguing that the Obama administration has never defined a “ limiting principle . ”
“ Every single judge and justice has asked the government , ‘ If you can do this mandate , what is it that you can not do ? ’ ” Rivkin said .
“ It ’ s all very fine to say the federal government is denied general police powers , ” Rivkin said . “ But it ’ s pure verbiage , it ’ s meaningless unless there is this limiting principle . … The government has been unable to come up with any meaningful limiting principle . ”
McCollum was the Florida attorney general who hired Rivkin and Casey and filed the states ’ lawsuit against the health law .
McCollum credits the Rivkin-Casey op-ed with sparking his interest in the issue . He assigned lawyers in the Florida attorney general ’ s office to do their own research and concluded that he wanted to challenge the mandate and the law ’ s expansion of Medicaid .
By early 2010 , McCollum , who was working with then-South Carolina Attorney General Henry McMaster , asked his fellow attorneys general if they wanted to join .
“ I had quite a bit of interest , ” McCollum told ███ in an interview , adding that one Democratic attorney general “ came very close ” to joining but decided at the last minute not to .
“ The politics of this is so great that I ’ m quite sure the Democrats who were sympathetic were worried they would face a primary , ” he said .
McCollum said he always thought the constitutional issue would wind up in the country ’ s highest court , but even he was surprised by just how intensely partisan the suit became .