Many Republican governors who opposed the law delayed taking action on it before the court ruled . Several , including Gov . Scott Walker of Wisconsin , now say they will wait to act until after November in the hopes that Republicans will win the presidency and the Senate and dismantle it . But Mr. Walker did not wholly reject the idea of expanding Medicaid . “ We ’ re not ruling it one way or the other , ” he said on Saturday after a meeting about controlling health care costs .
Once governors make up their minds , many could face battles with their legislatures . Gov . Mark Dayton of Minnesota , a Democrat , has made expanding Medicaid a top priority , but he faces some strong resistance from the state ’ s Republican-controlled Legislature . And Gov . Chris Christie of New Jersey , a Republican who has expressed doubts about expanding the program , faces a Legislature controlled by Democrats , many of whom want to implement the new law .
When Rhode Island ’ s legislature failed to reach an agreement on setting up a health care exchange after a disagreement about how abortions would be covered , Gov . Lincoln Chafee , an independent and former Republican , decided to create one by executive order . Mr. Chafee said here that he was moving “ full speed ahead ” to expand the Medicaid program because “ the status quo is not acceptable . ”
Even governors who seemed to be leaning in one direction or another were keeping their options open . Gov . Jack Markell of Delaware , a Democrat , said he thought the expansion would be good for his state , noting that “ there is a significant cost to doing nothing , ” because right now poor people without coverage get care in emergency rooms , which eventually drives up the costs for people who do have insurance . But he said he was still seeking clarifications from the federal government before absolutely committing to the expansion .
Gov . Mary Fallin of Oklahoma , a Republican , said that she was skeptical that expanding Medicaid made sense , but that her state would nonetheless do a thorough study of its options . “ We wanted to come here to this meeting and to visit with the other governors , certainly to listen to the experts talk about the Supreme Court ruling and the implications , especially the staff that we have that ’ s doing in-depth study of the Supreme Court ruling itself , ” she said .
Their decisions will have ramifications for years . Richard P. Nathan , a senior fellow at the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government who has written about American federalism , called the health care law “ the biggest change in state-federal relations since the enactment of Medicaid and Medicare in the Great Society . ”
Mr. Nathan pointed out that there was initial resistance in many states to the original Medicaid program , but that all states eventually signed up , with Arizona becoming the last to do so in 1982 . He said the same thing could happen this time . “ I think it ’ s not unreasonable to believe that even these posturing , recalcitrant states will , in the final analysis , come in , ” he said .
But many states worry about expanding their Medicaid programs , which generally do not currently cover childless adults . The health care law sought to expand the programs to cover all people earning up to 133 percent of the poverty level ; those with higher incomes would receive federal subsidies to buy private insurance . But while the law initially threatened to withdraw all Medicaid funding from states that failed to expand their programs , the Supreme Court ruled that such a threat was coercive “ economic dragooning ” and gave them the choice .
The expansion was expected to cover 17 million people , with the federal government paying a vast majority of the costs : through 2022 the federal government will pay an estimated $ 931 billion to expand Medicaid coverage , leaving the states with a bill of $ 73 billion , according to an analysis by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
But as health care costs have soared , many states are struggling to pay for their existing Medicaid programs , which have edged out education to become the largest share of state spending . And states are nervous about counting on the federal government , as Washington is consumed by talk of spending cuts . Gov . Tom Corbett of Pennsylvania , a Republican , asked , “ What ’ s it going to cost the people of Pennsylvania ? ”
The uncertainty was clear at a news conference of the Democratic Governors Association .
Gov . Peter Shumlin of Vermont , a strong supporter of the expansion , had just finished exhorting governors from both parties to “ have a spine ” and declare whether or not they would take the federal money and expand their Medicaid programs , when Gov . John W. Hickenlooper of Colorado joined the news conference and was asked what his state ’ s plans were .