After seven years of promising to repeal the Affordable Care Act , Republicans are finally at the point of reckoning – unveiling a replacement plan on Monday that upends Obamacare , but will also greatly test President Trump ’ s ability to unify Republicans behind it .
The plan , put forward by House Republicans , generally follows GOP principles . It effectively repeals much-maligned individual and employer insurance mandates , which Republicans see as interference in personal health-care choices and markets . Instead , it provides tax credits for individuals to purchase their own policies .
It also overhauls Medicaid – federally supported health care for the poor – which many Republicans see as too costly as the federal debt approaches $ 20 trillion .
But independent analysts say the repeal-and-replace plan , called the American Health Care Act , shows just how difficult it is to have “ insurance for everybody ” and health-care benefits that “ beautifully ” cover people , as Mr. Trump puts it , all while reducing costs .
“ This is going to be a difficult lift , and I don ’ t see Trump having much sway in this trek to repeal and replace , ” says G. William Hoagland , senior vice president of the Bipartisan Policy Center , in an email . He estimates that 8 million to 12 million fewer people would be covered under the GOP plan . The ACA added coverage for more than 20 million people .
The independent Congressional Budget Office has yet to report on the plan ’ s costs or its effect on the number of insured , though other independent analysts contacted by the Monitor agree with Mr. Hoagland that fewer people would be covered .
“ The House bill is caught in a nasty crossfire ” between conservative and moderate Republicans , including GOP governors , writes Lawrence Jacobs , a political science professor and health-care policy expert at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis , in an email .
Conservatives view the plan ’ s tax credits , which would replace Obamacare ’ s subsidies , as simply a new “ entitlement ” program . Moderates , on the other hand , say the tax credits are too meager to help low-income Americans , Professor Jacobs says .
He adds that many of the 16 Republican governors as well as their Democratic colleagues who expanded Medicaid ’ s reach under Obamacare are also sure to object to reduced outlays under the House plan . Thirty-one states plus the District of Columbia have expanded Medicaid coverage to include more than 11 million people .
• Effectively drop the individual and employer mandates by repealing their penalties immediately – and retroactively to 2016 . It would encourage continuous insurance coverage by having insurers impose a 30 percent boost on premiums if consumers let their coverage lapse .
• Replace subsidies that help low-income Americans buy private insurance plans on federal insurance market exchanges with tax credits that could be applied to private plans . The credits , based on age , range from a yearly total of $ 2,000 to $ 4,000 for individuals and up to $ 14,000 for families .
The credits would be applied monthly and are fully refundable , which means they would be paid even if a consumer does not owe taxes ( this is why conservatives consider this a new entitlement ) . The amount of money that patients can save in tax-free Health Savings Accounts would double .
• Fund expansion under Medicaid fully , but only through 2019 , after which the funding would decline . In a radical change , all states would get a set amount of money for Medicaid each year based on the size of their state ’ s Medicaid population . A $ 100 billion “ stability fund ” would be available to all states to use however they want to lower health costs .
• Continue the popular parts of Obamacare – allowing young adults to stay on their parents ’ health insurance until age 26 and prohibiting denial of coverage for a preexisting condition .
The plan will “ drive down costs , encourage competition and give every American access to quality , affordable health insurance , ” said House Speaker Paul Ryan ( R ) of Wisconsin in a statement Monday night .
But Democrats strenuously disagree , even as premiums have dramatically risen and choices declined in many Obamacare insurance markets .
So Republicans will have to muscle through the plan on their own , using a budget process known as “ reconciliation ” that requires only a majority vote for passage in both houses of Congress .
Even that low threshold , however , seems elusive given Republican division over the plan .
“ It still looks like Obamacare-lite to me , ” budget hawk Sen. Rand Paul ( R ) of Kentucky told reporters Monday evening . “ It ’ s going to have to be better. ” Two other Senate conservatives have voiced similar objections , as well as House conservatives .
But on Monday , four GOP senators from states that expanded Medicaid went in the other direction . They wrote a letter to Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell expressing concern over the House ’ s Medicaid reform . Given their slim majority , Senate Republicans could afford to lose only two Republicans on repeal-and-replace .
A Republican health-care expert who helped draft part of the ACA says the concerns over changes to Medicaid are well founded .
“ This is a dramatic change to the funding of Medicaid ” that goes “ way beyond ” repealing Obamacare , writes Daniel Derksen , director of the Center for Rural Health at the University of Arizona in Tucson , in an email .
The capping and then cutting of Medicaid eligibility and funding over several years shifts the costs and risks from the federal government to states , rural hospitals , physicians , and individuals and their families , writes Dr. Derksen , a physician .
That will make it “ much more difficult ” for Medicaid enrollees to remain enrolled and receive the care they need , and it will increase the number of charity cases at hospitals , he says .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Passing health-care reform took more than a century , as Presidents Harry Truman , Richard Nixon , and Bill Clinton witnessed , points out Jacobs . It required a filibuster-proof effort of 60 votes in the Senate for President Obama to get there .
“ The House bill starts the process , ” he writes . “ The question is whether it has a future . ”