Unless Congress appropriates new funds at some point in the next year , coverage for millions of children will lapse in September 2015 .
The Children 's Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ) covered 5.7 million children in 2009 . It was enacted by President Clinton in 1997 and was temporarily reauthorized under President Obama during his first year in office .
But funding for the program expires at the end of September 2015 .
CHIP operates under the Medicaid umbrella and covers children whose family incomes are too high to qualify them for traditional Medicaid . CHIP — unlike the traditional program — is funded through block grants ; states receive a fixed amount of money from the federal government , which they match with state dollars .
TWO MILLION CHILDREN WILL BE WITHOUT AFFORDABLE COVERAGE IF CONGRESS FAILS TO CONTINUE CHIP 'S FUNDING .
The situation for children is n't so dire now as it was in 2009 . Now that the state health insurance exchanges exist , many families with children enrolled in CHIP would have access to affordable forms of coverage on the exchange . Not all of them , though .
Due to a mistake in the way the Affordable Care Act was written , an estimated two million children will be without affordable coverage if Congress fails to continue CHIP 's funding . The mistake , known in health policy circles as the `` family glitch , '' prohibits families with incomes below 400 percent of the federal poverty line from receiving subsidies if one of the parents has health insurance through their employer — even when that coverage wo n't cover dependent spouses or children .
Senator Rockefeller of West Virginia has proposed legislation to extend CHIP funding through 2019 . That offers time to assess Obamacare 's impact and possibly repair the cracks in coverage for children , including fixing the family glitch .
Other problems with exchange coverage have been identified , though . There are gaps between the dental benefits that CHIP offers and the dental benefits provided through most exchange plans . Moreover , out-of-pocket costs would be higher for families with plans purchased through the exchange , which could discourage people from signing up altogether . It 's one thing for an adult to take on the risk of being uninsured ; CHIP provides a safety net for children who ca n't take any action to insure themselves .
The stakes for this are higher than the affordability of health insurance . A recent study used the initial CHIP expansion to determine whether the program had an effect on education . The authors found long-run positive effects on high school and college attainment .
Continued funding for CHIP requires an act of Congress , no small feat in an era of growing polarization . But this time , it is — quite literally — for the children .