A group of Democratic senators are taking heart in signals by the Obama administration Thursday that people who lost their existing health plans because of Obamacare ’ s requirements will be eligible for an exemption that lets them purchase a catastrophic plan .
“ I agree with you that these consumers should qualify for this temporary hardship exemption , and I can assure you that the exemption will be available to them , ” Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said in a letter to the six senators .
Although it is unclear how the mechanics of the exemption will work , the response to the Democrats ’ concerns addressed fears that people who lost coverage due to Obamacare will go without coverage if they do not find an alternative on state-based markets by Monday — the deadline to have coverage by the new year .
Obamacare ’ s requirements that all health plans had to provide a range of services contributed to many of these policy cancellations . But for weeks , the administration and the law ’ s outside defenders have derided such plans as sub-par junk and said consumers would be better off with their Obamacare-compliant policies .
The initial concerns were raised by Sens . Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire , Angus King of Maine , Mary Landrieu of Louisiana , Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota , and Mark Warner and Tim Kaine of Virginia .
Each of the senators represents a state that is served by HealthCare.gov , the federal exchange system that experience widespread web glitches upon its Oct. 1 debut .
The Obama administration has said the website is working much better as of the start of this month .
“ We are pleased that the Administration appears to have responded to the concerns we ’ ve raised , ” the senators said . “ As a result , this clarifies an option that will help those consumers who have had their plans cancelled this year transition more smoothly into the marketplace . We will closely monitor how the Administration implements this option , and we remain committed to proposing responsible solutions . ”