Speaking to reporters today at the White House , Press Secretary Jay Carney decried the scrutiny of Obamacare navigators as Republican talking points designed to sabotage the President 's healthcare law . Carney 's comments came in response to a question about a new Oversight Committee Report showing the Obamacare navigator program is marred by mismanagement and confusion .
Further , Carney fully defended navigators as people simply trying to get the uninsured signed up for health insurance through the exchanges .
During testimony before Congress in November , Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius admitted under oath convicted felons could be hired as Obamacare navigators handling sensitive personal information of people signing up .
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius admitted Wednesday that it was possible convicted felons could be hired as ObamaCare ‘ navigators , ’ giving them access to personal information like Social Security numbers and addresses of anyone signing up for the program .
Sebelius made the admission in an exchange with Sen. John Cornyn , R-Texas. , during a Senate Finance Committee hearing . It was the second time in a week Sebelius was on Capitol Hill , forced to defend the problem-plagued ObamaCare website .
“ Isn ’ t it true that there is no federal requirement for navigators to undergo a criminal background check , ” Cornyn asked her .
“ That is true , ” Sebelius answered . “ States could add in additional background checks and other features , but it is not part of the federal requirement . ”
Cornyn pressed , “ So a convicted felon could be a navigator and could acquire sensitive personal information from an individual unbeknownst to them ? ”
Further , an undercover investigation conducted by Project Veritas revealed Obamacare navigators urging enrollees to be defraud the government by lying on application forms about income in order to receive a larger subsidy .
Another report shows many navigator positions are being filled by former ACORN employees . ACORN was stripped of federal funding and dissolved in 2009 after another Project Veritas investigation showed the group was involved in encouraging tax fraud , voter fraud , illegal human trafficking and sex trafficking of minors into the United States .
A group formed from the ruins of ACORN is hard at work signing people up for ObamaCare , and may be collecting taxpayer cash for their work despite Congress ' efforts to cut the organization and its affiliates off from government funding , a watchdog group charged .
The United Labor Unions Council Local 100 , a New Orleans-based nonprofit , announced last month it would take part in a multi-state `` navigator '' drive to help people enroll in President Obama 's health care plan . The labor council was established by ACORN founder Wade Rathke after his larger group was broken up amid scandal in 2009 and banned from receiving taxpayer funds .
The government has given out $ 67 million in Navigator grants to help with the controversial rollout of ObamaCare . It was not clear if Local 100 got a grant of its own , but it has set up a help center with Southern United Neighborhoods , a charity founded in March 2010 with many former ACORN members , to enroll people in ObamaCare . Southern United Neighborhoods received a Navigator grant of $ 486,123 .
Incidents of fraud and concerns about who these `` navigators '' really are should be taken very seriously , but the White House is instead portraying the questioning of the navigator program as Obamacare `` sabotage '' from Republicans .