The Trump administration told a federal appeals court Monday it thinks all of Obamacare is unconstitutional , marking an escalation in its fight against the 2010 law .
Justice Department lawyers previously had argued that if the courts found Obamacare ’ s “ individual mandate ” is no longer constitutional , then a narrow slice of the program — consumer protections for people with pre-existing conditions — could not stand , either .
A federal judge in Texas went much further in a December ruling , agreeing with plaintiff states who said the whole law should be invalidated . On Monday , administration lawyers said they ’ re fine with that .
“ The Department of Justice has determined that the district court ’ s judgment should be affirmed , ” they wrote to the 5th U.S . Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals .
Underscoring that point , they ’ re not urging the court to reverse any of U.S. District Court Judge Reed O ’ Connor ’ s decision .
The administration ’ s position will breathe new life into the never-ending battle over Obamacare .
Democrats say the administration is playing with fire by refusing to defend the federal health care law against the suit , which was filed last year by more than a dozen Republican-led states . They say President Trump is leveraging the courts to try and secure the full Obamacare repeal that eluded him in 2017 , despite having a GOP-led Congress .
“ Tonight in federal court , the Trump administration decided not only to try to destroy protections for Americans living with pre-existing conditions but to declare all-out war on the health care of the American people , ” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said late Monday .
Mr. Trump has found ways to chip away at parts of Obamacare . Most notably , he urged Republicans to zero out Obamacare ’ s mandate penalty for shirking insurance when it passed its tax overhaul .
State GOP plaintiffs seized on that change , reasoning that if the mandate is no longer collecting money , is it no longer a “ tax ” as Chief Justice John G. Roberts said when upholding the health law in 2012 .
Blue-state attorneys general have argued in court the mandate is still on the books and , furthermore , Congress clearly intended to leave the rest of the law alone when it gutted the mandate .
The simmering debate played a pivotal role in the midterm elections . Democrats said the GOP didn ’ t have a backup plan if the lawsuit succeeded , citing their previous failure to replace the law with something better . Democrats retook the House .
Yet Josh Hawley , who joined the anti-Obamacare lawsuit as Missouri ’ s attorney general , defeated Sen. Claire McCaskill on election night and is now a sitting senator .
The administration ’ s decision to fully back the lawsuit will loom large on Tuesday when Democrats plan to propose measures that would make Obamacare more generous and combat Mr. Trump ’ s changes to the program , which they ’ ve dubbed “ sabotage . ”
Democrats are looking to regain their political footing , anyway , as Mr. Trump taunts them over the results of special counsel Robert Mueller ’ s two-year investigation , which found no collusion between his campaign and Russian meddlers .
“ The Barr summary clearly demonstrates that Republicans are trying to take your healthcare away , ” Sen Brian Schatz , Hawaii Democrat , tweeted — a wry allusion to Attorney General William Barr ’ s summary of the Mueller findings .
Yet Mr. Trump appears ready to dig in for a fight over health care , too .
He ’ s fumed in recent weeks over late Sen. John McCain ’ s decision to give GOP repeal plans a thumbs down in 2017 , and the White House ’ s fiscal 2020 budget says Obamacare should be replaced with fixed grants that allow states to spend federal health