Vice President Mike Pence is working to reassure voters that last month 's health care defeat is not the end of the fight to overhaul Obamacare . And President Donald Trump is doing his part too , meeting with one of the top GOP opponents of that defeated bill .
Pence primarily focused on jobs and building the economy during a weekend roundtable discussion in Reynoldsburg , Ohio . However , he said that the president will make good on his campaign promise to repeal and replace Obamacare .
`` It ai n't over yet , '' Pence said . `` You can take that to the bank . ''
Fox News reports the president will resort to more hardball tactics to get it replaced , including negotiating with Democrats and backing the congressional opponents of the members of the conservative House Freedom Caucus who led the opposition to House leadership 's overhaul bill .
Texas Republican Rep. Black Farenthold told Fox this tactic could further damage and alienate GOP conservatives in Congress . He fears that working with Democrats will only result in a more liberal-leaning bill .
`` If you move further to the left , you 're not just going to lose the Freedom Caucus , '' he said . `` You 'll lose people like me . ''
David Winston , a GOP strategist who advises congressional leaders , said it will be a long time before Republicans have to defend their congressional majorities . He says now is the time make strides in the right direction .
`` We have the House , the Senate , the White House , '' he said . `` People are going to expect points on the board . ''
Meanwhile , President Trump took to his Virginia golf course with Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , on Sunday to talk health care .
The outing came hours after he tweeted that talks about replacing the law `` will continue until such time as a deal is hopefully struck . ''
Trump added that anyone , especially `` the fake media , '' who thinks the effort is dead , `` does not know the love and strength in r party ! ''
Paul came out against the House GOP legislation but ended the day on a good note saying he his optimistic on the replacement of Obamacare .