Washington ( CNN ) - The federal website where Americans can sign up for new health insurance saw a rush of traffic ahead of this week ’ s deadline to secure coverage by next year , an Obama administration official said on Friday .
Julie Bataille , communications director for the agency directing the website , said 880,000 people visited HealthCare.gov on Christmas Eve – which was the last day Americans could go online to select plans beginning January 1 .
The website – which failed upon its initial launch in October and underwent a massive repair job in November – “ met the mark and did exactly what it was supposed to do , ” Bataille wrote in a blog on the Health and Human Services department website .
Previously , the administration said that more than a million visitors came to the website on Monday . The wave of clicks prompted the site ’ s “ queuing function ” to kick in , meaning users who couldn ’ t log on were given the option of leaving an e-mail address and returning later . Bataille said Friday that 129,000 people took advantage of the feature .
Initially set for December 15 , the deadline for enrolling in coverage was pushed back to December 23 earlier this fall . Earlier this week , that deadline was moved back a day to accommodate individuals looking for insurance but facing long wait times .
And the administration later said it was offering a “ special enrollment period ” for people who tried to enroll in plans by the deadline but were unable to .
Since the website failure in October , enrollment in the exchanges created under the Affordable Care Act has lagged behind what the White House expected , though officials contend they were always anticipating a surge in sign-ups close to the deadline .
While the administration is touting the surge in traffic , officials are not expecting to release enrollment data for December until the middle of next month .
Last week , officials said they expected enrollment to drop off in January , with no looming deadline to encourage sign-ups , with another spike coming in March , before the date at which Americans must obtain coverage before incurring a fine .