Retail giant Wal-Mart announced Tuesday that it will end health insurance coverage for 30,000 part-time workers , while the company plans to increase premiums for other workers , citing the Affordable Care Act . The announcement could actually be a boon to even more progressive health reform efforts .
The Wall Street Journal reported Wednesday that Wal-Mart is blaming rising costs for the moves , stating that the company 's insurance costs are expected to increase $ 500 million more than it had forecast for the year ending January 31 . In response , the company plans to drop coverage for employees who work less than 30 hours per week and will raise premiums for all other workers by 20 percent beginning January 1 . A Wal-Mart benefits executive would not tell the Journal how much the company expected to save as a result of the changes .
Starting in 2015 , the Affordable Care Act will require employers to offer health coverage to employees working at least 30 hours a week or pay a penalty , so the move won ’ t generate any fees for the company under the employer mandate .
As the paper noted , this isn ’ t the first time Wal-Mart has pared back health benefits in recent years . Prior to 2011 , the company offered health insurance coverage to part-timers who worked at least 24 hours per week . In 2012 , the company stopped offering health coverage to new workers who worked less than 30 hours a week ; the policy change announced this week ends coverage for those working 30 hours or less even if they were already employed by the company in 2012 .
Wal-Mart ’ s premium increases met with understandable frustration among employees , who earn an average $ 11.81 an hour . Its decision to end coverage for part-timers , on the other hand , may actually be a good thing for those particular workers . As Vox ’ s Sarah Kliff explains , many part-time workers can ’ t even afford their employers ’ insurance plans , and Obamacare ’ s insurance subsidies will offer part-timers significantly greater financial assistance than the company itself would provide .
Moreover , a shift away from employer-provided coverage could help achieve a single-payer insurance model , a goal long sought by many progressives . At the very least , as more individuals move onto Obamacare ’ s health care exchanges , it ’ s not inconceivable that health care consumers will demand greater competition and lower costs – which could then revive the push for a public option . Wal-Mart may not have had that in mind when the company made its announcement yesterday , but it may have helped nudge the country a little closer in that direction .