Got questions about the GOP plan to overhaul federal health law ? Join us on Twitter Thursday 12-1 p.m . ET for our # ACAchat . Kaiser 's Julie Rovner , NPR 's Alison Kodjak and health policy analysts of various political persuasions will be online discussing how the Republican plan could work , who wins and who loses . See you there !
After literally years of promises , House Republicans have a bill they say will `` repeal and replace '' the Affordable Care Act .
Some conservative Republicans have derided the new proposal — the American Health Care Act — calling it `` Obamacare Lite . '' It keeps intact some of the more popular features of the ACA , such as allowing adult children to stay on their parents ' health plans to age 26 and , at least in theory , ensuring that people with pre-existing conditions will still have access to insurance .
In some cases the elements of the law that remain are due to political popularity . In others , it 's because the special budget rules Congress is using so Republicans can avoid a Senate filibuster do not allow them to repeal the entire law .
But there are some major changes in how people would choose and pay for health care and insurance . Here are some of the biggest .
Both the GOP bill and the ACA provide tax credits to help some people pay their premiums if they do n't get insurance through work or government programs . And in both , the credits are refundable ( meaning people who owe no taxes still get the money ) and advanceable ( so people do n't have to wait until they file their taxes to get them ) . But the GOP 's tax credits would work very differently from those already in place .
Under current law , the amount of the credit is tied to a person 's income ( the less you earn the more you get ) and the cost of insurance where you live .
The GOP tax credits would be tied largely to age , with older people getting twice as much ( $ 4,000 per year ) as younger people ( $ 2,000 ) . But the Republican plan would also let insurers charge those older adults five times as much as younger adults , so even a credit twice as big might not make up the difference in premiums .
The GOP credits also do not vary by location , so they would be worth more in places where health care and health insurance are less expensive .
The GOP credits do phase out gradually , starting with incomes above $ 75,000 for an individual and $ 150,000 for families .
The biggest changes the Republican bill would make are to the Medicaid program . Starting in 2020 , it would roll back federal funding for the ACA 's expansion that allowed states to provide Medicaid coverage to all low-income individuals under 138 percent of the poverty level , rather than just the specific categories of poor people ( children , pregnant women , elderly , disabled ) who were previously eligible .
Thirty-one states opted to expand access to Medicaid . People who are covered under the expansion would continue to be funded by the federal government after that , but states would no longer be allowed to enroll anyone under those expanded criteria . And an enrollee who loses eligibility for the expansion program could not re-enroll .
But the bill would go further as well , making changes to the underlying Medicaid program that House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Greg Walden , R-Ore. , described as `` the biggest entitlement reform in the last 20 years . ''
Currently , Medicaid costs are shared between states and the federal government , but the funding is open-ended , so the federal government pays its percentage of whatever states spend . Under the proposed bill , the amount of federal funding would be capped on a per-person basis , so funding would go up as more people qualify . But that per-capita amount might not grow as fast as Medicaid costs , which could leave states on the hook for an ever-increasing share of the costs of the program .
`` Capping federal contributions to the Medicaid program will likely force states with already tight budgets to limit eligibility and cut benefits to at-risk Americans , '' said the American Public Health Association in a statement .
If you earn a lot of money , or even just enough to put aside something extra for health expenses , the GOP bill will provide a lot to like .
First , it would repeal almost all of the taxes that were increased by the ACA to pay for the expansion of health coverage . Those include higher Medicare taxes for high-income earners , a tax on investment income and various taxes on health care providers , including insurance companies , makers of medical devices and even tanning salons .
The bill would also provide new tax advantages for those who can afford to save , including allowing more money to be deposited into health savings accounts , and lower penalties for those who use those accounts to pay for nonmedical needs .
In addition , the plan would lower the threshold for deducting medical expenses on income taxes and allow people with job-based tax-preferred `` flexible spending accounts '' to put away more pretax money . It would also restore over-the-counter drugs as eligible for reimbursement from those accounts .
The GOP plan does n't actually repeal the requirements for individuals to have coverage or for employers to provide it . That 's because it ca n't under budget rules . Instead , the bill would reduce the penalties in both cases to zero , rendering the requirements moot .
The individual requirement was used by the health law to force healthy people into buying coverage to help improve insurers ' risk pools since they could no longer bar customers with pre-existing conditions .
Instead , the Republican plan would provide a penalty for those who do not maintain `` continuous coverage . '' Those with a break in insurance coverage of more than 63 days could still purchase insurance without regard to pre-existing health conditions , but they would be required to pay premiums that are 30 percent higher for 12 months .
The employer `` mandate , '' which requires firms with 50 or more workers to offer coverage or pay a fine , has actually had relatively little impact on insurance coverage , analysts have concluded , and probably is not necessary to prevent employers from dropping coverage . In both the ACA and the GOP bill , however , workers whose employers offer coverage could not decline that coverage and get a tax credit instead .
With all the taxes and fees stripped from the ACA , how will Republicans pay for their tax credits ? The answer is not clear .
`` We are still discussing details , but we are committed to repealing Obamacare and replacing it with fiscally responsible policies that restore the free market and protect taxpayers , '' said the Republican fact sheet that accompanied the release of the bill .
Also still missing is an estimate from the Congressional Budget Office that will detail not only how much the proposal will cost , but also how many people would gain or lose health insurance . Republicans insist that estimate will be available before the full House votes on the bill .
Kaiser Health News ( KHN ) is a national health policy news service . It is an editorially independent program of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation .