A new rule finalized by the Department of Health and Human Services requires that in June , three million Americans who bought insurance through state exchanges under Obamacare — including men — will begin receiving a separate monthly bill for abortion coverage under their plan .
The change means that Obamacare enrollees will pay two separate monthly bills : one for the insured 's general insurance premium , and another specifically for their carved-out `` payment for an amount equal to the actuarial value of the coverage for abortions for which public funding is prohibited . ''
HHS Secretary Alex Azar explained in a statement , `` The separate billing requirement fulfills Congress ' intent and reflects President Trump 's strong commitment to preventing taxpayer funding of abortion coverage . ''
The Washington Post pointed out that when former President Barack Obama was presenting plans for his signature Affordable Care Act , `` antiabortion lawmakers protested that it would illegally fund abortion , despite his assurances otherwise , through tax breaks and government subsidies . ''
Pro-life groups favor the Trump administration 's rule , and pro-choice groups are against it .
`` Consumers have a right to know if they are paying for elective abortion , '' U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops official Archbishop Joseph Naumann said of the new policy . `` While the Affordable Care Act still allows government-subsidized plans to cover abortion , at least with this rule , Americans can now see and try to avoid complicity by choosing plans consistent with their consciences . ''
The Post reported that `` abortion rights groups argued that it would create stigma around abortion and make it more difficult for women to get insurance coverage for abortion . ''
Planned Parenthood Action Fund blog reported that the new HHS rule `` makes it easier for anti-abortion consumers to pick and choose only those parts of a plan with abortion coverage that they want to pay for . It tells insurers the Trump administration will do nothing to stop them from letting consumers opt out of paying their fair share of the abortion coverage premium , after buying a plan that includes abortion coverage . ''
Opponents also fear the cost of implementing separate billing — such as changing software systems — could lead insurers to stop offering coverage for abortion services altogether .
According to the Daily Mail , HHS `` has estimated that the total cost to insurers will actually reach more than $ 541 million . '' The outlet noted , `` this cost is expected to filter down to consumers in some form or another . ''