U.S. President Barack Obama would not sign a Republican plan to extend subsidies for buying insurance under Obamacare if the Supreme Court rules against such assistance in the pending King v. Burwell case , U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said on Wednesday .
The proposal , offered by Republican Senator Ron Johnson and has 31 Republican co-sponsors , would extend the insurance subsidies until August 2017 . But Burwell said the measure would also take away the subsidies over time and repeal important components of Obamacare such as guaranteeing insurance for Americans with pre-existing health conditions .
Burwell said Wednesday Congress and the states would have to fix the Affordable Care Act if the Supreme Court disallows the subsidies for purchasing insurance . `` If the court makes that decision , we 're going to do everything we can , '' Burwell told the House Ways and Means Committee . But , she added , `` The critical decisions ... will sit with the Congress , and states and governors to determine if those subsidies are available . ''
Burwell testified Wednesday before the GOP-led House Ways and Means Committee as Obama 's five-year-old health overhaul remains a partisan flashpoint likely to reverberate through next year 's presidential and congressional elections .
According to excerpts of her opening remarks , Burwell lauded the health care law for `` our historic progress in reducing the number of uninsured and improving coverage for families who already had insurance . ''
Burwell 's appearance comes with a Supreme Court decision expected this month on whether subsidies that millions of Americans are receiving under the law are legal . It also comes as health insurers in many states have proposed double-digit rate increases for next year — which Republicans cite as evidence of the law 's failures .
`` It 's a pocketbook issue for families , for small businesses , '' said Rep. Erik Paulsen , R-Minn. , a Ways and Means member . `` There are better answers . ''
In a speech Tuesday , Obama mocked `` unending Chicken Little warnings '' from opponents who warned that the law would abridge people 's freedom .
`` There 's something , I have to say , just deeply cynical about the ceaseless , endless partisan attempts to roll back progress , '' Obama said at the Catholic Hospital Association conference .
In his prepared remarks , Rep. Sander Levin of Michigan , top Democrat on Ways and Means , said , `` The predictions of doom and gloom from the other side have certainly not come to pass . No rationing , no destroying Medicare , no bankruptcy . ''
Conservatives who brought the Supreme Court case contend that the health overhaul allowed subsidies only for people in states that created their own insurance marketplaces , not those using the federal HealthCare.gov website . More than 30 states use the federal website and millions of their residents could lose subsidies — which they receive as tax credits — and be forced to drop health coverage they 'd find too expensive .
A victory by the conservatives could put disproportionate political pressure on Republicans to help those who 've lost subsidies . Of the 34 states likeliest to be most affected by such a ruling , 26 have GOP governors . And 22 of the 24 GOP senators up for re-election next year are from those same states .
Top House and Senate Republicans have been working privately toward legislation restoring aid to those losing it until sometime in 2017 . It would also eliminate parts of the health overhaul , such as its requirement that companies insure workers . That would almost certainly draw a veto from Obama .
Republican lawmakers say they will unveil their plan once the justices rule , though there are no indications they have united behind a particular plan . They hope a Republican will inhabit the White House in 2017 so they can repeal the current law and enact one less expansive .
According to the most recent figures from Burwell 's agency , 10.2 million people nationally have obtained insurance coverage under the health law from state and federal marketplaces and started paying for it .
Of those , 7.3 million are from the 34 states most likely to lose subsidies if the plaintiffs win at the Supreme Court . About 88 percent of them — 6.4 million — receive federal subsidies averaging $ 272 monthly .
As insurers begin filing their premium requests for next year with state agencies , some seeking large increases are blaming unexpectedly high costs from covering more patients under the health care law and rising prescription drug prices .
Regulators can block the requested increases in some states while officials can pressure insurers to curb their increases in others .