Texas is on the verge of setting a new national precedent for states looking to defund Planned Parenthood .
If the Trump administration approves a new request from the Texas government , the state will be allowed to exclude Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers from receiving some federal family planning dollars . That would likely clear the way for other states to do the same .
“ This would have implications nationwide if this gets approved , ” said Jennifer Popik , federal legislative director with National Right to Life , an anti-abortion group that has affiliates in all 50 states .
“ For an administration with a pro-life focus , this is something they could do to divert funding from Planned Parenthood . ”
The push in Texas is the latest salvo against the women ’ s healthcare provider , which stands to lose federal funding for one year under the Republican healthcare bill that is now being considered in the Senate .
Republicans have long tried to block Planned Parenthood from being reimbursed by the government for medical services . Most of the federal money is paid out through Medicaid , the healthcare program for the poor .
The GOP ’ s principal objection to Planned Parenthood is that it provides abortions , though the Hyde Amendment prohibits the use of federal funds for the procedure .
President Trump has indicated he would support efforts to block federal funds to Planned Parenthood . He signed a bill passed by Congress in April that rolled back an Obama-era rule that banned states from withholding separate federal family planning funds , known as Title X Funding , from providers for political reasons .
Texas is essentially seeking federal Medicaid funding it lost four years ago when it excluded Planned Parenthood and other abortion providers from participating in a family planning program for low-income women who are not otherwise eligible for Medicaid .
The Obama administration halted the funding to Texas — about $ 35 million a year — stating that federal law requires states to allow Medicaid patients their choice of “ any willing provider , ” including those that provide abortions .
Texas in turn created its own state-funded program , called “ Healthy Texas Women. ” Now the state is asking the Trump administration for the federal money back , while still exempting abortion providers .
If approved , the program would take effect for five years beginning Sept. 1 . The federal comment period is open until Aug. 4 , after which the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services ( CMS ) would make a decision .
“ If CMS were to approve this waiver and offer federal funding for this program , it would open the floodgates for this to be implemented in other states , ” said Kinsey Hasstedt , a senior policy manager at the Guttmacher Institute , a liberal reproductive rights group .
“ It would offer a stamp of approval to violate decades-old Medicaid policy and federal law , which prohibits excluding Medicaid providers from these programs . … It would be a huge shift in how Medicaid is run . ”
Since 1972 , family planning services have been a mandatory benefit for Medicaid recipients , with healthcare providers reimbursed by the federal government at a 90 percent matching rate , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation .
In the 1990s , several states , led by California , sought waivers to create programs to serve low-income women not eligible for Medicaid .
Now 26 states have similar family planning programs , which are mostly funded by the federal government .
Two states — Iowa and Missouri — recently created their own state funded programs that exclude Planned Parenthood .
Republican lawmakers in Iowa agreed this year to give up millions of federal dollars to create a state-run family planning program that excludes abortion providers and their affiliates . Four Planned Parenthood centers in the state are now closed because of the lost funding .
Missouri lawmakers , meanwhile , decided in April to reject more than $ 8 million in federal funding the state was going to receive for its family planning program , and will create a state-funded program that bans abortion providers .
The reduced funding in Texas has led to some negative consequences , including a drop in women receiving services . The state also has the fourth-highest birth rate in the U.S .
State officials hope that getting the federal money back will improve the Healthy Texas Women program .
“ Increasing access to women 's health and family planning services is a priority in Texas , ” officials wrote in their application .
“ The [ Healthy Texas Women ] demonstration seeks to increase access to family services to avert unintended pregnancies . ”
But experts warn that more money will not help the problem , as community health centers in the state are already facing limited resources and facilities .
Sara Rosenbaum , a professor of health law and policy at George Washington University , and her colleagues concluded in an analysis that Texas ’ s proposal would diminish access to care for low-income women because health centers can not grow fast enough to replace services provided by Planned Parenthood and other centers .
And that could be an issue for other states that look to exclude Planned Parenthood from their family planning programs .
“ The notion that you can step down the availability of care and that there ’ s plenty to take its place is just fundamentally wrong , ” Rosenbaum said .
In Texas specifically , “ health centers would have to more than double their capacity overnight , and that ’ s just not possible . ”
If the Texas request is approved , the issue could end up the courts .
Federal law says Medicaid beneficiaries may go to any provider who is “ qualified to perform the service , ” and there are questions about whether Texas ’ s proposal would violate that .
Courts have previously sided with Planned Parenthood in cases where states have tried to block the organization from receiving Medicaid funding .
“ We are very concerned about this proposal and how it might be received by this administration , which has been very hostile to women ’ s health and to women healthcare providers like Planned Parenthood , ” said Mara Gandal-Powers , senior counsel at the National Women ’ s Law Center .
“ We ’ re very concerned , but it ’ s hard to go down the road of what might happen . ”
In a statement , Planned Parenthood spokeswoman Danielle Wells called the proposal an “ underhanded attempt to cut off care at Planned Parenthood with devastating consequences for our patients .
“ Texas paints a grim picture of what health care access could look like nationwide if the Trump administration approves this waiver . ''