CLOSE About half of Americans say they support the Affordable Care Act , according to a new AP-NORC poll , but many want it repealed and few want to keep the health care law in its current form . AP talked with people on both sides of the issue . ( Jan. 27 ) AP
The social media narrative greatly exaggerates how many people would lose insurance without Obamacare .
From # MakeAmericaSickAgain — Senator Charles E. Schumer 's , D-N.Y. , latest catchphrase — to # CoverageMatters , Twitter hashtags have emerged as the rhetorical weapon of choice for defenders of Obamacare .
One of the latest is # the27percent , supposedly the share of Americans under the age of 65 with pre-existing conditions who are at risk of losing coverage if Obamacare is repealed , according to a new report from the Kaiser Family Foundation .
But the 140-character version of Obamacare 's story leaves out a lot — including the truth . The overwhelming majority of `` the 27 % '' are in no danger of losing coverage after Obamacare is repealed and replaced . In fact , a straightforward reading of the data reveals that the pre-existing condition crisis used to sell Obamacare to voters never actually existed .
Obamacare requires insurers to sell to all comers , regardless of their health status or history . This `` guaranteed issue '' provision has been quite popular among Democrats and Republicans alike .
Obamacare 's defenders argue that repealing this provision will cause millions of people with pre-existing conditions to lose their coverage . The Department of Health and Human Services claims that up to half of non-elderly Americans have pre-existing conditions — and that these nearly 130 million `` could be denied affordable coverage without health reform . ''
The Kaiser report estimates that 52 million non-elderly people — 27 % of the population — have uninsurable health conditions . But even this smaller figure is an exaggeration .
For evidence , look no further than the Kaiser report itself . `` At any given time , '' the study states , `` the vast majority of these approximately 52 million people with declinable pre-existing conditions have coverage through an employer or through public programs like Medicaid . ''
Individuals insured through a government program have long been protected from coverage denials based on pre-existing conditions . And since 1996 , the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act has provided that same protection to Americans insured through their employers .
So denials of coverage were only ever possible in the individual market pre-Obamacare . And repealing the law would only affect the tiny share of Americans — 8 % — who get coverage in that individual market .
Even within this small segment of Americans , few were likely to face coverage denials before Obamacare . A 2010 congressional investigation found that the nation 's four largest insurers denied coverage to only one in seven applicants because of a pre-existing condition .
Assuming the same denial rate in a post-Obamacare world , roughly 1 % of the non-elderly population is actually at risk of losing coverage .
In other words , Obamacare upended the U.S. healthcare marketplace and drove premiums skyward for millions in order to address a problem that afflicts , at most , 1 in 100 Americans .
Even if we were to add every single uninsured American to the individual market and assume the same denial rate , the share of non-elderly people declined coverage due to a pre-existing condition would still be less than 3 % . And this last calculation is generous , since it 's likely that some of the uninsured population is eligible for coverage from a government program or employer .
The GOP 's replacement plan will still protect those with pre-existing conditions . The plan will bar insurers from raising people 's premiums significantly , provided they maintain continuous coverage . If they ca n't find affordable insurance on the open market , they 'll be able to turn to state-based high-risk pools supported by $ 25 billion in federal funding over 10 years for subsidized coverage .
This network of high-risk pools will guarantee affordable coverage for those with pre-existing conditions — without raising premiums for everyone else in the general insurance pool , as Obamacare did .
The social media campaigners behind # the27percent are perpetuating precisely the false narrative about pre-existing conditions that gave rise to Obamacare in the first place . Instead of opting for # FakeNews , Obamacare 's partisans should stick to the facts .
███ is president and Thomas W. Smith Fellow in Health Care Policy at the Pacific Research Institute . Her latest book is The Way Out of Obamacare ( Encounter 2016 ) . Follow her on Twitter @ sallypipes .
You can read diverse opinions from our Board of Contributors and other writers on the Opinion front page , on Twitter @ USATOpinion and in our daily Opinion newsletter . To submit a letter , comment or column , check our submission guidelines .