The campaigns represent a departure for insurers , who had previously directed their marketing to wholesale business accounts , not individual consumers . The shift in strategy may become necessary no matter what happens with the health care act , but it is fraught with challenges for an industry that is better known for causing consumer headaches than for curing them .
“ They are among the most disliked industries in the United States , ” said Regina E. Herzlinger , a professor of business administration at the Harvard Business School and the author of the book “ Who Killed Health Care ? America ’ s $ 2 Trillion Medical Problem and the Consumer-Driven Cure. ” “ The nature of the business is that they really are not that eager to O.K . every expense , ” Ms. Herzlinger said .
Indeed , insurance companies expressed concern about certain provisions in the Affordable Care Act when it was being debated in 2009 , and lobbied to shape some of the rules . If the law is upheld by the Supreme Court , it could force insurance companies to extend coverage to tens of millions of uninsured Americans , regardless of pre-existing medical conditions .
In the meantime , insurance companies have been spending more on their marketing and advertising efforts . According to Kantar Media , a research unit of WPP , spending on medical and dental insurance advertising increased to $ 789.3 million in 2011 from $ 667.7 million dollars in 2010 .
Mr. McAllister described Humana ’ s new approach as “ bright , honest , aware and bold. ” One television ad the company released in 2011 showed a family reunion at a summer home , complete with giggling children , cooing grandparents , bonfires and swimming at the lake .
In January , Aetna announced it , too , was refreshing its brand to continue “ its evolution from an insurance carrier to a health solutions company , ” the company said in a statement . “ More and more , the end consumer is who we need to focus on , ” said Belinda Lang , the head of brand and consumer marketing at Aetna .
Along with new advertising campaigns , several insurers are introducing new digital products , including some that seem to borrow equally from shopping comparison sites , airline loyalty programs and Groupon .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
For example , Humana has created a program that rewards members for healthy behavior like losing weight or quitting smoking , awarding points that can be redeemed for things like hotel reservations , electronics and clothing .
One of the biggest insurers in the country , the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association , recently updated its daily deals Web site , which offers members discounts on things like eye surgery and gym memberships . Aetna introduced a digital tool that allows consumers to compare out-of-pocket expenses . “ Ah , the potential of putting people first , ” says the narrator of its ad .
Putting people first is not a phrase many consumers associate with insurers , which instead tend to conjure up memories of endless bureaucracy , skyrocketing premiums and declined coverage . The advertising campaigns are an attempt by health insurance companies to humanize themselves and “ to make the patient believe that the health insurance company really cares about them and to reassure the customer that they get what they pay for , ” said Nora J. Rifon , a professor in the department of advertising , public relations and retailing at Michigan State University .
Fred Karutz , the general manager of health plan solutions at Silverlink Communications , a health care technology company , said that if the health care overhaul was left intact by the court , as many as 120 million Americans could be in the market for health insurance by the end of the decade .
“ Insurance is a large-numbers business , ” Mr. Karutz said . “ The marketing push is for nonbuyers , the people who are ambivalent. ” By nabbing new customers , sick , old , young and healthy , the companies can create “ a balanced risk pool ” he added .
EmblemHealth ’ s advertising campaign focuses on telling stories of its employees and sending its members a message that insurance can be personal . Some of the ads are large billboards placed at major intersections and landmarks in New York City , like Madison Square Garden . One ad , which quotes from Sonia , an Emblem employee , reads , “ You really develop a connection with someone when you can look in their eyes and help . ”
With its “ Go You ” campaign , Cigna addresses consumers directly for the first time . “ It is a shift , it ’ s an important shift , ” said Maggie FitzPatrick , the chief communications officer at Cigna . The campaign includes bold colored ads with more personal messages like : “ Why would you want to be like someone else ? Its exhausting just trying to be yourself . ”
Dr. Elliott S. Fisher , the director of the Center for Population Health at the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice , said the campaigns were necessary regardless of the outcome of the Supreme Court case .
“ Their future is going to depend on their ability to demonstrate value to patients and to employers , ” Dr. Fisher said of insurance companies . “ No one any longer questions the fact that health care is unaffordable and that the current way we are doing business isn ’ t working . ”
Despite all of their efforts , Mr. Karutz of Silverlink said , the companies still have a long way to go since many of them are new to the retail environment . “ As people become consumers , they seek out value , ” he said . “ In the group space , health plans could never hear the consumer scream , but in the retail space everybody can hear the consumer scream . ”
“ They need it , ” said John Kamp , the executive director of the Coalition for Healthcare Communication , a policy and marketing group . “ They know they are on the wrong side of the public attitude . ”