This week will offer a critical test for Democratic unity . Dems caught in Obamacare uproar
It ’ s not the GOP that President Barack Obama has to worry about in defending his botched health care rollout , it ’ s fellow Democrats .
They voted for the law , sang its praises for three-plus years and still believe in the promise of health care reform . But now they face a conundrum : stay in lock step with Obama and risk their credibility as advocates for the law ’ s benefits or publicly criticize the administration for its recent problems — especially a failure to more quickly acknowledge , and rectify , the major malfunction of its Internet marketplace .
It ’ s a particularly vexing question for Democrats worried about their party ’ s chances in the 2014 midterm elections , and , increasingly , they ’ re opting for the latter strategy .
“ What has happened is unacceptable in terms of the glitches , ” House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said on ABC ’ s “ This Week. ” “ They were overwhelmed to begin with . There is much that needs to be done to correct the situation. ” It was the second time in a week that Pelosi had gone public with her dismay over the implementation of a law that she carried to enactment by winning tough votes on the House floor in 2009 and ’ 10 .
With the shutdown and debt limit fight over , there is already more attention on the failure to get the website running smoothly . This week will offer a critical test for the Democratic unity seen this month on the fiscal issues . Republicans have already pivoted from their failure to defund Obamacare to calling for Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius to resign . They are also criticizing her for refusing to appear at a House Energy and Commerce
The White House is scrambling to show that it is addressing the concerns . Obama will discuss the rollout Monday morning in the Rose Garden , and “ directly address the technical problems with HealthCare.gov , ” a White House official said . And HHS announced Sunday that it is calling on the “ best and brightest ” tech experts it can find to help repair the flawed website .
The site has received nearly 20 million visits since it opened Oct. 1 , and nearly 500,000 people have created applications in the federal and state exchanges , the administration says — although officials won ’ t say how many people have actually completed the process of buying a plan , or break down how many people tried to enroll through state-run exchanges versus the federal website .
“ I can guarantee you that the efforts around the clock that have been under way since the launch of HealthCare.gov will continue , at the president ’ s insistence and direction , ” White House press secretary Jay Carney said last week , later adding that there ’ s more to Obamacare than one Internet portal . “ It ’ s important to remember the website alone is not the Affordable Care Act . ”
White House officials declined requests for interviews and did not reply to emailed questions for this story .
While the administration is urging patience , Democrats who will face voters in a little over a year don ’ t have the luxury of time . They ’ re having to make decisions now about how to position themselves if the administration continues to struggle with implementing the central piece of a law they supported .
Democratic political strategists are racing to find the safest ground for 2014 House and Senate candidates who support the law but don ’ t want to be dragged down if things don ’ t get better — and fast . “ Democrats running in 2014 need to be for fixing health care and need to run hard against those that want to repeal and defund it . They shouldn ’ t own responsibility for problems with the law or its implementation , ” said one Democratic Party operative .
In another potentially troubling sign for the White House , the No . 2 Democrat in the Senate , Dick Durbin of Illinois , said on “ Fox News Sunday ” that Sebelius will , at some point , have to testify on the Hill .
Several Democrats told ███ they aren ’ t getting good answers either , even in private .
The early signs suggest a rocky path for the White House in holding off Democratic criticism .