Obamacare Has Problems . The Senate Health Care Bill Does n't Solve Them , Experts Say
The Affordable Care Act is n't perfect . Even proponents of the law would agree with that .
In many parts of the country , there is only one insurer in the individual markets — and in a few , there are zero . Premiums have spiked , sending some people on the insurance exchanges hunting for new plans .
If you listen to the news , you know all of this . Particularly in the past year or so , these complaints have been at the heart of Republicans ' push for repealing the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare . And as senators try to scrape together enough votes to pass their own health care overhaul , these are at the heart of their pitch to the American people .
NPR asked several health care experts to tell us what they view as the biggest problems with the current health care system . Then we asked : Does the Senate bill fix them ? Most of the experts we consulted ( backed up by a Congressional Budget Office assessment ) said that for the most part , no — the Senate bill wo n't solve the health care system 's problems and that it , in fact , could make some of those problems worse .
The biggest problem with health care in the U.S. was around long before Obamacare , several experts who spoke to NPR said .
`` The fundamental problem with the health care system is health care is too expensive , '' said Sara Rosenbaum , a professor of health law and policy at George Washington University .
The U.S. spends around $ 9,450 per person , per year on health care — that is money charged by providers and insurers for services , according to data compiled by the Kaiser Family Foundation . That is around twice as much as in other rich countries .
`` We spend so much more than other countries , '' said Larry Levitt , senior vice president for special initiatives at the Kaiser Family Foundation . `` And while health care costs have been growing relatively modestly recently , they 're still growing faster than the economy as a whole . ''
`` These bills [ from the House and Senate alike ] do n't even really attempt to solve that problem , '' he said . `` This is a much narrower effort . ''
`` Essentially they 're moving the deck chairs on the Titanic , '' concurred Sabrina Corlette , research professor at the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at Georgetown University . `` This bill does nothing on cost containment , nothing on delivery system reform , nothing on the underlying reasons that health care is so expensive in this country . ''
The experts tended to agree that the Affordable Care Act did n't have much success on the cost-containment front , although they disagreed on why .
`` Health care spending did slow down a lot sort of during ACA implementation , but I do n't think we can attribute most of that to ACA , '' said Caroline Pearson , senior vice president for policy and strategy at Avalere Health . `` A lot of it had to do with the economy and the state of recession and sort of the hangover that that caused . ''
One of the most common criticisms of Obamacare right now is that insurers have been dropping out of individual markets set up by the health law . That leaves people in many parts of the country with only one option , and in 2018 , 47 counties could have zero insurers , according to the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services .
Opinions vary on how pressing the one-insurer problem is — `` It 's not ideal , but it 's not catastrophic having one insurer , '' said Levitt . Pearson was more urgent in her warnings : `` Absolutely that needs fixing . The ACA exchange markets are very fragile at this point . ''
Either way , it 's not clear that the Senate health bill would increase stability in the individual markets .
Under current law , the Congressional Budget Office says , the markets will generally hold firm over the coming decade : `` The subsidies to purchase coverage , combined with the effects of the individual mandate — which requires most individuals to obtain insurance or pay a penalty — are anticipated to cause sufficient demand for insurance by enough people , including people with low health care expenditures , for the market to be stable in most areas . ''
However , a `` small number of people '' live in places with `` limited participation '' by insurers . That is due in part to low profits for insurance companies , but it 's also due to `` uncertainty '' about how health care laws might be enforced in the future — which is created by continual threats to remove the law .
The Senate bill would not necessarily make more areas more stable . The recent CBO report refers to stability in `` most '' places , just as it does to describe the individual marker under current health law : `` Nongroup insurance markets would continue to be stable in most parts of the country . ''
But rural areas could have particularly unstable markets under the Republican plan , the CBO said . That is because low populations , combined with smaller subsidies , could mean few consumers . That would make exchanges in those areas less profitable .
So the difference between one law and the other is n't terribly clear in this respect .
In addition , it 's foreseeable that as funding like Obamacare 's cost-sharing reductions disappear , the markets will get shakier , says one expert .
`` Between now and 2021 , the substantial stabilization funding in the bill would be enough to calm markets even without an individual mandate , '' said Levitt . `` After that , money then disappears and there 's some grant funding to states , but that also diminishes over time . After 2021 , it 's very likely that insurance markets would look a lot worse under this bill than under ACA . ''
Premiums have climbed sharply in the Obamacare markets for a variety of reasons . The Senate bill would fix those increases , according to the CBO , but at a price . By 2020 , the average premium for a benchmark plan would be 30 percent lower than it would be under Obamacare .
That sounds good , but those lower premiums would n't be enough to entice poorer Americans to buy insurance . `` Few low-income people would purchase any plan '' under this bill , the CBO wrote .
And that is because the costs would just shift elsewhere . The Senate health care plan might push premiums down for some people , but it would also push deductibles up , the CBO said : `` Because nongroup insurance would pay for a smaller average share of benefits under this legislation , most people purchasing it would have higher out-of-pocket spending on health care than under current law . ''
That was the take of Christine Eibner , a senior economist and associate director of the Health Services Delivery Systems program at the RAND Corporation .
`` It 's still going to be more out-of-pocket spending relative to the ACA for people with incomes between 138 and 400 percent of the federal poverty level , '' she said . Those people are currently eligible for subsidies on the individual exchanges .
Nicholas Bagley , who teaches about health law at the University of Michigan , elaborated .
`` By linking subsidies to these less generous plans , the GOP health care plan says , 'Yes , we 're going to make sure you can purchase a plan , but the plans we 're going to make sure you can purchase are going to be very high deductible plans , ' `` he said .
Not everyone agrees with that assessment , though . Avik Roy , president of the Foundation for Research on Equal Opportunity , has been one of the loudest proponents of the Senate 's Better Care Reconciliation Act . He admits one thing he likes about Obamacare is `` the degree to which it tries to expand the size of the people who try to shop for their own insurance . ''
The Senate bill further encourages that `` economically coherent goal , '' he said , of `` more people buying insurance on their own in a thriving , robust and stable insurance market . ''
He thinks the individual markets will end up pulling people 's health care spending down because new age-rating rules ( which make insurance cheaper for younger people relative to older people ) and a change that would make marketplace plans , on average , cover less will drive younger and healthier people into the markets , pulling premiums further downward and lowering people 's health spending altogether .
By and large , it appears coverage levels would go down under the Senate bill , according to the CBO . Under that legislation , 22 million more people would be uninsured in 2026 than under current law , the CBO said . Nearly 70 percent of that — 15 million — is attributed to Medicaid changes . Seven million fewer people would be enrolled in the exchanges in that time frame .
`` There will be a lot of low-income people who wo n't have access to insurance , and then there will be some who wo n't be able to buy a plan through the exchanges , '' said Pearson . `` Even if they can afford the premiums , if the deductible is a $ 6,000 deductible , then that does n't really leave low-income people in a position to use their insurance . ''
That is a massive hit to coverage , and it 's one of the headline numbers causing Republicans the most headaches since the CBO report 's release .
Once again , however , Roy believes that the CBO is wrong . In his opinion , removing the individual mandate wo n't drive nearly as many people out of the market as the office says .
`` There 's a simple way for Republicans to highlight the CBO 's mandate mania : have CBO score one version of the bill with an individual mandate , and one version without , '' he wrote . That would show , in his words , that `` the mandate is the secret sauce driving the CBO 's faulty coverage predictions . ''
Depending on whom you ask , the Republican plan is solving other problems , though — some of which are not exactly health care-centric .
`` The problem it 's trying to solve is the Republicans did n't like the Affordable Care Act taxes , '' Bagley said . The Senate bill gives `` a massive tax cut , largely for the wealthiest Americans , and it finances that tax cut largely by cutting Medicaid , the program for low-income Americans , '' he added .
Nearly 70 percent of the tax cuts that would happen under the Senate bill would go to the top 20 percent of earners , according to the Tax Policy Center , and nearly 45 percent would go to the top 1 percent sliver of earners .
Meanwhile , another problem for many on the right is the existence of the Affordable Care Act itself . For eight years , `` repeal Obamacare '' has been the drumbeat of Republican candidates nationwide . The Senate bill is ostensibly a solution to this political problem , in the sense that it is billed as a `` repeal '' proposal .
But conservatives from David Brooks to Ann Coulter have blasted it as `` Obamacare lite . '' They argue from two directions — Brooks that the bill would n't help enough people , Coulter that she wants a `` one-sentence law saying there shall be a free market in health insurance '' — but they both say that too much of the original Obamacare structures ( subsidies , insurance exchanges ) are still there .
The Senate bill is n't seeking to tackle real health care issues here with conservative solutions , Brooks elaborated , so much as it is seeking a politically palatable , half-repeal solution that can somehow amass enough Republican votes to pass .
In other words , even if Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell can get those votes together , he will still have to face those in his party who say that the Senate bill still wo n't fully repeal Obamacare .