Last week ’ s tax-filing deadline was a little bit more complicated than in the past , thanks to Obamacare .
Americans had to prove to the Internal Revenue Service that they had health insurance last year — or risk a tax penalty . Many of those that shopped in the exchanges , meanwhile , learned that they actually owed the government money because they misreported their incomes when applying for subsidized coverage .
It ’ s unlikely that these folks would agree with President Obama ’ s assertion on the law ’ s recent five-year anniversary that it was working “ beyond a shred of a doubt. ” Obamacare has failed to increase coverage , deliver affordable care , or significantly improve the economy .
The White House claims that since Obamacare took effect , the number of uninsured Americans has dropped from 48 million to 32 million .
“ In just over one year , the ranks of the uninsured have dropped by nearly one-third , ” the president said .
But that ’ s misleading . According to the Census Bureau , the uninsured rate peaked in 2010 at 15.5 percent , four years before the individual mandate kicked in .
As the economy improved , many previously uninsured folks joined the workforce and received health insurance through their employers . That ’ s partially why the uninsured rate dropped to 14.8 percent in 2012 , 14.5 percent in 2013 , and 11.9 percent in the first quarter of this year .
Further , in 2014 , the Census changed the way that it calculated the uninsured rate . The effect was to show lower estimates of the number of uninsured .
If the decline in the uninsured rate started before the mandate was in place — and if the Census ’ s new methods are predisposed to find a decline — Obamacare can ’ t legitimately take credit for it .
Mr. Obama has bragged that his health care law has cut individual health care costs drastically . “ Most people , ” he said , “ have options that cost less than 100 bucks a month . ”
Yet premiums have skyrocketed under Obamacare . A recent report from HealthPocket — an online insurance marketplace — revealed that 23-year-old men who have not chosen to stay on their parents ’ plans have seen their premiums increase by as much as 78 percent under the law . Premiums for 63-year-old men increased 23 percent .
Women suffered a similar fate . Twenty-three-year-olds experienced premium spikes of 45 percent . Those 63 years of age watched theirs jump 38 percent .
Even premiums for those who receive subsidies have jumped — by 23 percent in the last year . That ’ s after taking those subsidies into account .
The president has further argued that patients are benefiting because Obamacare moves “ toward a payment model that rewards quality of care instead of quantity of care . ”
Instead , Obamacare has encouraged health care providers to put a price on each patient ’ s life . Under the law , some hospitals have begun experimenting with “ bundled payments. ” Insurers fork over one lump sum for a procedure rather than paying for its individual components . If the hospital can keep costs under the lump sum , it pockets the extra money .
This practice could lead health care providers to discriminate against high-risk patients who amass higher costs . If a patient needs an extra treatment that will exceed the bundle , the hospital will have to choose between its bottom line and the patient ’ s health .
Bundled payments also encourage “ upcoding , ” whereby doctors classify a condition as worse than it is to receive a higher lump sum . The practice can force insurers to spend more than necessary .
Finally , the president has tried to make the case that Obamacare hasn ’ t hurt the economy . “ It ’ s not the ‘ job-killer ’ that critics have warned about , ” he said .
Wrong again . As of Jan. 1 , Obamacare mandates that companies with more than 100 employees must offer health insurance to those who work more than 30 hours a week . Last year , companies had to shell out an average of $ 5,000 for each individual getting insurance through the company .
Naturally , companies have attempted to limit the number of full-time employees on their payroll . Staples , which has 85,000 workers , has limited part-timers to 25 hours a week . That trend has spread across the United States . Last year , 2 million people were working two part-time jobs last year — the highest level since the government began keeping track in 1994 .
Five years in , Obamacare is every bit the problem opponents said it would be . And that ’ s what is true “ beyond a shred of doubt . ”
• Sally C. Pipes is president , CEO and Thomas W. Smith Fellow in health care policy at the Pacific Research Institute . Her latest book is “ The Cure for Obamacare ” ( Encounter , 2013 ) .