Sen. Elizabeth Warren released her plan on Friday , and this time one details how she would pay for Medicare for All .
Following other presidential candidates releasing their health care plans , Warren ’ s plan pledges that “ there will be no middle class tax increases ” and Americans would benefit from the elimination of premiums and other out-of-pocket-costs .
“ $ 11 trillion in household expenses back in the pockets of American families , ” the release stated . “ That ’ s substantially larger than the largest tax cut in American history . ”
Democratic 2020 U.S. presidential candidate and U.S . Senator Elizabeth Warren ( D-MA ) speaks at a campaign town hall meeting at Dartmouth College in Hanover , New Hampshire , U.S. , October 24 , 2019 . REUTERS/Brian Snyder More
Warren ’ s plan would cost `` just under '' $ 52 trillion over a decade .
So how would Warren actually pay for it ? It all goes back to her wealth tax on the richest 1 % of Americans and cracking down on tax evasion and fraud .
Warren wants to place a 0.1 % tax on 1 % on the sales of bonds , stocks , or derivatives , which she claims would raise $ 800 billion in revenue over the next decade and “ would likely have little to no effect on most investors . ”
She also wants billionaires to pay a 0.06 % tax on each dollar of net worth above $ 1 billion , which she says would raise an additional $ 1 trillion in revenue .
“ Yes , billionaires will have to pay a little more , but they will still likely pay less than what they would earn just from putting their assets into an index fund and doing nothing , ” Warren said .
Her plan would also increase IRS funding , expand third-party reporting and withholding requirements , strengthen enforcement of the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act , and allow employees who disclose tax evasion and abuse to receive whistleblower protections .
“ A big part of our current tax gap problem is that we ’ re letting wealthier taxpayers get away with paying less than what they owe , ” she said . “ Studies show that the wealthiest 5 % of taxpayers misrepresent their income more frequently than the bottom 90 % . ”
Senator Elizabeth Warren ( D-MA ) speaks during an event to introduce the `` Medicare for All Act of 2017 '' on Capitol Hill in Washington , U.S. , September 13 , 2017 . REUTERS/Yuri Gripas More
$ 2.9 trillion from making sure large corporations pay fair share of taxes
$ 2.3 trillion in net federal revenue from cracking town on tax evasion and fraud
$ 1.65 trillion in revenue from a country-by-country minimum tax on foreign earnings of 35 % and taxation of foreign firms
$ 1.25 trillion over next 10 years by getting rid of asset depreciation loophole
$ 1.15 trillion in tax revenue by increasing take-home pay for workers
$ 800 billion in revenue over next 10 years from a 0.1 % tax on financial transactions
$ 250 billion in revenue `` because individual spending on premiums , deductibles , copays , and out-of-pocket costs will basically disappear ''
$ 100 billion over next 10 years from big bank fees
‘ Providers will now get paid Medicare rates for their Medicaid patients ’
Warren also stated that comprehensive payment reform will help reduce health care spending .
“ Under my approach , Medicare for All will sharply reduce administrative spending and reimburse physicians and other non-hospital providers at current Medicare rates , ” she said . “ My plan will also rebalance rates in budget neutral way that increases reimbursements for primary care providers and lowers reimbursements for overpaid specialties . ”
She added : “ Why ? This is partially because providers will now get paid Medicare rates for their Medicaid patients — a substantial raise . But it ’ s also because providers spend an enormous amount of time on billing and interacting with insurance companies that reduces their efficiency and takes away from time with patients . ”
Instead of employers spending money on their workers ’ health expenses , under Warren ’ s plan , there would be a new employer Medicare contribution . She states that this would save $ 200 billion over the next decade , and would help unions as well .
“ We can generate almost half of what we need to cover Medicare for All just by asking employers to pay slightly less than what they are projected to pay today , and through existing taxes , ” Warren said .
Adriana is an associate editor for Yahoo Finance . Follow her on Twitter @ adrianambells .
Follow Yahoo Finance on Twitter , Facebook , Instagram , Flipboard , SmartNews , LinkedIn , YouTube , and reddit .