During his State of the Union address on Tuesday , President Obama will probably declare that his signature health care law is finally starting to work as designed .
We expect him to claim the mantle of “ forward ” progress and suggest that anyone who opposes the law either does not understand it or simply wants to go “ back ” to days when insurance companies wreaked havoc on consumers .
Watch Senators Burr , Coburn and Hatch talk with Greta `` On the Record '' on Monday , January 27 at 7 pm ET .
But the problem is not that American families and businesses do not understand ObamaCare . The problem is that they simply do not like the product the White House has been pushing since 2010 .
Why should they ? After candidate Obama promised to lower annual health premiums by $ 2,500 per family , President Obama has advocated policies that have increased them by more than that amount – on average 41 percent in the individual market – with further premium hikes across the horizon as far as the eye can see .
After promising that his health plan would not “ add one dime ” to the deficit , the president ’ s team designed a $ 2.6 trillion budget-buster of a law that created new entitlements and expanded old ones .
Despite supposedly “ bending the cost curve , ” non-partisan budget experts agree the law increases costs and overall spending . Meanwhile , Medicare and Medicaid spending will roughly double over the coming decade , and our health care spending is still the largest driver of our national debt .
Sadly , instead of building on the innovation that has made our nation the envy of the world , new taxes on life-saving drugs and devices will send jobs overseas , stifle innovation , and only further add to increasing costs as they are passed onto consumers in the form of higher premiums .
Just as bad , ObamaCare itself has become a pre-existing condition for some four or five million consumers who have lost the plan they thought they could keep .
Millions of others are paying thousands of dollars more while having their choice of doctors or hospitals limited .
In response , the administration scrambled to provide “ accommodations , ” even while stubbornly refusing to revisit the underlying ObamaCare policies that caused the disruption of coverage .
Unfortunately , these problems were entirely predictable . When the law was still a bill being debated in the Senate , we strenuously argued for a different path forward .
We warned the policies of the law would create increased spending , higher costs , fewer choices , and a less stable insurance market .
While we believe repealing ObamaCare is an economic and moral necessity , merely criticizing the law is not enough . America needs an ObamaCare replacement .
We agree that the pre-ObamaCare status quo was unsustainable and unacceptable . The problem is that the law failed to fix most of the problems in health care , and made many even worse .
That is why we have decided to outline a proposal to repeal ObamaCare and replace it with sustainable reforms that actually lower health spending , instead of increasing it .
Economists across the spectrum agree that our policies will help put downward pressure on costs . And crucially , we suggest a way to help Americans who have pre-existing conditions in a way that is targeted , fair , and sustainable .
Our proposal starts with a very different set of assumptions from those who designed ObamaCare . We believe Washington , D.C. should actually reform – not try to manage – the private health insurance market .
We trust the choices of individual patients and consumers , not paternalistic bureaucrats .
We encourage consumer engagement not by mandating individuals buy costly coverage , but by giving Americans purchasing power and allowing them to choose a plan of their choice that works for them .
If a consumer does not want a plan that includes coverage for acupuncture , hair loss , maternity coverage and massage – the government shouldn ’ t force them to buy it .
Americans at all income levels make better choices for themselves if given the opportunity and the choice .
So we adopt policies that will make the market more transparent , competitive , and responsive to consumer demands .
We expand health care savings tools like health savings accounts , which allow consumers to keep more of their dollars for their health care needs .
We also put the brakes on another driver of health care costs -- the practice of defensive medicine -- by suggesting medical liability reforms .
We also have a sustainable , market-driven policy solution to help the many Americans who have pre-existing conditions .
We believe that every American -- whether they work for a Fortune 500 company , a family business , or a start-up company -- deserves protection if they stay enrolled in a health plan .
Before ObamaCare , if an individual tried to buy health coverage on their own , it was not only expensive , they could be denied coverage based on a pre-existing condition .
Our proposal would change that by repealing ObamaCare , and replacing it with a new “ continuous coverage ” consumer protection . Under our proposal , individuals moving from any health plan to another could not be medically unwritten and denied a plan based on a pre-existing condition .
To help consumers buying coverage on their own or through a small business , we take a range of steps .
- We allow small businesses to band together for coverage – like large corporations do – to negotiate a better deal for health coverage .
- We scrap all of ObamaCare ’ s rating changes and expensive mandates .
- We offer individuals who are uninsured , self-employed , or working at a small business a tax credit for health coverage to help them be able to buy a plan and keep it .
- We reform – but do not expand – the broken Medicaid entitlement . Too often Medicaid proves the axiom that access to a government health care program is not necessarily access to health care .
Because Medicaid often pays providers so little , roughly half of physicians no longer accept Medicaid patients .
Based on the feedback of many governors , we give states dramatically more flexibility to provide their citizens the health care they need , without all the red tape , micromanagement , and uncertainty from Washington .
Some may suggest the smart political move is to not present an alternative but to simply stand back and watch ObamaCare implode . But the failure of ObamaCare will not guarantee the success of free market health reform . In fact , even Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and the president have suggested the law is merely a stalking horse for government-run single-payer health care .
More importantly , we believe the American people are ready to consider a patient-centered , market-driven alternative .
Americans know the health care system was not working like it should before ObamaCare . But now they are clearly seeing how the law itself is failing .
Unlike ObamaCare , our plan acknowledges the real world in which people live and operate . We understand that markets are not perfect . But the answer is not a government-centered approach that limits choices and increases costs .
Our problems in health care are solvable if we chart a new path forward . The first step is to embrace a vision that respects individual freedom and puts our country on a more sustainable path .