CLOSE In an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network , President Donald Trump said that Republicans must come together on a replacement for the Affordable Care Act . ( July 12 ) AP
WASHINGTON — Senate Republicans Thursday released a revised version of their plan to replace Obamacare — dumping some tax cuts for the wealthy , allowing for more insurance policies with limited coverage and increasing funding to fight the opioid addiction epidemic .
But it 's unclear whether the changes are enough to win over moderates concerned that the bill ’ s cuts to Medicaid and private insurance subsidies will leave millions without care , or whether conservatives are satisfied the bill would repeal enough of the Affordable Care Act 's taxes and regulations .
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , had to scrap a planned Senate vote at the end of June because he could not round up the 50 Republican votes he needs to advance the legislation . Thursday he said the Senate will vote on the bill next week , even though there are still wavering Republican senators who have not committed to vote for it .
Here ’ s a look at what is in the revised bill , and how it could affect you .
The revised version keeps the taxes imposed by the ACA on investment income , on high earners . And it no longer eliminates the ACA ’ s limit on how much of the executive ’ s pay an insurance company can write off as a corporate tax deduction . The bill would still repeal other ACA taxes , including those on tanning beds , sectors of the health care industry and on high-cost employer-provided insurance plans .
Would you still receive a subsidy to reduce the cost of premiums ?
You could still lose all or some of your subsidy , which is now available to people earning up to $ 84,650 for a family of three . That income limit would still be lowered slightly and would become less generous . But people who have tax-advantaged Health Savings Accounts can use their HSA contributions to pay for premiums , instead of just for health services and products as they can now .
The bill would let anyone buy catastrophic plans , including those who qualify for subsidies . Those plans have low premiums , but high deductibles and limited benefits .
What if you need a lot of health care services ?
If an insurer offers plans that meet the ACA ’ s requirements — including covering minimum benefits and not charging sicker people more — theinsurer could receive funding to help cover the cost of sick customers . But it ’ s unclear whether the funding would be enough to keep the plans affordable . Because insurers would also be able to sell plans that don ’ t meet the ACA ’ s requirements , that would segment the market into sick and healthy people . Insurance companies say that would destabilize the market and increase costs for people with pre-existing conditions .
But would insurers have to cover you if you have a pre-existing condition ?
The plans that don ’ t meet the ACA ’ s requirements would not have to accept sick people , according to Larry Levitt , senior vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation . And the bill would make it easier for states to waive requirements that insurance plans cover specific benefits , which could make it difficult for those with expensive health conditions to find affordable plans . Like the earlier version , the new bill would also still end the ACA 's requirement that insurers spend a specific amount of the premiums they collect on benefits , instead of on profits , administration and other expenses
Would you still get help paying for deductibles and co-payments ?
The bill would still sunset in two years cost-sharing subsidies for low- and middle-income people who purchase insurance on an exchange . But it now includes an additional $ 70 billion – up from $ 112 billion – for states to reduce insurance costs in other ways . States would have to match the funds .
The bill would still eliminate the ACA 's requirement that insurers ca n't charge older customers more than three times what younger customers pay for the same coverage . Instead , those in their 60s could be charged five times as much , or more .
Would young adults be able to stay on their parents ’ plan ?
The bill would not change the ACA ’ s rule that dependent children can stay on a parent 's plan until age 26 .
If you are among the more than 14 million Americans who gained eligibility through the ACA , you could still lose it . Enhanced federal funding for the low-income adults who became newly qualified would be phased out , ending after 2024 .
Federal support for traditional Medicaid would also still be scaled back . States , which pay a portion of the cost of Medicaid , would have to find new funding or cut the program through restricting enrollment , curbing benefits , reducing payments to health care providers or finding efficiencies .
The revised bill does include changes to the way hospitals are paid by the federal government to help cover the bills of the uninsured , which are expected to increase . And if a state has a health emergency , the extra spending needed would not count toward the state ’ s new limit on federal Medicaid dollars .
The bill still effectively removes the ACA ’ s requirement that most people buy insurance by eliminating the tax penalties for failing to do so . But those who have a gap in their insurance coverage would have to wait six months before they can re-enroll .
The bill would still end the ACA ’ s penalties for larger employers who do n't offer insurance to workers . The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has said fewer employers will offer coverage if that change is made .
What if you or a family member are struggling with addiction ?
The revised bill increases funding to states for addiction services , including $ 45 billion instead of the $ 2 billion in the initial version . That ’ s how much GOP Sens . Rob Portman of Ohio and Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia were seeking to help fight the opioid epidemic in their hard-hit states . But it could still fall short of what ’ s needed .
As in the original version , insurance plans sold through the exchanges could not cover abortion services . There ’ s an exception for abortions performed to save the life of the mother , or to end a pregnancy that resulted from rape or incest .
The bill would also continue to block Planned Parenthood from receiving Medicaid funding for a year . The federal government already prevents Medicaid patients from receiving abortion services . But the bill would also block them from using Planned Parenthood for contraception , testing for and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases , and other services . GOP Sens . Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska oppose this provision .