Washington ( CNN ) It was the moment when hesitation became resolve .
`` Let 's get this f * * * ing thing done ! '' former combat fighter pilot , Air Force Colonel and Arizona Rep. Martha McSally exhorted her colleagues in a private pre-vote pep rally on Capitol Hill , as House Republicans entrusted their futures to fate and agreed to vote to repeal Obamacare .
Nearby , House Speaker Paul Ryan was `` giddy , '' said one colleague , sensing the narrowest of reputation-saving wins after a trial by political fire . Down Pennsylvania Avenue , as Thursday 's vote neared , President Donald Trump settled in front of a TV , his Twitter account poised , but slipping into the unusual state of calm that aides say envelops the hyperactive commander-in-chief when moments of history beckon .
For Democrats , by contrast , there was only deflation and despair -- as Obamacare , the law with nine lives , absorbed a dramatic blow . But thoughts of revenge also stirred . GOP lawmakers filed out of the House to a serenade : `` Na , Na , Na , Na , Hey , Hey , Goodbye , '' from Democrats convinced the Republicans had sealed their fate in the 2018 mid-terms .
Despite the Trump and GOP victory rally at the White House , the past few months are just an appetizer as the bill goes to the Senate and members head home to their constituents . There will be more rounds of Republican strife and debates over arcane parliamentary procedure with a new cast of lawmakers . Vice President Mike Pence -- who keeps Capitol Police officers busy with his frequent visits -- will spend more time in his Hill office . We 'll see a new report of how the bill will impact Americans . The tweets will undoubtedly continue .
This article relates behind-the-scenes negotiations and the emotional and political storm that raged on Capitol Hill as the House GOP belatedly , but triumphantly , honored a promise to its voters that it first made seven years ago and has renewed many times since .
Based on dozens of conversations with Republican and Democratic leaders , lawmakers and political aides by CNN 's teams on Capitol Hill and in the White House , it reveals how House GOP members finally steeled themselves to overcome the infighting and inaction that tarnished Trump 's First 100 Days .
It is also the story of how the GOP decided that the price of inaction now was greater than the risk of passing a bill that even many Senate Republicans believe is deeply flawed .
`` I think people in the House just simply wanted to get a bill out of the House and hoped that the Senate did something with it , '' said Rep. Charlie Dent , one of 20 Republicans who voted no .
But for those on the other side , victory tastes sweet .
`` This is a great plan , '' Trump said at the White House , seemingly looking forward to the next round . `` I actually think it will get even better . This is a repeal and replace of Obamacare . Make no mistake about it . ''
Flash back six weeks and it was all so different . After pulling an earlier version of the bill , a defeated Ryan admitted that Obamacare was `` the law of the land , '' and that the GOP , for now , had missed its moment .
A former opponent of the House bill , Sen. Rand Paul , wearing a Duke baseball cap from his alma mater , surprised the White House press pool after returning from golf with Trump on April 2 , saying a deal was getting closer .
The President tweeted that `` talks on Repealing and Replacing ObamaCare are , and have been , going on , and will continue until such time as a deal is hopefully struck . ''
Talks on Repealing and Replacing ObamaCare are , and have been , going on , and will continue until such time as a deal is hopefully struck . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) April 2 , 2017
Ryan was also quietly regrouping . He let the dust settle amid humiliating questions about his leadership . Critics highlighted his apparently misfiring relationship with Trump .
In reality , that impression was premature . The two men -- opposites in temperament and style -- grew increasingly close in the foxhole in the weeks to come .
Even so , there was no immediate sense among GOP leaders that health care 's time had come again . Committee chairs were gung ho to take on tax reform .
But Ryan did encourage members to keep talking about health care . Though optimism had been shattered , a more bottom-up approach was worth a shot . The Wisconsin Republican reasoned that time and rising political pressure on his members were needed to knit party splits before he could try again .
Ryan 's top health care staffer , Matt Hoffmann , served as the go-between as Rep. Mark Meadows , chairman of the Freedom Caucus and Rep. Tom McArthur , a second-term New Jersey lawmaker and chair of the Tuesday Group moderates , worked to fuse divisions that sent the American Health Care Act crashing .
Throughout April they swapped legislative language , finally agreeing on a deal to allow states to seek waivers to weaken several key Obamacare reforms that protect those with pre-existing conditions . But in a concession to moderates , the provision would not apply to those who maintained continuous coverage .
Once what became known as the MacArthur amendment was codified , whip teams set about testing its support in the Republican conference and solidifying the votes of Freedom Caucus members , the senior GOP source said .
The White House was agitating for a vote as a capstone to a barren First 100 Days . A week ago , House leaders decided not to try to ram the bill through just to meet the arbitrary deadline . But despite another perceived failure , the process was `` 100 percent still alive , '' one senior GOP aide said .
Questions still lingered about pre-existing conditions -- resulting in Rep. Fred Upton 's bombshell announcement that he would vote no , a brick wall that could have again blocked the GOP 's efforts .
But after a meeting with the President alongside his colleague Billy Long of Missouri and a guarantee that funding for high risk pools would rise from $ 5 billion to $ 8 billion , Upton came on board . Though Democrats and many policy experts say $ 8 billion is a drop in the bucket of the cash needed to fund high risk pools , Upton 's decision was crucial .
`` It gave our guys a clear-cut reason to get to yes , '' one senior GOP aide said .
By Wednesday night , less than 12 hours after the full details emerged of the latest change to a seemingly ever evolving , always-rejected piece of legislation , Republican leaders met in Ryan 's office . They did n't have a solid 216 yes votes , aides say . But they were close . Close enough to force the issue .
`` It was time -- we felt it was moving in the right direction , but we also knew we 'd hit a point of no return , '' one person directly involved in the process said .
Thursday , it was clear the play had paid off . They were locking in votes . Pledges from the Department of Health and Human Services helped flip two members . Leadership guarantees of future legislation brought along another . Ryan , who generally eschews the hard , one-on-one sell with wavering members , did just that , several times , one source said .
Implicit in all of it was protection -- - in the form of supportive GOP groups come campaign time -- - that would be there in spades for endangered members who went along , several sources said .
One member in the conference meeting , where colleagues were greeted by the theme tune from `` Rocky '' and snapshots of General George S. Patton , as well as McSally 's rallying call , said the tone of Ryan 's message to his troops was simple : `` It 's time to roll . ''
Trump waited for the vote in typical style : by tweeting .
`` If victorious , Republicans will be having a big press conference at the beautiful Rose Garden of the White House immediately after vote ! '' he wrote Thursday afternoon .
JUST WATCHED Sanders : Thousands will die if bill passes Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Sanders : Thousands will die if bill passes 01:12
And after weeks of misfires that exposed his inexperience in wooing Congress , he got his win .
`` Coming from a different world , and only being a politician for a short period of time , how am I doing ? Am I doing OK ? I 'm President . Hey , I 'm President , do you believe it , right ? '' he crowed in the Rose Garden .
Months ago many of those beaming Republican leaders behind Trump had not believed it or in him . There had been whispers that Trump 's loose tongue revealed his ignorance about what was in the bill and made compromise harder .
But by Thursday afternoon , Trump was pouring praise on Ryan and his crew , and it did seem that , in the President 's words , the party had `` developed a bond . ''
A White House official told CNN that Trump had kept up an intense push behind the scenes , ensuring that aides supported MacArthur and Meadows as they sought common ground and tasking HHS Secretary Tom Price with briefing wavering members on Medicaid funding .
He and Ryan swapped notes in multiple late night phone calls .
`` The President 's been incredibly engaged in this process , particularly over the last several days , '' deputy press secretary Sarah Sanders said .
For all his ham-fisted interventions , Trump has evolved through the health care process , aides believe . He now knows artificial deadlines cut no ice in Congress .
He 's also learned the legislative process is more complex than the business world — after running for office proclaiming his deal-making skills would take Washington by storm .
`` It 's not so cut and dry here , '' one aide said , explaining Trump 's thinking . `` There 's so many more players involved and everybody has something that they want . ''
Still , you ca n't take the businessman out of the President -- he still prizes the personal touch , the person said .
`` This president probably has more philosophic dexterity than most of the presidents I 've dealt with in the past , '' said South Carolina Rep. Mark Sanford , who voted for the bill . `` That makes it a little bit different because typically there is sort of a fixed starting point or a fixed ending point on where an administration might be . ''
As the votes rolled in , Trump 's coterie gathered in the dining room off the Oval Office , among them , Pence , Price , Trump 's daughter Ivanka , son-in-law Jared Kushner , top Economic Adviser Gary Cohn , adviser Steve Bannon , counselor Kellyanne Conway , press aide Hope Hicks , political aide Dan Scavino and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Administrator Seema Verma .
It felt like election night all over again . `` We were all overjoyed and he was very docile , frankly . Very hopeful but not prematurely celebrating . We saw the same thing today , '' one official said .
While Trump took the plaudits , many players in the drama spoke approvingly of Pence .
Even Dent , who voted against the bill , praised the Vice President 's soft sell technique .
`` He wanted to work with me . Very civil , very constructive meeting as you would expect from Mike Pence , '' Dent recalled . `` I always get the sense that Mike Pence is the velvet glove , the soft touch . The good cop . ''
Pence threw himself into the renewed push to pass health care soon after returning from a marathon trip to Asia . He was all over Capitol Hill over the last few days , forming a partnership with White House Chief of Staff Reince Priebus , who roamed the House floor as the vote went ahead .
A Capitol Police officer was overheard telling a colleague how he does n't like the days when Pence is on the Hill because he likes to mingle so many members , the responsibility of protecting him becomes even more intense .
In 2010 , then-Vice President Joe Biden called Obamacare a `` big f * * * ing deal . His sentiments were similar , for other reasons , on Thursday .
`` Day of shame in Congress . Protections for pre-existing conditions , mental health , maternity care , addiction services -- all gone , '' Biden tweeted .
Day of shame in Congress . Protections for pre-existing conditions , mental health , maternity care , addiction services -- all gone . — Joe Biden ( @ JoeBiden ) May 4 , 2017
Cries of `` shame , shame , shame , '' greeted GOP lawmakers as they walked down the ornate steps on the East Front of the Capitol .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi warned the GOP : `` You have every provision of this bill tattooed on your forehead . You will glow in the dark on this one . ''
But all may not be lost yet for the Democrats . The bill must go now to the Senate , and it emerged Thursday that the chamber will only use the House bill as a skeleton before writing its own legislation .
Now , House members are going home , where protesters and raucous town halls certainly await .
There is a feeling of accomplishment , several members acknowledged , that so far is a novelty in the new Republican era . They know what is ahead , and are ready .
`` We know the fight that 's coming , '' one senior GOP aide said . `` We want that fight . ''