The Obama administration was warned as early as March about potential risks with the implementation of HealthCare.gov , according to documents released by the House Energy and Commerce Committee . White House Press Secretary Jay Carney also acknowledged on Tuesday that President Obama was briefed at the time .
Key administration officials at the White House and Department of Health and Human Services received briefings this past spring from McKinsey & Co. , a private consulting firm that reviewed more than 200 documents and conducted interviews with HHS staff to identify potential problems before the Oct. 1 rollout .
A report prepared by McKinsey in late March discussed several issues that could hamper the implementation of ObamaCare , including insufficient testing and evolving requirements . The report also warned that the program relied too heavily on outside contractors .
At a hearing held Tuesday by the Energy and Commerce Committee , Chairman Fred Upton , R-Mich. , used the report to challenge the accuracy of April testimony by Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius that the site was `` on track . ''
`` But we now know that the secretary 's testimony did not match what was happening behind the scenes , '' Upton said , claiming the site was on track `` for disaster . ''
Rep. Steve Scalise , R-La. , said the reports reveal `` chaos in the Obama administration . ''
Carney later acknowledged that Obama was briefed as early as March , and said he `` absolutely '' followed up to see if changes had been made . But he said officials still did n't anticipate the site would perform as poorly as it did .
In one page of the presentation , the company specifically warned about a `` failure to resolve post-launch issues rapidly '' -- a scenario that ended up playing out last month . The company cautioned that a `` compressed testing window and volume uncertainty , '' coupled with the fact that response teams were not yet in place , would drag out the process of fixing problems after launch .
Sebelius , Medicare Chief Marilyn Tavenner , and Gary Cohen , a Medicare and Medicaid oversight official , attended a briefing on the firm ’ s analysis on April 4 , a Capitol Hill source said . Sebelius then testified at an oversight committee hearing two weeks after being briefed on the McKinsey report that the implementation of ObamaCare was on track , according to the Hill source .
Tim Murphy , R-Pa. , a member of the Energy and Commerce Committee , called into question the administration 's assurances , arguing that the report suggests the administration was aware the implementation was in trouble months before the fall rollout .
“ Despite assurances from Secretary Sebelius , Marilyn Tavenner , and Gary Cohen that ‘ all was well ’ and ‘ on track ’ with the launch of the Affordable Care Act , we now have documents dating back to April that call into question what they told us , ” Murphy said .
White House spokesman Eric Schultz acknowledged late Monday that red flags were raised as the website was being developed and recommendations were taken up by a development team at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services .
`` But nobody anticipated the size and scope of the problems we experienced once the site launched . Since that time , experts have been working night and day to get it functioning – and that is where our focus is , and should be , right now , ” Schultz told ███ in a statement .
CMS pushed back against the release of the report late Monday , stating that the agency has `` continually evaluated progress '' and has taken steps to mitigate risks and address concerns with the ObamaCare website rollout .
`` The review was completed six months before the beginning of open enrollment , was in line with industry best practices , and was followed by concrete action to address potential risks—as was intended , '' the agency said in a statement .