A new front opened Friday in efforts to reshape how the federal government implements President Barack Obama 's health-care overhaul now that the Supreme Court has ruled to keep the law in place .
Employers , insurers , hospitals , drug makers and others are angling for an advantage as the government writes the regulations and sets the policies that will bring the law to life .
Hospital owners want the government to reduce the $ 155 billion in health-care payment cuts they agreed to during negotiations over the law . Makers of medical devices hope to roll back a 2.3 % tax on their sales contained in the measure . Insurance companies want more leeway to charge older people higher rates than younger ones . Drug makers are aiming at a provision that could squeeze how much Medicare pays for medicine .
`` Let 's face it , this law is going to be amended and adjusted for years and years to come , '' said Rick Pollack , executive vice president of the American Hospital Association , a lobbying group .
The White House gave lobbyists fresh hope that they can win changes to the law after President Obama said Thursday he wanted to improve the overhaul . Although the legislation Mr. Obama signed in 2010 spells out most aspects of the law , federal officials can materially change it depending on how they write regulations to implement each provision .
For instance , though parts of the law such as restrictions on how much insurance companies can vary premiums by age would have to be changed by Congress , others , such as the requirement that large employers offer coverage to workers or pay a penalty , could be tweaked by federal regulators .
Congressional Democrats also could team up with Republicans to amend specific parts of the law , as they did when they repealed a small-business paperwork requirement of the health law in 2011 .
Photos A line of onlookers waited to enter the Supreme Court building Thursday morning to hear the court 's ruling in a landmark case over President Barack Obama 's health-care overhaul law . Evan Vucci/Associated Press Timeline : The Health-Care Debate Read a timeline of events surrounding President Barack Obama 's health-care legislation , from the bill 's path through Congress to the legal challenges . Looking Back : Health Care in America Read about past efforts to change how Americans receive and pay for health care . Supreme-Court Arguments Listen to audio excerpts and explore the transcripts of the health-law arguments at the Supreme Court . Day One : March 26 , 2012
Some hospital groups said Friday they will press Congress to peel back a portion of the $ 155 billion in payment cuts they agreed to . The Supreme Court made one change to the law , allowing states to opt out of expanding Medicaid to a broader swath of the poor without losing existing funding for the program . Hospitals say that will mean fewer people will be insured through Medicaid , and as a result they will absorb higher costs for unpaid medical bills .
`` The bargain that was struck seems to be out the window , '' said Bruce Siegel , chief executive of the National Association of Public Hospitals and Health Systems . He said the group will lobby to restore some payments meant to ease the burden for hospitals that provide a lot of uncompensated care .
Medical-device companies see a new opening to roll back their 2.3 % tax after 37 House Democrats joined 233 Republicans to repeal it earlier this month .
Retail , hospitality and restaurant companies have asked the administration to delay until 2016 enforcement of a requirement that larger employers cover full-time workers or pay a penalty , giving them two more years to comply .
Representatives of Blue Cross Blue Shield Association , Aetna Inc. and Humana Inc. HUM -2.00 % said they will ask Congress to change a provision that requires insurers to restrict how they vary premiums based on age .
Stephanie Cutter , deputy campaign manager for the Obama campaign , joins Jerry Seib on D.C. Bureau to discuss the aftermath of the Supreme Court ruling on the health-care law , and how it will affect re-election efforts .
The fresh burst of lobbying underscores how few are waiting for the November elections to see whether the measure remains in place for good . Presumptive Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney this week reiterated that he would repeal the law if elected . But that would require that Republicans control both the House and Senate . Companies and many states say they must press ahead with the law regardless of that possibility .
The Obama administration has released few details about what changes the president would support , beyond saying he backs legislation that would allow states greater latitude to set up their own health overhaul programs as early as 2014 .
`` If they discover they have better ways of doing this in ways that suit the needs of their states , then the federal government is open to it , '' said Stephanie Cutter , deputy manager of the Obama campaign .
More on the Court Read more about recent decisions and see details on the justices . More photos and interactive graphics
Congressional Republicans said they did n't believe the president would take up many of their ideas , but that they might be able to build on the recent push to repeal the medical-device tax . `` There are some areas where I think there may be common ground '' among members of Congress to tweak the law , said Rep. Tom Price ( R. , Ga . )
Employers and health-care companies already have won changes to the law by pushing for regulatory adjustments . More than 1,000 employers and union insurance plans won waivers from the administration that allow them to continue to cap how much in insurance benefits they pay out .
The D.C. Bureau Roundtable on how the Supreme Court delivered the ruling that no one in Washington was expecting , and what it will mean for the presidential election .
Insurance companies are making the biggest push to change how the law gets carried out . They are pressing regulators to give consumers only short windows of time to sign up for plans offered in new insurance exchanges set to open in 2014 . They want consumers to face penalties if they sign up late as a way of prodding them to buy coverage . `` The attention shifts to the workability , '' said Karen Ignagni , head of America 's Health Insurance Plans , an industry trade association .
Under the law , insurers are restricted from charging older customers—who are considered more likely to get sick—more than three times the rate they charge younger ones . The industry wants to be able to charge premiums up to five times higher for older consumers , and plans a fresh public campaign arguing that if premiums are too expensive for younger , healthier people , they wo n't buy insurance .
A woman examines front pages at the Newseum in Washington , D.C. , on Friday , a day after the court ruling . Associated Press
Peeling back the medical-device tax is long shot given that Mr. Obama has said he would veto such a change . JC Scott , the top Washington lobbyist for medical-device industry group AdvaMed , said lawmakers could put the repeal in a broader bill addressing myriad expiring tax provisions after the election .
Drug makers are taking aim at a provision of the health law that could squeeze how much Medicare pays for medicines . The Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America , the industry 's main lobby , is working to repeal an independent panel due to issue recommendations to Congress on ways to control Medicare spending .
The board might need to find $ 25 billion to $ 50 billion in Medicare cuts between 2015 and 2019 if Medicare spending does n't stay within certain targets , estimates Richard Evans , an analyst at Sector & Sovereign Research .
—Gerald F. Seib and Jonathan D. Rockoff contributed to this article .