Former Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius dismissed recently-unearthed comments from an adviser on President Obama ’ s health care overhaul as “ offensive ” and “ flat-out wrong , ” saying Monday there was an open process surrounding the law ’ s passage .
“ I think that Professor Gruber ’ s comments are just offensive and flat-out wrong — there couldn ’ t have been more open discussions , ” Ms. Sebelius said on CNN ’ s “ New Day. ” “ There were dozens of hearings and mark-ups and analysis . There were five committees in Congress ; this went on for months and months , so the notion that somehow this was a secret or that the tax frame was a secret is just really ludicrous . ”
In a recently-unearthed video , MIT Professor Jonathan Gruber , who consulted on the law , said a lack of transparency and the “ stupidity ” of the American public helped ensure the law ’ s passage .
The Obama administration and many Democrats have since tried to distance themselves from Mr. Gruber , who after saying he regretted those remarks has largely stayed out of the public eye as other videos of him talking about the law have surfaced .
“ We were very forthright with the American public — I think members of Congress who wrote this legislation were very forthright , ” Ms. Sebelius said . “ It was both about — having affordable coverage was certainly a piece of it , but also people getting coverage that they didn ’ t have . ”
She said the country has seen the biggest drop in the uninsured in U.S. history , “ and that ’ s very good news . ”
She also acknowledged early difficulties with the Obamacare website last year but said she ’ s proud of the work she did .
“ I was very happy to stay through the roll-out initially , and we had a disastrous eight weeks , there ’ s no excuse for that , the website was flawed and for eight weeks it was really miserable , ” she said . “ The good news is by the end of December when coverage started we had a million people sign up and by the end of open enrollment we had almost 8 million people and by the time we got to October of this year , about 6.7 million of those folks have new coverage and governors [ in ] red and blue states expanded Medicaid . That ’ s a great legacy and I ’ m really proud of that . ”