In two days of House debate this week , both parties recycled talking points with minor changes to take account of the Supreme Court decision .
Democrats said the ruling vindicated their policies , including a requirement for most Americans to have health insurance , starting in 2014 . And they said Mr. Obama needed to do a better job of defending the law , on which public opinion is deeply divided .
The Supreme Court ruling fired up Republicans because , they said , it confirmed their argument that the law would impose a tax , not just a penalty , on people who go without health insurance .
“ The court has spoken , ” said Representative Sandy Adams , Republican of Florida . “ Obamacare is a tax . ”
Nancy Pelosi , the House Democratic leader , described the law as one of the Democrats ’ greatest achievements , making health care “ a right , not a privilege , for all Americans . ”
Asked about the possible electoral impact of the Republican offensive , Ms. Pelosi said : “ The politics be damned . We came to do a job . We are very proud of what we did . ”
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
Republicans are still seething over how the law was adopted , without any Republican votes .
Representative John Fleming , Republican of Louisiana , said the law “ never would have gotten passed ” if the penalty for violating the individual mandate had been acknowledged as a tax .
Democrats said the attacks were overblown . And they gleefully quoted statements by Mitt Romney supporting an individual mandate as part of the health plan adopted in Massachusetts in 2006 , when he was governor .
Representative Sander M. Levin of Michigan , the senior Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee , said “ almost no one ” would pay the federal penalty .
“ The Congressional Budget Office estimates that only 1.4 percent of Americans will pay anything for refusing to purchase insurance , ” Mr. Levin said . “ That is just about identical to the percent of people in Massachusetts who have paid the penalty under Governor Romney ’ s health care law . ”
Contrary to Republican claims , Mr. Levin said the federal law should be viewed as a tax cut for middle-income people because it would provide tax credits to help them pay premiums for private health insurance .
Mr. Romney , the Republicans ’ likely presidential nominee , says he would take immediate action to roll back the federal law if he wins the White House .
Representative Charles B. Rangel , a New York Democrat and strong supporter of the 2010 law , said members of his party had made “ a lot of mistakes ” in selling its benefits to the public . Faced with unrelenting Republican opposition , he said , “ the administration has not made the case that uninsured people get health care ” under the law .
The Supreme Court rejected claims that the individual mandate was justified by Congress ’ s power to regulate interstate commerce , but upheld it as a permissible exercise of taxing power . Republicans said imposing a mandate by the tax power was scarier than using the commerce power . And they said it set a precedent for taxing “ inactivity . ”
“ How is this different from the government requiring Americans to purchase broccoli or pay a tax for not doing so ? ” asked Representative Dave Camp , Republican of Michigan and chairman of the Ways and Means Committee .
Representative Daniel Lipinski , Democrat of Illinois , was a lonely voice pleading for a middle way . “ We need a fix , not a repeal , ” he said , asserting that Congress should keep “ good parts of the law ” and add stronger cost controls .