Jonathan Gruber said Tuesday he was glib , insulting and speaking well beyond his abilities when he called American voters stupid and said Obamacare backers had to game the system to get the law passed .
But he also denied he was its architect , or even a very important part of the health care conversation .
Mr. Gruber ’ s caught-on-tape comments have been a political nightmare for an Obama administration trying to recover from a botched rollout of the exchanges last year . The Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist said his remarks were unfortunate but shouldn ’ t sour consumers looking for a better deal on their insurance , nor should they be evidence in a pending Supreme Court case that could topple one of the health law ’ s pillars .
“ I behaved badly , and I will have to live with that , but my own inexcusable arrogance is not a flaw in the Affordable Care Act , ” Mr. Gruber told the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform .
In a combative four-hour hearing , he refused to say how much money he ’ d been paid in total by states or the federal government to consult on the health law , telling the oversight committee they could take that up with his lawyer later .
And under intense questioning , he admitted that his economic modeling — the area where he said he does have expertise — predicted that some Americans would lose their existing insurance plans . President Obama had emphatically and repeatedly denied that this would happen in the runup to the bill ’ s passage .
Committee Chairman Darrell E. Issa , California Republican , balked at Mr. Gruber ’ s attempts to rein in the scandal , saying his remarks were inadvertently truthful and pulled back the curtain on Obamacare , which Democratic majorities muscled through Congress in 2010 .
Even Obamacare ’ s supporters lambasted him Tuesday for gifting the GOP another weapon in their fight against the law .
“ Man , you did a great job . You wrapped it up with a bow , ” said Rep. Elijah E. Cummings of Maryland , the panel ’ s top Democrat .
Among the comments that have come to light , Mr. Gruber said the law was written in a “ tortured ” way to game budget rules so as not to be declared a tax increase by the Congressional Budget Office and thereby obscure its impact from the public .
“ Lack of transparency is a huge political advantage , ” Mr. Gruber said in one clip . “ And basically , call it the stupidity of the American voter or whatever , but basically that was really , really critical to get the thing to pass . ”
Mr. Gruber apologized repeatedly Tuesday and ducked fierce debate with GOP lawmakers by saying he is not a politician .
“ Most of the people watching this morning aren ’ t politicians , and they don ’ t call people ‘ stupid , ’ ” said Rep. Trey Gowdy , South Carolina Republican .
Mr. Gruber tried to clarify remarks that suggest Obamacare subsidies should only help customers of state-run exchanges .
A lawsuit before the Supreme Court makes that same argument , and if the challengers are successful , it could seriously dent the health care law by cutting off the tax credits to about two-thirds of the states , which use the federally run exchange .
Mr. Gruber said he was speaking hypothetically about what would happen if the Obama administration , “ for whatever reason , might not create a federal exchange. ” If that happened , the only way states could be sure that their residents would get tax credits would be to set up their own exchanges , he told the committee .
Testifying alongside Mr. Gruber was Marilyn Tavenner , administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , who said it was “ regrettable ” that her agency included 400,000 dental plans with the enrollment figures it reported to the committee earlier this fall .
When the dental plans were excluded , Obamacare enrollment fell to 6.7 million in the first go-round , or less than the 7 million target the Congressional Budget Office had estimated .
Mr. Issa said it took his staffers just 20 minutes to find the error once the administration sent the correct documents over to the committee .
“ Simply put , this was a mistake , ” Mrs. Tavenner said . “ Moving forward , only individuals with medical coverage will be included in our individual affected enrollment numbers . ”