The Obamacare deadline is coming . One state well aware of the date is Minnesota , where computer problems have surfaced since the Oct. 1 launch of its health insurance marketplace MNsure , leaving many frustrated and without insurance . As Guy reported , in the midst of this crisis executive director April Todd-Malmlov did what any overseer would do : She went to Costa Rica .
After Todd-Malmlov announced her resignation this Tuesday , Scott Leitz , the assistant commissioner of the Department of Human Services , became MNsure ’ s interim chief executive officer until someone fills the post permanently . In light of these recent setbacks , Minnesota is considering postponing next week ’ s enrollment deadline , which means Leitz and the rest of the MNsure board has a host of anxious Minnesotans on their hands .
MNsure is the only way for those on Medical Assistance and MinnesotaCare to obtain insurance coverage . But , technical glitches , along with a highly publicized incident in which an employee accidentally emailed private insurance broker information , stymied Minnesotans ready and waiting to sign up . Now , with the executive director ’ s resignation , those insurance plans seem as unattainable as ever .
“ With less than a week before the critical enrollment deadline for Minnesota families , zero insurance policy cards have been issued and the MNsure help line is anything but helpful , ” House Minority Leader Kurt Daudt , R-Crown , said Tuesday night . “ Tonight ’ s news offers no comfort to hardworking Minnesotans who are still unsure if they ’ ll have insurance coverage on Jan. 1 . ”
These glitches were embarrassing enough . But , for the executive director to leave as her fellow citizens are struggling to get covered is the bitter icing on the cake .
Oddly , Todd-Malmlov wasn ’ t the only director to resign after taking a tropical vacation during her state ’ s health care rollout . Maryland ’ s director stepped down as well after returning from a trip to the Caribbean .
Todd-Malmlov may have left for some fun in the sun , but Minnesotans are the ones who got burned .