WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - The sweeping tax overhaul that passed the U.S. Senate on Saturday contains the Republicans ’ biggest blow yet to former President Barack Obama ’ s healthcare law , repealing the requirement that all Americans obtain health insurance .
The individual mandate is meant to ensure a viable health insurance market by forcing younger and healthier Americans to buy coverage to help offset the cost of sicker patients . It helps uphold the most popular provision of the law , which requires insurers charge sick and healthy people the same rates .
Removing it while keeping the rest of Obama ’ s Affordable Care Act intact is expected to cause insurance premiums to rise and lead to millions of people losing coverage , policy experts say .
“ It ’ s going to take a bunch of healthy people out of the insurance market , ” said Craig Garthwaite , director of the healthcare program at Northwestern University ’ s Kellogg School of Management .
Obamacare “ is going to collapse even more now , ” he said .
Republican lawmakers failed several times this year to scrap the mandate as part of a broader repeal of Obamacare , blocked by opposition from a few of the party ’ s senators , including Susan Collins of Maine .
Collins , still opposed to removing the mandate , said she voted for the tax bill on Saturday after being assured by Republican leaders that they will support legislation to prop up U.S. health insurance markets .
The tax bill is not yet final . The U.S. House of Representatives and Senate must now reconcile the differences in their respective versions of the legislation .
“ Repealing the individual mandate simply restores to people the freedom to choose , ” Republican Senator Lisa Murkowski , who has opposed previous Obamacare repeal efforts , wrote in an opinion piece in Alaska ’ s Fairbanks Daily News-Miner .
“ Instead of taxing people for not being able to afford coverage , we should be working to reduce costs and provide options . ”
One of the Obamacare stabilization bills , co-authored by Republican Senator Lamar Alexander and Democratic Senator Patty Murray , would restore billions of dollars in subsidies that health insurers use to reduce out-of-pocket costs for low income Americans .
A second , co-authored by Collins and Democratic Senator Bill Nelson , would create an additional $ 4.5 billion fund to compensate insurers for covering health care for the sickest patients .
Still , health policy experts said both of those measures would be needed without a mandate repeal and would not make up for expected premium increases and the rise in the numbers of uninsured Americans .
“ Neither of these bills would do anything to offset the increase in uninsured resulting from a mandate repeal , ” said Larry Levitt , health economist at the Kaiser Family Foundation . “ The marketplaces would limp along without a mandate but it ’ s probably not a stable place . ”
Without the mandate , health insurance premiums would rise 10 percent in most years over the next decade on the individual market and 13 million people would lose coverage by 2027 , the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office said in a report last month .
Levitt said that insurers would need around $ 10 billion per year to offset the lost revenue from the individual mandate rather than raise premiums .
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-KY ) leaves the Senate floor during debate over the Republican tax reform plan in Washington , U.S. , December 1 , 2017 . ███/James Lawler Duggan
Republicans , who control the White House , U.S. House of Representatives and Senate , failed for months to make good on a top campaign pledge of President Donald Trump .
Trump has said Congress will return to repeal-and-replace efforts next year and over the past several months has taken regulatory and executive actions to steadily undermine the Obamacare law .
Insurers and leading medical groups have already urged Congress to preserve the individual mandate and warned of “ serious consequences ” such as rising premiums and a rise in the number of uninsured if it were repealed .