The report doesn ’ t indicate how many people have actually paid premiums . Report : ACA sign-ups surpass 8M
About 13 million people got coverage under Obamacare during the first open enrollment season of the Affordable Care Act , enough for administration officials to be confident that every state ’ s insurance market will be stable going into 2015 .
The latest enrollment data filled out the demographic small print that was lacking in President Barack Obama ’ s mid-April announcement that enrollment in the exchanges had passed 8 million – exceeding goals and expectations for an open enrollment season that got off to a disastrous start .
“ At this historic moment , we ’ re one big step closer to finally realizing the president ’ s dream of an America where there truly is opportunity for all , ” outgoing Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said on a call with reporters .
The report said 8 million had signed up in the state and federal exchanges , and that Medicaid and Children ’ s Health Insurance Program enrollment had grown by at least 4.8 million since October . Many were newly insured .
About 28 percent of the exchange enrollees were in the 18 to 34 age bracket , with large numbers of younger people signing up at the last minute . Most exchange enrollees got subsidies .
Mike Hash , director of the Office of Health Reform at the Department of Health and Human Services , said the numbers are strong enough to prevent dramatic pressure to increase premiums .
“ Premiums will be stable and the risk pool is sufficiently large and varied to support that kind of pricing… in every state , ” Hash said , a conclusion he said was based on HHS data and outside information .
The report did not say how many people have paid their first premiums , the final step in getting covered . The industry estimates the number will be about 85 percent . GOP critics argue it will be much less and cite the high cost of Obamacare coverage as a deterrent .
The HHS enrollment report , covering state and federal exchanges through mid-April , found that of the 5.18 million people who applied for financial assistance and chose a plan through HealthCare.gov , just 13 percent told the government that they had coverage at the time of the application . But HHS officials said tjhe sample is small , the data is “ not very reliable ” and people may have underreported their coverage . Data for all the state exchanges wasn ’ t available .
Critics of the health law have suggested that many or even most people getting covered were already insured — and that many were compelled to switch to the exchanges after their old health plans were cancelled . But insurance officials , surveys and polls , and states collecting data have found that more Americans are getting covered , although the precise numbers may be elusive for some time .
The total on the federal and state exchanges as of mid-April – 8,019,763 – includes about 2.2 million young adults , roughly 28 percent of total enrollment . That ’ s a less robust figure than administration officials initially hoped for but one built on a huge surge of interest in the final month .
An additional 4.8 million people were enrolled in Medicaid and the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program at the end of March compared to the enrollment level before Oct. 1 . The Medicaid enrollment numbers may rise once figures from state agencies come in .
More than a third of the exchange sign-ups came from three states with large numbers of uninsured residents , including California , where 1.4 million people signed up , Florida , which saw 980,000 , and Texas , which saw 730,000 sign-ups . The next closest states were New York and North Carolina , which each signed up more than 350,000 residents . New York and California are blue states running their own exchanges ; the other three have GOP governors who are hostile to the Affordable Care Act .
Although the report ’ s overall numbers hewed closely to data already released by the White House , it also included for the first time details on the demographic breakdown of exchange sign-ups . About 63 percent were white , compared to 17 percent African American , 11 percent Latino and 8 percent Asian .
More than eight in 10 enrollees qualified for subsidies to help purchase health insurance on the exchanges , according to the report .
People who signed up for insurance in the exchanges are most likely to have picked a “ silver ” plan – considered an average level of benefits , co-pays and deductibles . About 54 percent of the total were women compared to 46 percent who were men .