Republican opponents are going to want to declare the controversial legislation a failure . Obamacare D-Day now a soft launch
For months all eyes have been on October 1 — the first day people can sign up for Obamacare .
But as that day approaches , many people working on the nuts and bolts of the health law are tamping down any expectations of a sign-up stampede .
Not everyone will enroll immediately . And that , they say , is the way they want it .
Given all the worries that web sites could crash , call centers could be overwhelmed , and the federal government ’ s data hub could falter as it checks eligibility and subsidies , they ’ d rather see a slow buildup during an open enrollment season that runs through March .
“ October 1 will be an important day to raise awareness , but it is the first day of a six-month public education effort , ” said Tara McGuinness , a senior White House communications adviser working on rollout of the health law .
But given the politics of Obamacare , expect a rush to judgment .
Republican opponents are going to want to declare the controversial legislation a failure , and the sooner the better . Either tepid enrollment or technical glitches will advance their argument that the law is doomed to fail . They see the White House as playing a game of lowered expectations rather than ‘ fessing up to the failures .
“ If I were HHS or CMS or whoever ’ s calling the shots over there , or the White House , I would think that would be a natural thing to do , ” said Sen. Pat Roberts ( R-Kan. ) , one of the skeptics . “ Part of me believes this is Thelma and Louise about 10 miles from the Grand Canyon . ”
Democrats -from President Barack Obama on down - say that hiccups are to be expected when the switch is flipped on the new state exchanges . It ’ s an intricate system that requires several complex government technology systems to successfully talk to each other — and to the consumer . A modest start to enrollment may reduce any start-up strain .
“ There are going to be some glitches . No doubt about it , ” Obama said at a news conference last month . “ There are going to be things where we say , you know what ? We should have thought of that earlier , or this would work a little bit better or this needs an adjustment . ”
And it could all get even more complicated if Congress doesn ’ t figure out how to avoid a government shutdown . That wold be because of the ongoing fight about Obamacare - and it could start the same day enrollment does , Oct. 1 .
The administration hopes to keep the glitches minimal-and to have time to repair them before Obamacare ’ s public image is further hurt . Alan Weil , executive director of the National Academy for State Health Policy , says “ no one gets hurt ” if a problem springs up in October and is fixed in November .
“ October 1 is an important day but no one actually gets coverage until January 1 , ” Weil said . “ No one ’ s life changes on October 1 . ”
Democratic supporters of the law say that 2014 enrollment shouldn ’ t be measured until open enrollment ends in late March . In fact , they say , it may take two or three years to really evaluate such a dramatic new program . The Congressional Budget Office has forecast gradual growth in coverage over the years .
None of this means that October 1 isn ’ t important— it is . The administration hopes the start of enrollment will drive a lot of attention to the law from the media and on social networks , which will encourage uninsured people to check out the new exchanges . But people are likely to mull over options , and come back to the websites and marketing materials more than once before they commit . They may not want to pay in October if they can wait until December for coverage in January .
That ’ s what happened when Massachusetts opened its exchange in late 2006 .
Jon Kingsdale , who ran the Massachusetts exchange and is now a director at the Wakely Consulting ’ s Boston office , said people in that state had an average of 18 interactions - web visits , e-mails or phone calls —before they actually bought coverage .
“ It ’ s not going to be sudden , immediate enrollment , ” Kingsdale said of the Affordable Care Act . “ I would expect very little enrollment in October for benefits that don ’ t start until January . ”
In Massachusetts , about 10,000 new , subsidized enrollees signed up each month over the first 15 months . The biggest spike came in the last two months before the mandate kicked in , Kingsdale said .
Kevin Counihan , who is leading the Connecticut insurance marketplace , hopes for a similar pattern .
“ October is really the first month of testing … because it ’ s the first month I really believe that all the elements of the federal data hub and state interfaces are going to be ready . That ’ s not a bad thing , ” Counihan said . “ It ’ s going to give the states and the federal government time to really tweak it . ”
He expects spurts of enrollment in the first two weeks of December — closer to to the start of coverage on Jan. 1 — and toward the end of open season in March .
That ’ s what Mila Kofman , the executive director of the DC Health Link , anticipates . Consumer education in October — and a rush of enrollment in December .
“ We want to make sure that they ’ re not pushed into making a quick decision , ” she said .
Nevada plans to advertise in staggered phases and won ’ t start directing people to the exchange website until Oct. 7 .
“ We want to avoid the possibility of a federal data hub crash or massive use on the federal hub so we ’ re turning the message over to come and enroll in Nevada health link ” later in October , said C.J . Bawden , a communications officer for the state exchange .
The state ’ s advertising now says that the health exchange is coming . But on Oct. 7 , the ad messaging in the northern half of the state will change to say that it ’ s now time to enroll . A week later , the advertising will change in the southern part of the state – a staggered approach to further ensure that the exchange isn ’ t overloaded .
David S. Lopez , president and CEO of Harris Health System near Houston , Texas , says he ’ s hoping to get his uninsured patients matched with insurance as quickly as possible . Today , nearly two-thirds of the system ’ s patients pay for care themselves . But he ’ s looking at the long game .
“ To expect we ’ ll be a rousing success in signing people up – no , it ’ s not going to happen the first month or even the first year , ” Lopez said . “ We have to acknowledge there is going to be a learning curve . You ’ ll build the momentum and we ’ ll eventually get there . This is going to be a work in progress . ”