Almost lost in the polemics over Obamacare ’ s depressing impact on employment was the troubling overall outlook presented recently by the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) .
Prospects for both the budget and the economy in general are declining , in the CBO ’ s view , with potential consequences severe enough that they demand further attention .
Start with budget deficits . During the next 10 years , the government ’ s pool of red ink will rise by fully $ 1 trillion compared with what the CBO projected as recently as last May — an increase of nearly 16 percent ( from $ 6.3 trillion to $ 7.3 trillion ) .
The $ 514 billion deficit for 2014 looks like progress only when compared to the trillion-dollar-plus totals of recent years , notes the Heritage Foundation ’ s Romina Boccia . In one of the few thorough accounts of the CBO ’ s analysis , Ms. Boccia writes : “ [ T ] his year ’ s improvement is a misleading short-term phenomenon . ”
It is not , though , for a lack of taxes . In the CBO ’ s estimates , federal tax revenues will rise by a healthy 9 percent this year — $ 255 billion — reaching an unprecedented $ 3 trillion .
That total represents roughly 17.5 percent of the nation ’ s economic output as measured by gross domestic product ( GDP ) , a level the CBO describes as slightly greater than the average of the past 40 years .
Revenue will rise another 9 percent in 2015 , and then continue growing in subsequent years , reaching 18.4 percent by 2024 , the CBO says . In other words , federal taxes will claim an ever-greater share of the economy .
The problem is , “ higher revenues will continue to chase higher spending , ” notes Ms. Boccia . Even with the alleged austerity of the Budget Control Act , government outlays will surge from 20.4 percent of GDP this year to 22.4 percent in 2024 .
These are near-record levels for peacetime spending , and they will continue in future decades , heaping on more debt even as tax revenues continue growing .
“ [ T ] he aging of the population and rising costs for health care would almost certainly push federal spending up significantly relative to GDP after 2024 if current laws remained in effect , ” says the CBO . “ Federal revenues also would continue to increase relative to GDP under current law , reaching significantly higher percentages of GDP than at any time in the nation ’ s history — but they would not keep pace with outlays . As a result , public debt would reach roughly 110 percent of GDP by 2038 , CBO estimates , about equal to the percentage just after World War II . ”
As usual , the higher spending will be driven mainly by the government ’ s major entitlements , Medicare , Medicaid and Social Security . These three programs will surge to 52 percent of total federal spending in the next 10 years , including the Medicaid expansions under President Obama ’ s health care law .
Add to that Obamacare ’ s additional $ 1.2 trillion in gross outlays , and the conclusion is clear : Current spending practices are worsening an already unsustainable fiscal trend .
Meanwhile , the CBO ’ s economic projections have fallen as well . The agency ’ s estimates of real GDP growth are now lower each year for the next decade compared with the outlook last February , with GDP growth averaging just 2.6 percent for 2014 through 2023 .
In some years , the growth projections have shrunk by a full percentage point , or close to it ( Table 1 ) . The CBO also has reduced its projections of monthly job gains through the next decade ( Table 2 ) . This is where Obamacare ’ s employment effects play into the overall picture .
Because labor is a key component of GDP , one reason for the slower projected growth is the continued decline in labor-force participation , which already has reached its lowest levels in 3 decades . Participation will sink further , partly as a result of the long-anticipated baby-boomer retirements .
Adding to that trend , Obamacare will encourage some workers to work less , or not at all , so they can retain their government health subsidies . This will reduce the number of hours worked by the equivalent of about 2 million workers in 2017 , rising to 2.5 million in 2024 .
Defenders of the health care law gamely tried to contend this is a good thing . It demonstrates , they argue , how the health care law frees workers from the “ job lock ” that tied them to work they didn ’ t like just so they could keep their employment-based health insurance .
That , however , is not what the CBO said . The agency ’ s report explained that Obamacare ’ s phaseout of subsidies with rising income creates “ an implicit tax on additional earnings , ” thereby discouraging workers from earning more .
That ’ s why these workers will choose to work less , or not at all — to avoid the effective tax penalty . Thus , the health care subsidies themselves shackle recipients to lower incomes .
Still , if the Obamacare advocates want to cling to their freedom-from-job-lock claim , they should be pleased to note another of the CBO ’ s findings : A net average of 6 million to 7 million more workers will likewise be liberated from their job-related health insurance each year , as employers drop their group coverage owing to Obamacare .
The CBO ’ s account is even more devastating in light of the agency ’ s generally agnostic view of how best to shrink deficits and debt — whether through lower spending or higher taxes or both .
Whatever its official stance , the CBO ’ s latest budget and economic report confirms , once again , that the unrestrained pace of government spending threatens to drive the U.S. economy toward a crisis that may soon become unavoidable .
Patrick Louis Knudsen is a Washington-based writer who served for 20 years on the staff of the House Budget Committee .