Under pressure to deliver a win for President Trump , House Republicans are working on a new Obamacare repeal compromise that could bridge the divide between hard-line conservatives and centrists who tanked the first attempt .
The proposal by Rep. Thomas MacArthur , New Jersey Republican , would shift to the states the burden of deciding what services insurers must cover and would let insurers charge healthy customers less , so long as states set up risk pools to subsidize sicker people priced out of the market .
No state could waive the part of the Affordable Care Act requiring insurers to cover people with pre-existing medical conditions , however , preserving the most popular part of the 2010 Affordable Care Act .
“ This amendment will make coverage of pre-existing conditions sacrosanct for all Americans and ensures essential health benefits remains the federal standard , ” Mr. MacArthur , chairman of the moderate Tuesday Group , said on his Facebook page Thursday after Politico published a one-page description of his plan .
It ’ s unclear whether the proposal can win over enough holdouts to pass . Republicans ’ first go-around last month ended in a mess after leaders were unable to muster the votes and had to yank the bill .
A Republican aide said lawmakers don ’ t even have legislative text of the proposal so they don ’ t know whether it can bridge the gap .
SEE ALSO : Brat : New health care bill can be done in a week
Yet President Trump was bullish about their progress , saying House Republicans could revive their plan and hold a vote either next week or shortly thereafter .
“ The plan gets better and better and better , and it ’ s gotten really good , ” Mr. Trump said at a joint press conference with Italian Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni .
House Republicans are under immense pressure from the White House to deliver an Obamacare repeal , a campaign vow that hasn ’ t been fulfilled as Mr. Trump nears 100 days on the job .
Failing a second time would be a gut punch for the party as it tries prove it can wield all the levers of political power successfully . After health care , Mr. Trump wants to tackle tax reform and a $ 1 trillion infrastructure plan .
House Speaker Paul D. Ryan , Wisconsin Republican , signaled on Wednesday that negotiators were putting the finishing touches on a plan to bridge rifts within the party over health care , although lawmakers also must focus on a stopgap spending bill to keep the government funded when it returns from its two-week break .
“ I want to get both , ” Mr. Trump said . “ I think we ’ ll get both . ”
Under the MacArthur plan , states could ask Health and Human Services Secretary Thomas Price to waive Obamacare ’ s “ essential health benefits ” package , which requires insurers to cover a slate of services such as mental health and maternity care .
They also could scrap community rating , in which insurers are required to charge the same prices to everyone in a given area . Insurers wouldn ’ t be allowed to discriminate based on gender or age , though older people still could be charged up to five times more than young people .
States could allow insurers to charge sicker consumers more than healthy ones , so long as they set up a “ high risk pool ” to absorb some of their costs .
That could win over hard-line House Freedom Caucus members , though it may scare off centrists who don ’ t want to tweak the guarantees of Obamacare .
While sicker customers could still get covered , they might face high premiums , health care analysts said .
The analysts said legislative details will be crucial , including who would be in the high-risk pool and how much they would have to pay to get covered .
“ Maybe this is enough to convince the Freedom Caucus people that states can do what they want to do , but I don ’ t see this as being very popular , ” said Timothy Jost , a law professor at Washington and Lee University in Virginia who closely tracks the debate . “ It would make coverage unaffordable for many older consumers and would segregate high-cost consumers in coverage that would likely be inadequate unless the high-risk pools were very generously funded . ”
“ To make the bill more palatable to right-wingers , the big change appears to be the abandonment of the protections for people with pre-existing conditions . Yet another Trump promise shattered , ” said Sen. Christopher Murphy , Connecticut Democrat . “ The Republican health care repeal bill was an unworkable , unpopular piece of garbage a month ago , and it still is today . ”
The published plan doesn ’ t provide much detail on the state waiver process , though it suggests waivers would be easy to obtain .
The HHS secretary is supposed to approve the plan within 90 days of determining it is complete , although states “ must attest that the purpose of their requested waiver is to reduce premium costs , increase the number of persons with health care coverage or advance another benefit to the public interest in the state , including the guarantee of coverage for persons with pre-existing medical conditions . ”