Govs . Rick Scott and John Kasich have already accepted pieces of the law . Obamacare as weapon for GOP
Republican governors are wielding an unlikely weapon to force Medicaid changes they ’ ve been talking about for years .
Conservatives who hate President Barack Obama ’ s health law have been agitating to convert Medicaid into a no-strings-attached block grant for states since the Reagan era . That effort died — or at least got put on indefinite hold — with Obama ’ s reelection . But red-state governors see another chance to ram through some of the changes they seek . Ironically , their opening was created by the health law ’ s Medicaid expansion .
A wave of anti-Obamacare governors — those who kept shunning the health law even as Ohio ’ s John Kasich , Florida ’ s Rick Scott and New Jersey ’ s Chris Christie made headlines as they accepted pieces of it — are looking to take the billions of federal dollars to expand Medicaid on their terms . They ’ re using what leverage they can muster with a White House that wants them to sign on , cover millions of uninsured and make the health law succeed . They can ’ t get a block grant , but they can push for greater autonomy , part of their long drive to give the states more control over spending and structure .
“ Governors are under tremendous pressure to expand [ Medicaid ] , and I think a lot of them were willing to listen , ” said Dennis Smith , a conservative health care consultant who has worked on Medicaid for President George W. Bush , Wisconsin Gov . Scott Walker and The Heritage Foundation . “ I think all the governors are going to work in the best interest of their states . They ’ re saying , ‘ How can we do it our way that makes the most sense for us ? ’ ”
Rather than put new enrollees in the “ broken ” Medicaid system , these governors want to buy private health insurance plans for this low-income population using Obamacare funds and , in some cases , using the Obamacare health insurance exchanges . It ’ s all subject to a lot more negotiation and boundary-setting with the Department of Health and Human Services , but talks continue and both sides are holding their breath for a breakthrough on the “ private option . ”
They may not get the flexibility they seek — and there ’ s no way to know whether they ’ d then reluctantly push ahead with expansion or sit it out . But the fact that these governors are even talking expansion is a sea change .
To witness the pendulum swing , look no further than Pennsylvania . Republican Gov . Tom Corbett , a longtime Obamacare critic , trekked to Washington recently to meet with HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius . He ’ s looking to broker a deal amid dismal approval ratings and increasing bipartisan pressure at home to do something — anything — to capture the flood of Obamacare dollars available to states that expand Medicaid .
The Corbett meeting came after a string of high-profile Republican defections on expansion , as well as more nuanced recent moves by states including Ohio , Tennessee and Arkansas to provide private health insurance coverage using Medicaid expansion dollars . In particular , Arkansas ’ s proposal , tentatively endorsed by HHS , to do the full Medicaid expansion but via private health insurers in the Obamacare exchanges , has encouraged other states to come forth with similar notions . Among them are Republican governors in Indiana , Oklahoma and Nebraska .
“ Gov . [ Mary ] Fallin is interested in pursuing an Oklahoma solution to Oklahoma health care needs , ” said spokesman Alex Weintz , noting that the state contracted for a report on its options from the national consulting firm run by former HHS Secretary Mike Leavitt , who headed Mitt Romney ’ s transition team .