Thousands of Medicaid doctors are bracing for a tough start to 2015 : a 42 percent pay cut .
The Affordable Care Act temporarily boosted payment rates for primary care doctors who see Medicaid patients in 2013 and 2014 . The idea was to make sure doctors kept participating in Medicaid — which typically has low reimbursement rates — even as the program expanded to cover millions more Americans this year .
That earlier Obamacare pay raise was big , averaging out to a 73 percent increase for primary care doctors across the country . But it was also temporary , lasting only two years , and is set to run out on December 31 . That means , beginning January 1 , 2015 , Medicaid doctors will earn less each time they see a patient — or , they could decide to pull out of the program altogether . Nobody is totally sure which way doctors will go .
Here 's a quick guide to why the raise happened , why it 's running out , and what it means for the future of Obamacare .
1 ) Obamacare raised Medicaid 's primary care payments in 2013 and 2014
It 's long been true of the American health care system that Medicare ( the federal insurance program that covers the elderly ) pays doctors more than Medicaid ( the state-federal insurance program that covers the poor ) .
On average , Medicaid paid doctors about two-thirds of what Medicare pays — although , as this map shows , there 's lots of variation across the country .
Even though Medicaid paid less , it has usually done a pretty good job making sure patients can get in to see primary care doctors . But there was a worry that , after Obamacare , that might not be the case . Medicaid is one of the two big programs the law relies on to expand health insurance coverage ( the other is the marketplaces ) . Forecasters had estimated that 13 million additional people would join the program in Obamacare 's first decade , and 7 million of those people would sign up in the first year .
Research has found that doctors are more likely to accept new Medicaid patients when their payment rates are higher . And the Affordable Care Act included a provision that aimed to entice doctors to sticking with — or perhaps joining — the program as it expanded to cover millions more Americans .
Beginning in 2013 , the law bumped Medicaid primary care doctors ' reimbursement rates up to match those of Medicare ( specialists did not get any increase ) . The law funded the increased payments through the end of 2014 , setting up a looming cliff that we 're now approaching .
2 ) Doctors will see a 42 percent pay cut in 2015
That 's an estimate from the Urban Institute , which ran the numbers on how payment rates will change in 2015 .
The decline will vary a lot from state to state . That 's because each state sets its own payment rates for primary care doctors . In a state like California , for example , which tended to pay Medicaid doctors very low rates , Obamacare has doubled their fees . But in North Carolina , where the two programs fees were more similar , the pay rate increase was much smaller .
3 ) The federal government will not extend the pay cut
Mostly because it 's expensive : the two years of the pay-bump cost the federal government $ 11 billion .
Medicaid advocacy groups have lobbied Congress a bit to extend the pay cut for at least two years now . And Sens . Patty Murray ( D-WA ) and Sherrod Brown ( D-OH ) did introduce legislation that would extend the pay bump until 2016 .
`` We ’ re ready to lobby for what ’ s right to improve the situation , '' Roland Goertz , chair of the Academy of Family Physicians , had said in 2012 about extending the pay cut . `` We ’ re ready to go to the mat for what works , and we need to be going in this direction . ''
But the issue has n't gotten traction ; the Murray-Brown bill has languished in committee since its introduction this past summer . And that means , barring any last minute miracle , Medicaid payment rates will decline in many states — but not all — on Thursday .
4 ) Fifteen states are stepping in to extend the payment raise
Medicaid is a joint federal-state program , with the two governments splitting the bill for patients ' coverage . And , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation , 15 states will step in and provide funding to either fully or partially continue the payment increase .
What 's notable about this map , however , is that the states stepping in tend to be those that were already paying Medicaid doctors pretty well in the first place . They are places like New Mexico that , before Obamacare , paid primary doctors 85 percent of the Medicare rate , or Mississippi , which paid 90 percent .
The states that have a much bigger gap between Medicaid and Medicare payments , like California , are not generally not stepping in to avert the payment cut . This is probably due to the fact that fixing the bigger gaps is so much more expensive .
5 ) Nobody knows what this will mean for Medicaid patients ' access to care
The worry among Medicaid advocates is that lower payment rates will translate into fewer doctors being willing to see patients . This is a articulated in a recent New York Times article , citing data from Ohio :
A survey by the Ohio State Medical Association found that some Ohio doctors began accepting Medicaid patients because of the rate increase in 2013 . Ohio doctors who were already participating in the program said they had accepted more Medicaid patients after the rate increase . And almost 40 percent of Ohio doctors indicated that they planned to accept fewer Medicaid patients when the extra payments lapsed .
Previous studies have shown that states that pay more for primary care in Medicaid do have more doctors accepting new patients . This chart from Health Affairs shows the correlation :
Those are the reasons for concern — but there are also reasons to think things might go okay , too . Medicaid patients tend to have just as good access to primary care as patients in private coverage . One 2012 study commissioned by the federal government found that Medicaid patients are equally as likely to have had a routine check-up in the past year as those with private insurance . The real challenges in access tend to happen when patients seek speciality care .
And it 's worth keeping in mind there were thousands of doctors who saw Medicaid patients prior to the Affordable Care Act 's pay bump . These are people who , even before they got a big raise , thought it made sense to see these patients at lower rates . That gives decent reason to think that these doctors will stick around after the pay increase disappears , too .