The White House expressed optimism Friday afternoon that the Republican-backed health care bill would pass the House despite speculation it was short of support ahead of an afternoon vote demanded by President Trump .
White House press secretary Sean Spicer said Trump is looking forward to the House passing the bill and confirmed House Speaker Paul Ryan is meeting with Trump to “ discuss the way forward ” on the bill .
According to GOP lawmakers and congressional aides , House Republican leaders were short of the votes needed for the bill to pass .
Trump on Friday told lawmakers still on the fence over repealing and replacing ObamaCare with TrumpCare , that voting against the White House-backed bill is tantamount to voting for Planned Parenthood .
Trump tweeted Friday , “ The irony is that the Freedom Caucus , which is very pro-life and against Planned Parenthood , allows P.P . to continue if they stop this plan ! ''
In a bid to coax support from conservatives , House leaders proposed a fresh amendment repealing Obama 's requirement that insurers cover 10 specified services like maternity and mental health care .
Conservatives have demanded the removal of those and other conditions the law imposes on insurers , arguing they drive up premiums .
The president met with members of the Freedom Caucus Thursday in an effort to win them over . But the vote was postponed after administration officials fell short .
Trump issued lawmakers an ultimatum Thurday night . He wants the House to vote Friday on the legislation to begin dismantling ObamaCare and if it fails , he is `` done with health care , ” and ready to move on to tax reform , a source told ███ .
`` My understanding is he ’ s going to get it , '' White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer said on `` The O'Reilly Factor . ''
`` We ’ re hoping to make this the last anniversary that any American has to suffer under ObamaCare by instilling a patient-centric health care system in place , and the president has made that case to members throughout the spectrum of the Republican conference , and tomorrow , it ’ s time to vote , '' he added .
House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy , R-Calif. , thinks it will wrap up by 4:30 or 5 p.m . ET ( WATCH ███ CHANNEL FOR COMPLETE COVERAGE ) . If the bill passes , it will be a monumental achievement for Speaker Ryan and Trump . But if the bill stumbles , recriminations will abound .
`` If Exec branch tells Legislative branch `` when 2 vote '' `` how 2 vote '' & `` what it will b allowed 2 work on if vote fails , '' is that a republic ? ''
Republican leaders Thursday canceled a vote after leadership 's attempts to lobby enough votes apparently failed -- a major setback for Ryan and Trump .
`` For seven and a half years we 've been promising the American people that we will repeal and replace this broken law because it 's collapsing and failing families , '' House Speaker Paul Ryan told reporters after meeting with Republican leaders . `` Tomorrow we 're proceeding . ''
Trump and Republican leaders had spent much of the day scrambling to get both moderates and conservatives on board with the increasingly unpopular legislation .
`` We have not gotten enough of our members to get to yes at this point under what we have now , '' House Freedom Caucus Chairman Mark Meadows , R-N.C. , told reporters .
Ryan postponed his press conference twice as he worked with House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy R-Calif. , Majority Whip Steve Scalise , R-La. , and Chief Deputy Whip Patrick McHenry , R-N.C. , to get enough votes to get the American Healthcare Act through the House on the seventh anniversary of ObamaCare 's passage .
The House Rules Committee is expected to prep the health care bill starting at 7am ET Friday .
When asked about the timing of the vote McCarthy told ███ the House should be `` done in the afternoon '' but said Democrats could delay things .
Meanwhile , Trump met inside the Cabinet room with the Freedom caucus to try and rally conservatives to the cause . He also tweeted , urging supporters to call their representatives to back the bill .
A senior administration official told ███ after the meeting with Trump and the conservative group that there was a deal in the works , but that it was not yet finalized . A source from the Freedom Caucus later said there was n't yet a deal .
`` I would say progress is being made , and that progress should be applauded with the efforts by the White House to deliver on a campaign promise , and to lower premiums for every American from coast to coast and in between , '' Meadows said . He also called Trump 's involvement `` unparalleled in the history of our country . ''
When asked if this was a loss for the president , Meadows said : `` Absolutely not . ''
Earlier in the day , Spicer had expressed confidence that the White House was would be voted on and would pass .
`` It ’ s going to pass . That ’ s it , '' he said at his daily press briefing .
Spicer also noted that Trump had been making calls past 11 p.m. Wednesday night to try and bring members on board .
Sources later told ███ that the White House was anticipating a vote after midnight , but that was before the vote was canceled .
House Republicans were due to meet about the around 7 p.m . ET , but there appeared no clear path to pass the bill .
In appealing to conservatives with concessions that include limiting requirements that plans offer benefits including maternity and substance abuse care , Republican leaders risk scaring off moderates . A plan to cut funding to Planned Parenthood also risked spooking centrist Republicans .
Meanwhile , Democrats blasted what they saw as Republicans ’ amateurish maneuvering . House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi said it was a `` rookie 's error '' to bring the legislation to a vote so early , and urged fellow Democrats to oppose the legislation .
“ While Republicans scramble to make TrumpCare even more destructive , our Caucus must continue to be fully engaged today in exposing its disastrous consequences for the American people , ” she told colleagues in a letter Thursday .
The AHCA would stop ObamaCare ’ s tax penalties against Americans who choose not to buy coverage , as well as cutting the federal-state Medicaid program for low earners . It would also give tax credits to help people pay medical bills , while allowing insurers to charge older Americans more . It would also repeal tax increases on high-earners and health companies .