For the first time , hospitals and insurers would be forced to disclose their secret negotiated rates under a far-reaching plan released Friday by the Trump administration .
Administration officials said the final rule will compel hospitals in 2021 to publicize the rates they negotiate with individual insurers for all services , including drugs , supplies , facility fees and care by doctors who work for the facility .
The administration proposed extending the disclosure requirement to the $ 670 billion health-insurance industry . Insurance companies and group health plans that cover employees would have to disclose negotiated rates , as well as previously paid rates for out-of-network treatment , in file formats that are computer-searchable , officials said .
The insurers , including Anthem Inc. and Cigna Corp. , would have to provide a transparency tool to give cost information to consumers in advance , senior administration officials said .
The requirements are more far-reaching than many industry leaders had expected and could upend commercial health-care markets , which are rife with complex systems of hidden charges and secret discounts . The price-disclosure initiative has become a cornerstone of the president ’ s 2020 re-election health strategy , despite threats of legal action from industry .
“ Right now there is too much arbitrage in the system , ” a senior administration official said in an interview Thursday with The Wall Street Journal . “ There are a ton of vested interests who will oppose this . We expect to get sued . We ’ re really goring people ’ s oxes . ”
SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS How could information from insurers and hospitals be helpful to you if this plan goes into effect ? Join the conversation below .
Hospitals and insurers typically treat specific prices for medical services as closely held secrets , with contracts between the insurers and hospital systems generally bound by confidentiality agreements . Policy makers , employers and patients are often unable to see clearly which hospital systems and doctor practices are driving high costs .
The proposal covering insurers is the newest part of the price-disclosure initiative , and it would include the private-employer market , where about 158 million people get their health insurance . Insurers and group health plans would have to put the negotiated rates into a file that third-party developers could incorporate into shopping tools .
Insurers would also have to create a web-based tool for beneficiaries that discloses the list price , the negotiated rate , cost sharing , and the amount left on a plan deductible , as well as allowable out-of-network rates , officials said . There will be a 60-day public comment period on the proposal .
The requirements for the negotiated rate file could cost insurers an estimated $ 200 million to build based on estimates in the proposal .
Other costs include an estimated $ 64 million to $ 161 million for three years to implement and maintain posting about cost sharing .
The proposal also states that “ price transparency may have the opposite effect because in some markets where pricing is very transparent , pricing can narrow and average costs can increase . ”
Studies show consumers are often required to pay more out of pocket when they don ’ t have the price information they need to comparison shop . Employer health-plan deductibles are outpacing wage growth and have risen to an average $ 1,655 for a single plan , according to a September survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation . Workers on average pay $ 6,015 toward the cost of their coverage .
Related Video Drug pricing is complicated and secretive . WSJ explains how the flow of money , drugs and rebates behind the scenes may drive up the price of prescription medicine for consumers . Illustration : Mallory Brangan
On the final rule covering hospitals , facilities will have two obligations . First , they will have to provide insurer-specific negotiated rates in a computer-readable file .
Second , hospitals will have to post negotiated charges online for 300 specific services that patients typically shop around for . Seventy of those services , including vaginal birth , colonoscopy , and joint-replacement surgery , are stipulated in the rule , according to senior administration officials . Hospitals can select the other 230 services they post online .
Hospitals face fines of up to $ 300 a day if they don ’ t comply with sharing negotiated rates .
The requirements would cost hospitals more than $ 23 million annually in 2016 dollars , according to an estimate in the rule . Annual costs range from $ 38.7 million to $ 39.4 million in 2019 dollars .
Taken together , the price-disclosure initiatives could reshape the $ 3.5 trillion health-care industry .
Prices charged for health care vary widely depending on whether a provider is in or out of the patient ’ s insurance network and on the insurer ’ s undisclosed price agreements with hospitals . A magnetic resonance image of the lower back costs $ 141 at an imaging center in Jefferson , La. , but $ 7,646 at a hospital in Torrance , Calif , according to data from Clear Health Costs , which publishes information on health costs .
Hospitals , insurers and others in the industry have spent the past nine months since the idea was floated by the White House denouncing the proposal and gearing up for a pitched legal battle .
The industry is also likely to argue in any legal challenge that negotiated rates are proprietary and include confidential contractual agreements . Industry groups have also said it runs counter to the First Amendment .
Pharmaceutical companies prevailed with a similar argument when the Trump administration said they had to disclose list prices for drugs in television ads . A federal judge in July ruled that the requirement overstepped regulatory authority .
“ It ’ s actually worse than we expected , ” said Tom Nickels , executive vice president of the American Hospital Association . “ They have additional requirements . It ’ s additional data that I don ’ t know is particularly helpful for consumers . ”
If rates are public , health-care companies say , some hospital systems might push for payment rates that match their crosstown rivals ’ .
Proponents argue it would bring costs down . Out-of-network doctors could try to compete with in-network negotiated rates . Health systems that charge higher negotiated rates could lose business if they don ’ t match competitors ’ rates or justify the reasons for their steeper costs . And employers could press their insurers to include hospitals with lower negotiated rates in their networks .
Employers and patients are often unable to see which hospital systems and doctor ’ s offices are driving prices upward . Some health-care economists argue that the secrecy is a factor in why the U.S. spends more per resident on health care than any other developed nation .
The administration ’ s vision is to arm patients with information needed to make health-care decisions much like shopping for other consumer services . Rates potentially could be posted on public websites , where consumers would check the negotiated price of a service before they pick a provider .
The White House push on price disclosure comes as President Trump seeks to close the gap with Democrats , who hold an advantage on health care in public polling .
President Trump has stated that under his health-care plan , Americans will get better care at a lower cost than they currently pay . About three in 10 adults are very or somewhat confident the president will deliver on his promise , while 62 % say they aren ’ t too confident or not at all confident , according to an October poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation .
The White House is prepared to defend the rule and the proposal covering insurers from lawsuits , a senior administration official said . Officials said authority for the requirements stem from the Public Health Service Act .
“ You ’ ll be able to negotiate all over the place , ” Mr. Trump said in an October speech in Florida . “ And you ’ ll be able to pick everything you want , from the hospital to the doctor . And it ’ s going to save you a tremendous amount of money . ”