Yes , she reportedly will . Perhaps even `` as early as next week '' :
HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius plans to testify before Congress about the rocky Obamacare rollout as early as next week , her office confirmed Monday . Sebelius intends to testify before the House Energy and Commerce Committee whenever they can find a “ mutually agreeable date , ” HHS spokeswoman Joanne Peters said . She had declined to appear at a hearing scheduled for this Thursday — which Republicans immediately noted . “ To be clear , the House hearing is this week , ” said Brendan Buck , a spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner . He called the HHS statement “ window dressing. ” Buck also quickly tweeted that Sebelius ’ s plan to testify at a later date is “ unacceptable. ” “ Let ’ s be clear , the HHS statement is one announcing Sebelius will NOT testify Thursday in the House . Unacceptable , ” he wrote . Republicans have sharply criticized Sebelius both for the magnitude of the problems with the HealthCare.gov Obamacare website and for her refusal to testify this week . Just minutes before the HHS statement , Boehner took to Twitter to urge her to come to the Hill . “ Secretary Sebelius must change her mind and appear at this week ’ s hearing in the House , ” he tweeted .
So why can ’ t she testify this week ? Oh , right . She has a scheduling “ commitment ” :
The administration pushed back , noting that Sebelius had “ always indicated to the committee that she intended to testify. ” She just couldn ’ t do it this Thursday because of a commitment in Phoenix , HHS said .
Ah , yes . She will be in Phoenix and thus unable to attend . Completely understandable . I mean , it ’ s not like the last time she was asked to testify she attended a swanky gala the night before instead . Oh , wait . That did happen . So , forgive me if I ’ m a bit skeptical she can ’ t clear her schedule , do her job , and answer questions about a failed government website completely gone amok .
In any case , I was wondering how long she ’ d be able to hold out . Not only have Congressional Republicans demanded she explain herself over the website rollout she once described as `` user-friendly , '' they want her resignation . So I imagine when she finally does sit down on the hot seat , she ’ ll be grilled mercilessly . Meanwhile , her boss is pretending everything is just peachy despite little evidence to back such breathless claims . Lucky for him , he didn ’ t have to answer to angry lawmakers . Sebelius wo n't have that luxury .
Grab some popcorn , my friends . This 'll be one hearing you won ’ t want to miss .