President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama are targeting a particular group of powerful Americans in their effort to boost enrollment in the Affordable Care Act : moms .
That ’ s right , moms . The White House figures no one is better able to cajole the so-called “ young invincibles ” into getting health care than their mothers , who have cared for them so long , and cleaned up after them , and packed them lunches , and did they ask for any thanks ? Your happiness is thanks enough , that ’ s what they said .
Sorry , we got carried away for a second . So the Obamas are meeting today in the Oval Office with a group of mothers . Several of their visitors are heading outreach efforts designed to let friends , neighbors , and kids take advantage of their new health insurance options , according to the White House .
“ Moms have a unique role to play in helping young adults gain health-care coverage , ” says a White House official , speaking on background .
Young adults are important to the Affordable Care Act , aka “ Obamacare ” , because they ’ re relatively healthy . Insurers need their premiums to balance out the costs of older Americans , who generally consume more health services .
If fewer young people than expected enroll , then premiums might rise in following years to cover the revenue shortfall . Then , even fewer young people might sign up , due to increased costs , and then the costs might have to rise again , and so on , creating a “ death spiral ” for the law , according to critics . ( The law does contain some financial stabilizers meant to fend this off . )
The White House is right to be concerned about young peoples ’ reaction to the law so far . Evidence from some state exchanges shows they are not signing up in anticipated numbers . Perhaps worse , they are less likely to even know about the law and their ACA options than are older possible customers .
A recent Gallup poll found that only 63 percent of 18-to-29-year-olds are very or somewhat aware of the ACA , as opposed to 72 percent overall .
“ This is very significant because younger Americans are the target of the Affordable Care Act , at least in terms of the necessity that they sign up for insurance to make the whole thing work , ” said Frank Newport , Gallup editor-in-chief , in a commentary on the survey .
That ’ s the shortfall moms are supposed to address , apparently – the information deficit . Many of them are good at that , aren ’ t they ? They bug you and bug you to wear your coat out in the cold , and that works , doesn ’ t it ? Except all those other kids showed up for school in a hoodie and shorts and laugh at you . We ’ re not bitter at all .
Anyway , America ’ s moms may be a good group to rally to the ACA ’ s defense , if they can be rallied . The Heritage Foundation is urging mothers to go the other way , and tell their kids to not sign up , due to potential rate shock from higher premiums under Obamacare , and the possibility of higher taxes to pay for the law ’ s subsidies in the future .
But it ’ s possible that the need to sign up young people has been exaggerated . That ’ s what a group of scholars from the Kaiser Family Foundation is arguing , in any case .
They ’ ve run the numbers , and they figure that the pool of potential enrollees for Obamacare is about 40 percent young adults . If , say , the pool of actual enrollees is only about 33 percent young adults , then projected costs for insurers will rise by a ( non- ) whopping 1.1 percent to keep revenues in line , according to their calculations .
That 's because `` premiums are still allowed to vary substantially based on age , '' they say .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
If young people represent only 25 percent of enrollees , projected costs for insurers would rise 2.4 percent , according to the KFF study .
“ Premiums are not as sensitive to the mix of enrollment as fears about a ‘ death spiral ’ suggest , particularly with respect to age , ” write the authors of the study , Larry Levitt , Gary Claxton , and Anthony Damico .