Preparing for a Supreme Court decision that could strike down Obamacare ’ s subsidies for nearly 7.5 million people this summer , Senate Republicans are coalescing around a plan to resurrect them — at a steep price for the White House .
With several Senate Republicans facing tough reelections , and control of the chamber up for grabs , 31 senators have signed on to a bill written by Sen. Ron Johnson ( R-Wis. ) that would restore the subsidies for current Obamacare enrollees through September 2017 . But the administration would have to pay a heavy price — the bill would also repeal Obamacare ’ s individual and employer mandates and insurance coverage requirements .
“ In that moment of what could be political chaos , we ’ re offering such a reasonable proposal that solves a mess , ” Johnson said . “ It fixes a mess caused by a sloppily written law , unlawfully implemented . All we ’ re asking for is a little bit of freedom back , which would be , I think , pretty popular , ” Johnson said . Even Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) is backing Johnson ’ s measure , along with the rest of the chamber ’ s GOP leaders .
Johnson , who ’ s got a tight race in 2016 , says the legislation would be a bridge to ensure that consumers can keep the insurance they have — a promise that President Barack Obama was widely criticized for breaking in 2014 .
But even if Johnson could somehow persuade Obama and Senate Democrats to accept his plan — a herculean task — the bigger problem will be his Republican colleagues in the House .
The growing divide between the two chambers leaves the GOP in an awkward spot . The court could gut Obamacare in June , handing Republicans a long-sought victory they couldn ’ t achieve legislatively . But without a backup plan that the whole party supports , the GOP has no way to blunt the political damage if millions of Americans lose the ability to pay for their health insurance .
When asked about Johnson ’ s bill , Rep. Matt Salmon ( R-Ariz. ) gave a thumbs-down and , imitating a game-show buzzer , said only “ Eerrrrrrntt ! ”
Republican Study Committee Chairman Bill Flores of Texas , who said he is planning to release an Obamacare replacement plan in the coming days , said : “ If you ’ re voting for an extension , you ’ re essentially voting for the continuation of Obamacare — that ’ s a real problem . ”
The court is expected to hand down a ruling in King v. Burwell in late June . Democratic lawmakers insist that there is no way to undo the damage if the court sides with the challengers , short of passing legislation that simply restores the subsidies . A new bill would allow the subsidies to go to residents of all states , not just the ones that set up their own exchanges under the Affordable Care Act .
Republicans expect Democrats to have that one-page bill ready to go in the wake of a Supreme Court ruling against the subsidies .
“ If it just blows up , then the president is able to just say , ‘ Here ’ s my remedy , ’ … and we ’ ve got to have a substantive alternative , ” said Rep. Peter Roskam ( R-Ill. ) . “ You want to make sure that there ’ s a rational transition and that we can get to a post-Obamacare era without losing whatever momentum you have in this issue . ”
He said the Republican alternative is just “ not ripe ” yet .
Obama has been adamant that he won ’ t support legislation that would undermine Obamacare . Republicans question whether he would stand by that pledge if he ’ s faced with millions of Americans losing their health care and a dissolution of his signature legislative success .
Several House Republicans insist that a ruling against the subsidies would force a new debate on the entire health care reform law . Many House Republicans are focused on replacement plans that would issue tax credits — instead of Obamacare ’ s tax subsidies — to help consumers buy insurance .
That ’ s part of the plan being put together by a group of three committee chairmen — Ways and Means head Paul Ryan ( R-Wis. ) , Energy and Commerce chief Fred Upton ( R-Mich. ) and Education and the Workforce chairman John Kline ( R-Minn. ) — to replace the health law and respond to a court ruling .
Their proposal , outlined in a Wall Street Journal op-ed , would allow states to “ opt out ” of the health law ’ s insurance requirements as well as the individual and employer mandates . Consumers would get tax subsidies to help them buy coverage . When asked last week about the plan ’ s status , Upton declined to comment .
Budget Committee Chairman Tom Price ( R-Ga. ) , who has his own Obamacare alternative bill , would also issue tax credits — depending on age — that people could use to buy health insurance .
If the court rules against the White House , Price said an alternative could be put in place quickly . He doubts that a transitional policy — which Johnson and his supporters say would be needed to protect consumers from losing their coverage — would be needed .
“ I think there ’ s a much better way to do it , ” Price said of extending the Obamacare subsidies . “ I think there ’ s a ready opportunity to move in the direction of patient-centered health care instead of perpetuating the [ problems ] in Obamacare . ”
Some Republicans worry that any legislation that extends the subsidies , even temporarily , would not only box the party into keeping them indefinitely but also water down the party ’ s opposition to the president ’ s health law .
“ We do get into a little trouble on the messaging because people say : ‘ What is the difference between that and what we ’ re already doing ? ’ ” said Rep. John Fleming ( R-La. ) . “ Whether you continue subsidies or you use tax credits , they ’ re all tax credit programs one way or another . ”
Freshman Republican Sen. Ben Sasse of Nebraska is trying to thread the needle between preserving existing coverage and not embracing Obamacare . His plan would allow consumers to keep their Obamacare plans for 18 months after a potential Supreme Court ruling , but the amount of subsidies would decrease gradually over time .
A McConnell spokesman said the majority leader backs Sasse ’ s plan , too , although he is not listed as an official co-sponsor .