Yesterday , major health-insurance company Humana announced that it would pull out of the Obamacare exchanges in 2018 , the first large insurer to announce its plan to withdraw from the exchanges entirely for next year . Last year , Humana reduced its participation in the healthcare exchanges set up by the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) , participating in only eleven states rather than 15 for 2017 . But now , the company cites a lack of stability in the marketplace , leading to this new decision .
“ Based on its initial analysis of data associated with the company ’ s healthcare exchange membership following the 2017 open enrollment period , Humana is seeing further signs of an unbalanced risk pool , ” the company ’ s statement said .
This year , Humana is covering about 150,000 people through the Obamacare exchanges . This latest announcement follows a trend that began last year , as major insurer after major insurer pulled out of the exchanges for 2017 , and those that remained increased their premiums by an average of 25 percent .
Meanwhile , this morning the CEO of another major insurance company , Aetna , said in an interview at a Wall Street Journal event that the Obamacare markets are in a “ death spiral. ” Though he wouldn ’ t comment on whether or not Aetna will completely pull out of the exchanges for 2018 , CEO Mark Bertolini stated emphatically that many regions will likely totally lack Obamacare insurer options for the coming year .
This latest news on the continued collapse of the Obamacare exchanges increases the pressure on the GOP and the Trump administration to push through a repeal and replace plan that limits the damage of the Affordable Care Act as much as possible .
The Trump administration this morning proposed a rule that , in part , would alter the existing ACA regulations in order to stabilize its insurance marketplaces until Congress can settle on a repeal — and possibly even a replacement — plan . Two congressional Republicans , Kentucky senator Rand Paul and South Carolina representative Mark Sanford , are expected to unveil an Obamacare replacement bill today that would lift restrictions on insurers and provide tax breaks to Americans who purchase healthcare .