President Obama hits the campaign trail Thursday with a bus tour in Ohio . The state is a crucial battleground not only for the presidential election , but also because it could decide whether Democrats keep control of the Senate .
Up for re-election there is Democrat Sherrod Brown , who is being challenged by the state 's Republican treasurer , Josh Mandel . Mandel is highlighting Brown 's staunch support of the new health care law — with a big assist from outside groups .
On Cleveland 's West Side this week , Brown faced a gaggle of reporters and onlookers in a corridor lined with fruit and vegetable stalls .
`` Thank you all for joining us in one of America 's and Ohio 's and Cleveland 's greatest institutions , '' he said , `` the West Side Market . ''
Brown came to the 100-year-old market on official business , touting a federal grant that helps vendors accept food stamps . But later in an interview , the talk quickly turned to his campaign and to Mandel , whose name Brown never mentioned .
`` The difference between me and my opponent , by and large , is that I wake up every day trying to figure out how to create jobs , '' he said . `` My opponent wakes up every day and figures out what office to run for next , and that really is the contrast . I 'm doing my job every day . That 's why it 's no surprise when you pick a day to come out here that I 'm doing my work , not campaigning . ''
Brown is one of 60 senators who voted for the new health care law , and he 's pleased most of it was upheld by the Supreme Court . But when asked whether he 'll now campaign on that widely unpopular law , Brown demurred .
`` My view is there are so many good things in it , I supported it and will continue to , '' he said , `` but it 's important that the politics stop here , that instead of people trying to get political benefit from this , that we move on and focus on what we ought to be doing , and that 's job creation . ''
Some shoppers said they 'd like Brown to talk more about the health care law .
`` He voted for it , '' Nancy Wassen , a Democrat from Ashland , said . `` I think he kind of has to at least include that in what he talks about . ''
`` Right now , there are a lot of people that are against Obamacare , so I 'm not sure that that 's the wisest decision to make , '' said Laura Dorrie , a retired teacher who described herself as an undecided independent .
There was a big turnout Wednesday at the Fourth of July parade in the working-class Cleveland suburb of Parma , which Obama plans to visit Thursday . He 'll get there on the heels of Mandel .
Mandel is 34 years old but could easily be mistaken for a teenager . This former Marine intelligence officer did two tours in Iraq ; he 's a fast-rising star in the Republican Party and a Tea Party favorite .
In an interview , Mandel said three things are on his mind when he gets up in the morning : `` Being a good husband , being a good state treasurer , and going to Washington to change our country . ''
To do that , Mandel said , he 'll keep reminding voters of Brown 's vote for the health care law .
`` Sherrod Brown held in his hands the power to stop this government-run health care act , '' he said , `` but instead of stopping it , he cast the deciding vote on the federal government 's takeover of health care . ''
The independent fact-checking group Politifact has labeled that deciding-vote charge false . It 's not the only questionable claim Mandel has been making . He also said he 's the underdog when it comes to campaign spending .
`` At the end of the day , you know , Sherrod Brown 's going to have a lot more money than we 're going to have , '' he said , `` but this race ai n't about money . ''
Records provided by the Brown campaign show outside groups backing Mandel have spent nearly five times more than groups backing Brown .
`` You have certainly more money being spent by the Republicans , '' said Ken Goldstein of Kantar Media Group , which tracks TV ad spending in the Ohio Senate race . `` And most of that is due to the group spending that is being done on Josh Mandel 's part . ''
Nearly $ 10 million worth of TV ads paid for by outside groups and favoring Mandel have already aired in Ohio , including one from Crossroads GPS that says it 's no surprise Brown voted for Obamacare : `` He supports Obama 's agenda 95 percent of the time . ''
Groups such as Crossroads GPS do n't have to disclose their donors . Brown said he suspects the money is coming from business groups opposed to his union-friendly voting record .
`` I mean , I know who does n't like me from outside the state , but I think this money is really all about this , '' he said . `` Without that outside money for my opponent , this would n't be much of a race . ''
Recent polls show Brown ahead of Mandel by single digits — a gap that is narrowing as outside money continues to pour in .