New York University ’ s medical school turned everybody ’ s heads when they announced that they would be providing free tuition for all their students .
The short-term wisdom of one school giving its medical students a free education , especially if the deal is subsidized by other students who will enter less lucrative fields , can be debated . But the news actually raises an important question for Medicare-for-all .
The much-discussed George Mason University report on Sen. Bernie Sanders ’ s Medicare-for-all bill raised a key point : If we are to pay all health care providers at Medicare rates , as the bill currently dictates , then providers are going to see a pay cut . Medicare rates are considerably lower than private insurance .
The exact size of the cut will depend on , for example , how much more health care we use . But it ’ s fair to say that the pay cuts for providers are going to be a big hurdle for making single-payer health care a reality . The industry is mobilized to stop it , with the pay cuts at the forefront of their minds .
And one concern about single-payer I ’ ve heard from doctors is regarding medical debt . Yes , maybe they could live with a little less money . But the debts that many physicians leave school with are staggering : The median is $ 190,000 . It could make life hard for a lot of people if they have to continue paying their loans while seeing their income cut .
There could be a solution to this : Include free medical school tuition in a Medicare-for-all bill . Progressives are already running on cost-free college .
The first question would be about cost , of course . If you take the Association of American Medical Colleges ’ s numbers on annual tuition and the medical student population , the sticker price for this proposal would be somewhere between $ 22 and $ 29 billion . In the context of a bill that costs more than $ 30 trillion over 10 years , that might be doable if it would soften one of the most potent attacks on it .
( The real cost might be different , as the figures above don ’ t account for scholarships and other discounts that students already receive that lower the net cost they have to pay , AAMC noted . )
You ’ ll also have to contend with attacks about socializing the medical workforce . But that ’ s probably coming anyway in this scenario .
An additional argument in its favor — aside from perhaps relieving some of the concern about provider payment cuts — is that free medical school for everyone could make the medical field more accessible for disadvantaged youth . The race and gender disparities in medicine are well-documented .
If subsidizing medical school — and by extension , the education of well-paid doctors — raises some uncomfortable class questions for progressives , another iteration could be free nursing school paired with an expansion of the physician duties that nurses are allowed to perform . Or maybe do both .
Medicare-for-all proponents , including Sanders ’ s office , have already start thinking about whether they could address medical school costs in a Medicare-for-all bill , I ’ m told . We don ’ t know what exactly it ’ d look like , and every additional cost has to be offset elsewhere . So it ’ s not as easy as just inserting the language .
But they are already considering it . NYU might just be ahead of the curve .
███-mark Sign up for the newsletter VoxCare Email ( required ) Zip Code By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the data transfer policy . For more newsletters , check out our newsletters page Subscribe
This story appears in VoxCare , a newsletter from ███ on the latest twists and turns in America ’ s health care debate . Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news .
Are you interested in more discussions around health care policy ? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates .