Those people clad in white keeping silent vigil in front of the California state Capitol have a message for Democratic legislators : The thousands who opposed the stricter vaccination mandates signed into law Tuesday aren ’ t backing down .
As it turns out , however , neither are those Democratic legislators .
In spite of the outcry over Senate Bill 277 , which eliminates the personal belief exemption for childhood vaccines , the Democrat-controlled Legislature followed up this week by advancing two more bills expanding immunization requirements , including one aimed at child care workers .
The result is that the battle over state-mandated vaccines is erupting into an all-out political war . A recall effort has begun against state Sen. Richard Pan , a Democrat and pediatrician who sponsored S.B . 277 , along with a referendum campaign to repeal the bill .
“ They have awoken a sleeping giant that is not going away and is only going to get bigger , ” said Christina Hildebrand , a Bay Area resident who founded A Voice for Choice to fight mandatory vaccinations .
“ That ’ s the one thing I would say is the silver lining of all this : They don ’ t know what they ’ ve just done , ” she said . “ The people have woken up . ”
More than 100 bills were introduced in 36 state legislatures after a January measles outbreak at Disneyland . Nearly all of them fizzled — except in California .
Despite rallies and hearings packed with opponents of mandatory vaccination , Gov . Jerry Brown , a Democrat , signed S.B . 277 shortly after it hit his desk Tuesday .
Later that day , the Assembly Health Committee approved a bill , S.B . 792 , to require day care and preschool workers to be vaccinated against a number of diseases , including the flu , as a condition of employment . A day later , Assembly Bill 1117 , which gives incentives to doctors to vaccinate Medi-Cal patients , sailed through the Senate Health Committee on a 6-1 vote .
The passage of those bills , coupled with S.B . 277 , would give California the toughest vaccination requirements in the nation .
“ One child ’ s death is one too many , especially when it may be preventable , ” state Sen. Tony Mendoza , a Democrat who introduced S.B . 792 , said in a statement . “ With the recent deadly outbreaks of measles and influenza , we must do everything in our power to protect California ’ s children who spend time in day care . ”
The Democrats have plenty of support behind their vaccine push , including from the California Medical Association , public health groups , school districts and labor unions . Proponents argue that use of the personal belief exemption has put at risk “ herd immunity ” in some areas where vaccines are unpopular .
“ Years of anti-science , anti-vaccine misinformation have taken its toll on immunization rates to the point that the public is now [ in ] danger , ” Mr. Pan said in a recent statement .
He pointed to a Public Policy Institute of California poll released last month that showed 67 percent said children should be vaccinated before attending public school . The poll didn ’ t ask about private school , although S.B . 277 also requires vaccines for children entering private schools .
Supporters of the vaccination bills have tried to dismiss foes as anti-government conservatives , but the loosely organized coalition is nothing if not politically diverse . Along with Republicans leery of government overreach are Santa Monica and Marin County liberals who view skeptically the pharmaceutical industry and the chemicals used in some vaccines , such as mercury and aluminum .
Then there ’ s the Hollywood wing . Actor Jim Carrey drew headlines and criticism this week with a Twitter photo of a boy with autism and the message , “ A trillion dollars buys a lot of expert opinions . Will it buy you ? Toxin free vaccines , a reasonable request ! ” the last sentence bellowed out in all capital letters .
Terry Roark , an East Bay volunteer with the National Vaccine Information Center , said Democrats have alienated a segment of the voting base by pushing mandatory vaccines while calling for individual choice on other health issues , starting with abortion .
“ The California Democratic Party had their convention in Anaheim a month or so ago and passed a resolution that said that the party would support all vaccine-mandate bills , ” Ms. Roark said . “ People are leaving the party in droves .
“ Some people say , ‘ Hey , you have to stay in the party and work within the party to change the party , ’ and other people say , ‘ Nah , screw ‘ em , ’ ” she said . “ They ’ ll give me a choice if I want to carry a baby or abort , but once that baby is born , the woman no longer has any rights to choose what gets injected into the kid ? Come on , now . Something ’ s wrong with that picture . ”
Among the legislation ’ s foes are those who have no problem with vaccines but resent the government intrusion . Former Assembly member Tim Donnelly on Wednesday launched the referendum on S.B . 277 over the issue of government mandates on health care .
“ This referendum is not about vaccinations ; it is about defending the fundamental freedom of a parent to make an informed decision for their children without being unduly penalized by a government that believes it knows best , ” said Mr. Donnelly , a talk show host on Radio Free California .
Mr. Donnelly , who placed third in the state ’ s 2014 open gubernatorial primary , said Mr. Brown “ signed away a parent ’ s right to choose what ’ s best for their children . ”
“ This is a victory for leftists bent on absolute control . No more choice , no informed consent , only compliance or else , ” he said on Facebook . “ So , if you are [ a ] Democrat upset over this , A ) are you going to leave your party over this & B ) what party are you going to join , if any ? ”
Even the American Civil Liberties Union of California has expressed reservations about S.B . 277 , which gives parents the option of home-schooling their children or enrolling them in an “ independent study program ” with no classroom interaction .
Kevin Baker , legislative director for the ACLU of California , said the problem is that the state Constitution lists a public school education as a fundamental right . The ACLU was neutral on the bill .
“ Safe schools are important , and immunization is a valuable protection against outbreaks of infectious diseases , ” Mr. Baker said in an April statement . “ At the same time , we need to proceed with great caution on any proposed law that deprives kids of their fundamental right to education by banning them from classrooms . ”
So far , no lawsuit has been filed against S.B . 277 , mainly because it doesn ’ t take effect until July 1 , 2016 . The opposition ’ s best argument may be whether people can be required “ to give up the human right to informed consent to medical risk-taking in order to exercise a civil right to an education , ” said Barbara Loe Fisher , head of the National Vaccine Information Center .
“ This is a very dangerous precedent to set , and I think people aren ’ t looking at the bigger picture , ” Ms. Fisher said . “ And I think it ’ s important to look at the bigger picture . This is not a good precedent to set , because it ’ s a slippery slope . Freedoms are taken away incrementally . ”
Opponents of vaccine legislation aren ’ t terribly well-organized — there are at least a half-dozen such groups in California , all working on different aspects of the fight . Although they were able to hire lobbyists , it ’ s unclear whether they have the funding to hang in there for the long term .
By their own admission , they don ’ t constitute a majority , at least not yet . What they do have is intensity , the kind not seen since perhaps the anti-war rallies of the 1970s , said Ms. Roark , who remembers those days .
“ I think [ Democrats ] were surprised by the amount of opposition , ” Ms. Roark said . “ But this is not just a California issue . This is an American issue . And the whole world is watching . ”