While the administration publicly expresses full confidence in its health care law , privately it fears one part of the system is so flawed it could bankrupt insurance companies and cripple ObamaCare itself .
`` Week after week , month after month , '' says John Goodman of the National Center for Policy Analysis , `` the Obama administration kept telling us everything 's working fine , there 's no problem and then they turn on a dime and fire their contractor . ''
To justify a no-bid contract with Accenture after firing CGI as the lead contractor , the administration released documents from the Department of Health and Human Services and the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services that offered a rare glimpse of its worst fears , saying the problems with the website puts `` the entire health insurance industry at risk '' ... `` potentially leading to their default and disrupting continued services and coverage to consumers . ''
Then it went even further , saying if the problems were not fixed by mid-March , `` they will result in financial harm to the government . ''
It even added that without the fixes `` the entire health care reform program is jeopardized . ''
In spite of the `` urgent '' need officials cited to keep the system from collapsing , the White House spokesman said he knew nothing about it .
“ I did n't see the article I 'm not aware of those statements , ” Jay Carney said .
The dangers were known in early December , but later , shortly before CGI was fired , Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius gave ███ an upbeat account .
“ I ’ m thrilled that we ’ re going to have millions of people for the first time that have health security , ” she said .
Shortly after the website went live , one official told Congress a critical part of the system – what is known as the “ back end ” -- had not even been built yet .
Doug Holtz-Eakin , former head of the Congressional Budget Office , says `` the back end -- that information is supposed to be transmitted to an insurance company , the insurance company knows who you are , they know what policy you 've picked . ''
But the back end still has n't been built , so insurers are dealing with massive confusion , missing information on who 's signed up and what subsidies they get .
Sebelius insisted once again Wednesday it would all come together and insurance companies will get their money .
`` I mean we will get them paid , ” she said . “ There is no question about that , so we are on track . ''
For now , though , officials concede they 're relying on estimates from the insurers .
`` Here 's who we think we have , and here 's the subsidy we think they 're owed , '' explains Jim Capretta of the Ethics and Public Policy Center . `` Please send us a check from the treasury , '' he says chuckling . `` The honor system again . ''
`` There 's no way to effectively match policies and people , '' says Holtz-Eakin .
`` And on top of that , you ca n't match policies , people , to the federal subsidies and that 's a big problem in terms of just the mechanics of making payments . ''
The administration emphasizes that fixing the site by mid-March is urgent . Otherwise the system could descend into chaos and threaten the future of ObamaCare .
Meanwhile , a new Quinnipiac poll gives the president poor grades for his management of health care , with 59 percent disapproving while 36 percent approve .