“ Our job is to convey to them that there is help coming that they didn ’ t know about , ” said Rachel Klein , Enroll America ’ s executive director .
The group has raised only about $ 6 million so far — but financial backers include some major players in the medical industry : insurers like Aetna and Blue Cross Blue Shield , associations representing both brand name and generic drug manufacturers , hospitals and the Catholic Health Association . Insurance companies generally opposed the law before its passage in 2010 but now have a stake in its success .
Over the next two years , the group hopes to raise as much as $ 100 million for advertising , social media and other outreach efforts . “ There are so many different groups that can play some role in this : hospitals , community health centers , pharmacies , tax preparers , ” said Ron Pollack , chairman of Enroll America ’ s board . “ Our job has got to be to try to galvanize each of those sectors , so there is a wide variety of ways people potentially can hear about this . ”
Although the campaign will be national , the group will devote more resources to some states than to others . About half of the nation ’ s uninsured population lives in six states : California , Florida , Georgia , Illinois , New York and Texas . Of those , states whose leaders remain opposed to the health care law , like Texas , will probably get the most attention , Mr. Pollack said .
At the same time , Enroll America will coordinate with states , many of which are planning their own outreach and enrollment efforts , and with the Obama administration .
The Department of Health and Human Services has already awarded a $ 3.1 million contract to Weber Shandwick , a public relations firm , to plan a national education campaign for next year . It plans to seek proposals soon for a larger contract with a public relations firm that would help with the actual campaign , officials there said . Although the campaign has yet to take shape , an administration official confirmed that President Obama will play a role as it moves forward .
Republicans in Congress have already criticized the administration for spending taxpayer money to promote the law . Last month , Representative Dave Camp of Michigan , who leads the Ways and Means Committee , subpoenaed Kathleen Sebelius , the secretary of health and human services , seeking information on “ public relations campaigns , advertisements , polling , message testing , and similar services . ”
In addition to holding focus groups in Miami , Philadelphia , San Antonio and Columbus , Ohio , Enroll America commissioned a nationwide survey to help hone its message . The survey , conducted in September and October by Lake Research Partners , a Democratic polling group , found that the vast majority of uninsured people are unaware of the new coverage options provided by the law .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
They are also skeptical . Many who participated in the focus groups or survey reported bad experiences trying to get health insurance , and doubted that the law would provide coverage that was both affordable and comprehensive .
“ It ’ s two major mountains that need to be climbed , ” Mr. Pollack said . “ People are unaware of the benefits that could be provided to them , and they have to overcome skepticism , based on their past experiences with trying to obtain insurance . ”
One message in particular resonated with the survey respondents : that under the new law , all insurance plans would have to cover doctor visits , hospitalizations , maternity care , emergency room care and prescriptions . They also liked the statements , “ If you have a pre-existing condition , insurance plans can not deny you coverage , ” and “ You might be able to get financial help to pay for a health insurance plan . ”
But the survey found that even with federal subsidies , many uninsured people may balk at the cost of coverage . Only about a third of respondents leaned toward thinking monthly premiums of $ 210 for a single person earning $ 30,000 a year , for example , were affordable .
Those amounts became more acceptable when respondents were told it would “ protect you from thousands of dollars of medical debt if you got sick ” or “ cover all of the basic care you need . ”
In the end , Lake Research Partners recommended that Enroll America not cite specific dollar amounts at all when they talk to the uninsured about new coverage options . “ Talking about ‘ free or low cost ’ plans may be more motivating , ” the survey authors wrote in a report .
Another finding : respondents generally did not like hearing that the law would require most Americans to buy health insurance or pay a fine starting in 2014 . “ The data show warning signs for messaging around the mandate , ” the survey authors wrote .
The survey also found that many uninsured people would be uncomfortable using the Internet to find an insurance plan — a potential problem , since federal subsidies will be available only through the online markets called exchanges . Most respondents said that they would prefer in-person help signing up , and that they would trust family members to help them more than anyone else . Ms. Klein said she expected women , “ the health care decision makers for their families , ” would be instrumental in persuading their relatives to get coverage .
“ A lot of the way this is ultimately going to get around is word of mouth , ” Ms. Klein said . “ It really needs to become a sort of buzzword , that there ’ s change afoot . ”