( CNN ) – The Republican divide over whether to shut down the federal government in a bid to end President Barack Obama 's health care law is merely a tactical split , rather than a larger ideological rift , the party 's national chairman said Sunday .
Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus , speaking on CNN 's `` State of the Union , '' said he was n't picking a side on the issue , which has pitted establishment party members against their younger colleagues .
`` I am not advocating for one tactic or the other , but what I am advocating for is to set the record straight that the Republican Party is the party that is totally unified in defunding and delaying and getting rid of Obamacare . It 's the Democrats fighting each other over the overall picture of whether or not we should keep Obamacare in place , '' Priebus told chief political correspondent Candy Crowley .
To illustrate the Democratic split , Priebus pointed to July votes in the House on delaying the individual and employer mandates in Obamacare , which garnered support from 22 and 35 Democrats , respectively . Those handful of Democratic lawmakers , he argued , represented more of a divide than do Republicans squabbling over the best way to end the Affordable Care Act , which was signed into law in 2010 .
`` The real story here is the Democrats in the Senate and the House , the ones that are vulnerable and want to be re-elected , have turned their back on the president , and that 's the story . Not the tactics on the Republican side of the aisle , '' he argued .
Those tactics will come to a head in late September , when the current measure funding the federal government is set to expire . Some Republicans have said they 'll oppose any new continuing resolution that does n't strip Obamacare of its funding .
Leading that fight are three Republicans elected to office on waves of tea party support : Sens . Mike Lee of Utah , Ted Cruz of Texas , and Marco Rubio of Florida .
In Iowa Saturday , Cruz amplified his calls for using the upcoming government funding fight as leverage to defund Obamacare , but said fellow Republicans threatened to stall his efforts .
`` A lot of politicians in Washington , in both parties , are telling the American people , 'It ca n't be done . ' Why ? Because Barack Obama will always stand for his principles , so America , apparently conservatives , have to give up on ours , '' he said at a gathering hosted by the evangelical organization Family Leader .
Instead of working together on a real plan to get rid of Obama 's health care law , Cruz argued that establishment Republicans were simply putting on a guise of opposing Obamacare without taking real action .
`` This thing ai n't working , but I ca n't count the number of Republicans in Washington saying we ca n't defund it , '' he said . `` We can pass symbolic votes against it , but we ca n't actually stand up and take a risk and potentially be blamed . ''
Republicans who oppose a government shutdown fight include GOP Sens . John McCain and Tom Coburn , as well as last year 's GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney , who told a crowd of Republican donors in New Hampshire last week that `` the people of the nation would not be happy '' if Republicans help trigger a shutdown .
House Majority Leader Eric Cantor has also tamped down on talk of government shutdown threats , saying in an interview with the National Review that `` no one is advocating a government shutdown . ''
But in Iowa , Cruz 's calls for defunding Obamacare were met with enthusiastic applause - something he said was unlikely to be replicated in Washington .
`` If I were sitting in the Senate cloakroom , the reaction to that statement would be fundamentally different . I do n't think I 'm quick enough to dodge all the things that would be thrown at me , '' he joked .