The problems facing the Affordable Care Act 's implementation have given the law 's critics no shortage of ammunition to take potshots at President Obama 's signature legislative accomplishment . But to hear those critics tell it , the ACA 's problems are an unfolding political catastrophe in which Democrats are poised to abandon ship and the law is just a hair 's breadth from repeal . Repeal of the law is and always has been a fantasy , but right now it 's being enabled by members of the mainstream press for whom the ACA 's problems are n't serious enough and somehow merit embellishment .
Tea Party congressmen and conservative pundits have been keeping the repeal fantasy alive ever since the law was signed back in 2010 . The backlash from the government shutdown , which was inspired by Tea Party efforts to gut the ACA , did nothing to dull enthusiasm for the “ repeal Obamacare ” crowd . “ Obamacare will be repealed well in advance of the 2014 elections , ” conservative wag Steven Hayward wrote in Forbes on November 11 . “ There is a chance Obamacare could be repealed in a bipartisan vote , ” wrote Ed Rogers in the Washington Post . Congress “ could try to vote now , under new conditions and with the American people behind them , to repeal the whole thing , ” Peggy Noonan wrote in the Wall Street Journal . “ And who knows , they just might. ” No , they wo n't . And even if Congress did somehow manage to pass a bill repealing the ACA , it would in all certainty be vetoed by President Obama .
But this is what pundits and activists do : shape and spin stories to conform to their preferred outcome . The National Journal 's Josh Kraushaar , rather than tamping down this irrational enthusiasm among the law 's opponents , is giving it a leg up . “ There 's a growing likelihood that over time , enough Democrats may join Republicans to decide to start over and scrap the whole complex health care enterprise , ” Kraushaar writes in his November 18 column . Now , this is caveated to the point that it 's essentially meaningless -- he 's saying there 's an increased chance of something possibly happening over an indeterminate time period -- -- but Kraushaar nonetheless wants us to think that repeal is a real threat .
Basically it comes down to veto-proof majorities in both houses of Congress . “ Consider : Despite the White House 's protestations , 62.4 percent of the House voted for Michigan GOP Rep. Fred Upton 's legislation ( 261-157 ) , just shy of the two-thirds necessary to override a veto. ” That 's true enough , but Upton 's bill was not for full repeal of the law . The votes for Upton 's bill , which would permit health insurers to continue selling plans that do n't meet the ACA 's minimum standards , reflect Democratic dissatisfaction with the law , but the vote itself was essentially symbolic . The bill wo n't be taken up by the Senate , and it would never survive an Obama veto . Those Democrats went into the vote knowing that it would n't have any impact on policy . So you ca n't just extrapolate from that symbolic expression of frustration a desire to scrap the whole law .
Notably , Kraushaar did n't give any indication that he actually spoke to any House Democrats when speculating on their willingness to abandon the ACA . Salon 's Brian Beutler did ask a House Democrat , Rep. Steven Cohen , that question on MSNBC over the weekend and Cohen dismissed the idea out of hand . “ I ca n't see a veto proof number coming up . I just do n't see that happening . ”
On the Senate side , Kraushaar 's argument is even weaker , given that Democrats control the chamber , so he can only offer up hypotheticals for arriving at a far-fetched political destination :
To overcome a veto , Republicans would need 22 of those 28 winnable votes . Right now , they would n't come close . But Reid and the White House may end up relying on swing-state Democrats like Claire McCaskill and Bob Casey to protect the law . If the political mood does n't improve in short order , will they want to be in that position ? And if Republicans retake the Senate in 2015 , the political momentum for repeal would only grow .
That 's a lot of ifs and questions left unanswered . But from all this Kraushaar arrived at the notion that repeal is visible on the horizon . Ironically , by sketching out the immense political shifts and alignments of the electoral stars that must occur in order to arrive at veto-proof majorities for ACA opponents , Kraushaar unwittingly demonstrated just how unlikely it is for the repeal fantasy to come true .