ObamaCare enrollments are finally taking off , passing the 3 million mark earlier this month . The early hiccups with the federal health exchange website have largely been solved , too , and predictions of a dreaded insurance `` death spiral '' now seem wildly off .
Not a bad turnaround for a law that seemed broken back in October .
Yet for all the positive ObamaCare news that 's come out in the past month or so , a new tracking poll from the Kaiser Family Foundation finds that , among the uninsured , ObamaCare has actually grown less popular since December . Only 24 percent of the uninsured have a favorable impression of the law , while nearly twice as many , 47 percent , say the opposite . That 's a sizable shift from one month ago , when the popularity split was 36/46 .
Certainly , there 's a ton of volatility in Kaiser 's survey , so the latest numbers could be statistical noise . But the overall trend — the uninsured souring on the law — is quite clear , and supported by other recent surveys .
ObamaCare is supposed to most benefit the uninsured . So why is that crucial group turning against the law ?
For one , it 's possible that since they 're more directly impacted by the law , they 're more familiar with its warts . The federal exchange website was notoriously glitchy in the early going , and overall public perception of the law quickly turned south . That trend was most pronounced among the uninsured , with large majorities of those who visited Healthcare.gov reporting a dismal user experience .
With the site ( mostly ) repaired , that sentiment could change if the uninsured give the site a second crack and discover a smoother experience .
There 's likely also a fiscal element underlying the downward trend . A December CBS News/New York Times survey , for instance , found that almost six in 10 uninsured thought the health-care law would hurt them financially .
Indeed , that could be true for many of the uninsured . In essence , the law is requiring them to either purchase something or pay a penalty for not doing so . With the individual mandate 's deadline drawing closer , it 's possible that the uninsured are beginning to feel that financial pinch .
Furthermore , some 8 million people are caught in a health-care limbo , too poor to obtain federal subsidies , but unable to tap the law 's vast Medicaid expansion since their states are n't participating in it . Twenty-four states , most with GOP governors , declined the Medicaid expansion , effectively denying millions of low-income people access to cheap health insurance .
Other studies have found that even those who were supposed to qualify for subsidies are n't getting them as readily as expected .
Back in September , a whopping 76 percent of the uninsured were largely unfamiliar with the law . And last month , nearly 60 percent still said they had n't bothered to look up even basic information about potential coverage options . Even now , only 23 percent of the uninsured have visited a federal or state exchange site , according to Gallup .
In other words , it 's possible that at least some of the opposition is n't stemming from the law 's true impact , but merely to its perceived impact . A huge chunk of the uninsured do n't know what the law would do for them , but they do n't like it anyway .
That should n't be too surprising . More people report seeing negative , rather than positive , media coverage of ObamaCare , per Kaiser . So though a majority of the uninsured say the law has n't really affected them yet , twice as many ( 30 percent ) say they 're worse off under it than those ( 13 percent ) who say they 're better off .
Now , the good news for ObamaCare is that half the uninsured still plan to get coverage , according to Kaiser 's survey . And with the federal exchange performing much better than before , it 's certainly possible the negative perceptions will turn around as the uninsured give it another shot , or try it out for the first time .
In the end , perceptions of ObamaCare wo n't doom the law ; low enrollment would . And on that front , it appears there will be more than enough enrollments to keep the program afloat .