The silence surrounding the unspeakable horror in a quiet stretch of South Shore Drive speaks volumes about the city ’ s tattered safety net .
I know this net is sturdy enough for the folks who have access to minute clinics .
But how do we put our faith in a system that sends a 20-year-old suicidal mother of two home ( after an apparent mental breakdown ) with a “ diagnosis of a mood disorder and a prescription . ”
You don ’ t have to be a psychiatrist or preacher to know that isn ’ t right . How could a person in that condition possibly take care of two babies ?
Still , it seems like most of us don ’ t have a problem with it .
That is what struck me on Monday morning as I passed by the high-rise building where the tragedy happened .
It was as if nothing out of the ordinary had occurred there .
There was the Monday morning drone of buses and cars ; the knot of people waiting at the bus shelter ; a young man walking briskly down the sidewalk .
But just a few days ago , on this very sidewalk , an obviously deranged woman crashed from 11-stories after allegedly killing her own children .
In a court hearing Saturday , prosecutors charged Aleah Newell with stabbing her 70-year-old grandfather nearly a dozen times ; stabbing and fatally scalding her 7-month-old son in a bathtub ; and hurling her 2-year-old from the 11th floor apartment before leaping to what she hoped would be her death .
It was a miracle that a scaffold broke her fall and she survived with a broken wrist and ankle . Her grandfather had been in critical condition , though he was expected to live . Her babies are dead .
Newell is charged with two murders and an attempted murder and is facing a possible life sentence behind bars .
At the South Shore address , on Monday , where this unspeakable tragedy occurred , workers prepared to scale the building using one of the other scaffolds hanging from the high-rise , and a garbage truck idled loudly as workers piled on their routine haul .
You could walk right by without knowing that such a diabolical act had taken place .
There were no banners with loving messages tied to poles or flowers piled up in bunches ; no stuffed teddy bears or action figures ; no marchers or protesters demanding more be done to help save women suffering from mental illness .
But apparently there were moments when Newell tried to shoulder her responsibilities and cried out for help .
For instance , according to prosecutors , two days before the tragedy Newell had taken the 2-year-old to Comer Children ’ s Hospital for treatment for his asthma .
Prosecutors said the distraught woman had asked her mother on New Year ’ s Eve to pick up her boys so she could “ get her life together . ”
But when Newell ’ s mother , Zera Newell , got there last Wednesday , her daughter and the boys weren ’ t home , according to prosecutors .
The distraught mother had spent New Year ’ s Eve and the day before in Humboldt Park at Shield of Hope , a homeless shelter run by the Salvation Army .
Shield of Hope is an emergency homeless assessment and rapid-response center , according to a statement the agency put out in the wake of this tragedy .
“ Despite reports in recent days , no family has been , nor will be turned away . Our doors are open to all who seek respite , ” the statement said , according to WGN .
The shelter verified that Newell checked out of the facility on New Year ’ s Day .
“ We continue to pray for the family and those impacted by this tragedy , ” the statement added .
But shouldn ’ t they have put some “ rapid-response action ” behind those prayers , especially since Newell allegedly told another woman at the shelter , “ I can ’ t do this . I can ’ t take care of them ” ?
Additionally , Zera Newell told the ███ her daughter had asked staff at the shelter to take the children away from her .
But under these circumstances , how could an agency that is supposed to serve people in a crisis situation let such a troubled woman walk out of the shelter on New Year ’ s Day with two toddlers in tow ?
Jassen Strokosch , a spokesman for the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services said , “ A parent attempting suicide does not automatically mean a child is removed from a home .
“ Every family is different . DCFS would assess the entirety of the situation . For example , does the parent who attempted suicide have other family supports they can rely on ? Are there two parents involved or one ? Are there grandparents or an aunt or uncle involved that can step in to care for the children ? DCFS would assess many of these options before a judge would remove a child from a home , ” he said in an email .
According to FBI Statistics , 450 children are murdered by their parents each year in the US .
Last month , Mayor Lori Lightfoot announced a plan for public agencies to “ coordinate with one another as well as mental health providers when responding to emergency calls , ” the ███ reported .
Hopefully , this new effort will help save other desperate women and their children .