Senator Max Baucus ( D-Mont . ) thinks the president should seriously consider delaying the individual mandate tax on Americans who don ’ t purchase health insurance by March 31 -- that is , if Healthcare.gov isn ’ t up and functioning properly sometime in the next 30 days .
But wait a minute . Earlier in the week , he called Senator Marco Rubio ’ s bill to delay that specific provision “ inappropriate . ”
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus ( D-Mont . ) , in a new interview , compares President Obama 's new health-care exchanges and the accompanying Web site to `` Humpty Dumpty . '' Baucus also said he 's open to delaying the penalties for those who do n't obtain insurance by the current March 31 deadline . `` Let 's just see how much of this can be put together , how much Humpty Dumpty can be fixed , in the next month , '' Baucus told KYAA-AM . `` And if it looks like Humpty Dumpty 's not getting put back ... together , then maybe we should start thinking about delaying the penalties . ''
What ’ s more , earlier in the week Baucus said that Rubio ’ s bill was intentionally crafted to “ disrupt the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. ” Really ? Rubio responded to this baseless charge in kind on the Senate floor ( via WFB ) :
Rubio correctly notes that the idea existing laws can not be changed or amended by members of Congress is specious . That ’ s what the legislative branch does , he told his Senate colleagues . “ That ’ s what the legislative process is about , ” he said .
As Guy noted earlier in the week , simply delaying the individual mandate without delaying other key provisions is wonderful politics for Republicans -- but a horrible idea . It would effectively dissuade young people from enrolling in the exchanges , thus incentivizing insurance providers to raise rates -- hastening the so-called “ death spiral ” that could very well bring down Obamacare and our economy along with it . Democrats , meanwhile , seem to finally be noticing that the Obamacare “ train wreck ” ( a term , incidentally , Baucus himself coined ) is a serious problem . Why do I know this ? Because Baucus isn ’ t even running for re-election , and he ’ s already spooked -- as are some of his Democratic colleagues .