Obama has had a love-hate relationship with insurers since the debate started . The breakup with insurers
President Barack Obama is breaking up with the health insurance industry again .
He ’ s had a love-hate relationship with the insurers ever since the early days of the health care reform debate . He yelled at them in public for giving people skimpy coverage , then slipped them a gift-wrapped box of chocolates — the individual mandate they wanted to gain millions of new customers .
Even during the implementation of Obamacare , he has stuck with the industry , staying in the rocky relationship despite all the petty bickering . He has to use them as a foil to advertise the law ’ s benefits , like all the rebates from greedy insurance companies . But he also needs them to make the law work — which is why he has been careful not to raise his voice at them even as they sent cancellation notices to individual insurance customers throughout the country .
Now , Obama is putting them on the spot . The message of his proposed one-year fix to the cancelled policies is this : I ’ m giving you a chance to clean up the mess . If you don ’ t clean it up , don ’ t blame it on me .
“ The bottom line is insurers can extend current plans that would otherwise be cancelled into 2014 , ” Obama said at his Thursday press conference .
Industry CEOs have been summoned to a White House meeting Friday that ’ s sure to be full of those awkward conversations about who did what to whom , and who ’ s being unreasonable this time .
It ’ s enough to stress a relationship to the breaking point . And breaking up , as the song goes , can indeed be hard to do - and in the case may have implications for innocent bystanders , such as health care customers .
“ The president was clear as a bell : ‘ We ’ ve done our part . If rates go up or anything , that ’ s not our fault. ’ And that ’ s not the case , ” said Bill Pierce , a former Department of Health and Human Services official who has also worked in the health insurance industry .
Democrats badly needed a fix to point to on Friday , when they 'll have to vote on a Republican bill to let all Americans keep their health plans . But the need to give Democrats political cover can ’ t justify a change that could backfire in other ways , Pierce said .
( IN 90 SECONDS : Obamacare puts Democrats ’ credibility on the line )
“ It is a political solution to a policy problem … You can not solve a policy problem with a political solution , ” said Pierce , now a senior director at APCO Worldwide .
Sure , there was a bit of “ it ’ s not you , it ’ s me ” in Obama ’ s press conference Thursday . “ That ’ s on me . I mean , we fumbled the rollout on this health care law , ” Obama said .
“ What we want to do is to be able to say to these folks , you know what , the Affordable Care Act is not going to be the reason why insurers have to cancel your plan , ” Obama said .
There ’ s just one problem : Health insurers say the fix won ’ t work . And state insurance commissioners and leading actuaries aren ’ t sure , either .
For one thing , health insurance plans already set their prices for the Obamacare plans assuming that they ’ d get a certain number of customers , and the right mix of healthy and sick people . If they don ’ t get those people , they ’ re warning that the mix will be thrown off , and prices will have to go up — creating a new nightmare for the administration .
“ Changing the rules after health plans have already met the requirements of the law could destabilize the market and result in higher premiums for consumers , ” Karen Ignagni of America ’ s Health Insurance Plans , the leading health insurance trade group , said in a statement .
“ Changing the [ Affordable Care Act ] provisions could alter the dynamics of the insurance market , creating two parallel markets operating under different rules , thereby threatening the viability of insurance markets operating under the new rules , ” said Cori Uccello , the senior health fellow at the American Academy of Actuaries .