Congress is steadily taking the sting out of ObamaCare , removing the most unpopular parts of the law while leaving the most popular elements in place .
Lawmakers in the last two months have repealed the law 's insurance mandate and delayed a slew of controversial taxes , including the Cadillac tax on high-cost health plans , which is reviled by unions and businesses alike .
But other central provisions of the law , including subsidies to help people buy coverage , the expansion of Medicaid and protections for people with pre-existing conditions , remain in place . And those parts appear likely to stick around for the foreseeable future , given that the GOP repeal push is on hold indefinitely .
Former staffers who helped write the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) are optimistic that the law can still function without the mandate and the taxes , even if they would have preferred for those policies to stay in place .
Some argued the removal of some of the most unpopular parts of the law actually strengthens the political standing of ObamaCare , making it harder to repeal .
“ The ACA is like an overachieving child with parents who got divorced that ’ s still on track to go to a good college , ” said Bob Kocher , a former Obama White House health-care staffer who helped write the ACA .
The law ’ s subsidies , he said , are both hard to touch and key to the system .
“ No politician wants to take subsidies away , and it ’ s the subsidies that enable the insurance expansion , ” Kocher said .
And despite the repeal push in Congress , enrollment in ObamaCare was only down slightly for 2018 . That surprised experts who predicted that the Trump administration ’ s handling of the law would discourage people from signing up .
“ I think a year ago no one would have predicted that the marketplaces would be as strong as they are today , ” said Jeanne Lambrew , a longtime Obama health-care adviser who worked on passing the law , though she warned of future actions the Trump administration could take .
ObamaCare is increasingly dependent on its federal subsidies , which make it easier for people with low incomes to get affordable coverage . People who earn too much to qualify for the aid increasingly face high premium costs .
“ The ACA is just a shrunken version of what it could be , ” said Jonathan Gruber , an MIT health economist whose work helped shape the law . “ It ’ s shrunk to a public entitlement program , and that ’ s , you know , unfortunate . ”
He said people who qualify for the subsidies can find affordable coverage , but the growth of the law is limited because people who do not qualify face costs that “ can be exorbitantly expensive . ”
The size of the ObamaCare marketplaces , around 10 million people , is less than half of the roughly 25 million people that the Congressional Budget Office once projected would be enrolled by this point . The gap is partly due to fewer employers dropping coverage than was expected .
Congress ’ s decision to repeal the mandate that people have insurance will likely result in larger premium increases for people who don ’ t qualify for subsidies , potentially depressing enrollment further .
Still , the law has contributed to a steep drop in the uninsured rate . The National Health Interview Survey found that 16 million people have gained coverage since the law went into full effect in 2014 .
The repeal fight last year showed that cutting off funding in ObamaCare that helps people get coverage tends to be unsuccessful , said Tom Miller , a health-care expert at the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute .
The parts of the law that have been rolled back , like the mandate and the taxes , are seen as impositions , in contrast to the spending on coverage .
“ The lesson of last year is when it comes to actually spending less money , no , no we 're stopping at that , ” Miller said .
“ As long as the funding streams remain there , which they do , there ’ s certainly an irreducible minimum [ of people enrolled ] , ” he added .
The delay of the Cadillac tax , while not at the core of the ACA , is particularly irritating for architects of the law . They included the tax in an effort to control health-care costs , hoping it would incentivize employers and insurers to lower costs and avoid having to pay the tax .
But unions and businesses decried the tax , and members of both parties have responded by delaying its implementation .
“ It ’ s really disappointing to see both parties I think really not understand the policy and respond to really simplistic rhetoric , ” said Kocher , a supporter of the tax .
Lambrew noted more generally that all of the ACA taxes were put in place to fund the law and help prevent it from adding to the deficit .
“ The taxes were there because we wanted to make sure this was sustainable in the long run , ” she said .
With the taxes chipped away and the mandate gone , though , the law becomes somewhat more palatable for many in the GOP , even if they would prefer repeal .
Republicans are now considering steps to stabilize ObamaCare markets and stop premium hikes by funding what is known as reinsurance , though conservative lawmakers generally object to that idea .
“ Even though Republicans have this burning desire to get rid of it , they understand elections matter , and they are now in a position where they have to stabilize the market so they can argue , ‘ Hey , we 're reducing premiums , ’ ” said Chris Condeluci , a former Senate Republican health-care staffer .
Condeluci , who worked for the Senate Finance Committee at the time of negotiations over the ACA in 2009 , said he thought some Republicans might have voted for the law if the mandate hadn ’ t been included .
Lambrew said it makes sense for Republicans to take ownership of the law now that they control the government — especially given the push on the left for a new single-payer system .
While they might not like ObamaCare , she said , “ they really don ’ t like the alternative . ”