If Mr. Trump picks Ms. Verma to succeed Mr. Price at the Department of Health and Human Services , it would be taken as a sign among many that he wants to continue vigorous opposition to the Affordable Care Act , with the government doing the minimum required by the law to implement its provisions . Ms. Verma , an ally of Vice President Mike Pence , worked closely this year with Republicans in Congress on their proposals to undo the law and to cut Medicaid , the program for more than 70 million low-income people .
Still , some progressives have interpreted her work under the health care law in Indiana , where Mr. Pence was governor , to mean that while she opposed the Affordable Care Act , she was committed to finding ways to enforce it if it remained on the books .
Mr. Gottlieb has more experience in Washington and was seen at the time of his appointment as the more moderate of candidates being considered . In his first months at the F.D.A. , he has deftly balanced the concerns of patients and pharmaceutical companies , while taking steps to combat the opioid epidemic and speed access to lower-cost generic drugs . His nomination would be seen as a signal that the president might want to take a different approach to the health care debate .
“ We have the votes on the substance but not necessarily on the process , which is why we ’ re still confident that we can move health care forward and get it done in the spring , ” Sarah Huckabee Sanders , the White House press secretary , said before Mr. Price ’ s resignation .
After the latest legislative failure , Mr. Trump said he would sign an executive order in the coming week intended to enable Americans to buy health insurance across state lines , a sign that he did not intend to wait for Congress . But it is not clear that he has the authority to do that on his own , and states often resist federal efforts to intrude on their regulation of insurers .
Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee , the Republican chairman of the Senate health committee , and Senator Patty Murray of Washington , the panel ’ s ranking Democrat , have resumed negotiations on bipartisan legislation intended to shore up the current insurance exchanges and prevent prices from shooting up .
The uncertainty comes at a crucial moment , just as federal and state officials are preparing for the fifth annual open enrollment period under the Affordable Care Act . The open season , when people can sign up for coverage , runs from Nov. 1 to Dec. 15 . Critics say that the Trump administration has destabilized insurance markets , driving up premiums for 2018 and making it harder for people to enroll .