Barack Obama and his Democratic allies in the U.S. Congress have grown more confident in recent months about their ability to use the president 's signature healthcare law as a draw rather than a liability in this November 's midterm elections .
Three races in New Hampshire illustrate the challenge , offering a test of whether Democrats can overcome voter skepticism about the 2010 Affordable Care Act . The law , aiming to expand health insurance coverage to millions more Americans , has come under sustained attack from Republicans .
The president has urged Democrats campaigning in the Nov. 4 congressional elections not to run away from `` Obamacare , '' but instead to `` forcefully defend '' it . Obama has said that a surge in enrollment shows the system is running smoothly now , after its disastrous debut last October .
New Hampshire , which is closely divided between Democrats and Republicans , is one of about 10 states where Republicans hope to make gains in order to pick up six seats they need to put the Democratic-led Senate under their control .
Senators Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire , Kay Hagan of North Carolina and Mary Landrieu of Louisiana have been among the Democratic targets of anti-Obamacare ads by conservative groups such as Americans for Prosperity .
Republicans are counting on voter antipathy toward Obamacare to try to take charge of the Senate and expand their majority in the House of Representatives . But while Obamacare may now be working better , national polls clearly show more people disapprove than approve of the law .
In New Hampshire , Shaheen and Representative Carol Shea-Porter , a fellow Democrat , were among the earliest advocates of the healthcare law . The state 's other Democratic Representative , Ann Kuster , was elected after the law passed , but also backs it .
Shaheen said in an interview she shared Obama 's view that as Americans get to know Obamacare , they are embracing it . Shaheen said there was `` a lot of misinformation '' about the law . `` The reality is it 's beginning to work for people , '' she said .
But 51 percent of New Hampshire adults oppose Obamacare while just 37 percent support it , the University of New Hampshire Survey Center reported last month in a WMUR-Granite State poll . Sixty-one percent of the state 's voters think medical costs will increase under the act .
`` The perception is , 'it will hurt my family and costs will go up , ' '' said Andrew Smith , director of the center . `` In a political campaign , that is a big boulder to push uphill . ''
Skeptics include people like Derek Gagnon , a 33-year-old auto mechanic who says he would not even consider voting for anyone who had backed the Affordable Care Act .
He has no health insurance , but he also says he has no intention of signing up for the private insurance offered through the government-run website , HealthCare.gov .
`` I should n't be forced to do something like that in a free country , '' said Gagnon , referring to the law 's requirement , known as the `` individual mandate , '' that almost all legal U.S. residents buy health insurance or pay a fine .
`` I 'll pay the fine this year and next year , '' Gagnon said at a frozen yogurt store outside New Hampshire 's state capital , Concord . `` Maybe I wo n't have to pay it the third year , because by then Obama will be out of office . ''
Gagnon 's distaste for the individual mandate dovetails with a principal line of conservative attacks nationally on the law .
Obamacare is meant to extend subsidized health coverage to millions of uninsured Americans through new online private insurance markets and an expansion of the Medicaid program for the poor . But conservative critics portray it as a government intrusion in a major sector of the economy that will hurt job growth and erode freedoms .
Shaheen 's leading Republican opponent in the Senate race , Scott Brown , is betting that theme will resonate in New Hampshire , where the state 's famous motto is `` Live Free or Die . ''
In April , Brown kicked off his candidacy with the declaration that New Hampshire could `` Live Free or Log On '' - a caustic reference to signing up online for Obamacare .
Lately , he has been traveling the state on an `` Obamacare Is n't Working '' tour . Brown , a former senator from neighboring Massachusetts , says the act should be completely repealed and the issue of healthcare reform should be left to the states .
Brown has been rising in the polls against Shaheen . But she was ahead 45 to 39 percent in a recent WMUR-Granite State poll .
Dean Spiliotes , a New Hampshire political analyst , said Shaheen , a former New Hampshire governor , still had political capital in the state , and he doubted the healthcare issue alone could defeat her .
`` People view her as not an ideologue . That has helped her with voters , '' said Spiliotes , a political science professor at Southern New Hampshire University . `` If Obamacare rises to the level of taking out Jeanne Shaheen , there is something larger going on . ''
To be sure , Obamacare faces unique challenges in New Hampshire . Just one insurance company in the small state offered insurance policies through the program this year , and the insurer does n't cover healthcare in 10 of the state 's 26 hospitals , deficits Shaheen and Shea-Porter have been working to fix .
Spiliotes said New Hampshire Democrats are defending Obamacare `` but they are kind of doing it in fits and starts . It 's not a uniform , rah-rah kind of support . ''
In one hopeful sign for Democrats , enrollment in Obamacare in the state of 1.3 million people has reached 40,000 - double the number that had been expected .
Shea-Porter , a former social worker who came to Congress in 2006 campaigning on healthcare reform , said she would never run away from Obamacare because she considers the law to be a `` great joy and triumph . ''
That said , she understands the political perils for Democrats of Obamacare . She lost her seat in Congress in 2010 elections after her vote for the law , only to be re-elected in 2012 . Her 2014 race is considered a toss-up although her Republican opponent has yet to be chosen in a September primary .
Shea-Porter , who met last week with recent healthcare enrollees in Somersworth , said she is aware of the qualms some people have , including wariness of providing personal information on a government website .
But she said the best way to advertise Obamacare 's benefits is to publicize the stories of people who signed up and discovered that `` nothing terrible happened . ''
Patrice Glynn , 54-year-old New Hampshire resident , is already convinced . Glynn , a diabetic , lived without health insurance for nine months after she lost her job and before she signed up on HealthCare.gov . `` If it was so bad , would 40,000 people be on it ? '' she asked . ( Editing by Caren Bohan and Frances Kerry )