We were promised war . Last month , after President Obama nominated Sylvia Mathews Burwell to replace departing Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , Republicans told anyone who would listen that they would seize the opportunity to once again fulminate about the evils of the Affordable Care Act . This spectacle , it was thought , would put already vulnerable Democrats in an awkward position as they ’ d have to once again take sides in the fight over the disastrously unpopular law .
“ Republicans hope to turn Sylvia Mathews Burwell ’ s nomination to run the Department of Health and Human Services — announced by President Barack Obama on Friday — into a proxy war over Obamacare , ” reported Politico on April 11 .
“ Republicans have made it clear they wo n't pass by this midterm election-year opportunity to highlight all of the Affordable Care Act 's problems , ” noted CBS News .
Even Democrats were convinced that Republicans would put Burwell through the wringer . “ They ’ ll be bound and determined to make as much hay out of a confirmation process as they can as they try to put the program in the worst possible light , ” former Harry Reid aide James Manley told Bloomberg Businessweek .
And so yesterday , when Republicans on the Senate Health , Education , Labor , and Pensions Committee got their chance to put Burwell and the Affordable Care Act on the hot seat , the questioning ended up being ... pretty damn boring , actually . The Republicans just don ’ t seem as confident in their anti-Obamacare obsession as they used to be .
There ’ s a good reason why . Between Obama ’ s nomination of Burwell and yesterday ’ s hearing , Obamacare ’ s problems started disappearing . The ACA met and exceeded its goals for the first open enrollment period . We found out that the vast majority of people who signed up for coverage actually paid their premiums . The uninsured rate dipped dramatically .
The Republicans have also been dealing with some Obamacare P.R . fiascoes . A House GOP report claiming a low rate of premium payments for Obamacare enrollees was swiftly and very publicly debunked . The day before Burwell ’ s hearing , House Republicans were embarrassed after health insurance executives they ’ d called to testify to the ACA ’ s failures instead showed up and kicked the legs out from the GOP ’ s critiques of the law .
Take all that together and you can understand why Senate Republicans lacked the ammunition and/or the inclination to put the screws to Burwell .
Instead , ranking member Lamar Alexander used his opening statement to give a tepid , pro-forma attack on the law while offering the Republican bromides of “ more choice ” and “ more freedom ” as alternatives . His message to the nominee ? “ Ms . Burwell , you have a reputation for competence . And I would respectfully suggest you ’ re going to need it. ” John McCain , typically an ornery and irascible critic of anything linked to Obama , stopped by to dump an almost embarrassing heap of praise on Burwell . ( Though he did joke that Burwell was taking over as captain of the Titanic after it had struck the iceberg . )
You can tell Republicans are really going to miss having Kathleen Sebelius to kick around . In the past , Senate Republicans have had little problem stirring up phony controversies about President Obama ’ s high-level political appointees , but Burwell ’ s résumé and good relationship with Capitol Hill make her a difficult target , even as she assumes control of a healthcare law Republicans love to hate .
The flip side to the Republicans ’ lack of fire was the degree to which Democrats on the committee vociferously defended the Affordable Care Act . Most noteworthy among them was Kay Hagan of North Carolina , widely considered the most vulnerable Senate Democrat this election cycle .
Recall that a month ago , the conventional wisdom was that vulnerable Democrats would be put in a tough spot by Burwell ’ s hearings because Obamacare would be back on the front pages . And yet , Hagan used her time to question Burwell about expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act , noting specifically that the state Legislature in North Carolina had blocked the Medicaid expansion :
`` Last year , in North Carolina , our state legislature and governor decided against expanding the state ’ s Medicaid program , and as a result , about 500,000 people who would have qualified for coverage through Medicaid are now not able to do so . [ … ] Director Burwell , can you compare the experience of states that have expanded their Medicaid programs to those that haven ’ t , commenting specifically on the health of newly eligible enrollees and whether there ’ s any increased cost for states or health providers like hospitals ? ''
The content and timing of Hagan ’ s question are noteworthy – the man who led the North Carolina House of Representatives in opposing Medicaid expansion within the state , Thom Tillis , just won the Republican nomination to challenge Hagan in November . Hagan ’ s campaign against Tillis to date has been awkward . Before the GOP primary she tried to move against Tillis on Obamacare from the right , airing a misleading ad that quoted Tillis calling Obamacare “ a great idea. ” It was likely intended to drive conservatives away from Tillis and force a runoff in the primary . That didn ’ t happen , so now she has to transition to a general election strategy .
Her focus on expanding Medicaid makes sense , as it 's one of the more popular parts of Obamacare and safer ground for Democrats this cycle . In North Carolina , 54 percent of voters back the expansion of Medicaid , according to a New York Times poll from last month . Of course , there ’ s no guarantee that strategy will work . North Carolina ’ s political climate is particularly treacherous for Democrats in midterm elections , and even the savviest messaging on Obamacare may not be enough to overcome the structural disadvantages Hagan faces .
Even still , her questioning at Burwell ’ s hearing , and the Republicans ’ wan performance , represent a flipping of the Obamacare script from a month ago , when it was assumed that aggressive Republicans would have uncertain Democrats on the defensive . There ’ s still one more hearing to go , and it ’ s possible that it will provide more fireworks than yesterday ’ s snoozer , but everything that ’ s happened in the past month should make clear that Obamacare ’ s political trajectory has been altered significantly .