WASHINGTON — A chance encounter between two senators on an airplane last month in Maine may be the catalyst for a breakthrough on health care reform .
Since that Sunday afternoon meeting at the Bangor Airport , Florida Democrat Bill Nelson and Maine Republican Susan Collins have been talking to each other about ways of finding a solution on an issue that has deeply divided Congress along party lines .
There 's no grand bargain in sight , but a low-key dinner the two organized for a bipartisan clutch of senators at a Washington restaurant Wednesday night suggests at least a few lawmakers are trying to find a way out of the partisan gridlock .
That effort took on added significance following the stunning defeat early Friday morning of a Republican bill to do away with some parts of the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare , leaving lawmakers scrambling to decide the best way to move forward on health care reform .
The deciding vote was cast by Arizona Republican Sen. John McCain . He had implored colleagues to reach a bipartisan solution during a stirring floor speech he delivered Tuesday , just days after a brain cancer diagnosis .
The following night , Nelson and Collins hosted the dinner at NoPa Kitchen , an American brasserie steps from the International Spy Museum .
The attendees included key Senate moderates such as Republicans Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Mike Rounds of South Dakota , and Democrats Joe Donnelly of Indiana , Claire McCaskill of Missouri , Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire , Mark Warner of Virginia and Joe Manchin of West Virginia .
Collins and Murkowski joined McCain as the only three Republicans to vote against the bill , which died 51-49 .
`` It was a good first start and everyone ( at the dinner ) pretty well knows that the path that we 're on is not going to be the ultimate solution , '' Nelson said Thursday before the bill was killed .
`` We need to reconsider our approach , '' she said in a statement posted on her Twitter account . `` The ACA is flawed and in portions of the country is near collapse . Rather than engaging in partisan exercises , Republicans and Democrats should work together to address these very serious problems . ''
Democratic Senate leader Chuck Schumer said he spoke with GOP House Speaker Paul Ryan of Wisconsin on Friday about working together .
“ There ’ s a thirst to do it , ” Schumer said . “ I just hope the magic moment of John McCain last night has lasting effect and makes us work together in a better way and both sides are to blame for the past . ”
Collins and Nelson , both former insurance commissioners in their states , traded some ideas on the plane ride to Washington during that June flight . Notably , Nelson said , they liked the idea of creating a federal reinsurance fund that would protect the health insurance companies against catastrophe .
Nelson has already introduced a bill to that effect after a Congressional Budget Office analysis concluded it would lower health care premiums 13 % in Florida alone .
The more they talked , the more they realized they could work on other aspects of health care reform given the political stalemate between party leaders .
`` We said let 's do this together , '' Nelson said . `` That led to Susan taking the initiative and inviting everybody that was there to get their ideas . ''
A reinsurance fund was one ideas that was discussed over dinner , he said . So were ways to address cost-sharing reductions that go to help low-income Americans on the individual health care market pay for coverage . The goal was finding ways to stabilize the health insurance markets , he said .
Manchin touted the reinsurance proposal on the Senate floor Thursday . And McCaskill said lawmakers need to act now to ensure people have someplace they can buy insurance next year .
`` We are trying to get the ball moving in a bipartisan way , '' she said . `` So we ’ re trying to start with a bipartisan group and see if we can ’ t come up with some ways to stabilize the markets . ''
The Missouri Democrat said she 's hoping to team up with Republicans and `` start small and then see if we can grow our number . ''
When they left the dinner , there was no commitment to meet again as a formal working group . But Nelson said he expects the senators will keep talking .
In his closing comments , Nelson told the group that their roles as moderates who can lead a bipartisan effort would grow if the repeal bill failed ,
`` There 's going to be a vacuum created in which we ought to offer some of these ideas , '' he said .
███ reporter Nicole Gaudiano of ███ contributed to this story