“ The Supreme Court is the highest court in the nation , and it said that it ’ s a tax , so it ’ s a tax , ” Mr. Romney told CBS News . “ They have spoken . There ’ s no way around that. ” He later repeated his assertion to CNN after a Fourth of July parade here , an idyllic summer retreat on the edge of Lake Winnipesaukee .
The Obama campaign seized on Mr. Romney ’ s words , calling it a glaring contradiction of his chief spokesman ’ s remarks . “ First , he threw his top aide Eric Fehrnstrom under the bus by changing his campaign ’ s position , ” the campaign said . “ Second , he contradicted himself by saying his own Massachusetts mandate wasn ’ t a tax . ”
Mr. Fehrnstrom ’ s comments on Monday , in which he also said that Mr. Romney felt the health care law was unconstitutional and should have been invalidated , were backed up by a campaign news release that day saying that Mr. Romney believed the mandate is “ an unconstitutional penalty ” — notably , not a tax .
The backlash that erupted on Wednesday was a reminder of just how problematic the issue of health care reform is for Mr. Romney . As governor of Massachusetts , he oversaw the 2007 fulfillment of a first-in-the-nation plan requiring that nearly every state resident obtain health insurance or pay a penalty if they failed to do so .
The question of the “ individual mandate , ” as the requirement is known , has emerged as one of the most polarizing national political issues of the day . It helped propel the Tea Party movement to mainstream politics , with conservatives calling it a gross overreach of federal power and an infringement on personal liberty .
Mr. Romney ’ s support of the Massachusetts plan deepened suspicions among many conservatives , who were already wary of him because of the more liberal positions he once took on social issues like abortion and gay rights .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
His comments about the mandate being a tax came on an otherwise slow Fourth of July , ensuring that they dominated the news cycle , albeit one that fewer people than usual were paying attention to .
By insisting the mandate is a tax , Mr. Romney has opened himself up to the criticism that he , too , raised taxes as governor . His campaign has sought to portray him as a tax cutter , despite the Obama campaign ’ s efforts to highlight state fees that rose under Mr. Romney .
In the CBS interview , he insisted that he had not imposed a tax and sought to draw an academic distinction between taxes and penalties .
“ The chief justice in his opinion made it very clear that at the state level , states have the power to put in place mandates , ” he said . “ And as a result , Massachusetts ’ s mandate was a mandate , was a penalty , was described that way by the legislature and by me , and so it stays as it was . ”
Mr. Romney appeared to be making a finer point about the absolute role the Supreme Court plays in setting American law , even if the nuance was lost on many . “ Well , the Supreme Court has the final word and their final word is that Obamacare is a tax . So it ’ s a tax , ” he said .
He also sought to reconcile his comments on Wednesday with his earlier positions — and put himself in line with conservatives — by saying he agreed with the dissent in the Supreme Court case . That dissent , by Anthony M. Kennedy and three more conservative justices — Clarence Thomas , Antonin Scalia and Samuel A. Alito Jr. — called the majority ’ s ruling “ vast judicial overreach ” and argued that the health care law should have been struck down .
Bill Burton , a founder of Priorities USA Action , a “ super PAC ” supporting Mr. Obama , said that “ Romney ’ s ideological gymnastics will both weaken his standing on the health care debate but , more importantly , will further undercut any notion of strength in his leadership . ”
Mr. Romney ’ s remarks proved a distraction from what should have been a day of patriotic photo-ops as he vacationed in New Hampshire . He appeared in the annual Fourth of July parade here , energetically working the crowds . “ Terrific to see you ! ” he said , beaming as he stretched his hands out toward the onlookers , sometimes shaking with both hands . “ Hey , how are you ? Happy Fourth of July ! ”
Though this is clearly Romney country — yard signs for the candidate dot lawns everywhere here , the site of his lake house — there were a few interlopers along the parade route .
Sid Hall of nearby Tuftonboro stood with a group of his friends and family waving “ New Hampshire for Obama ” signs along Main Street . About 20 of them were at the parade , a family ritual that is usually apolitical . But this year he said they decided to pull a quiet act of liberal defiance . “ We do feel a little out of our element , ” he said with a smile .