The firestorm over President Obama 's `` you can keep your plan '' lie now threatens to singe vulnerable Democrats next year , so they 're springing into action to try to force the administration to keep its word . Louisiana 's Mary Landrieu -- an ardent Obamacare supporter -- is scrambling to undo one of the obvious consequences of a law she 's voted to pass , fund , and retain :
Sen. Mary Landrieu said Wednesday she would propose legislation to ensure all Americans could keep their existing insurance coverage under Obamacare , a fresh sign of the political problems the law ’ s rollout has created for congressional Democrats . Landrieu , a Democrat who faces a tough reelection in Louisiana in 2014 , said she would either offer her own bill or formally sign onto another measure that would ensure that the law would not force anyone off of their existing health policies . “ The promise was made , and it should be kept , ” Landrieu said in the Capitol Wednesday . “ And it was our understanding when we voted for that bill that people when they have insurance could keep with what they had . So I ’ m going to be working on that fix . ”
If that truly was Landrieu 's `` understanding '' at the time , she 's a moron . I 'll let Steny Hoyer explain why . The more likely explanation is that she 's a committed Democratic partisan who was willing to do the White House 's bidding in order to drag Obamacare across the finish line via lies and sweetheart buy-offs . Her repetition of the president 's `` keep your plan '' nonsense was either the product of ( a ) unforgivable ignorance or ( b ) self-interested cynicism . The latter option sounds about right because it also explains her sudden reversal on this point . She now professes to be shocked -- shocked ! -- that people ca n't keep their preferred coverage . Republicans have been aggressively challenging Obama 's ludicrous promise since it was first made . Those warnings fell on willfully deaf ears . Responding to Republican accusations that she 's finally kicking up a fuss to cover her own political ass , Landrieu had the audacity to accuse the GOP of `` making things up , '' and said she expects to be re-elected next fall . Your call , Louisiana . Flashback :
In September 2010 , all Senate Democrats , including Landrieu , voted to reject a plan Republicans said would have killed Obama administration regulations that now have resulted in the cancellation of insurance policies .
Senate Democrats also voted unanimously to block a Republican proposal to delay Obamacare 's individual mandate by one year , which led to the recent government shutdown . Now they 're singing a different tune :
The unequivocal promises Democrats made in 2009 have emerged as a political liability for the White House and Democrats in Congress . And some like Sens . Joe Manchin , a Democrat from the red state of West Virginia , and Sen. Jeanne Shaheen ( D-N.H. ) , who faces reelection next year , have either called for an extension of the enrollment period or a delay of major elements of the law .
It 's almost as if they 're a bunch of loyal Harry Reid robots who are frantically scurrying to pose as independent-minded pragmatists now that voters are really angry . Republicans , for their part , seem willing to exploit their Democratic colleagues ' richly-earned heartburn . Sen. Ron Johnson introduced his clever `` If You Like Your Plan , You Can Keep It '' Act yesterday . Here 's part of the pile on press conference :
Johnson and Rubio both know that Obamacare can not withstand this legislation . Not forcing people into more expensive coverage would uproot a major part of the law 's redistributionist cost structure . Johnson 's proposal , like other populist `` solutions '' to the current mess , would make matters worse . But it 's outstanding politics . Will Harry Reid allow a vote on the bipartisan Landrieu-Johnson plan , which simply demands that the president keep his promise to millions of people ? If it passes , Obama will be in the excruciatingly awkward position of being forced to veto a proposal that 's literally named after the most famous promise of his presidency . `` Own it , '' Democrats . I 'll leave you with three points : The Left has taken to arguing that Obama 's breached vow is actually good news because a lot of people 's current plans are `` junk '' coverage that 's been foisted upon them by `` bad apple '' insurers in an `` unregulated '' individual market . Obamacare 's new ( and more expensive ) coverage will be `` better , '' they say . ( 1 ) Even if that were all true , people were still promised the choice of keeping their plan , which millions now can not . ( 2 ) The vast majority of current coverage is not `` junk , '' and the marketplace has been very heavily regulated for years . Some people are being coerced into buying empirically worse coverage for more money , or obtaining benefits they do not need . David Frum calls this phenomenon the `` Obamacare ripoff . '' Obama 's blaming of insurers for dropping existing coverage is another preposterous lie . His law forced them to do so . ( 3 ) Trying to spin the indefensible leads to lots of uncomfortable stammering :