DES MOINES , Iowa — Joni Ernst promised to “ unload ” on Obamacare in a 2014 campaign ad that featured her firing a gun as a narrator described what she would do to the Democratic health care law .
But three years after winning election to the Senate on a vow to seek an “ immediate '' repeal of the law , the Iowa senator is being very careful about pulling that trigger .
“ I am legitimately undecided on this , ” she said here Friday after relentless attempts by questioners in the state ’ s two largest cities to pin her down on the health care bill under consideration in the House in the state ’ s two largest cities . “ And you will hear that from a number of my colleagues , as well . ”
Ernst was part of a Republican wave election that year that brought 12 new GOP members to the Senate and secured a Republican majority . Without exception , the winners used the unpopular law and its bungled launch to propel them to victory .
But as Obamacare ’ s popularity has improved , those same senators are now among the most prominent critics of the Republican proposal to undo the law being pushed by Speaker Paul Ryan and President Donald Trump . A Congressional Budget Office estimate this week that the plan would leave 24 million more people uninsured and increase premiums in the short term has only heightened the anxiety .
Indeed , now Ernst is using the word “ deliberative ” when describing her state of mind about replacing Obamacare . She emphasizes that pre-existing conditions must be covered and that children up to the age of 26 be able to remain on their parents ’ insurance plan , both of which the Republican alternative would require .
Ernst insists she still wants to dismantle the law , but admits it ’ s not quite as simple as the “ repeal and replace ” mantra seemed in 2014 .
“ We have to take this up and move cautiously , ” she said after an event in Cedar Rapids , a Democratic bastion . “ When digging into it , it is much more complicated than simply saying ‘ repeal Obamacare . ’ ”
Health care is clearly top of mind in Iowa , where about 150,000 Iowans have benefitted from the Medicaid expansion under Obamacare and nearly 50,000 more have used subsidies to buy healthcare on the Obamcare exchanges . While the longtime swing state has veered more firmly into the Republican column the past two election cycles , how Ernst handles the Obamacare debate could determine just how tough a reelection challenge she receives in 2020 .
“ You ’ re talking about people getting kicked off health care . If Medicaid is rolled back and Ernst votes for it , they ’ re going to have a reason to be mad , ” said Brad Anderson , Barack Obama ’ s Iowa director in 2012 .
What ’ s remarkable is that Ernst ’ s ambivalence about the current repeal plan is echoed by a majority of the Senate Republican class of 2014 , by and large a very conservative bunch . They ’ re now threatening to make Majority Leader Mitch McConnell ’ s life far more difficult if and when the House sends over its plan to roll back Obamacare ’ s Medicaid expansion and replace its subsidies with skimpier tax credits .
Sens . Cory Gardner of Colorado and Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia are balking at plans to reverse the Medicaid expansion . Sens . Bill Cassidy of Louisiana and Steve Daines of Montana are worried about the CBO projections of fewer people covered and only marginally lower premiums over time .
Those senators all supported a complete repeal of Obamacare in the past .
Sen. Tom Cotton ( R-Ark . ) , a magnet for attention , has been taking the fight to Speaker Paul Ryan ’ s plan , warning that House Republicans could get steamrolled in the next election if they vote for it . During his 2014 campaign , the Republican vowed to “ start over ” on Obamacare — not far off from the advice he ’ s now offering his House counterparts .
“ There ’ s not a reason to rush . We should get it right , ” Cotton said in an interview this week . “ I am speaking out for the people I serve in Arkansas . And I just don ’ t think this bill is going to work for them . ”
Such blunt assessments are not Ernst ’ s style . But people who know her say she ’ s similarly apprehensive about where Republicans are going on health care .
“ The way she ’ s approaching the future of Obamacare is consistent with the job she ’ s been doing as a senator since she 's been elected . Thoughtful , deliberate and going her own way , ” said Matt Strawn , a former Iowa GOP chairman . “ Most of the Republicans I talk to don ’ t want to be in the business of taking away peoples ’ coverage . ”
Ernst bobbed and weaved as she was berated over almost any negative comment she made about the health care law at a pair of rollicking town hall meetings on Friday . Constituents shouted at the former lieutentant colonel in the Iowa National Guard to “ answer the question ! ” — particularly about potential cuts to Medicaid — but Ernst she gave away little about which way she ’ s leaning on perhaps the most consequential decision of her political career .
Sen. Tom Cotton , a magnet for attention , has been taking the fight to Speaker Paul Ryan ’ s health care plan .
Ernst she said that she wants an opportunity to amend the House proposal before committing to anything .
“ I will continue to evaluate this , ” she said in Cedar Rapids . “ I want to make sure it works for Iowans . ''
Some Democratic constituents at the events were nonetheless convinced that she ’ ll fall in line with Republicans , and just didn ’ t want to deliver the bad news to liberal crowds .
“ I would assume so , ” said Perry Howell of Iowa City , who was holding a sign that read , “ Sen . Ernst please don ’ t castrate Obamacare ” — a reference to a viral ad she ran in 2014 vowing to make Washington squeal like a pig . “ She had very politic answers . She knows that she ’ s in a hostile environment . ”
“ She wants to appear cautious . But I don ’ t think she is . How does she not really see what a disaster [ the House bill ] is ? ” fumed Peter Fisher of Solon , who works for a left-leaning think tank .
Ernst ’ s colleagues disagree . They say she ’ s been privately raising concerns centered around the Medicaid expansion — but it ’ s just not like her to throw bombs or invite public party infighting . The first female combat veteran to serve in the Senate , Ernst has cut a low-key , heads-down profile in the Senate as she works to build seniority and a power base in the cliquey chamber .
███ Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
“ She ’ s very concerned about the Medicaid states . Hers is one of them . The present solution in the House is not something that is easily supportable , ” said Sen. John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) , who campaigned tirelessly for Ernst .
Ernst wouldn ’ t go that far in her public remarks at the two town halls followed by lengthy sessions with reporters . Perhaps it ’ s because she was prepared for incoming fire from the swath of Democratic voters who pressed her not just on Obamacare , but also climate change , Planned Parenthood and gun control .
Though Ernst generally handled the combative crowds calmly , not taking apparent offense at the jeers and signs that caricatured her as “ Miss Piggy. ” But she did bristle at one point when someone asked how she could be considering a plan that would cut benefits while she enjoyed generous government insurance .
“ I don ’ t take the Senate insurance . I am on TriCare , ” Ernst responded . “ I don ’ t have the fancy Senate plan . ”
Though Ernst was in unfriendly if not hostile territory , tours of the state ’ s more liberal urban areas are a near-requirement as she follows in the footsteps of Sen. Chuck Grassley ( R-Iowa ) , who ’ s famous for his 99-county tours .
And despite ample evidence that some the questioners coordinated ahead of time — using similar phrases and distributing signs among themselves to egg Ernst on — the senator said the concerns she heard on Friday were all “ valid . ”
“ There ’ s a level of angst out there and most of it centers on health care , ” Ernst said after the event at Drake University in Des Moines . “ It ’ s a very personal issue . It ’ s an emotional issue … I understand that . ''