You 've got questions about the health law ? The Obama administration has some answers . Finally .
Now that the Supreme Court has found the Affordable Care Act constitutional and the president 's re-election made clear that big chunks of the law will take effect Jan. 1 , 2014 , the administration is finally releasing rules of the road that states and insurance companies have been clamoring for .
The big one makes clear how companies will have to comply with anti-discrimination requirements starting in 2014 . The law requires that health insurance be made available to everyone regardless of health status and that people with pre-existing conditions not be charged higher premiums .
Premiums are allowed to vary according to certain factors , including age , smoking status , location and family size . But , and it 's an important but , coverage ca n't be cancelled because of an illness .
`` The proposed rules and guidance we 're releasing today would make it illegal for insurance companies to discriminate against the approximately 129 million Americans with pre-existing health conditions , '' Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told health reporters on a conference call .
The rules could still change some , but there 's not much time for people to complain or ask for tweaks . The comment period ends Dec. 26 .
A second rule lays out more detail on how states and insurance plans will have to determine which benefits to offer . This is the third iteration of the rule regarding so-called essential health benefits . The department said it received more than 11,000 public comments on the first two documents it published on the subject .
This rule continues to stipulate that every health plan for individuals and small businesses offer a core package of benefits . The requirements are grouped into 10 separate categories , including inpatient and outpatient care , maternity care , prescription drugs and laboratory services .
The rule also seeks to establish that the minimum benefits `` be equal in scope to benefits offered by a 'typical employer plan . ' `` The precise plan , however , will vary by state , since generosity of benefits tends to vary by state .
The rule allows states to pick an existing plan as a benchmark for measure new plans . The yardstick plan can be :
( 1 ) the largest plan by enrollment in any of the three largest products in the state 's small group market ; ( 2 ) any of the largest three state employee health benefit plans options by enrollment ; ( 3 ) any of the largest three national Federal Employees Health Benefits Program ( FEHBP ) plan options by enrollment ; or ( 4 ) the largest insured commercial HMO in the state .
If a state does n't select a benchmark plan , HHS will use option 1 , the largest plan for small groups in the state .
The National Retail Federation was generally pleased with the administration 's action . `` We appreciate the Administration 's outreach and general restraint in these proposed regulations , '' said NRF 's Neil Trautwein in a statement . `` It is important that essential health benefits echo available market coverage today . More extensive but unaffordable coverage would help no one in the end . ''
The rule also lays out a complex formula to help consumers figure out how much each plan ( labeled a little like Olympic medals ) will cover in medical bills . Generally , bronze plans will cover 60 percent of costs , silver plans 70 percent , gold plans 80 percent and platinum plans 90 percent .
Finally , the administration is laying out rules to govern the use of employer-provided `` wellness programs . '' These popular programs encourage employees to meet certain health goals , such as losing weight , quitting smoking , or lowering cholesterol .
The rules spell out that programs must not be `` overly burdensome '' and must provide a `` reasonable alternative means of qualifying for the reward '' for individuals whose medical conditions `` make it unreasonably difficult , or for whom it is medically inadvisable , to meet the specified health-related standard . ''