President Trump will end key payments to insurers selling ObamaCare plans , the White House announced late Thursday , marking Trump 's most aggressive move yet to dismantle the law after multiple GOP efforts to repeal and replace it failed this year .
The Trump administration has continued making the the disbursements to insurers , known as cost-sharing reduction payments , on a monthly basis . But Trump had consistently threatened to end the payments , which are worth an estimated $ 7 billion this year .
`` Based on guidance from the Department of Justice , the Department of Health and Human Services has concluded that there is no appropriation for cost-sharing reduction payments to insurance companies under Obamacare . In light of this analysis , the Government can not lawfully make the cost-sharing reduction payments , '' the White House said in a statement late Thursday night .
The payments were created as part of the Affordable Care Act but were then the subject of a lawsuit by House Republicans during the Obama administration . A federal court ruled the payments were being made illegally , but the Obama administration appealed .
Congress could still decide to appropriate the payments , and there is bipartisan agreement that they should be made . But no action has been taken , and some Republicans are hesitant to vote for what they see as a bailout of ObamaCare .
`` The bailout of insurance companies through these unlawful payments is yet another example of how the previous administration abused taxpayer dollars and skirted the law to prop up a broken system . Congress needs to repeal and replace the disastrous Obamacare law and provide real relief to the American people , '' White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said .
The administration 's decision is likely to lead to lawsuits . It also puts enormous pressure on lawmakers to reach a deal on funding the payments , adding yet another partisan battle to an already full calendar .
Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles ( Chuck ) Ellis SchumerSchumer : Trump 's reported Russian meddling remarks among 'most disturbing things ' yet Senate Democrats say top NRA officials knew about Kremlin ties Office of Director of National Intelligence not planning to release whistleblower complaint MORE ( D-N.Y. ) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) issued a joint statement calling the decision a `` spiteful act of vast , pointless sabotage ... now , millions of hard-working American families will suffer just because President Trump wants them to . ''
Meanwhile , Speaker Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanDemocrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Three-way clash set to dominate Democratic debate Krystal Ball touts Sanders odds in Texas MORE ( R-Wis. ) praised the decision to end the Obama administration 's appeal of the subsidies .
`` Today ’ s decision ... preserves a monumental affirmation of Congress ’ s authority and the separation of powers , '' Ryan said in a statement . `` Obamacare has proven itself to be a fatally flawed law , and the House will continue to work with the Trump administration to provide the American people a better system . ”
Cutting off the subsidies could throw the ObamaCare marketplace into chaos .
The Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) said in August that about 1 million additional people would be uninsured in 2018 and insurance companies would raise premium prices by about 20 percent for ObamaCare plans if the payments were cut off .
The CBO also said halting the payments would increase the federal deficit by $ 194 billion through 2026 , largely because federal assistance to buy ObamaCare plans rises when premiums do .
The payments help low-income people afford co-pays , deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs associated with health insurance policies . Insurers have called the payments critical , saying that without them , they would have to massively increase premiums or exit the individual market .
Many insurers have already priced their plans for the coming open enrollment period , which begins Nov. 1 .
The leaders of Senate Health Committee have been working toward a bipartisan deal to fund the payments for two years in order to stabilize the markets in the short term .
But progress was halted when lawmakers tried to pass a last-ditch ObamaCare repeal bill from Sens . Lindsey Graham Lindsey Olin GrahamIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules Democrats demand Barr , senior officials testify on Ukraine ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff MORE ( R-S.C. ) and Bill Cassidy William ( Bill ) Morgan CassidyTo win the federal paid family leave debate , allow states to lead the way Democrats divided on surprise medical bill fix America 's newest comedy troupe : House GOP MORE ( R-La . ) last month , and the sides have still not reached an agreement .
The decision on the payments comes after Trump on Thursday signed an executive order aimed at loosening ObamaCare restrictions on insurance plans , which also could help destabilize the law .