NEW ORLEANS ( ███ ) - A federal appeals court panel appeared sympathetic on Tuesday to Republican efforts to overturn Obamacare , expressing skepticism to Democratic calls to overturn the ruling of a Texas judge who found the landmark U.S. healthcare reform law unconstitutional .
Two Republican-appointed members of the three-judge panel of the 5th U.S . Circuit Court of Appeals sharply questioned lawyers for a group of Democratic state attorneys general and the Democratic-led U.S. House of Representatives defending the Affordable Care Act .
Republicans including President Donald Trump have repeatedly and unsuccessfully tried to repeal the ACA since it was passed in 2010 . The Justice Department would normally defend a federal law , but Trump ’ s administration has declined to do so in a challenge by 18 Republican-led states .
The court made no decision on Tuesday . Whichever way it rules , the decision could prompt an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court , potentially setting up a major legal battle over healthcare for tens of millions of Americans in the midst of the 2020 U.S. presidential election .
The judges focused on whether Obamacare lost its legal justification after Trump in 2017 signed a law that eliminated a tax penalty used to enforce the law ’ s mandate that all Americans buy health insurance .
“ If you no longer have the tax , why isn ’ t it unconstitutional ? ” Judge Jennifer Elrod , who was appointed by Republican President George W. Bush , asked during Tuesday ’ s hearing on a sweltering day in New Orleans .
Judge Kurt Engelhardt , a Trump appointee , asked why if Congress thought the law had so many “ excellent ideas ” unrelated to its “ linchpin ” mandate , it would not have taken steps to ensure the rest of the law would not be struck down as well .
“ There ’ s a political solution here that you , various parties are asking this court to roll up its sleeves and get involved in , ” Engelhardt said .
A coalition of Democratic state attorneys general led by California ’ s Xavier Becerra stepped up to defend the signature achievement of Trump ’ s Democratic predecessor , Barack Obama . The House of Representatives intervened after Democrats won control in the November midterm elections , during which many focused their campaigns on defending Obamacare .
U.S. Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D-NY ) , holding a picture of head-injury victim Emilie Saltzman , and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi ( D-CA ) lead fellow congressional Democrats for remarks on health care coverage of pre-existing conditions , on the steps of the U.S. Capitol in Washington , U.S. July 9 , 2019 . ███/Jonathan Ernst
Republican opponents call the law an unwarranted intervention by government in health insurance markets , while supporters say striking it down would threaten the healthcare of 20 million people who have gained insurance since its enactment .
In 2012 , a divided U.S. Supreme Court upheld most of its provisions , including the individual mandate , which requires people to obtain insurance or pay a penalty .
The mandate compelled healthy people to buy insurance to offset sicker patients ’ costs after Obamacare barred insurers from denying coverage to people with pre-existing health conditions .
The Supreme Court ’ s conservative majority found Congress could not constitutionally order people to buy insurance . But Chief Justice John Roberts joined the court ’ s four liberal members to hold the mandate was a valid exercise of Congress ’ tax power .
After Trump signed a tax bill passed by a Republican-led Congress that reduced the tax penalty to zero dollars , a coalition of Republican-led states headed by Texas sued , alleging the tax penalty ’ s elimination rendered Obamacare unconstitutional .
In December 2018 , U.S. District Judge Reed O ’ Connor in Fort Worth , Texas , agreed . O ’ Connor , who was also nominated by George W. Bush , said that because Obamacare called the mandate “ essential , ” the entire law must be struck down .
Kyle Hawkins , Texas ’ solicitor general , said “ essential ” language was all the 5th Circuit needed to look at to see the entire law should be struck down . “ The best evidence is the text itself , ” he said .
Douglas Letter , the House of Representatives ’ general counsel , argued that since Congress had not repealed the rest of Obamacare , it never intended to invalidate the entire law .
“ Courts are required to give a statute a constitutional interpretation if you can and save everything unless Congress prefers no statute , ” he argued .
The Justice Department initially argued the mandate was unconstitutional but most of Obamacare could be severed from it . But it argued on appeal that rest of the law can not be severed .
Pressed by Elrod on the administration ’ s plans if Obamacare is struck down , August Flentje , a Justice Department lawyer , said , “ A lot of this stuff would need to get sorted out , and it ’ s complicated . ”