States running their own Obamacare insurance exchanges are reporting a significant surge in sign-ups just four days before the first major enrollment deadline .
The increase has ranged from 30 percent to 40 percent in the past few weeks , according to state officials who briefed reporters Wednesday . Monday is the last day to sign up for a plan that will guarantee health coverage effective Jan. 1 .
California , which has one of the most successful programs , averaged 15,000 enrollments a day last week , up from an average 7,000 a day the week before , state officials said . In all of November , 80,000 Californians picked a plan ; in the first week of December , 50,000 signed up .
RELATED : Obamacare Countdown - One Week to First Major Enrollment Deadline
`` We are all still in the first inning of a nine-inning game , '' Covered California executive director Peter Lee said . `` Friends are telling friends ; family are telling family . … We are quite confident that as we go into the next half of enrollment that we will build momentum . ''
In Kentucky , enrollments are up 40 percent since Thanksgiving , straining the state 's exchange and forcing administrators to hire dozens of extra call-center workers and application processors . `` We are seeing about 3,000 people a day approved for Medicaid or a [ qualified health plan ] , '' Kentucky Health Benefit Exchange executive director Carrie Banahan said . `` We started out a few weeks ago at about a thousand per day . ''
In New York , phones at marketplace call centers are ringing off the hook , averaging between 1,200 to 1,500 calls per hour , officials say . Roughly 4,500 people are enrolling in coverage each day , state Department of Health counsel Lisa Sbrana said .
In the past week alone , they 've seen a 34 percent increase in people signing up .
`` We 're really happy , '' Sbrana said . `` We 're seeing a good mix of enrollees across age groups . ''
The uptick in demand has also been seen in Connecticut , where 47,000 people have enrolled through the exchange since October and they 're now adding an average 1,400 people a day .
`` One area things are not going as well for us is the call center , '' Access Health Connecticut CEO Kevin Counihan said . `` We did n't staff up fast enough for the calls '' before the Dec. 23 deadline .
Fourteen states plus the District of Columbia operate their own online insurance exchanges under the Affordable Care Act . Some states have been less successful with enrollments through the program than others . Marketplace websites in Maryland , Oregon , Minnesota and Hawaii , for example , have been plagued with technical problems similar to those that have hampered the federal HealthCare.gov , stunting enrollment .
`` We 've had some challenges , '' Washington Health Benefit Exchange CEO Richard Onizuka said . `` Our system was out most of the first week of December . ''
RELATED : Sebelius Orders Probe of Obamacare Launch - 'Flawed , Failed , Frustrating '