Shortly following Donald Trump ’ s upset victory in November , the Obama administration and the legacy media began telling us that Obamacare enrollment was skyrocketing due to fear of the president-elect ’ s pledge to repeal the law . Three days after the election , for example , CNN produced this headline : “ Obamacare sign-ups surge after Trump ’ s election. ” Obama himself boasted in December about “ the biggest day ever for Healthcare.gov. ” Well , like everything else these people told us , this was hogwash . The actual signup numbers are in , and they are the lowest ever . What happened ? CNN reports that the slump was caused by… er… Trump .
That ’ s right , the same “ news ” outlet that claimed fear of Trump was driving enrollments to record highs now says that the President is the cause of Obamacare ’ s worst signup year ever . And former Obama administration officials are singing the same refrain . The Hill reports , “ A former Obama administration official estimates that nearly 500,000 people missed out on ObamaCare enrollment this year because of moves by the Trump administration. ” This comes from Joshua Peck , former chief marketing officer for HealthCare.gov , who claims that Trump accomplished this dark deed by pulling a few ads at the end of the enrollment period .
This fiction ignores the outrageous premiums and deductibles that characterized the 2017 Obamacare plans . It also fails to acknowledge the paucity of choices offered by the exchanges . As the Daily Signal points out , “ The Heritage Foundation finds that insurer competition in the Obamacare exchanges is worse than ever in 2017 , with 70 percent of counties having only one or two insurers selling coverage. ” This is nearly twice the number of counties that offered so few choices last year . Note to Mr. Peck and anyone else afflicted with economic illiteracy — when you raise prices ( on health plans or widgets ) while reducing choice , you get fewer buyers .
And that is precisely what happened . The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) , reported Friday that the cost of the plans offered by HealthCare.gov experienced “ a 25 percent increase over the previous year in the average premium… as well as a 28 percent decline in the number of [ insurers ] participating over the past year. ” Thus , the paltry 9.2 million signup total not only falls short of last year ’ s figure , it continues Obamacare ’ s consistent record of failing to hit its enrollment targets . As Jeffrey Anderson wrote in the Weekly Standard last year , the shortfall had already reached 24 million before the 2017 enrollment period had begun :
Three years ago , on the eve of Obamacare ’ s implementation , the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) projected that President Obama ’ s centerpiece legislation would result in an average of 201 million people having private health insurance in any given month of 2016 . Now that 2016 is here , the CBO says that just 177 million people , on average , will have private health insurance in any given month of this year — a shortfall of 24 million people .
This failure to hit its enrollment goals has plagued Obamacare since its comically inept rollout . As Sharyl Attkisson wrote six months after the launch , the actual number of Americans newly insured by the “ Affordable Care Act ” fell far short of the 8 million figure promulgated by the Obama administration : “ Assuming the most positive estimates — that 85 percent of the 8 million enrollees have paid their premiums and 43 percent had coverage before — the newly insured would number only about 3.9 million. ” Even if the administration ’ s estimate had not been deliberately fudged , it would have amounted to well under a third of CMS projections .
The enrollment pace was nearly as lethargic during Obamacare ’ s second enrollment period as it had been for 2014 , and the gory details of the 2016 plan year are provided above . In other words , lackluster signup totals have constituted an ongoing failure of the “ Affordable Care Act ” since it was first foisted on an unwilling electorate . Yet the legacy media and various refugees from the Obama administration still expect us to believe that the sorry signup performance reported Friday by CMS is somehow the fault of a president who took office three weeks ago . As the New York Times puts it , “ Drop in Late Obamacare Enrollment Appears to Be a Trump Effect . ”
This is not atypical of the wacky logic employed by Obamacare apologists . Jonathan Chait , for example , gives the “ Affordable Care Act ” credit for the following : “ Medical inflation has dropped to its lowest level in decades. ” The only problem with this claim , according to CMS , is that this decline in health care inflation began in 2003 . Presumably , Chait believes that the White House is equipped with a “ wayback machine ” that allowed President Obama to retroactively fix inflation and now allows President Trump to go back in time to retard Obamacare enrollments . Using this kind of logic , he concludes that the Republicans now “ own Obamacare . ”
That , by the way , is where all this “ Trump effect ” nonsense is going . The Democrats and their media mouthpieces know that Obamacare has decimated their party . Thus , they desperately want to deed it over to Trump and the GOP . They couldn ’ t care less if their reasoning fails to pass the laugh test or how many rhetorical pirouettes they must execute . They just want to get rid of the damned thing . The voters , however , know the “ Affordable Care Act ” has made their lives worse and that no Republican voted for the law — not one . The Democrats own Obamacare , and ( please pardon the mixed metaphor ) it ’ s a bear market for white elephants right about now .