Sen. Kamala Harris Kamala Devi HarrisHarris calls for judicial nominee freeze during impeachment trial Warren-Sanders dispute thrusts gender into 2020 spotlight Deval Patrick knocks lack of diversity in Democratic debate MORE ’ s ( D-Calif. ) town hall Monday night on CNN got the network its highest ratings ever for such an event with an individual election candidate , according to the network .
“ In total viewers , the Town Hall averaged 1.957 million , a +75 % advantage over CNN 's prior four ( 1.119 million ) , '' CNN said in a statement .
Harris ’ s presidential campaign was quick to tout the ratings on Twitter .
The California Democrat is hoping to capitalize on high early fundraising numbers and enthusiasm from the base before the Democratic primary field , which already includes a handful of other high-profile candidates , gets even more crowded .
It was reported last week that the Harris campaign raised more than $ 1.5 million in online donations in the 24 hours since she announced her candidacy for president . She also held a highly publicized rally Sunday to officially kick off her presidential bid .
With the increased attention , recent polling has shown Harris moving up in the primary race among possible contenders such as former Vice President Joe Biden Joe Biden Parnas : U.S. ambassador to Ukraine removed to clear path for investigations into Bidens Five takeaways from Parnas 's Maddow interview Parnas : Trump threatened to withhold more than just military aid to Ukraine MORE , Sen Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersWarren to Sanders : ' I think you called me a liar on national TV ' Warren-Sanders fight raises alarm on the left On The Money — Presented by Wells Fargo — Trump signs first phase of US-China trade deal | Senate to vote Thursday on Canada , Mexico deal | IRS provides relief for those with discharged student loans MORE and former Rep. Beto O ’ Rourke ( D-Texas ) .
Sens . Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann WarrenWarren to Sanders : ' I think you called me a liar on national TV ' Warren-Sanders fight raises alarm on the left Overnight Health Care : Health insurers urge Supreme Court to take ObamaCare case | Lawmakers press Trump officials to change marijuana rules | Bloomberg vows to ban flavored e-cigs if elected MORE ( D-Mass . ) and Kirsten Gillibrand Kirsten GillibrandImpeachment trial weighs on 2020 Democrats On The Money : Senate panel advances Trump 's new NAFTA despite GOP gripes | Trade deficit falls to three-year low | Senate confirms Trump pick for small business chief Pete Buttigieg to appear in Fox News town hall MORE ( D-N.Y. ) , former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro , Rep. Tulsi Gabbard Tulsi GabbardGabbard on personal meeting with Sanders : 'He showed me the greatest respect ' Warren-Sanders dispute thrusts gender into 2020 spotlight Deval Patrick knocks lack of diversity in Democratic debate MORE ( D-Hawaii ) and others have either declared their candidacy or suggested they intend to run in 2020 .
Harris is expected to be one of as many as 30 candidates in the Democratic field , many of whom will try to angle their appeals to the progressive wing of the party .