Much — if not all — of this funding was in the pipeline well before March . | AP photos , Jay Westcott/███ HHS pushes out cash ahead of ruling
Conservatives wanted the White House to stop spending on the health care law until the Supreme Court rules on whether it ’ s constitutional .
But the administration has forged ahead , spending at least $ 2.7 billion since oral arguments in the case ended on March 28 . That ’ s more than double the amount that was handed out in the three-month period leading up to the arguments , according to a ███ review of funding announcements from the Department of Health and Human Services .
While much — if not all — of this funding was in the pipeline well before March , the timeline for handing out specific funds is not set in stone , which gives the agency leeway over the kinds of dollars it has been handing out .
And the stakes have increased as the date of a Supreme Court ruling approaches , because money that is spent most likely won ’ t have to be repaid . But remaining funds will dry up if the court strikes down the law .
The court is expected to announce its decision this week .
The $ 2.7 billion includes grants and awards that have been handed out since the Supreme Court arguments — including more than $ 90 million in funds for health insurance cooperatives that HHS announced Friday .
By contrast , the administration gave out about $ 1 billion in grants , loans and other awards during the three months before the Supreme Court arguments .
An HHS spokesperson strongly disputed the idea that there was any change in the timeline because of the court .
“ This story is flat-out wrong . Since the passage of the Affordable Care Act more than two years ago , we have worked continuously to implement the law and to educate the American people about the benefits , ” the spokesperson said . “ The premise of the story does not take into account the timeline of implementation . ”
Some Republicans have been pushing to halt all implementation of the law until the Supreme Court ruling comes out . Last year , for example , a draft of the House Labor-HHS appropriations bill , which provides funding for the health care agencies , would have frozen all spending on health reform until the court ruled . And Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison ( R-Texas ) has been pushing a bill that would have blocked any more implementation of the law before the ruling .
Rep. Denny Rehberg ( R-Mont . ) , chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor , HHS , Education and Related Agencies , who authored the appropriations bill that would have put implementation funding on hold , blasted the latest HHS spending in a statement provided to ███ .
“ It was irresponsible to spend a single dollar implementing the law before the Supreme Court rules , and I fought hard to prevent that money from being spent , ” Rehberg said .