If Health Law Falls , Coverage For Young Adults Gets Tricky
When it comes to health care , even the seemingly easy things become hard .
Take coverage for young adults under the Affordable Care Act .
It 's one of the most successful — and popular — provisions of the law that have taken effect so far . Earlier this week the Obama administration announced that between September 2010 and the end of 2011 , more than 3 million young adults under age 26 who would otherwise have gone without insurance gained coverage by remaining on their parents ' health plans .
Last week , major health insurance companies , including United Healthcare , Aetna and Humana , announced they would continue to offer the benefit even if the Supreme Court strikes down the law when it issues its ruling , which is expected next week . Even some Republicans say they support the idea of letting young people remain on their parents ' health plans .
But it turns out that might not be so easy .
`` This could have adverse tax consequences , both to the employee whose child is on the plan and to the employer , for purposes of payroll taxes , '' said James Klein , president of the American Benefits Council , which represents large-employer health plans and companies that provide services to those plans .
How 's that ? Well , says Klein , the problem is that lots of those young adults are no longer dependents of their parents for tax purposes . So if the employer continues to provide coverage to that adult child , the value of that insurance could be considered taxable income to the parent . Under the health law , such coverage is not treated as taxable income .
As an example , he says , `` if the value of adding a child onto your policy is $ 500 a month , that 's $ 6,000 a year . So that 's $ 6,000 of extra income on which you would be taxed , plus the payroll taxes that you the employee and the employer would be paying on behalf of that $ 6,000 . ''
And while that could be a lot of money for some people , he says , the money is only part of the problem .
`` It 's the utter confusion that this would cause for employers . Because after all , there would be some 24-year-old kids who are legal dependents , for whom there would be no income tax owed , '' Klein said . `` And then there would be others for whom they 're not legal dependents and so there would be tax that would be owed . It would be extraordinarily confusing . ''
Then there 's the question of whether workers and employers might owe back taxes for coverage that 's been provided already . Klein says the Obama administration could theoretically take care of the problem by having the IRS issue some sort of clarification . But he worries that like everything else to do with the health law , even that could get caught up in partisan politics .
`` I 'm just afraid that rather than a quick resolution that provides clarity , both sides could arguably use this for their political benefit , '' he said .