A research group found that Romney 's plan would be worse than doing nothing . Study : 72M uninsured under Mitt plan
Mitt Romney ’ s health care plan wouldn ’ t just insure fewer people than “ Obamacare ” — it would make the uninsured problem worse than it would have been if the law had never passed , according to a comparison of the two plans by a research group with a history of pro- “ Obamacare ” studies .
The analysis by the Commonwealth Fund , a New York-based health care research foundation , found that under Romney ’ s health care plan , the uninsured population would soar to 72 million by 2022 — 12 million higher than if nothing had been done at all .
By contrast , if President Barack Obama ’ s health care law is fully implemented — including complete state participation in the now voluntary Medicaid expansion — the number of uninsured people would drop from 47.9 million in 2011 to about 27.1 million people in 2022 , the report estimated .
The Commonwealth Fund produces studies that often cast the national health care law in a favorable light , and spotlight the shortcomings of the American health care system compared to other countries .
The number of insured Americans would rise in every age group under the Affordable Care Act and fall in every group under Romney ’ s plan , Sara Collins , vice president for Commonwealth ’ s affordable health insurance program , told reporters in a conference call Monday .
The report says most of the difference is due to Romney ’ s plans for Medicaid , which he would turn into block grants , and the expansion of Medicaid that ’ s planned under the ACA . The gap between those two proposals accounts for about 80 percent of the difference in their impact on the uninsured , according to the analysis .
The Commonwealth Fund report is based on research by MIT economist Jonathan Gruber , who worked on both the federal and Massachusetts health reform laws , and is the latest dire forecast from ACA sympathizers about health care under a Romney administration .
The Romney campaign said the “ flawed report ” misstates Romney ’ s proposals and depicts “ a fantasy world where Obamacare has been a success . ”
“ Under ObamaCare , Americans have seen their insurance premiums increase , small businesses are facing massive tax increases , and seniors will have reduced access to Medicare services , ” Ryan Williams , a Romney spokesman , wrote in an email to ███ . “ The American people did not want this law , our country can not afford this law , and when Mitt Romney becomes president he will repeal it and replace it with common-sense , patient-centered reforms that strengthen our health care system . ”
CORRECTION : Corrected by : Vivyan Tran @ 10/02/2012 03:20 PM CORRECTION : This story has been updated to correct the report ’ s assumption of the growth rate in Romney ’ s Medicaid block grant proposal , which was described incorrectly in the Commonwealth Fund ’ s own report . The group ’ s estimate assumed that the block grants would grow at the rate of the Consumer Price Index plus 1 percent .