( CNN ) - As the Obama administration and Democrats gear up to promote the president 's sweeping health care reform as a winning solution in the next election cycle , Republicans are gearing up to prove the opposite .
Sen. Pat Roberts , R-Kansas , argued Saturday in the GOP 's weekly address that Obamacare is a law crafted out of political maneuvering and has an ill-fated future for Americans .
“ Health care as you know it will change , '' he said . `` Simply put , will you and your family have the health insurance you need to ensure your well-being ? ''
He pointed to a recent report from the Government Accounting Office that found problems with the exchanges and cautioned the system may not be up and running by October 1 , the start date for open enrollment for insurance plans .
`` Time is running out . As one of the Democrat authors of the bill said , American families are facing ' a train wreck ' , '' Roberts said . He was referring to Sen. Max Baucus of Montana who told Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius he was concerned the public was not being educated enough before the rollout of the plans .
`` Too little is known about the exchanges , '' Roberts argued . `` The fear is that only the sick will pay to join the exchange without young healthy people to foot the bill , then all costs will further skyrocket . ''
Obama defended the law as recently as June 7 , when he touted the Affordable Care Act 's success in California . Pointing out that many opponents predicted costs would rise and choice would decrease , the president rattled off statistics showing more insurers have applied to enter the California insurance marketplace when it opens in October , and that estimated premiums have been lower than expected .
But Roberts said Saturday that lawmakers should have done more in 2010 to `` create real change '' as the bill was being written .
`` We should have expanded access to care for those in need while protecting the all-important relationship between you and your doctor , '' he said .
He 's introducing his own bill in the Senate to ensure the public exchanges and fee for those who do n't have insurance will cease to exist if the program is n't ready by October .
`` We need to make the right kind of change to the health care system… change that does n't include higher taxes , higher premiums and decision-making by government bureaucrats rather than our own doctors , '' he said .
More than half of Americans oppose the law . According to a CNN/ORC International Poll last month , 43 % favor the Affordable Care Act , while 54 % oppose it . It 's worth noting that a significant chunk of the opposition comes from people who say the law does not go far enough . Overall , 35 % oppose the law because it is too liberal ; 16 % say they oppose it because it is not liberal enough .