The Obama administration has announced a delay in next year 's Obamacare enrollment period ( known as open enrollment in the private sector ) until after the 2014 midterm elections are over . This change does not effect those trying to sign up now and does not delay a fine from going into effect for those who do n't sign up for some kind health insurance by early next year . More from Fox News :
The Obama administration plans to delay the start of next year 's ObamaCare enrollment period , a move pitched as a way to give consumers and insurance companies more time to study their options -- but which also conveniently pushes the second round of enrollment past the 2014 midterm elections .
A Department of Health and Human Services official confirmed the change to Fox News . The decision does not affect those trying to enroll this year , despite the myriad problems with the launch of the law and HealthCare.gov . Rather , it affects those who will sign up late next year for 2015 coverage .
The administration will allow consumers to start signing up on Nov. 15 , 2014 , as opposed to Oct. 15 . Enrollment will last until Jan. 15 , 2015 , instead of Dec. 7 .
An HHS official told Fox News the move will give insurers `` the benefit of more time to evaluate their experiences during the 2014 plan year '' and let them take into account late-filing customers when setting their 2015 rates .
The official added : `` This change is good news for consumers , who will have more time to learn about plans before enrolling and an open enrollment period that 's a week longer . ''
Despite claiming this move is about give consumers `` more time '' to make a decision about a health plan , this delay in sign up is purely to further protect vulnerable Democrats who are up for re-election in 2014 . Healthcare experts have warned rate shock for 2015 will be worst than for 2014 . Those rates will be submitted to Health and Human Services in April 2014 . Open enrollment prior to the 2014 elections , when consumers become very focused on the cost of their health insurance plans , would be another political nightmare for Obamacare supporters up for reelection as healthcare premiums continue to skyrocket .