The arrival of Jan. 1 will be a big event for Obama ’ s health care law . A nervous New Year 's for Obamacare
So January has finally arrived , maybe New Year ’ s Eve didn ’ t end so well for you , and you ’ ve decided to take your brand-new Obamacare coverage out for a test drive .
Except — oops — maybe your new health insurer doesn ’ t have any record of you . Or you didn ’ t get the coverage you thought you were getting .
The arrival of Jan. 1 will be a big event for President Barack Obama ’ s health care law — the day when Americans across the country can use their new health insurance for the first time . It could be a day of badly needed success stories , if people have a smooth time and sing the praises of their new private health insurance or Medicaid coverage .
But it could also be a day of hiccups , and if there ’ s any reality to some of the new problems health care analysts have been warning about — like people who thought they were covered but find out they ’ re not , or can ’ t sign up in time to replace their canceled coverage — that ’ s when we could start hearing about them .
If the Affordable Care Act can get through its first days of actual health coverage without big eruptions , the Obama administration may finally be able to move toward a narrative that focuses on how the law can work . But if it has to spend those days putting out more fires , the phrase “ troubled rollout ” won ’ t be going away anytime soon .
Here ’ s a guide to the “ ruh roh ” moments health care experts will be watching for next week :
One potential problem that ’ s getting a lot of White House attention , thanks to all of the canceled health insurance policies , is that there could be people who tried to replace their old coverage with insurance that meets Obamacare standards — but they couldn ’ t get it done in time and they ’ ll end up with no coverage on Jan. 1 .
The Obama administration estimates that nearly half a million people may not have been able to replace their canceled coverage — not as many as there could have been , given the larger estimates of all canceled policies , but still a problem . And if they ’ re not taken care of , it won ’ t take long for the people who suddenly face a lapse in coverage to complain loudly about it and put real faces on the issue .
The administration has been scrambling to get on top of that problem . That ’ s one reason it suddenly pushed back the enrollment deadline by a day , letting people sign up as late as Tuesday — rather than Monday — so anyone stuck in last-minute Web traffic could still get health insurance through the federal Obamacare website .
Last week , it announced that anyone whose plan was canceled will be able to buy a catastrophic health plan — a cheaper , scaled-back insurance policy — if they haven ’ t been able to find another replacement . They ’ ll also be exempt from the law ’ s individual mandate , at least temporarily .
It has also extended the deadlines for people to enroll and persuade insurers to cut their new customers even more slack when they pay their first premium . America ’ s Health Insurance Plans , the main health insurance trade group , has announced that as long as people pay their premium by Jan. 10 , insurers will consider them covered as of Jan. 1 .
The problem , though , is that all of the last-minute rule changes could create confusion and add to the mounting stress on insurers to process late enrollments quickly — so some could still fall through the cracks .
“ The concern about the constantly changing deadlines is that it ’ s going to make it more difficult to make sure people get enrolled in their coverage and that the coverage starts on Jan. 1 , ” said AHIP spokesman Robert Zirkelbach . “ There ’ s a very short time period to do all the steps that are necessary to get people enrolled . ”
For the Obama administration , the constant changes are an acceptable risk to get as many people enrolled as possible . Insurers and insurance regulators had been worried that not everyone would be able to finish signing up in time , even with the repairs to the federal website .
The threat of a coverage gap for a significant number of people is a “ big concern , ” said Ohio Lt. Gov . Mary Taylor , who also serves as the state ’ s insurance commissioner and is a vocal Obamacare critic .
Administration officials are less worried , noting that anyone who went to the trouble to buy individual health insurance — a difficult , time-consuming process — would be strongly motivated to replace it . But they ’ re watching the situation closely , and they say they ’ re trying to give people as many options as possible .
Many of the people with canceled policies could have replaced their coverage in other ways , like taking the replacements offered by their insurers or buying directly from other insurance companies . And Obama ’ s decision to allow insurers to extend old policies will help consumers in some states , though not all states are cooperating .
But the likelihood is that at least some would have needed to use the Obamacare website . Jon Kingsdale , a consultant who ran the Massachusetts health insurance exchange that predated Obamacare , said the relatively low enrollment numbers before December suggest that a lot of people may have tried to sign up and failed .
With all of the problems with the federal HealthCare.gov website , which serves 36 states , there ’ s a lingering possibility that people who thought they had signed up for coverage will find that their insurer has no record of them .
During the website ’ s rockiest weeks in October and early November , the “ back end ” of the site — the part insurers deal with — was spitting out error-filled enrollment records , and in some cases none at all . That raised fears of a repeat of the experience when Medicare Part D was launched , when seniors showed up at pharmacies to have their prescriptions filled and found that there was no record that they had coverage .
The Obama administration says its website repairs have pretty much stopped those errors , but that still leaves nearly 15,000 consumers who didn ’ t have an enrollment record generated at all .
The administration has been reaching out to consumers who have tried to sign up on HealthCare.gov , sending emails reminding them to pay their premium and to contact their insurer if they haven ’ t received an insurance card — a preventive measure in case the insurer didn ’ t get their records . But it won ’ t be clear until January whether the administration and insurers have managed to find all of those customers .
There are also a lot of variations on that theme , Kingsdale said : “ ‘ I got my coverage , but my son didn ’ t . I got coverage , but it ’ s the wrong kind. ’ That ’ s frankly not too unusual for the start of a big program like this . ”
Even if that happens , the problems aren ’ t likely to be as urgent as they were with the Medicare Part D rollout , according to Alan Weil of the National Academy of State Health Policy . With that launch , huge numbers of low-income seniors were being switched from Medicaid to Medicare , and needed their prescriptions filled right away .
Molly Cooke , president of the American College of Physicians , said doctors will probably do what they usually do for patients who can ’ t prove they have health insurance : Set priorities , take care of the urgent care needs first , but try to postpone care that isn ’ t so time-critical .
For someone with high blood pressure who ’ s not sure whether their Obamacare coverage is in effect , for example , most doctors would say the patient needs to get started on antihypertensive drugs right away and the insurance can be sorted out later . But there ’ s “ no real advantage ” to getting other tests now , as opposed to waiting a month or two while their insurance status is worked out , Cooke said .